 Pearson Education Limited, Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, Essex CM20 2JE, England and Associated Companies throughout the world. www.longman.com .
 Ferris, Archives of 76, Bay Village, Ohio; 20 From History of the English Speaking Peoples . Ferris: "The English speaking Peoples" Ferris was a pioneer of American culture .
 Gift of Mrs Russell Sage, 1909; 28 Gift of Bela J Ward and H Judd Ward . Mrs Russell Russell Sage gave birth to Bela Ward in 1909 .
 The Underground Railroad, by Charles T, Webber, Cincinnati Art Museum, and by Bettmann/Hulton Picture Company; 52. Photographs of the Underground Railroad were taken in 18th century .
 His aim was to open up a shorter trade route between the two continents . He wanted to open a shorter route between Europe and Asia .
 In Asia, he intended to load his three small ships with silks, spices and gold, and sail back to Europe a rich man . He intended to sail to Asia, where he planned to make a rich fortune .
 He turned west across the unknown waters of the mid-Atlantic Ocean . Then he turned west to the unknown sea floor .
 Ten weeks after leaving Spain, on the morning of October 12, he stepped hore on the beach of a low sandy island . Ten weeks later, he left Spain and landed on the island .
 It was not the edge of Asia that he had reached, but islands off the shores of a new continent . Europeans would soon name the new continent America . For many years they went on calling its inhabitants Indians .
 Only recently have these first Americans been described more accurately as ‘native Americans’ or Amerindians . Only recently, they have been called ‘Native Americans”
 Columbus arrived in San Salvador at the age of 50,000 years . His ancestors had already been living there for maybe 50,00 years .
 Scientists believe that the distant ancestors of the Amerindians came ta America from Asia . We say ‘maybe’ because nobody is completely sure, but we're not sure .
 This happened, they say, during the earth’s last ice age, long before people began to make written records . This happened during the ice age .
 At that time a bridge of ice joined Asia to America across what is now the Bering Strait . The bridge was built across what now is known as Bering Island .
 From Alaska the hunters moved south and east across America, following herds of caribou and buffalo . They followed the animals as they went from one feeding ground to the next . The hunters moved from Alaska to the U.S.
 Maybe 12,000 years ago, descendants of these first Americans were crossing the isthmus of Panama into 1 THe First American South America .
 About 5,000 years later their camp fires were burning on the frozen southern tip of the continent . Tierra del Fuego is now called Tierra de Fueguego—the Land of Fire .
 People living in highland areas of what grass with tiny seeds that were good to eat . People in highlands areas of Scotland were able to eat tiny seeds of grass .
 They cultivated the wild grass with great care to make its seeds larger . The wild grass was cultivated with care to ensure its seeds were larger .
 Pueblo people of present day Arizona and New Mexico were the best organized of the Amerindian . They lived in g farming peoples roups of villages, or in towns which were built for safety on the sides and tops of cliffs .
 The Pueblo made clothing and blankets from cotton which grew wild in the surrounding deserts . The clothing was made from cotton that grew from the surrounding desert deserts .
 On their feet they wore boot-shaped leather moccasins to protect their legs against sharp rocks and cactus plants of the desert . They wore them on their feet to protect them from sharp rocks .
 Long Europeans came to America the Pucblo were building networks of canals across the deserts to bring water to their fields . Long Europeans arrived in the U.S. in 17th century, they were building canals .
 Archacologists traced canals and ditches which enabled the Pueblo to irrigate 250,000 acres of farmland . A people called the Apache were the neighbors of the people who lived in the same valley .
 They wandered the deserts nd mountains in small bands, hunting deer and gathering wild plants, nuts and roots . They wandered from small bands to small bands of men and women .
 They also obtained food by raiding their Pueblo neighbors and stealing it from their neighbors . They also raided their neighbors and stole it from them .
 The Apache were fierce and warlike, and they were much feared by the Pueblo, The Buffalo Hunt by Charles M Russell . Amerindians hunting buffalo .
 The Iroquois were a group of tribes who lived far away from the Pueblo and the Apache in the thick woods of northeastern North America . They were skilled farmers who worked together growing beans, squash and maize .
 They used birch bark bark canoes to carry them swiftly along the rivers and lakes of their forest homeland . The tribesmen are known for their birch canoes, which they used to travel in canoes .
 The Iroquois lived in permanent villages, in long, wooden huts with barrel-shaped roofs . The Iroquois used to live in permanent, wooden villages, with barrel shaped roofs .
 These huts were made from a framework of saplings covered by sheets of elm bark . The huts are made from saplings made from elm trees covered in elm tree sheets .
 They were as feared by their neighbors as the Apache of the western deserts were feared by theirs . They were feared as much by the neighbors as they feared by the Apache .
 Around their huts they built strong wooden stockades to protect their villages from enemies . The stockades were built around them to protect them from their enemies . Around them huts were built strong wooded stockades .
 Eager to win glory for their tribe and fame for themselves, they often fought one another . They often fought each other for their tribes .
 From boyhood on, male Iroquois were taught to fear neither pain nor death . Bravery in battle was the surest way for a warrior to win respect and a high position .
 Many miles to the west, on the vast plains of grass that stretched from the Mpi River to the Rocky Mountains, there was another warrior nation . The Mpi nation was a warrior nation of warriors .
 The Sioux grew no crops and built no houses . But they were better known by the name which other Amerindians gave to them which means "enemi"
 Millions of these large, slow-moving animals wandered across the western grasslands in vast herds . For food, for shelter and for shelter, they depended upon the buffalo for food and clothing .
 The buffalo never remained on one pasture for long, so everything the Sioux owned designed to be carried easily . Within hours they could take down the tepees, the conical buffalo-skin tents that were their homes, pack their belongings in lightweight leather bags .
 A hot ember would be sealed inside a buffalo horn filled with rotted wood . Hot ember was sealed inside the horn of a buffalo . A buffalo horn was sealed in the buffalo horn .
 There it would smolder for days, ready to bring warmth from the old village to the new . There would be smoldering for days .
 The story says that one morning long ago a lone man awoke, face to the sun, emerging from the soil . The story is said to have occurred long ago in the area .
 There was nothing but soft and quaking mud, for the earth itself was still young . The earth itself is still young, and there was nothing more to offer .
 Up and up the man drew himself until he freed his body from the clinging soil . The man's body was freed from clinging soil. He drew himself up and up until he was freed .
 At last he stood upon the earth, but it was not solid, and his first few steps were slow and uncertain . "At last, he stood on the earth ... but it's not solid," he said .
 From this man sprang the Dakota nation and, so far as we know, our people have been born and have died upon this plain; and no people have shared it with us until the coming of the European .
 This large cone-shaped tent was invented by the buffalo hunters of the w grasslands . It was invented in the early 1900s by buffalo hunters .
 It is built round a framework of about twelve slim, wooden poles approximately twenty feet long . It was built round by twelve slim-shaped wooden poles . It is the first of its kind to be built in a museum in the world .
 The thin ends of the poles were tied together with strips of buffalo hide . The poles were raised and spread until their bottom ends formed a circle about fifteen feet in diameter . The end of the pole was tied together and spread to form a circle .
 As many as forty buffalo hides were sewn together then spread over the frame . The ends of the frame were fastened to the ground by pegs .
 A doorway covered with a flap of skin was left in the side of the side and an opening at the top acted as a chimney . A doorway was left covered in the skin and a top door was left at the side .
 The outside of the tepee was decorated with painted designs that had religious or historical meanings . The tepee's outside was decorated by painted designs with religious or historic meanings .
 The lifestyle of the people of North America’s northwest c ast was different again . The people of the northwest were different again.
 They gathered nuts and berries from the forests, but their main food pecially the salmon of the rivers and the ocean . Their main food was the salmon .
 The “potlatch’s” was a popular ceremony amongst the wealthy Pacific coast tribes of North America . Potlatches were popular among the wealthy .
 A modern potlatch is a kind of party at which guests are given gifts, but the original pot latch ceremonies went much further . A modern Potlatch party is a sort of party where guests receive gifts . The original potlatches were held at the same time as the
 A few months’ work during this season provided the people of the Pacific coast with enough food to last a whole year . The people of this year’s Pacific coast provided enough food for a year .
 This abundance of food gave the tribes of the Pacific coast time for feasting, for carving and for building .
 Tribes like the Haida lived in large houses built of wooden planks with elaborately carved gables and doorposts . Tribes such as Haida used to live in large homes built of wood planks and wooden gables .
 Tri trunks were specially decorated trunks which some tribes placed in front of their houses, but which the Haida made part of the house . Trunks were decorated tri trunks made into part of their homes .
 The totem pole was a record of the history of the family that lived in the house . The carvings on the totem pole were a record for the family .
 Amerindian peoples of North America developed widely varied ways of life . Amerindians lived in their own way of life in North America .
 All suited the natural environments in which the tribes lived, they lasted for many centuries . The tribes lived in the same environment for centuries .
 The arrival of Europeans with their guns, their discases and their hunger for land would eventually destroy them all. away . away everything that he owned to show how wealthy he was. and gain respect. away. away from Europeans .
 To avoid disgrace, the person receiving the gifts had to give back even more . To avoid embarrassment, the gift recipient had to return even more.
 We have seen that the Asian ancestors of the Amerindians arrived in America long before Columbus . We have also seen that they arrived in the U.S. long before Christopher Columbus . The Amerindian ancestors are believed to have arrived in Europe before Columbus Columbus .
 In the centuries after 1492 stories and legends grew up about other adventurous seamen having reached the New World long before Columbus .
 One legend tells how a Buddhist monk named Hoei-Shin sailed from China to Mexico in ap 459 . One legend says he sailed to Mexico with Buddhist monk .
 Irish monk named Brendan the Bold landed in America in Ap 551 . Another claims to have landed in the U.S. in Ap 50051 .
 The first suropean to reach the New World was Leif Ericson, Lucky Leif,” a Viking sailor from Iceland . Yet another says that the first suropropan to arrive in New York was a Viking .
 As recently as 1953 a plaque was set up at Mobile Bay in Beal Leif Ericson sighting America . A plaque has been set up in Mobile Bay, Mobile Bay .
 Welsh explorer Prince Madoc landed on the shores of Mobile Bay in 1170 and left behind, with the Indians, the Welsh language . All these stories have their supporters.
 Scholars have found evidence to support the old legends of the Vikings . But only in the case of the Viking Vikings have modern scholars found idence to support them .
 In the 1960s, archaeologists uncovered traces of Viking settlements in both Newfoundland and New England . Viking settlements were found in both New England and Newfoundland .
 In Newfoundland the archaeologists found the foundations of huts built in Viking style . The foundations of the huts were found in Newfoundland .
 Until the arrival of Europeans none of the Amerindian tribes knew how to make iron . These objects were important pieces of evidence that the Vikings had indeed reached 2 .
 The spindle whorl was exactly like those used in known Viking lands such as Iceland . It was used in the Viking kingdom of Iceland, where it was found .
 The Vikings were a sea-going people from Scandinavia in northern Europe . They were the people of Scandinavia and Scandinavia . The Vikings are the people who travelled to Scandinavia on the sea .
 They were proud of their warriors and explorers and told stories called “sagas” about them . They told stories about them. They were also proud of them .
 The saga of Leif Ericson tells how he sailed from Greenland to the eastern coast of North America in about the year ap 1000 .
 The hostility of the local Amerindians and the dangers of the northern seas combined to make them give up their attempt to colonize Vinland . Vinland was the first colony of Vinland, and the last of its kind .
 The Vikings sailed away and their discovery of Vinland was forgotten except by their storytellers . The Vikings discovered Vinland and sailed away from Vinland on their way to Vinland .
 It was the Spanish who began the lasting European occupation of America . The Spanish were responsible for the first European invasion of America.
 Columbus took back with him some jewelry that he had obtained in America . Columbus returned with him with some of the jewelry he had acquired in the U.S. When Columbus returned to Spain he took the jewelry .
 The reason is that to the end of his life Columbus believed that his discoveries were part of Asia . Columbus believed to have discovered Asia, and believed that it was Asia .
 Amerigo Vespucci was the man who corrected the mistaken idea . Amerigo helped correct this mistaken idea. Amerigo was Amerigo .
 During the late 1490s he wrote some letters in which he described two voyages of exploration that he had made along South America .
 Some years later Vespucci’s letters were read by a German scholar who was revising an old geography of the world . The letters were later read by the German scholar .
 The letters convinced the scholar that Vespucci was correct, and that the lands beyond the Atlantic were a new continent, he says . The scholar says the letters convinced him he was correct .
 To honor Vespucci the scholar named them America, using the feminine form of the first name as the other continents had female names . America was the first continent to have a female name .
 To sixteenth century Europeans America was a land of marvels, a place where nothing was impossible . A New Wortp The Fountain of Youth is published in New York City .
 Some believed there they might discover a way to regain their lost youth . Some even believed that there might be a way of losing their youth . Others believed there might also be a chance to find a way back to their youth.
 Ponce de Leén was a Spanish conquistador who came to the New World with Columbus on the explorer’s second voyage . He came to New World on Columbus' second voyage with Columbus .
 The Amerindian people of Puerto Rico told de Leon that to the north lay a land rich in gold . Amerindians told him there were gold in the area .
 This northern land, they said, also had an even more precious treasure -- a fountain whose waters gave everlasting youth to all those who drank from it . The northern land also had a fountain that "gave everlasting youth," they said .
 In the spring of 1513 de Leén set off in search of the magic fountain . He landed in present day Florida and sailed all around its coast searching for the miraculous waters .
 adventurers crossed the Atlantic Ocean to search for more of the precious metal . Augustine was the first permanent European settlement on the mainland of North America .
 Hernan Cortés conquered the Aztecs in the 1520s . Cortés had a lust for gold that led him to conquer the Aztec Empire .
 The Aztecs were a wealthy, city-building Amerindian people who lived in what is today Mexico . The Aztec people lived in the region of Mexico .
 Francisco Pizarro attacked the Incas of Peru in the 1530s . The Incas were the first Incas to invade the Spanish empire . Pizar attacked them with a lust for gold in the 1500s .
 A stream of looted treasure began to flow across the Atlantic to Spain from a new empire built up by such conquerors . In the years that followed, other Spanish conquistadores took the search for gold to North America .
 Hernando de Soto and Francisco Coronado explored much of the southern part of what is now the United States . Between 1539 and 1543, the two explorers explored the area .
 He led his expedition westward, discovering the Mississippi River and traveling beyond it into Texas and Oklahoma . He led him westward .
 Coronado traveled north from Mexico, searching for the “Seven Cities of Gold” Amerindian legends said lay hidden somewhere in the desert . Amerindians said the seven cities of gold were believed to have been found .
 He and his men became the first Europeans to see the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River . They journeyed as far cast as Kansas before returning to Mexico .
 Discovery of the Mississippi is a romanticized nineteenth-century painting by William H Powell . Powell painted the Mississippi in the early 1900s . Powell's painting was published in the 1920s .
 De Soto and his followers are shown displaying their cannon and 4 c70s5 10 10 a group of frightened Amerindians . The cannon is shown displaying its cannon and c70.5 10 c70S5 10 . It is shown in a photo of the scene .
 The journeys of men such as de Soto and Coronado gave Spain a claim to a large amount of land in North America . Spain was given a large portion of land by the Spanish conquistador .
 They also led to the founding of some of the earliest permanent European settlements in the area .
 In 1497 King Henry VII of England hired an Italian seaman named John Cabot to explore the new lands and look again for a passage to Asia . Cabot died in 1497, but Cabot was able to find a way to the continent .
 This time he sailed south along the coast of North America as far as Chesapeake Bay . The first time he had sailed south, he sailed in the same way as the first time .
 In later years English governments used them to support their claims to own most of the east coast of North America . English governments also used them in support of their claim to the East Coast .
 In 1524 the French king, Francis I, sent an Italian sailor named Giovanni Verrazano for the same purpose as Columbus and Cabot~to find lands rich in gold and anew sea route to Asia . The French king sent the Italian sailor to find new gold and sea routes to
 Verrazano sailed the full length of the east coast of America, but found neither . He sailed the entire length of America but never found neither of the continent's coasts .
 The Verrazano Narrows Bridge is one of the city's most impressive sights . It was built in the 1930s and carries the name of the bridge .
 Ten years later another French explorer, Jacques Cartier, discovered the St. Louis-Dauge . Cartier was the first explorer to discover the island .
 He returned to France and reported that the forests lining the river’s shores were full of fur-bearing animals . The forests lined the banks of the river are full of fish and the waters were full fish .
 The next year he sailed further up the river, reaching the site of the present-day city of Montreal . He sailed further down the river .
 Cartier failed to find the way to Asia that he was looking for, but he gave France a claim to what would later become Canada . Cartier died in 1903 at the age of 18 .
 Europeans could only do this by establishing settlements of their own people . Europeans would only be able to do this if they established settlements of themselves . Europeans were able to establish settlements by establishing their people .
 By the seventeenth century plenty of people in Europe were ready to settle in America . By the mid-nineteen-century, plenty of Europe was ready to move to the US .
 In the hundred years after 1600, Europeans set up many colonies in North America for reasons like these . European colonies in America were set up in the 1600s .
 Replicas of the ships that carried the first settlers to Jamestown in 1617 . The ships were the first ships that brought the settlers to the town . The first settlers arrived in the 17th century .
 For hours the frightened sailors struggled with wet ropes and snapping canvas sails . For hours they struggled to pull their sails from the sky .
 Atlast, as dawn colored the eastern skic the storm came to an end, Men dropped to the decks, exhausted . Atlast .
 The sailors tied their ships to trees on the banks of a broad and deep river . A few weeks later, on May 20, the sailors tied them to trees in the river .
 They named the river the ames, in honor of James, king of England, the country from which they had set sail five months before .
 On the swampy banks they began cutting down bushes and trees and building rough shelters for themselves . The group cut down bushes, trees and built rough shelters .
 The settlement was the first lasting English settlement in America . It was located in a group of huts on a hill in New York City .
 They were too busy dreaming of gold to grow enough food to feed them . And although their English homeland was many miles away across a dangerous occan .
 The settlers were sent to Jamestown by a group of rich London investors . The settlers had been sent to the town by a wealthy group of investors .
 Company's purpose was to set up colonies along the Adantic coast of North America, between 34° and 38° north latitude . The Company was set up in 17th century .
 Investors paid the costs of its expeditions and in return were given the right to divide up any profits it made . It was a joint stock company -—thatis, the investors paid the . costs of the expeditions .
 Most of the colonists hoped that the colonists would find gold, as the Spanish conquistadores had done in Mexico . ny.y. hope that they would also find gold .
 The colonists eagerly obeyed the Company’s orders to scarch for gold . The colonists hoped The colonists would obey the orders .
 There was “no talk, no hope nor work, but dig gold, wash gold, load gold”, wrote one of their leaders, Captain John Smith .
 And then the colonists began to die~in ones, in twos, then in dozens, finally in dozens . The colonists died in one place, one place and one place .
 Of the settlement in October 1609, only sixty were still alive st point in the winter of (00 colonists living in the in March 1610 . Jamestown r 1609-1610, only 60 of the settlement were alive in that winter .
 Stories reached England about settlers who were so desperate for food that they dug up and ate the body of an Amerindian they killed during an attack .
 The Virginia Company gathered homeless children from the streets of London and sent them out to the colony . The children were among the children sent out to live in the colony of Virginia .
 Spanish ambassador in London told of three condemned criminals who were given the choice of being hanged or sent to Virginia . The Spanish ambassador told of the choice between hanging or being sent to the Virginia state .
 For many English people these carly years of the seventeenth century were a time of hunger and suffering . For many people, the carly period of the 17th century was a period of suffering and hunger .
 Incomes were low, but the prices of food and clothing climbed higher every year . Food and clothing prices climbed higher each year . Incomes are low but the price of clothing and clothing is high .
 English people decided to move to Virginia to escape from the certainty of hardships at home . And i the crops failed, ome English people .
 This seems more important than the reports of disease, starvation and cannibalism there . This seemed more important to the reports than reports of cannibalism .
 In Virginia a poor man could hope for a farm of his own to feed his family . In they starved was worth worth worth of living on a farm .
 The captain and the princess s the most able of the Captain John Smith w original Jamestown settlers . John Smith was one of the most successful of the early settlers .
 An energetic 27-year-old soldier and explorer, he landed there in 1607 . He had already had a life full of action when he landed on the island .
 It was he who organized the first Jamestown colonists and forced them to work . He was also the leader of the colony's first settlers .
 If he had not done that, the infant settlement would probably have collapsed . The settlement would have collapsed, he says. If he hadn't done that he would have been able to save it .
 When food supplies ran out Smith set off into the forests to buy corn from the Amerindians . Smith set out into the forest to buy food from Amerindian tribesmen . Smith: "When food supplies run out Smith went to the forests for food .
 Pocahontas, the twelve-year-old daughter of the chief, Powhatan, saved his life by shielding his body with her own . According to a story that he told later (which not everyone believed), the Amerindians were going to beat his brains out when
 Pocahontas went on to play an important part in Virginia's survival . She brought food to the starving settlers, bringing food to help them survive .
 In 1609 Smith was badly injured in a gunpowder explosion and sent back to England . Smith was sent home to England in 1609 after being injured in an explosion .
 Pocahontas married tobacco planter John Rolfe in 1614 . Five years later she married the planter in 1616 .
 Pocahontas died of smallpox in 1617 while waiting to board a ship to carry her back to Virginia with her newborn son . Pocahrontas was the last Native American to die of the disease . She died of the smallpox .
 Many Virginians today claim to be descended from him and so from Pocahontas . The Virginians claim to have been descended from Native Americans . Pocahrontas was a Native American woman who lived in Virginia .
 A New Worip Brides for sale for sale . The Virginia Company shipped over a group of ninety young women as wives for its settlers .
 Fora number of years after 1611, military governors ran Virginia like a prison camp . The price must have been reasonable .
 Earlier visitors to America, like Sir Walter Raleigh, had brought dried leaves of tobacco to England . The first dried leaves were brought to England from America .
 Its popularity had been growing ever since, for smoking, for taking as snuff, even for brewing into a drink . Its popularity has grown ever since .
 In Virginia a young settler named John Rolfe discovered how to dry, or “‘cure,” the leaves in a new way .
 They cleared new land along the rivers and ploughed up the streets of Jamestown itself to plant more .
 The price of a good horse in Virginia, Virginia, was sixteen pounds of top quality tobacco . A good horse was 16 pounds of tobacco .
 The possibility of becoming rich by growing tobacco brought wealthy 14 men to Virginia . Wills tobacco was one of the most famous English tobacco companies in England .
 Workers from England brought workers from England to clear trees and plant tobacco . They obtained large stretches of land and brought workers to clear them from England .
 Soon the houses and barns of their estates, or ‘plantations, could be seen through the trees along the banks of the James river . Soon they could see their estates and their estates .
 Most of the workers on these early plantations were “indentured servants” from England . Most of these early plantation workers were ‘indentures servants’ from England. The plantation was set up in 1881 .
 They promised to work for an employer for an agreed number of years in exchange for food and clothes . They also promised to be paid for work for seven years, seven was average .
 Luckier ones were given a small piece of land to start a farm of their own -if they were still alive . Luckier farmers were given the chance to start their own farms .
 Life in Virginia Martin's Hundred, an’ early English settlement on the Jamel river, is an early 16th century English settlement .
 3 VircINnian B continued to be hard to find . Archaeological evidence for the discovery of the site continues to be difficult .
 Diseases like malaria and wars against the Amerindians continued to kill hundreds of settlers . Hundreds of settlers died from malaria and other diseases .
 Between 1619 and 1621 about 3,560 people left England to settle in Virginia . About 3,500 people from England left the country to settle there .
 Virginia’s affairs had been controlled so far by governors sent over by the Virginia Company . Virginia had been ruled by the company .
 The House of Burgesses was set up by the Company after the collapse of the Great Depression . It is the first time the House of Lords has been set up in England .
 The burgesses were clected representatives from the various small settlements along Virginia’s rivers . Burgesses were chosen from small settlements in Virginia's rivers .
 The Virginia House of Burgesses was the start of an important tradition in American life . People should have a say in decisions about matters that concern them, the author says . The House was started by Virginia's Burgesses .
 The blacks were set to work in the tobacco fields with white indentured servants from England . The blacks worked in the fields in tobacco fields in the early 1900s .
 White servants were indentured for a fixed number of years . But there was a very serious difference between their position and that of the whites working beside them . White servants had to be indentured to a fixed period of years.
 Their masters might treat them badly, but they knew that one day they would be free . They knew they were going to be free, even though they might be treated badly .
 In fact they were slaves—although it was years before their masters openly admitted the fact . The slaves were slaves .
 English government put an end to the Company and made itself responsible for the Virginia colonists . English government made it responsible for Virginia colonists in 17th century .
 Fierce Amerindian attacks in 1622 had destroyed several settlements and killed over 350 colonists . There were still very few of them still in existence .
 Out of nearly 10,000 settlers sent out since 1607, 1624 census showed only 1,275 survivors . Out of 10,500 settlers, only about 1,300 survived .
 Building a new homeland in the steamy river valleys of Virginia had proved harder and taken longer than anyone had expected . Building the nation's first homeland in Virginia proved harder than anyone expected .
 The first society of English people overseas had put down living roots in the U.S. But this was not the first time they had put their roots in America .
 By 1624 one thing was clear— Virginia would survive . Other struggles lay ahead, but by 1624, Virginia would still be strong .
 The Jamestown settlers were not the first English people to visit Virginia . The settlers came to Virginia in 17th century .
 Sir Walter Raleigh had sent ships to find land in the New World where English people might settle . Twenty years carlier the adventurer Sir Walter . Raleigh sent ships in search for land in New World .
 He named the land they visited Virginia, Virginia, in honor of Elizabeth, England’s unmarried Queen . The land was named after Elizabeth, Elizabeth, the Queen of England .
 They built houses and a fort, planted crops and searched without success for gold . They built a fort and planted crops, searched for gold, but never found it .
 They ran out of food and made enemies of the local Amerindian inhabitants . But they ran out food and became enemies of locals . They made enemies with Amerindians .
 The colonists were led by an artist and mapmaker named John White, who had been a member of the 1585 expedition . The colonists led by John White .
 Virginia Dare is the first English child to be born in America . Virginia Dare was born in August 18th . She is now the first child born in the United States .
 When his ships reached Roanoke in August 1590, he found the settlement deserted . The settlement was the first to be discovered by the explorer .
 There was no sign of what had happened to its people except a word carved on a tree—“*Croaton,” the home of a friendly Indian chief, fifty miles to the south .
 Some believe that the Roanoke settlers were carried off by Spanish soldiers from Florida . Some believe they were taken off by the Spanish soldiers .
 Others think they may have decided to go to live with friendly Indians on the mainland . Others think that they may also have gone to live in friendly Indian culture .
 "Pilgrims" are people who make a journey for religious reasons . PuRITAN NEW ENGLAND: Pilgrims are pilgrims who made a journey to the North Pole .
 The Pilgrims were a small group of English men and women who sailed across the Atlantic Ocean in the year 1620 . The group’s members came to be called the Pilgims because they went to America to find religious freedom .
 This is because they see them as the most important of the founders of the future U.S. America . This is despite the fact that they are important to the future of the country .
 The Europe that the Pilgrims left behind them was torn by religious quarrels . The Europe they left behind was torn between religious and religious .
 For more than a thousand years Roman Catholic Christianity had been the religion of most of its people . Roman Catholics had been in Roman Catholicism for more than 1,000 years .
 By the sixteenth century, some Europeans had begun to doubt the teachings of the Catholic Church . Some Europeans began to doubt its teachings .
 A German monk named Martin Luther quarreled with these leaders . They were also growing angry at the wealth and worldly pride of its leaders .
 He claimed that individual human beings did not need the Pope or the priests of the Catholic Church to enable them to speak to God . He said that individual humans do not need to rely on the Pope to talk to God in order to speak out .
 A few years later a French lawyer named John Calvin put forward similar ideas . A French lawyer later put forward a similar idea .
 Calvin claimed that each individual was directly and personally responsible to God . Calvin claimed each person was personally responsible for their actions .
 In most countries people were expected to have the same religion as their ruler . People in most countries expected to be religious in order to be rulers .
 Henry VIII formed a national church with himself as its head in the 1530s . Henry VIII was the head of the national church in England .
 Many English people believed that this Church of England was still too much like the Catholic Church . In the later years of the sixteenth century many English people thought that this church was too much of the Catholic .
 They disliked its elaborate ceremonies and the rich decorations of its churches . They disliked it for its lavish ceremonies .
 When James I became King of England in 1603 he warned the Puritans that he would drive them from the land if they did not accept his ideas on religion . The Puritans were the first to accept James I's ideas of religion .
 To escape persecution, a small group of people left England and went to Holland . To escape this persecution, they left England to escape the persecution .
 Holland was the only country in Europe whose government allowed religious freedom at this time . Holland was only country to allow religious freedom in this time of religious freedom .
 The Puritans never felt at home there. The people of Holland welcomed the little group of exiles, but the Puritans were never at home .
 They persuaded the Virginia Company to allow them to settle in the northern part of its American lands . Here they persuaded the company to let them settle .
 On September 16, 1620, the Pilgrims left the English on the Mayflower . The Mayflower Compact was signed in 1616 . On September 17, 1616, the first Mayflower landed in New England .
 They did not want to put themselves in further danger by quarreling with one another . The pair had been fighting for their lives in the past .
 Before Janding at Plymouth, therefore, they wrote out an agreement, In this document, they agreed to work together for the good of all .
 In the Compact the Plymouth settlers agreed to set up a government~a “civil body politic’ —to make “just and equal laws’ for their new settlement . The Plymouth settlement was settled in 17th century .
 Pilgrims and Strangers alike promised that they would obey these laws . All of them promised to obey the laws, and they did .
 In the difficult years which followed, the Mayflower Compact served the colonists well . The Compact was signed in 17th century by the Pilgrim family .
 It is remembered as one of the first important documents in the history of democratic government in America .
 For years the Mayflower had carried wine across the narrow seas between France and England . The Mayflower took wine from France to England .
 For sixty-five days the Mayflower battled through the rolling waves of the north Atlantic Ocean . The Mayflower was the first ship from the New England colony to set sail over the North Atlantic .
 At last, on November 9, 1620, it reached Cape Cod, a sandy hook of land in what is now the state of Massachusetts . At that time, it was the first landfall on Cape Cod .
 Cape Cod is far to the north of the land granted to the Pilgrims by the Virginia Company . The Virginia Company granted the land far north of Cape Cod .
 Pilgrims did not have enough food and water, and many were sick . Many were sick, many had no food or water and many had to be sick . The Pilgrim was among the first to come to the Americas .
 On December 21, 1620, they rowed ashore and set up camp at a place they named Plymouth . They named it Plymouth, and it was named Plymouth by Plymouth .
 The frozen ground and the deep snow made it difficult for them to build houses . The deep snow and frozen ground meant it was difficult for the families to build homes .
 Before spring came, half of the little group of a hundred settlers were dead . Half of the group of settlers were killed .
 Friendly Amerindians gave them seed corn seed corn and showed them how to plant it . The Amerindian community was given seed corn seeds by Amerinians .
 Not one of the Pilgrims accepted when a ship arrived in Plymouth in 1622 and offered to take passengers back to England . It was not the end of their hardships, but when they were offered to return, not one of them accepted .
 Ten years later a much larger group of almost a thousand colonists settled nearby in what became the Boston area . The Boston area is now known as Boston .
 Charles I Charles was even less tolerant than his father James had been of people who disagreed with his policies in religion and government . These people left England to escape the rule of a new king . Charles was also less tolerant of those who left the country to escape .
 Its population grew quickly as more Puritans left England to escape persecution . The population grew rapidly as more and more Puritan fled to England .
 Many years later, in 1691, it combined with the Plymouth colony under the name of Massachusetts . The colony was named Massachusetts .
 The ideas of the Massachusetts Puritans had a lasting influence on American society . The Massachusetts Puritan's ideas were first published in 17th century .
 One of their first leaders, John Winthrop, said that they should build an ideal community for the rest of mankind to learn from . One of the first leaders of the colony said that it should be a model for mankind .
 Many Americans still see their country as a model for other nations to copy . To this day many Americans continue to see their nation as an example for others .
 Puritans believed that governments had a duty to make people obey God's will . The Puritans of Massachusetts believed that people should obey their own will .
 They passed laws to force people to attend church and punish drunks and adulterers . The laws include laws to punish people who are drunk or have sex with prostitutes .
 Puritan minister Roger Williams believed that it was wrong to run the affairs of Massachusetts in this way . Williams was a Puritan in a settlement called Salem .
 He objected particularly to the fact that the same men controlled both the church and the government .
 Williams believed that church and state should be separate and that neither should interfere with the other . Williams believed in the belief that the state and church should be kept separate .
 In 1535 they sent men to arrest him, but Williams escaped and went south . Williams was joined by other discontented people from Massachusetts . He escaped and joined others from Massachusetts in 1535 .
 On the shores of Narragansett Bay Williams and his followers set up a new colony called Rhode Island . Rhode Island was the first colony of its kind .
 Rhode Island promised its citizens complete religious freedom and separation of church and state . Rhode Island has a history of religious freedom in the state .
 The leaders of Massachusctts could not forgive the people of Rhode Island for thinking so differently from themselves . Rhode Island is a state of origin .
 A string of English colonies stretched along the east coast of North America . William Penn signed a treaty with the Amerindians .
 Under a charter from the English king, Charles Il, Penn was the proprictor, or owner, of Pennsylvania . Penn was granted a charter by Charles II in 17th century .
 Penn belonged to a religious group, the Society of Friends, commonly called Quakers . Penn was a Quaker, a member of a Quakers religious group .
 These customs had helped to make them very unpopular with English governments .
 Penn promised his fellow Quakers that in Pennsylvania they would be free to follow their own ways . Many of the Quakers emigrated to Pennsylvania .
 Penn's promise of religious freedom, together with his reputation for dealing fairly with people, brought settlers from other European countries to Pennsylvania . Penn was known for his reputation of dealing with people and his reputation .
 From Ireland came settlers who made new farms in the western forests of the colony . From Ireland, settlers made farms in western forests .
 Most of the victims were members of small religious groups who had left Germany to escape persecution . Most of them were German-born people who had escaped persecution .
 A few years later, in 1670, the English founded the new colonies of North and South ‘arolina .
 The last English colony to be founded in North America was Georgia, settled in 1733 . Georgia was the first English colony of North America to settle in 1734 .
 In November, 1621, they sat down to eat together and give thanks to God for enabling them to survive the hardships of their first year in America . They sat down together and gave thanks to each other .
 The Wampanoag and Pequamid people of the nearby forests had shared corn with the Pilgrims . They had shown them the best places to catch fish . The Pilgrim's first settlers died in 17th century .
 The Amerindians had given seed corn to the English settlers and shown them how to plant crops that would grow well in the American soil . Later the Amerindian had shown the settlers how to grow corn .
 In the 1620s settlers from Holland founded a colony they called New Netherlands along the banks of the Hudson River . Minuit buys Manhattan for $1.5 billion .
 Amerindian people called the Shinnecock used the island for hunting and fishing, although they did not live on it . The island was used by Amerindians who used to live there .
 In 1626 Peter Minuit, the first Dutch governor of the New Netherlands, “bought’” Manhattan from the Shinnecock . In 1624 Peter Minuits, the Dutch governor bought Manhattan .
 He paid them about twenty-four dollars’ worth of cloth, beads and other trade goods . He paid the men $24,000 in goods .
 Shinnecock believed that land belonged to all men . Like all Amerindians, he believed that all men should have their land .
 They thought what they were selling to the Dutch was the right to share Manhattan with themselves . They thought that what they . were selling was a right to . share Manhattan .
 The Dutch believed that buying land made it theirs alone . But the Dutch, like other Europeans, believed buying land alone made it their alone .
 Different beliefs about land ownership were to be a major cause of conflict between Europeans and Amerindians for many years to come .
 Peter Minuit bought Manhattan Island for $1.5 million . Minuit's price became part of American folklore after he bought the island for $10 million .
 The colonies stretched from New Hampshire in the north to Georgia in the south . The colonies were established in 17th century .
 Colonial Settlement 1650-1770 . In the far north was the New England group, centered on Massachusetts .
 Since the time of the Pilgrims the people of New England had spread inland and along the coast . The people of the New England have spread inland .
 In these they sailed to catch cod or trade with England and the West Indices . In these these they were able to find cod .
 The towns had grown up whose people earned their living by trade, manufacturing . But important towns had become important places for trade and manufacturing .
 Philadelphia is one of the largest cities in the United States . The city is home to the largest city in the country .
 Long before most English cities, its streets were paved with brick and strect lamps were lit every night . The streets of the city were paved in brick and lit with lamps .
 All three towns owed much of their prosperity to the profits of the transatlantic trade that they carried on with England . The three towns were founded in 17th century .
 Their ships exported furs, timber, tobacco, and cotton, and brought back fashionable clothes, fine furniture, and other manufactured goods . Their ships also brought back clothing, furniture, clothing and clothing .
 The Shuth East Pioyectiof Me Ci Pl pli ved ter Cooper sy 5 Coroniat Lire 1n AMERICA .
 Many had German, Dutch or Swedish ancestors rather than English ones . Many of them also had German or Dutch ancestors .
 In the hot and fertile river valleys wealthy landowners farmed large plantations . In their hot river valleys rich people farmed huge plantations .
 They lived in fine houses, with wide, cool verandahs from which they could look out over their fields of tobacco or cotton . "They lived in . fine houses with wide . verandahues from which . could look . out over . fields, they said .
 The prosperity of the plantation-owning southerners was already beginning to depend upon it . But the prosperity of plantation owners was already depend on it .
 Close by stood groups of smaller, more simple buildings—stables, washhouses, blacksmiths’ shops and little huts in which the black slaves lived . Close by is a group of smaller buildings, including wasahouses, washouses .
 Almost always a river flowed nearby, with a wharf where sea-going ships could be loaded to carry the plantation’s crops to England . The plantation's crops were often transported to England by sea-bound ships .
 Most people still lived less than fifty miles from the coast . In all three groups of colonies most people still live less than 50 miles away .
 Those furthest inland had traveled up tidal rivers like the James and the Hudson, clearing the trees and setting up farms along their banks . Those who had traveled inland had moved to the banks .
 During the fifty years after 1733 settlers moved deeper into the continent . During the 50 years after the 1733 settlement was made, settlers moved into Europe .
 They traveled west into A New Wortp central Pennsylvania, cutting down forests of oak trees to make hilly farms . They cut down oak trees in order to build hilly fields .
 The settlers cleared the land of trees, then cut the trees into logs and planks . The settlers cut the land into logs, planks, and then cut them into planks.
 Farmers ploughed between the tree stumps and sowed their seeds . Four months later they harvested the crops of corn and wheat .
 If the soil was rocky, or poor in plant foods, life could be hard and disappointing . But if the soil is rocky or poor, it could also be hard to live on .
 Scttlers with poor soil often left their farms and moved westward, to try again on more fertile land . The poor soil was often left to try and find fertile land again .
 As they traveled inland they passed fewer and fewer farms and villages . The family was traveling inland, passing through the countryside . It was the first time the family had seen the ocean in the U.S.
 This area, where European settlement came to an end and the forest homelands of the Amerindians began, was called the frontier . This area is where Europeans came to a halt and the forests of Amerindian people began . The frontier was the beginning of European settlement and the
 Fresh waves of settlers pushed the frontier westwards westwards in their search for fertile soil .
 Frontier farms and villages often separated by miles of unsettled land . Because of this, frontier villages were often separated from each other . Frontier farms were often located on miles of land .
 The people of frontier communities had to rely upon themselves for almost everything they needed . For such reasons, frontier communities were dependent on their own resources .
 They developed their own kinds of music, entertainment, art and forms of religious worship . They had their own kind of music and entertainment .
 They helped each other clear land and build houses and barns . Yet they also needed to work together, helping each other with tasks .
 A strong belief that individuals had to help themselves and a need for them to cooperate with one another . The combination of these two ideas . Strengthened the feeling that people were equal and that nobody should have special rights and privileges .
 The frontier way of life helped democratic ideas to flourish in America . It was a frontier of frontier America . The frontier was a place for democracy .
 Americans like to think that many of the best values and attitudes of the modern U.S. can be traced back to the frontier experiences of their pioneer ancestors . Today’s Americans are proud of their frontier experiences .
 This thickly forested mountain range runs roughly parallel to the Atlantic coast of North America . It stretches for hundreds of miles and stretches for more than 500 miles .
 When settlers reached the foothills of the Appalachians they found waterfalls and rapids blocking the rivers they had been following westwards . The waterfalls blocked the rivers that they were following west .
 Daniel Boone led a party of settlers into the mountains in 1775 . Boone was a hunter and explorer named Daniel Boone . Boone's party was led by a group of settlers .
 With a party of thirty axmen he cut a track called the Wilderness Road through the forested Cumberland Gap, a natural pass in the Appalachians . The party cut the track through the natural pass through the woods .
 Boone's Wilderness Road enabled thousands of settlers to move with horses, wagons, and cattle into these fertile lands . Boone’s Wilderness Road was the first road to open in the early 1900s .
 This means that in all of them people had a say in how they were governed . This is the first time people have a say on how they are governed in the UK .
 At the head of this government was a governor, chosen by the English king . The governor was chosen by most cases by the king, most of the time in England .
 To rule effectively, these governors depended upon the cooperation of assemblies elected by the colonists . This governors were elected by colonists to rule effectively . The colonies' governors were chosen by colonists .
 In most colonies all white males who owned some land had the right to vote . In most of the colonies, white males owned enough land to vote in the colonies .
 Since so many colonists owned land, this meant that far more people had the vote in America than in England itself . This was the first time the vote was allowed to be held in America .
 St. Lawrence River and south towards the frontier areas of the English colonics on the Atlantic coast . The English colonized the area around the St. Louis River .
 Louisiana, named for the French king, Louis XIV, stretched across the center of the continent . Louisiana was named for French king Louis XIV . Louisiana is now Louisiana .
 It included all the lands drained by the Mississippi River and its tributaries . The Mississippi River is one of the largest rivers in the world .
 In the middle of the cightcenth century most of the forests and plains of both of these vast areas were still unexplored by Europeans .
 The French claim to own them was based upon journeys made in the previous century by two famous explorers . The French say they own them based on journeys made by two explorers .
 From 1603 onwards, Champlain explored the lands on both sides of the St. Charles River . Champlain's first voyage was in 1603 .
 The two most important of these posts later grew into the cities of Quebec and Montreal . Montreal and Quebec became Montreal .
 René La Salle was a fur trader, explorer and empire builder all in one . He was the first French explorer to explore the world . He found the world of fur traders and explorer .
 At last he reached the Gulf of Mexico, where the great river empties into the sea . The great river is the source of the vast majority of Mexico's natural resources .
 The French claim that Louisiana belonged to them worried both the British government and the American colonists . The French claimed the territory of Louisiana .
 They would be able to keep the colonists to the east of the Appalachian Mountains and stop them from moving westwards . They would have been able to stop the colonists from moving eastwards .
 In 1756 Britain and France began fighting the Seven Years War . After several wars earlier in the eighteenth century, the war began in France .
 The British sent money and soldiers to North America . William Pitt the Elder was the prime minister of the British Empire .
 In 1758 British and colonial forces captured the French strongholds of Louisburg on the Gulf of St. St. Louis .
 In 1760 Montreal fell to them, The war was ended by the Peace of Paris which was signed in 1763 . In 1763 the war ended with the peace of Paris .
 France gave up its claim to Canada and to all of North America east of the Mississippi River . France also gave up their claim to North America and gave up all of Canada .
 Even before the defeat of the French, colonists in search of better land began to move over the Appalachian Mountains into the Ohio valley .
 George III issued a proclamation in 1763 to prevent war with the Amerindian tribes who lived in the area . The English king, George III, issued the proclamation to avoid war with them .
 It forbade colonists to settle west of the Appalachians until proper treaties had been made with the Amerindians . It also forbade settlers west of Appalachians to settle in the region .
 British government told them they must pay new taxes on imports of sugar, coffee, textiles, and other goods . They became angrier still when they were told they would pay more taxes .
 The government also told them that they must feed and find shelter for British soldiers it planned to keep in the colonies . The British government told them they must find shelter and feed for the British soldiers .
 It had cost British taxpayers a lot of money to defend the colonies during the French and Indian War . The war cost the British taxpayers millions of pounds to defend colonies .
 Until the 1760s most Americans seemed quite content to be ruled by Britain . Trade laws and “‘sleeping dogs”’ remain a mystery to Americans .
 An important reason for this was the presence of the French in North America . The French were important in the development of the continent .
 The colonists felt that they needed the British navy and soldiers to protect them . So long as France held Canada and Louisiana, the colonists felt they needed them .
 Another reason the colonists accepted British rule was that the British government rarely interfered in colonial affairs . Another reason is that the colonial authorities rarely interfered with colonial affairs.
 A century earlier the British Parliament had passed some laws called Navigation Acts . The Navigation Acts were passed by a century earlier .
 colonies were forbidden to export to any country except England . The colonies were restricted to certain products called “enumerated commodities” that the colonies were allowed to export .
 The colonists did not care much cither about import taxes, or duties, that they were supposed to pay on goods from abroad . The colonists didn't care much about the import taxes .
 Ships could unload their cargoes on hundreds of lonely wharves without customs officers knowing . Ships were able to unload cargues without customs officials knowing .
 He knew the independent spirit of the British colonists in America and wanted no trouble with them . He knew that he wanted to avoid trouble with the British .
 Merchants believed that the new import taxes would make it more difficult for them to trade at a profit . Merchants believed it would be difficult to make a profit from the new tax system .
 Other colonists believed that the taxes would raise their costs of living . Others believed that they would not be able to afford to live on their own .
 British troops feared they might be used to force them to obey the British government . They also feared that if British troops stayed in America they might use them to force people to obey them .
 This last objection was an early example of a belief that became an important tradition in American political life . People © should not allow governments to become too powerful, he says .
 In 1765 the British Parliament passed another new law called the Stamp Act . A New Wortp A cartoon showing the burial of the Act shows the burial
 This too was intended to raise moncy to pay for the defense of the colonies . This was intended for the colonies, but was meant to be used to raise money for the defence .
 It said that the colonists had to buy special tax stamps and attach them to newspapers, licenses and legal papers such as wills and mortgages .
 Americans had claimed the right to clect representatives to decide the taxes they paid . Ever since the early years of the Virginia settlement Americans claimed to be able to decide their taxes .
 They insisted that as ‘frecborn Englishmen’ they could be taxed only by their own colonial assemblies . Now they insisted that . as . “frec born Englishmen, they could . be taxed . Only by colonial assemblies. Now they insist they can be taxed
 All over the colonies merchants and shopkeepers refused to sell British goods until the Act was withdrawn . The Act was pulled out of circulation in the colonies .
 In Boston and other cities angry mobs attacked government officials selling stamps . Angry mobs attacked officials selling the stamps in Boston .
 In articles and speeches, he attacked the British government’s claim that it had the right to tax the colonists .
 Boston mob began to shout insults at a group of British soldiers on March 5, 1770 . The mob began shouting insults at the British soldiers in Boston .
 One of the crowd tried to take a soldier’s gun and the soldier shot him . The soldier shot the man in the head after he was shot by a soldier .
 More shots were fired and three more members of the crowd fell dead . Without any order from the officer in charge, more shots fired . Three more people fell dead in the crowd .
 Samuel Adams used this “Boston Massacre’s” to stir up American opinion against the British . Adams used the ‘Massacre’ in Boston as a means of stirring up U.S. opinion against British .
 He wrote a letter which inaccurately described the happening as an unprovoked attack on a peacefull group of citizens . The letter was written by the author of the letter . He wrote that the attack was not an attack on peacefull citizens .
 All this opposition forced the British government to withdraw the Stamp Act . The Stamp Act was withdrawn by the government .
 It was determined to show the colonists that it had the right to tax them . But it was determined it had to show it was right to do so .
 In 1767 the British placed new taxes on tea, paper, paint, and various other goods that the colonies imported from abroad . The colonies imported tea and paper from overseas .
 A special customs office was sct up in Boston to collect the new duties . The new customs office has been set up to collect duties .
 It was not until 1770, when the British removed all the duties except for the one on tea, that there was less trouble .
 Some colonists in Massachusetts were determined to keep the quarrel going . But some colonists were determined not to keep it going .
 In December 1773, a group of men disguised themselves as Mohawk Amerindians . They disguised themselves in the name of Mohawk Indians . The men were killed in 1773 .
 Adams' letter and Revere’s picture were seen by thousands of people throughout the colonics . Adams’ letter and the picture of Revere were seen throughout the Colonics . Revere's picture was also seen in the colonies .
 Together they did a great deal to strengthen opposition to British rule . Together they were able to defeat British rule in the early 1900s .
 The powers of the colonial assembly of Massachusetts were greatly reduced in the 17th century . Massachusetts was the first state of the Massachusetts colony of Massachusetts .
 On June 1, 1774, British warships took up position at the mouth of Boston harbor to make sure that no ships sailed in or out of the harbor . British warships were stationed at the Boston harbor .
 A few months later, in September 1774, a group of colonial leaders came together in Philadelphia . The colonial leaders gathered in Philadelphia for the first time in 1774 .
 They formed the First Continental Congress to oppose what they saw as British oppression . The Congress was formed in 17th century .
 It called upon all Americans to support the people of Massachusetts by refusing to buy British goods .
 Part-time soldiers began to organize themselves into groups, or “militias,” and to gather together weapons and ammunition . They gathered together weapons, ammunition, and gathered together ammunition .
 The colonists were ordered to seize weapons and ammunition that they had stored in Concord, a nearby town . Their orders were to .seize weapons, ammunition that rebellious colonists had stored .
 Signal lights hung from the spire of Boston’s tallest church anid two fast riders, Paul Revere and William Dawes, jumped into their saddles and galloped off with the news .
 In the village of Lexington the British found seventy American militiamen, farmers and tradesmen, barring their way . The British found the Americans barring them from the village .
 These part-time soldiers were known as ““Minutemen”-This was because they had promised to take up arms immediately —in a minute— whenever they were needed . This was because of their promise to take action immediately .
 First shots had been fired in what was to become the American War of Independence . The first shots were fired in the American Revolution .
 British soldiers destroyed some of the weapons and gunpowder there . The British soldiers reached Concord a few hours later and destroyed some weapons .
 Hundreds of Minutemen gathered in Boston to gather for the group's return to the U.S. Hundreds more gathered to join the group in Boston .
 The next month, May 1775, a second Continental Congress met in Philadelphia and began to act as an American national government . The Congress began in Philadelphia .
 George Washington set up an army of 17,000 men under the command of George Washington . It set up a British army under George Washington in 17th century .
 Washington was a Virginia landowner and surveyor with experience of fighting in the French and Indian War . Washington died in 1842 .
 Continental Congress also sent representatives to seek aid from friendly European nations, especially from France, Britain's old enemy . The Continental Congress was also sent to seek help from friendly Europe nations .
 On July 2, 1776, the Continental Congress finally took the step that many believed was inevitable . The Continental Congress took place in New York City on July 3,1776 . It was the first time the U.S. Congress had taken steps to take action .
 The Declaration of Independence is the most important document in American history . It was written in 17th century America's first Independence Day .
 It was written by ‘Thomas Jefferson, a landowner and lawyer from Virginia.’ It was published by Thomas Jefferson in 17th century .
 After repeating that the colonies were now “free and independent states” it officially named them the United States of America . The U.S. of America was officially named after the colonies in 1881 .
 John Hancock of Massachusetts was one of the first members of the Continental Congress to sign the Declaration of Independence . Hancock signed the Declaration in 17th century . John Hancock was the first member of Continental Congress .
 Hancock picked up the pen and wrote his name in large, clear letters . “Large enough,” he said, “for King George to read without his spectacles.” Hancock said .
 The Declaration of Independence was more than a statement that the colonies were a new nation . It was a statement of independence, not just a statement .
 Ideas such as these were a central part of the political traditions that the colonists’ ancestors had brought with them from England . Ideas such an idea were central to the colonists' political traditions .
 Colonial leaders had also studied them in the writings of English political thinkers named John Locke .
 Paine was one of the most influential voices calling for American independence . Men like Jefferson combined Locke’s ideas with their own experience of the revolution .
 Paine was a Republican named Thomas Paine, who immigrated to America in 1774 . He was a member of the Republican Party . Paine died in 1776 .
 Paine became one of the first to persuade Americans to make a complete break with Britain . Two years later, in a brilliantly written pamphlet called Common Sense, he wrote Common Sense . Paine's pamphlet was published in the same year as the pamphlet Common Sense.
 It had an enormous effect on American opinion and prepared people’s minds for independence, says historian . It had ‘enormous effect’ on U.S. opinion and helped prepare people for independence .
 Officers life in America to produce a new definition of democratic government . Officers of the U.S. need to change their lives in order to win back democratic elections . They need to create a new model of democracy in America .
 This new definition said that governments should consist of representatives elected by the people . The definition of governments is based on the fact that they are elected by people .
 The main reason that governments existed was to protect the rights of individual read parts of it to their troops, it said . It also said that governments exist to protect individual rights of individuals .
 Paine rallied the Americans with a new pamphlet called The Crisis . The pamphlet was published in 1776 . Paine's pamphlet The Crisis was published later that year .
 Its words are still remembered in times of difficulty by Americans today .
 In one of the darkest hours of the war Paine's words helped to save Washington’s armies from melting away and inspired new supporters .
 After some early successes, the Americans did badly in the war against the British . The Americans were defeated by the British in World War Two .
 Washington’s army was more of an armed mob than an effective fighting force, says historian John Avlon . Washington's army was 'armed mob' rather than a real fighting force .
 Few of the men had any military training and many obeyed only those orders that suited them . Few had any training and few had any knowledge of the military .
 Officers quarreled constantly over their rank . General Nathan Heard read the Declaration of Independence to his troops . General Heard was the first American general to do so .
 Washington set to work to train his men and turn them into disciplined soldiers . Washington would train his troops to become disciplined soldiers.
 U.S. suffered defeat after defeat, but this took time, and meanwhile, the Americans suffered defeat . The Americans were defeated by the Germans in the first round of the World Cup .
 Washington wrote to his brother that he feared that the Americans were very close to losing the war . Washington feared that he was close to winning the war.
 The British commander was cut off from his supplies and his men were facing starvation . His men were cut off by the British commander and faced starvation .
 After swearing never again to fight against the Americans, the prisoners were put on board ships and sent back to England . The prisoners swore never to return to fight again .
 Benjamin Franklin was delighted when he received the news of the victory at Saratoga . Benjamin Franklin, the American ambassador to France, was delighted .
 He used it to persuade the French government to join in the struggle against Britain . The French government joined the fight against Britain in the Second World War .
 In February 1778, the French king, Louis XVI, signed an alliance with the Americans . Louis XVI signed a treaty with the U.S. in 1778 .
 French ships, soldiers and money were soon playing an important part in the war . French ships and soldiers soon became important players in the fight against the Germans .
 From 1778 onwards most of the fighting took place in the southern colonies . Most of the conflict took place between the British and Spanish colonies .
 George Washington surrounded 8,000 British troops under General Cornwallis at Yorktown, on the coast of Virginia . Cotnwallis was worried, but he expected British ships to arrive and rescue .
 When the news reached London the British Prime Minister, Lord North, threw up his hands in despair . Lord North: 'When the news reaches London the news was not good news. When it was announced the news of the death toll was almost impossible'
 The British started to withdraw their forces from America and British and American representatives began to discuss peace terms . The British and U.S. representatives were able to pull their forces out of the war .
 In 1783, Britain officially recognized her former colonies as an independent nation . The Treaty of Paris was signed in September 1783 . It was the first time Britain recognized the colonies as independent nations .
 The treaty granted the new United States all of North America from Canada in the north to Florida in the south, and from the Atlantic coast to the Mississippi River . The treaty gave the new U.S. the right to all parts of the continent .
 The Marquis de Lafayette landed in America in 1777 . He was a twenty-year-old French aristocrat . Lafayette was a French nobleman .
 His father died fighting the British in the French and Indian War . But he came also to avenge the death of his father, who died in the war . He was also avenge his father's death .
 Lafayette served without pay in the American army . He became a major-general on the staff of George Washington . Lafayette served in the U.S. Army without pay during his service .
 In the next four years he fought in many battles, proving himself to be a brave and determined soldier . In the past four years, he fought for the British Army .
 He won Washington’s respect and friendship and played a part in the defeat of the British at Yorktown in 1781 .
 When the French revolution broke out in 1789, political opponents had Lafayette imprisoned and took away his estates . When the war ended Lafayette returned to France, 'There he continued to support American interests,’
 In 1824 the now aging Lafayette returned to the United States. A few years later it granted him land in Louisiana . The now-aging Lafayette returned in 1824 .
 The Marquis de Lafayette was a living symbol of the birth of their nation . He was greeted by the American people as a hero, a hero . He is now a national hero .
 In 1783 most Americans felt more loyalty to their own state than to the new United States . Most Americans were loyal to their states rather than the new nation .
 Miss Liberty holds the new flag and places the laurel wreath of victory on George Washington’s head . Miss Liberty also places a wreath on Washington's head .
 It made its own laws and its own decisions about how to run its affairs . It is now a state of its own . It has a history of self-defying .
 The first big problem faced the new U.S. was how to join together these sometimes quarrelsome little countries into one united nation . The United States was formed from the United States of North Korea in 1945 .
 During the War of Independence the states had agreed to work together in a national Congress to which each state sent representatives . Each state sent a representative to the Congress .
 The Articles of Confederation had begun operating in 1781 . The agreement that sct up this plan for the states to cooperate with one another was called the Articles of Constitution .
 Under the Articles of Confederation, the central government of the United States was very weak . The Articles were signed by the U.S. Constitution in 1817 .
 It was given certain rights, but it had no power to make those rights effective . It was not given the power to change those rights .
 Congress could only obtain soldiers and sailors by asking the states for them . Congress could vote to set up a U.S. army and navy, but it could only get soldiers from states .
 It could vote to spend money, but it had no power to collect taxes to raise the money . It could spend money but it could also vote to raise money .
 Congress needed money to pay debts owed to France, some states refused to pay . When Congress needed funds to pay France's debts, many states refused .
 When the War of Independence was over, individual states began to behave more and more like independent nations . Individual states began behaving like independent states after the war .
 In some places states began fighting one another to decide the ownership of particular pieces of frontier land . In some cases states even began fighting over ownership of land .
 The weakness of its government made it difficult for the new U.S. to win the respect or the help of foreign nations, the president says .
 The British felt that the American government was so weak that it was not worth dealing with . The British believed that the U.S. government was too weak to deal with .
 George III was sure that the Americans would soon be begging to rejoin the British Empire . George III thought that the U.S. was soon begging to join the British empire .
 Thomas Jefferson wrote home sadly that the U.S. was the least important and least respected of all the nations with embassies in Paris . Thomas Jefferson, now the American representative in France, wrote that the United States was the most important .
 Tt was clear that for the U.S. to survive there would have to be changes in the Articles of Confederation . Tt. was clear for the United States to survive .
 In February 1787, Congress asked each state to send delegates to a meeting or "convention" in Philadelphia to talk about such changes . The meeting took place in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in 1787 .
 The smallest state, Rhode Island, refused, but the other twelve agreed . Rhode Island was the smallest state to refuse, and the other 12 agreed .
 The delegates to the Constitutional Convention disagreed about the changes that needed to be made . The delegates disagreed on the changes needed .
 Most wanted a stronger THE LEGISLATIVE central government . At the same time most wanted a strong The Legislam Government .
 They believed that a stronger central government would protect their property and business interests . They said they believed that the government would also protect their interests .
 The original purpose of the Constitutional Convention was simply to revise the Articles of Confederation . The Convention was originally intended to revise Articles of the Confederation .
 The Constitution of the United States set out the plan for this government in a document called the Constitution . It was written by the founders of the U.S.
 The Constitution gave the United States a “federal” system of government . The Constitution also gave the U.S. a "federal" system, the Constitution .
 A central, or federal, authority has some of it . The rest is in the hands of local authorities in the separate regions that make up the country . A central authority is responsible for some of the country's finances .
 The new Constitution still left the individual state governments with a wide range of powers . Individual state governments still have wide powers . The new constitution still leaves individual state government with wide-ranging powers .
 It gave it the power to collect taxes, organize armed forces, make treaties with foreign countries and control trade . It also gave it control of taxes, organized armed forces and made treaties .
 The Constitution made arrangements for the election of a national leader called the President to take charge of the federal government . President was elected to lead the country in the Constitution .
 It would be his job to run the country’s everyday affairs and to sce that people obeyed the laws . It is not his job but to run country's everyday affairs, he says .
 The structure of the new government. the Government of the U.S. A.A. shown here are laid down in the Constitution. The rules and arrangements for Ligee THE PEOPLE [Elect]. The structure . shown here is laid down . by the Constitution .
 When the ceremony came to an end, he officially took control of the nation’s government . The ceremony was the first time he had officially taken control .
 He said it was “the interest and duty of a wise people to discourage” them . He said later that it was a “wise people’s duty” to discourage them .
 He favored a strong federal government, so he tended to govern in a Federalist manner . Even so, he favored a stronger federal government .
 The way that he dealt with the ‘Whiskey Rebellion’ of 1794 was an example of this, he said . He said: “I’m proud of the way he handled the situation in 1794 . I’ll always be proud of his
 The law-making, or “legislative,” powers of the federal government were given to a Congress . Some of this they made, including some they made .
 Congress was to consist of two parts, the Senate and the House of Representatives . The Senate and House were to be divided into two parts . The House was to be made up of two chambers, the House and the Senate .
 In the Senate each state would be equally represented, with two members, whatever the size of its population . Each state would have two members in the Senate, with the state's population as large as its own .
 The number of representatives a state had in the House of Representatives was turned into whiskey, which they then sold . A state had to have a representative in each state's House to vote on the issue .
 Pennsylvania farmers refused to pay a tax on whiskey . The federal government placed the tax on the whiskey . Pennsylvania farmers refuse to pay the tax .
 They burned down the houses of the federal tax collectors, or “revenue agents,’’ who tried to make them pay . “Revenue agents’s’t’ were tried to pay them .
 Washington sent an army of 15,000 men to support the rights of the federal government . Washington sent 15,500 men to back the U.S. Constitution .
 The soldiers arrested a few of the leaders, but later pardoned them . President pardoned some of them after the soldiers arrested them .
 After this there was no more organized resistance to paying the whiskey tax . The whiskey tax was introduced in the 1930s .
 They made it in stills hidden away in the woods, hiding away in places that reyenue agents could not find . The stills were hidden away from the public eye in places where they were found .
 Such illegal “moonshine’s whiskey —so called because it was often made at night—continues to be made to this day .
 President Washington reviewed the troops at Fort Cumberland, Maryland, during the Whiskey Rebellion . President Washington visited the fort at the time .
 The Constitution set up a Supreme Court to control the ‘judicial’ part of the nation’s government . The Constitution also set up the Supreme Court as a “judicial” body .
 The job of the Supreme Court was to make decisions in any disagreements about the meaning of the laws and the Constitution, says Justice Scalia . Scalia says the job of Supreme Court is to solve any disagreements over meaning of laws and Constitution .
 To each branch it gave powers that the other two did not have; cach had ways of stopping wrongful actions by either of the other 2 . Cach was given powers to stop wrongful actions .
 This was to make sure that no one person or group could become powerfull enough to take complete control of the nation’s government . This was made to ensure the government was not taken over by a single person .
 The American people had rebelled against being ruled in an undemocratic fashion by Britain . The U.S. had rebuffed the British government's attempts to rule the country .
 They did not want to replace the unrepresentative rule of the king and parliament in London with the rule of a tyrannical central government in the U.S. They wanted to replace them with the tyrannical government in America itself .
 This was that the federal government might try to weaken the power of the states to run their own individual affairs . This was the case of the U.S. government trying to weaken its power in the states .
 The Constitution said what powers the federal government should have and what powers should be reserved for the states . To remove this danger, the Constitution said exactly what powers were reserved for states .
 It said that the states would be allowed to run their internal affairs as they wished, provided that they kept to the rules of the Constitution . The states would have to run internal affairs in accordance with the Constitution, it said .
 Before the new system of government sct out in the Constitution could begin, it had to be approved by a majority of the citizens in at least nine of the thirteen states .
 People made speeches and wrote newspaper articles both for and against the Constitution . Those in favor won the argument, those in favor of the Constitution won't .
 In June 1788, the assembly of the state of New Hampshire voted to accept, or “ratify,” the Constitution . The assembly voted to "ratify" the Constitution in 1788 .
 The Constitution went into effect in March 1789, but it was still not really complete . The Constitution was still incomplete when it was completed .
 The reason for the Bill of Rights was that the original Constitution had said nothing about the rights and freedoms of individual citizens . The original Constitution did not say anything about individual citizens, the author says .
 In 1801 John Adams appointed a new head of the Supreme Court . John Adams had succeeded George Washington as President of the United States in 1797 .
 The Court's new Chief Justice, to give him his official title, was John Marshall . John Marshall was the new chief justice of the Supreme Court .
 Marshall was a 46-year-old lawyer and politician . Marshall fought in the American army during the War of Independence . Marshall died in 1847 .
 Marshall was to be Chief Justice of the Supreme Court for thirty-five years . Marshall was a Supreme Court Justice for 30 years . He was appointed to be the Chief Justice for 35 years .
 He made his most important decision as a judge only two years after he was appointed . But he made the decision only 2 years after being appointed .
 Marshall said the Supreme Court has the power to decide whether particular American laws are according to the Constitution . In an 1803 legal case known as Marbury Madison, Marshall said that the court can decide whether certain laws are constitutional . Marshall: The Supreme Court should be able to decide if particular
 If the Supreme Court decides that any law is “repugnant to the Constitution” does not agree with it, the Court can declare it illegal, or “void,” and so prevent it from being enforced . The Supreme Court can also declare the law illegal,
 In claiming it, Marshall established firmly the most important ba dea in American constitutional law . Marshall established it, and it was the first time he had done so .
 The Supreme Court is the final authority in deciding the meaning of the Constitution . If justices decide that any law is ‘unconstitutional,’ that law can no longer be enforced .
 The Constitution and the Bill of Rights illustrated two different sides of American political life . The first political parties were created by the Constitution . The Constitution was written in 17th century .
 On the one hand people saw that the country needed a strong and efficient central authority . On the other hand people see that the government needed to be strong, they said . The country needed strong central authority, they added .
 "On the other hand they wanted to protect individual rights and freedoms," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "I'm not afraid to go to jail," says Sutter .
 Differing ideas about the importance of these issues gave birth to the first political parties in the U.S. The parties were born out of differing ideas .
 For this reason it appealed to richer people, who believed that a strong central government would make their property safer . The government appealed to rich people who believed it would make them safer .
 To people such as small farmers and craftsmen, this seemed likely to make it easier for people like themselves to control government actions . To people who like themselves, the move would have made it easier to control the government .
 Land was becoming scarcer and more expensive in the U.S. colonies by the time they quarreled with Britain . Land became more scarce in the American colonies in 17th century .
 After 1783 more and more people set off for the new territories between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River that the Treaty of Paris had granted to the U.S. The treaty of Paris granted the United States the territories .
 Armed only with axes, guns, and plenty of self-confidence, they journeyed across the mountains to make new farms and settlements out of the wilderness . Armed with axes and guns, the men were able to build new farms in the mountains .
 Amerindians who already lived on these lands saw the settlers as thieves who had come to steal their hunting grounds . The settlers came to the area to steal hunting grounds from the Amerindian people .
 The settlers struck back, sometimes destroying entire Amcrindian villages . The settlers often struck back and destroyed entire villages .
 The new government of the United States tried at first to keep the peace by making treaties with the Amerindians . The new U.S. government made treaties with them .
 By 1817 President James Monroe was writing that their hunting way of life “requires a greater extent of territory than is compatible with the progress of civilized life and must yield to it.”
 Monroe believed there was only one way for the Amerindians to survive . Monroe believed that there was the only way to survive. Monroe .
 They would have to be moved from lands that white settlers wanted to other lands, further west . White settlers would need to move them further west, says the historian .
 There, undisturbed by settlers, they would be free either to continue their old ways of life or to adopt those of white Americans . They would either be left behind by settlers or adopted by whites .
 In 1830 the United States government passed a law called the Indian Removal Act to put this policy into practice . The law was passed by the U.S. government in 1830 .
 The law said that all Indians living east of the Mississippi River would be moved west to a place called Indian Territory . The law also said that Indians living west of the river would be relocated to Indian territory .
 This was an area beyond the Mississippi that was thought to be unsuitable for white farmers . White farmers were thought to have been unable to farm in the area .
 Some people claimed that the Indian Removal Act was a way of saving the Amerindians . Some people claim that the removal of the American Indians was to save their people .
 Most saw it as a way to get rid of them and seize their land . But most saw it simply as a means of getting rid of the land . The land was seized by the government to seize and seize .
 Cherokees were an Amerindian people who suffered greatly from the Indian Removal policy . The Cherokees suffered from the removal of Native Americans from their homeland .
 Their lands lay between the state of Georgia and the Mississippi River . Their lands were land between the Georgia and Mississippi .
 Cherokees had changed themselves from a stone age tribe to a civilized community . Cherokees became a civilized tribe in the early nineteenth century .
 The first six Presidents of the U.S. were all from rich families . Old Hickory was the first President of the United States from wealthy families .
 All of them came from long-settled states along the Atlantic coast . Also, all of them were from long, settled states . All of the men came from the same area as New England .
 Andrew Jackson was born into a poor family on the western frontier . His name was Andrew Jackson and he had been born in poor conditions .
 Jackson commanded the American army at the Battle of New Orleans in 1814 . Jackson had commanded the U.S. Army at the New Orleans battle .
 Hickory is a particularly tough kind of wood that grows in American forests . Hickory wood is particularly hard to work with, especially in the hard-working areas of the wood .
 It was the votes of such people that made him President in 1828 and then again in 1832 . It was a popular vote for him to be President again .
 Three things they wanted above all were cheap money, cheap manufactured goods and cheap land . And what they wanted was three things: Cheap money, manufacturing goods and land .
 Jackson provided cheap money by encouraging banks to make loans at low rates of interest . Jackson encouraged lenders to make low-rate loans to encourage low-interest interest rates .
 Cherokees and other eastern Amerindians forced to move west of the Mississippi . He provided cheap land by forcing the Cherokees to move to the west .
 Some believe that he was concerned only about winning popularity and the power that went with it . Others believe he was only concerned only with winning popularity .
 Others say his policies of giving voters what they wanted were an important landmark in making the U.S. a more genuinely democratic country . Others say that Jacksonian democracy was a mistake .
 They had become Christians and attended church and sent their children to school . They had also become Christians, attended church .
 Cherokee people had a written language and published their own newspaper in both Cherokee and English . They had their own written language . They published a newspaper .
 They even wrote for themselves a Constitution modeled on that of the U.S. Constitution . They also wrote a constitution modeled on the United States .
 Congress declared their lands belonged to the state of Georgia and they were divided up for sale to white settlers . Congress declared that their lands belong to Georgia .
 Cherokees were driven from their homes and forced to march hundreds of miles to what is now the state of Oklahoma . The Cherokees are now known as the Cherokees .
 In bitterly cold winter weather American soldiers gathered thousands of Cherokee men, women, and children, and drove them west . Thousands of Cherokee people were driven from their homes to the U.S.
 By the time it was over, 4,000 of the Amerindians—a quarter of the whole Cherokee nation — were dead . By the end of the war, 4.000 Amerindian people were dead, including a quarter of them .
 Long before the Indian Removal Act the federal government had begun to organize the new western lands for settlement . The federal government began organizing the western lands in the 1800s .
 As each township was surveyed and marked out in sections the land was sold by auction . The land was auctioned off by auction after each section was marked out .
 They usually sold the land later, at a higher price, to settlers arriving from the E; Every year more settlers moved in .
 They used the river as a road to carry themselves, their goods and their animals into the new lands . The river was used as a way to carry them and their goods to new lands.
 Daniel Boone's axmen cut through the Cumberland Gap in the Appalachians . Others moved west along routes like the Wilderness Road that Daniel Boone’s axmen had cut .
 Such roads were simply rough tracks, just wide enough for a wagon and full of holes, rocks and tree stumps . Such roads would have been simply wide enough to fit a wagon .
 The average speed at which travelers could move along them was about two miles an hour . Travelers were able to walk along them at about two mph .
 It earned its living by selling food and raw materials to other countries . It earned a living selling raw materials and food to other nations .
 During the eighteenth century an Industrial Reyolution had come to Britain . During the 17th century an industrial revolution had been established in Britain .
 New machines driven by water and steam power had made possible great increases in production . New machines were driven by steam power .
 In 1789 an English mechanic named Samuel Slater took the Industrial Revolution across the Atlantic to America . Slater was the first mechanic to bring the industrial revolution to the U.S. The Industrial Revolution began in 1789 .
 Slater memorized the details of the latest English cotton spinning machines . He carried them in his memory because it was against the law to take plans of the machines out of England .
 Slater went into partnership with Moses Brown in the U.S. Slater was a successful businessman in the United States . Slater was born in London, England, and later moved to Australia .
 Together they opened a mill, or factory, to spin cotton at Pawtucket, Rhode Island .
 In time that process turned the northeast of the nation into its first important manufacturing region .
 Federal authorities divided the lands between the Appalachians and the Mississippi into two . For purposes of government, the lands were divided into two counties .
 The area south of the Ohio was called the Southwest Territory and that to the north the Northwest Territory . The Northwest Territory was also known as the Southwest and Southwest Territory .
 Each of these two big territories was divided again into smaller ones . As the number of people living in them increased, each of them was divided up into smaller territories .
 Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Michigan and Wisconsin were eventually made out of the Northwest Territory .
 As each nation was formed it was placed under the rule of a governor appointed by Congress . As each state was formed, each was placed in the power of the governor .
 When the number of white males living in a territory reached 5,000 it could elect its own lawing body . The territory could elect a new body when it reaches the threshold of five,000 .
 Between 1803 and 1815 Britain and France were at war . It could also send a representative to The War of 1812 . France could also have a representative in the 1812 War .
 They stopped American merchant ships and sometimes seized their cargoes . They stopped U.S. merchant ships .
 The British took seamen off American ships and forced them to serve in the British navy . They were especially angry at the British because of the British taking seamen from American ships .
 In the early months of this War of 1812 American ships won a number of fights at sea . American ships fought at sea in the early years of the war .
 Much stronger British navy soon gained complete control of the coastal waters of the United States and blockaded American ports . But the much stronger British Navy soon gained control of coastal waters .
 American attempts to invade British-ruled Canada ended in disaster . Even more humiliating for the Americans, British forces captured and burned Washington .
 In December 1814, the United States and Britain signed a treaty of peace in Europe . The treaty was signed by the U.S. and Britain .
 Two weeks later, before the news reached America, British forces attacked the city of New Orleans . Two weeks after the news of the attack on New Orleans, the British attacked it .
 The whole of the War of 1812 was as pointless as this last battle was . Tn many ways the whole of this war was pointless as the final battle of the war .
 The British nayy’s wartime 9 Years oF GROWTH give its point of view in Congress . The British . 9 years oFGROWTH .
 When the population of a territory reached 60,000 it became a new state, with the same rights and powers as the original thirteen states . The territory became a state when the population reached the threshold of 60,00 .
 The Ordinance laid down for controlling the growth of the United States has been followed ever since . The importance of the plan is that the original thirteen states were not able to control for their own benefit lands that were settled later .
 As the United States grew bigger it went on being a democratic union of equals . This meant that as the U.S. grew bigger the union was democratic . The United States went on to be a democracy of equals, the president said .
 This forced Americans to begin making goods of their own and so gave a start to American manufacturing industry . This led to the rise of American manufacturing in the United States .
 Thomas Jefferson was one of many people who had been against the growth of industry in the U.S. Jefferson was against growth of the American industry .
 He saw how important it was to the future safety and prosperity of the country . Now he saw how much of his country's future is in the future .
 In 1800 the western boundary of the United States was the Mississippi River . Wrasse sue IP ACTEIC CEDED BY GREAT BRITAIN .
 Beyond its wide and muddy waters, there were great areas of land through which few white people had traveled . The area was largely uninhabited by white people, but few white men had traveled there .
 The ruler of France at this time was Napoleon, who would soon become the country’s emperor . Napoleon was soon to become the ruler of the country .
 Americans feared Napoleon might send French soldiers and settlers to Louisiana . Americans feared that Napoleon might block the further westward growth of the U.S. Americans feared he might send troops and settlers .
 Jefferson had been planning to send an expedition to explore Louisiana . Even before this he had planned to send a large expedition .
 He was a keen amateur scientist and wanted to know more about the geography, the people, the animals and the plants of the lands to the west of the United States . He was also keen on the geography and people of the west .
 He also hoped that the explorers might find a way across North America to the Pacific Ocean . The explorer hopes to find his way across the North American ocean .
 Sometimes they had to wade shoulder-deep in the river, pulling the boats forward against fast and dangerous currents . Sometimes the boats were pulled into the river against fast currents .
 When the Missouri became too shallow to follow any further, the men marched for ten weeks across the Rocky Mountains . They killed their horses for food and with only melted snow to drink .
 They had been away for two anda half years and had traveled almost 4,000 miles . The couple had been together for almost two and a half years . It was the first time they had seen each other since 2004 .
 They had failed to find an easy overland route to the Pacific, but they had shown that the journey was possible . They had shown the world that it is possible to reach the Pacific .
 They had brought back much useful information about both Louisiana and the western lands that lay beyond it . They had also brought back some useful information .
 They stretched from Alaska in the north to California in the south and inland through the Rocky Anmerindians discovering Lewis and Clarke Mountains to the undefined borders of Louisiana . They stretched between Alaska and California in north and inland .
 In 1805 four countries claimed to own Oregon— Russia, Spain, Britain and the U.S. Russia and Spain were the first to claim Oregon .
 The British and the Americans were in the strongest position in Oregon . But in Oregon, the British and Americans were the strongest .
 Both already had trading posts scattered along Oregon’s coasts and rivers . The Oregon state and Washington state already have trading posts .
 At these posts traders bought beaver and other animal furs from Amerindian and European trappers . Trading posts were set up in the early 1900s .
 Such trappers were called “mountain-men’’ because they spent their lives wandering the mountains of Oregon and California in search of furs . They were known as ‘mountain trappers'
 By the 1830s the British had more settlements and trading posts in Oregon than the Americans . By the 18th century, the U.S. had more American settlements than the British in Oregon .
 American political leaders began to fear that Britain would soon gain complete control of the area . U.S. political leaders feared it would soon become a British-controlled region .
 To prevent this they made great efforts to persuade more Americans to start farms in Oregon . To prevent it, they tried to persuade people to start farming in Oregon, Oregon .
 They sailed from the cast coast ports of the United States, around South America and up the long Pacific coast . They sailed around the world, sailing from the U.S. to South America .
 Lewis and Clark explored the Southwest of the U.S. in the early 1800s . They usually set out from Independence, 41 A New Nation Zebulon Pike .
 The leader of the expedition was a young lieutenant in the American army named Zebulon Pike . The expedition was led by Pike, a young American soldier .
 In November 1806, Pike and his men reached the Rocky Mountains near where the city of Pueblo, Colorado, now stands . Pike's men were able to reach the Rocky Mountain in November 1804 . Pike was killed in 1806 .
 Pike traveled further into the mountains, into lands that were then ruled by Spain . Pike traveled to Spain in the following spring . The following spring Pike traveled into the Spanish mountains .
 Spaniards took away his notes and papers and sent him back to the U.S. Although he was treated with courtesy, he was sent back to Spain .
 Pikes Peak, a mountain in Colorado, is named after him . He was first sighted on November 15, 1806, and named after one of his first peaks .
 By the 1870s improved seeds and better methods of cultivation were making it possible for farmers to turn these lands into one of the richest grain-growing areas in the world .
 From Independence they followed a twisting trail of about 2,000 miles across plains and mountains to the mouth of the Columbia River . From Independence to Columbia, the trail was followed by a trail of more than a dozen miles .
 This overland route to the Pacific coast became known as the Oregon Trail . The Oregon Trail was known as "The Oregon Trail"
 It was more a collection of trails, all heading in the same general direction across western North America and meeting occasionally at river-crossing points and passes through the mountains .
 Floods and blizzards, prairie fires and accidents, disease and starvation took many lives . Floods, blizzers, blogs and accidents killed many people in the early 1900s .
 In spite of the dangers, settlers continued to make the long journey . The long journey was made by settlers in the early 1900s .
 People left worn-out farms in the East, packed their possessions on wagons and set off for the West . People left their worn out farms in East and left for the west .
 This was a claim that it was the clear intention of fate that the territory of the United States should stretch across North America from the Atlantic to the Pacific . The U.S. claims it was a clear intention that the . intention of the . United . States should have a territory of
 Supporters of manifest destiny demanded that the United States should take the whole of Oregon, all the way north to the boundary with Alaska at latitude 54 degrees 40 minutes . The U.S. should take Oregon north to Alaska .
 They began using the slogan ‘Fifty four forty or fight’ and threatened the British with war . The British were threatened with war by the British . The slogan was used to warn the British of war .
 By the summer of 1846 the United States was already at war with Mexico . The U.S. and Mexico were at war in 1846, but it was not until 1846 that the war began .
 Polk agreed in June to divide Oregon with Britain in two almost equal sections . Polk agreed to divide the state with the British in June .
 The 49th parallel of latitude already formed the boundary between the U.S. and Canada to the cast of the Rocky Mountains . The dividing line was the 49th . parallel .
 The 1846 war with Mexico had grown out of events that had been taking place in Texas . The war was the result of a war between Texas and Mexico in 1846 .
 Thousands of Americans had settled in Texas, but up to the 1830s it was ruled by Mexico . Thousands had settled there in Texas .
 Texas defeated a much larger Mexican army in 1836 at the Battle of San Jacinto . Led by General Sam Houston, they defeated the Mexican army and made Texas an independent republic .
 In 1845, Texas became part of the United States . Eventually the two countries reached an agreement about this and in 1845 Texas was part of Texas .
 In April 1846, there was fighting between American and Mexican soldiers along the border between Texas and Mexico . The fighting took place in Texas .
 Polk saw an opportunity to take land from Mexico and he declared war . Polk saw it as an opportunity for the U.S. President Polk declared war against Mexico . Polk was captured by Mexican troops .
 By September 1847, they had occupied Mexico City, the country’s capital, Mexico City . They had occupied the Mexican capital .
 The treaty forced Mexico to hand over vast stretches of its territory to the United States . The treaty made Mexico hand over enormous stretches of land to the U.S.
 Today these lands form the American states of California, Arizona, Nevada, Utah, New Mexico and Colorado . They are now the states of the United States .
 The annexation of these Mexican lands completed the “manifest destiny” of the U.S. of the United States, historian says . The annexation was the "manifest destitution" of the American empire, he says .
 It now stretches across the North American continent from ocean to ocean . It was now stretched across the continent .
 In little more than halfa century it had grown from a small nation on the shores of the Atlantic into one of the largest countries in the world .
 Most of the settlers who traveled to Oregon made the journey in four-wheeled wagons . Wagon trains were used to transport the settlers to Oregon .
 A wagon train usually consisted of about twenty-five wagons, each with a canvas cover to protect its contents from the weather . The train train was made up of about 25 wagons . The wagons were used to transport passengers and passengers .
 Scen from a distance, these covers made the wagons look like ships sailing across a sea of grass . The covers were made to make wagons sail across the grass in order to avoid being hit by the wind .
 Each wagon could carry a load of between 2 and 2¥ tons and was pulled by a team of either mules or oxen . The wagons were pulled by either oxen or mules and mules .
 Others argued oxen were stronger than mules and easier to control . Others argued that oxen would be stronger and more easily controlled .
 oxen were used more than any other animals to pull the wagons that traveled the Oregon Trail . For this reason oxen pulled wagons more than other animals . The Oregon Trail was the only trail trail covered by oxen .
 A wagon train crossing the prairie . Slaves preparing the ground to plant cotton on a southern plantation . a3) si 11 NorTH AND SOUTH .
 For 1. million of these people, the words of the Declaration of Independence ‘that all men are created equal’ were far from true . For 1 million of those people the words were not true, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Thomas Jefferson, who wrote the Declaration of Independence, owned slaves . Thomas Jefferson owned slaves himself . Jefferson was a slave owner .
 George Washington and other leaders of the movement for American independence and freedom fought for freedom in the U.S. So did George Washington, who died in 17th century .
 Other big landowners in southern states such as Virginia defended slavery . But other big landowners defended slavery in the South .
 Many abolitionists wanted to end or abolish slavery by law by law . Many were abolitionists . Many of the abolitionists were slaves .
 By the carly nineteenth century many northern states had passed laws abolishing slavery inside their own boundaries . Many northern states passed laws banning slavery in their own borders .
 In 1808 they persuaded Congress to make it illegal for ships to bring any new slaves from Africa into the U.S. Congress also banned ships bringing new slaves .
 By the 1820s southern and northern politicians were arguing about whether slavery should be permitted in the new territories that were then being settled in the West .
 The argument centered on the 11 Nortu anp Soutu Missouri territory, which was part of the Louisiana Purchase . Missouri territory was the 11th and 11th largest territory in the U.S.
 Southerners argued that slave labor should be allowed in Missouri and all the other lands that formed part of the Louisiana Purchase . The Louisiana Purchase was the largest land in the world and was the site of the largest slave trade .
 Northern farmers moving west did not want to find themselves competing for land against southerners who had slaves to do their work for them . Eventually the two sides agreed on a compromise .
 Slavery would be permitted in the Missouri and Arkansas territories but banned in lands to the west and north of Missouri . Slavery was allowed in Missouri, Arkansas and Missouri territories .
 The Missouri Compromise, as it was called, did not end the disputes between North and South . It did not stop disputes between the two statesmen .
 Northern states favored such duties because they protected their young industries against the competition of foreign manufactured goods . Northern states favor such duties to protect young industries .
 Southern states opposed them because southerners relied upon foreign manufacturers for both necessities and luxuries . Southern States opposed them .
 During the argument about import duties a southern political leader named John C Calhoun raised a much more serious question . Calhoun was a leader of the Southern Confederacy during the time .
 He claimed that a state had the right to disobey any federal law if the state believed that the law would harm its interests . He said a state could disobey the law if it believed that it would harm the state's interests .
 Calhoun’s claim was strongly denied by Senator Daniel Webster of Massachusetts . Senator Webster strongly denied the claim by Calhoun .
 The power to decide whether the federal authorities were acting rightly or wrongly belonged to the Supreme Court, Webster says . Webster: The power belongs to the court, not to individual states .
 If states were given the right to disobey the federal government, he said, it would become ‘a mere rope of sand” and lose power to hold the country together .
 Webster's speech was a warning to Americans that the states’ rights doctrine could become a serious threat fo the unity of the United States . Webster: States’s rights doctrine is a threat to America's unity . Webster was speaking at the time of the speech .
 California was admitted to the United States as a free state . Utah and New Mexico were given the right to decide for themselves whether or not to allow slavery .
 Eli Whitney was visiting friends in the southern state of Georgia in 1793 . A 46-year-old school teacher named Eli Whitney visited friends in Georgia, Georgia . Whitney was a school teacher and teacher at the time .
 Georgia's cotton growers removed seeds that were tangled among its fibers . However, the mills could not use Georgia’s cotton until its growers removed the many seeds .
 The amount of cotton that planters grew was limited to the amount that their workers could pick the sceds from . Until a way could be found to do it more quickly, planters were limited to what they could grow .
 He invented the cotton “engine’ —or “gin” for short. He invented cotton ‘engine” -or ‘gin’ - for short .
 This was a machine that quickly separated the seeds and the fiber of the raw cotton . This was the first machine to separate seeds and fiber from the cotton .
 Whitney’s gin can remove seeds from more than four hundred pounds of cotton in the same time that it had taken previously to remove them from two pounds . Whitney's gin removes seeds from cotton in less than two pounds less than a year . Whitney says he hopes to use the gin
 Whitney’s invention made possible a huge increase in the amount of cotton grown by southern planters . Whitney's invention made a huge rise in cotton grown in the southern states .
 By the year 1820 the output of their plantations and farms was cight thousand times higher than in 1791 . The output of the plantations was thousands times higher in the year of 1791 than the year 1791.
 The increase was achieved by bringing in more slaves to plough and hoe the land and pick the cotton . More slaves were brought in to help pick cotton .
 The prosperity of the planters came to depend more every year on slavery being allowed to continue . The prosperity . of the . planters depended on slavery .
 This fact, perhaps more perhaps than any other, explains why southerners broke away from the rest of the U.S. This fact is perhaps the most significant reason why they split up .
 They did so in order to try to save slavery, their “peculiar institution’’ as they called it, as they did so . They tried to try and save slavery and with it their prosperity and way of life, they said .
 This was a law to make it easier for southerners to recapture slaves who escaped from their masters and fled for safety to free states . The law was passed in the 18th century to help recapture escaped slaves who fled to safety .
 Slave owners had long offered rewards, or “bounties, for the return of runaway slaves . Slave owners offered rewards for their slaves' safe return .
 These men made their living by hunting down fugitive slaves in order to collect the rewards on them . These men hunted them down and collected the rewards from them .
 With the support of the new law, bounty hunters now began searching free states for escaped slaves . The new law allows bounty hunters to search for slaves in free states .
 The Fugitive Slave Act angered many northerners who had not so far given much thought to the rights and wrongs of slavery . It angered many northern Americans who had never given much of thought to slavery .
 They mapped out escape routes and moved runaway slaves by night from one secret hiding place to another . The slaves were moved by night in secret hiding places to escape escape routes .
 The final stop on these escape routes was Canada, where fugitives could not be followed by U.S. laws or bounty hunters . The fugitives escaped from the United States .
 Many conductors on the Underground Railroad were former slaves themselves . The Underground Railroad was founded by former slaves in 1881 .
 They traveled deep into slave states to make contact with runaways . Often they traveled deep in slave states, making contact with slaves .
 As the number of fugitive slaves increased, gunfights between bounty hunters and conductors became more common . Gunfights became more and more common as bounty hunters hunted for slaves .
 In 1854 a Senator named Stephen Douglas persuaded Congress to end the Missouri Compromise . Stephen Douglas was a Senator in the 1854 Senate . Douglas was elected to the Senate in 1854 .
 West of Missouri, on land that was supposed to be closed to slavery, was Kansas . Kansas was a western territory called Kansas . The territory was called Kansas.
 In 1854 Congress voted to let its people decide for themselves whether to permit slavery there . Congress voted in 1854 to allow slavery to be allowed in the U.S.
 Some Americans opposed to slavery were prepared to wait for it to come to an end gradually and by agreement with the slave owners . William Lloyd Garrison and the abolitionists were among those who wanted to end slavery .
 The best known spokesman of the people in this second group was William Lloyd Garrison . Garrison was a Boston writer . Garrison is one of the best known journalists in the world .
 Garrison produced the first issue of Ihe Liberator, a newspaper dedicated to the abolition of slavery, in 1831 . Garrison was a slave abolitionist . Garrison's first issue was published on January 1, 1831, in New York, New York .
 He became wellknown for the extreme way in which he expressed his views . He became known for his extreme views .
 He printed, sometimes invented, sensational stories about how cruelly black slaves were treated . He printed and sometimes invented stories about the treatment of slaves .
 He attacked slave owners as evil monsters, about whom nothing good could be said . The slave owners are evil monsters about nothing good, he said .
 In 1835 an angry mob paraded him through the streets of Boston with a rope around his neck . An angry mob showed its dislike of his opinions by parading him around .
 His bloodthirsty calls for action and sensational stories continued to offend both supporters of slavery and those who wanted to bring it to an end peacefully .
 They convinced many others that slavery was evil and that it must be abolished at once . But they convinced many other people that slavery is evil . The only way to do this was by war .
 Pro-slavery immigrants poured in from the South and antislavery immigrants from the North . The North and the South were at the beginning of the 1800s .
 John Brown led a raid in which a number of supporters of slavery were killed . In reply, a halfmad abolitionist named John Brown lead a raid . The raid was a response to a demand for abolitionists to be killed .
 Congress delayed its admission to the U.S. because of the trouble there, Congress delayed it . Congress delayed the admission of the United States.
 A slave named Dred Scott had been taken by his owner to live in a free state . The slave was taken to the free state of South Carolina by his slave owner .
 Scott asked the Supreme Court to declare that this had made him legally free . Scott asked for the court to declare he had been freed . Scott says he is now legally free.
 Congress had gone beyond its constitutional powers in claiming the right to prohibit slavery in the western territories, it said . It added also that Congress went beyond its . constitutional powers . Congress has gone beyond constitutional powers, the letter said .
 The Supreme Court seemed to be saying that free states had no right to forbid slavery within their boundaries . The court seemed to say that slave owners could put their slaves to work anywhere . Free states were not allowed to prohibit slavery in their borders .
 Lincoln said in a series of public debates with Douglas that slavery must be stopped . Lincoln said that the spread of slavery must have been stopped .
 He was willing to accept slavery in the states where it existed already, but that was all . He was also willing to let slavery be allowed in the U.S.
 Looking to the future of the U.S. he gave his listeners a warning . Looking at the future, he gave them a warning: "Don't be afraid of the future"
 In 1860 the Republicans chose him as their candidate in that year’s presidential election . In 1860 he was chosen as the Republican candidate for president .
 In 1859 the same John Brown who had fought in ‘bleeding Kansas’ had tried to start a slave rebellion in Virginia . The same man who fought in Kansas tried to take over a slave revolt in 1859 .
 The attack failed and Brown was captured, tried for treason and hanged . He was captured and hanged for his part in the attack .
 Many northerners claimed that he was a martyr in the struggle against slavery . He was a hero in the fight against slavery and many northerner claimed he was martyr .
 They believed it was a sign that the North was preparing to use force to end slavery in the South . They believed that it would be a sign of the North's intentions to end the South's slavery .
 In 1860 the southerners put forward a candidate of their own to oppose Lincoln . In the presidential election of 1860, Lincoln was defeated by the Southern Democrats .
 They threatened that the South would break away, or ‘secede,” from the United States if Lincoln became President . They threatened to break away from the U.S. if Lincoln was elected .
 In every southern state, a majority of the citizens voted against Lincoln . Lincoln was elected to the presidency in 2010 .
 The state of South Carolina voted to secede from the United States in December 1860 . A few weeks later, the state voted to separate from the U.S. The state was the first state to do so .
 In February 1861, eleven states announced they were now an independent nation, the Confederate States of America, often known as the Confederacy . The eleven states became independent states in 1861 .
 The nineteenth century’s bloodiest war, the American Civil War, was about to begin . It was the first time the Civil War had begun in the South .
 She was born in 1821 and grew up as a slave on a plantation in Maryland . She grew up on a slave plantation and died in 1881 .
 In 1849 she escaped to Philadelphia and joined the Underground Railroad . She escaped in 1849 to escape to Philadelphia . She was later found to have escaped to New York .
 Harriet Tubman had great abilities as an organizer . Tubman could neither read nor write, but was a great organizer .
 When the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 made those cities unsafe, she led the people in her care to Canada . She led them to Canada, where she died in 1850 .
 Harriet Tubman worked as a nurse, a cook and a laundress with the Union armies fighting in the South . Tubman was a nurse and laundress during the Civil War . She was a cook, nurse and cook during the war .
 It is also said that she tisked her life by traveling behind Confederate lines as a spy . It was also said to have been a Confederate spy .
 She used profits from her autobiography to pay for her charity work . Here she worked to help children and old people . She also used the profits she earned from her book to help others .
 On March 4, 1861, Abraham Lincoln took the oath of office as President of the United States . When she died in 1913, she had already become a legend .
 Lincoln appealed to the southern states to stay in the Union in his inaugural address as President . Lincoln's inaugural address was his first address to the nation's first lady .
 He warned that he would not allow them to break up the United States by seceding . But he also warned that they would not be allowed to secede from the U.S.
 Confederate guns opened fire on Fort Sumter, a fortress in the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina, on April 12 . The U.S. was occupied by Confederate troops at the time .
 Jefferson Davis, the newly elected President of the Confederate States, made a similar appeal for men to fight for the Confederacy . Jefferson Davis made the appeal to men .
 Some people find it difficult and painful to decide which side to support . Some people found it difficult to decide whether to support either side of the debate .
 The son of the commander of the Confederate navy was killed fighting in a Union ship . He was killed in a battle fought in the Confederate Navy .
 Lincoln’s own brothers-in-law died fighting for the Confederacy . Three of Lincoln's own brothers in-law fought for the Confederate Army in the Civil War .
 Union warships blockaded the ports of the South from the first months of the war . Union warships blocked the ports from the South during the war.
 The cotton trade embargo prevented the Confederacy from selling its cotton abroad and from obtaining foreign supplies . They did this to prevent the Confederate from selling cotton abroad .
 In both men and material resources the North was much stronger than the South . The North and the South were much stronger in both men, material resources .
 The North grew more food crops than the South . It also had more than five times the manufacturing capacity, including most of the country’s weapon factories . The South had only nine million people and 3. million of them were
 North not only had more fighting men than the South, it could also keep them better supplied with weapons, clothing, food and everything else they needed . So the North could keep the South better supplied .
 The only way it could win the war was to invade the South and occupy its land. The South would have to be occupied by the South, the president says . The South was the only way the U.S. could win it, he says .
 Allit had to do was to hold out until the people of the North grew tired of fighting, he says . He says: "Allit had done was to stay in the North until the North tired of its fighting"
 Many of the best officers in the pre-war army of the U.S. were southerners . The South was the birthplace of the Civil War .
 Most recruits led by these officers had grown up on farms and were expert riders and marksmen . Most of the recruits led up to these officers grew up on farm animals .
 Confederate soldiers were defending their own 12 Tue Crvit War homes . Most of the war’s fighting took place in the South, meaning Confederate soldiers defended their own homes .
 The South was fighting for its independence from the North, they said, just as their grandfathers had fought for independence . The South is fighting for independence from its own country, the South said .
 The war was fought in two main areas: in Virginia and the other east coast states of the Confederacy, and in the Mississippi valley . The Mississippi valley was the heart of the war, and the Mississippi River valley .
 In Virginia the Union armies suffered one defeat after another in the first year of the war . In Virginia, the Union Army suffered many defeats .
 Confederate forces in Virginia had two great advantages. They were thrown back with heavy heavy fire. ‘The Confederate forces tried to capture Richmond, the Confederate h time they were thrown . again and again they tried to . capture Richmond. Again and again, the . Confederate forces . tried to
 Many rivers cut across the roads leading south to Richmond and so made the city easier to defend . The first was that many rivers cutting across roads leading to the city . The second was that the city was made more secure by the city's rivers and rivers .
 Two Confederate generals in particular, Robert E Lee and Thomas J Jackson, showed much more skill than the generals leading the Union army at this time .
 Jackson got his nickname “Stonewall” because he stood firm against advancing Union troops . Jackson was nicknamed Stonewall for his stand-in-steady stand-off against Union forces .
 Union forces in the Mississippi valley had more success in Mississippi . Fortunately for the North, Union forces were able to defeat the Confederate forces .
 In April 1862, a naval officer named David Farragut sailed Union ships into the mouth of the river and captured New Orleans . New Orleans, the largest city in the Confederacy, was captured .
 At the same time other Union forces were fighting their way down the Mississippi from the north . The battle took place in 1881 .
 By spring 1863, the Union armies were closing in on an important Confederate stronghold on the Mississippi called Vicksburg . The Union armies closed in on the Confederate stronghold .
 On July 4, after much bloody fighting and a siege lasting six weeks, Vicksburg surrendered to the Union army led by General Ulysses S Grant . On July 5, 1863, the city surrendered to Grant's Union army .
 It became impossible for western Confederate states like Texas to send any more men and supplies to the east . It was impossible for west Confederate states to send more troops and supplies .
 General Lee, the Confederate commander, believed that if his army could win a decisive victory on northern soil, popular opinion there might force the Union government to make peace . General Lee believed if he could win the decisive victory in northern soil he might force peace .
 In the last week of June 1863, Lee marched his army north into Pennsylvania . Lee marched into Pennsylvania in June 1863 .
 The battle which followed was the biggest that has ever been fought in the United States . The battle was the largest ever fought in U.S.
 Confederate army suffered a defeat from which it would never recover . In three days of fierce fighting more than 50,000 men were killed or wounded . Lee broke off the battle and led his men back into the South .
 President Lincoln realized that the North would only win the war if he could arouse more enthusiasm for its cause . The Emancipation Proclamation was published in 1862 . Lincoln realized in the summer of 1862 that the war would only be won if the North won .
 This Proclamation declared that from January 1, 1863, all slaves were to be made free . But only if they lived in areas that were part of the Confederacy, they could be freed .
 From a struggle to preserve the Union to abolish slavery, it became a struggle both to preserve and abolish slavery . The struggle for the Union and abolition of slavery was a struggle for both sides .
 After the Emancipation Proclamation everyone knew that it was only a matter of time now before slavery was ended everywhere in the U.S. The slave trade was abolished in the United States in 1863 .
 As fall colored the trees of the eastern woods, the Union armies moved in to end the war . The Union armies ended the war in the fall .
 In November 1864, the Union army led by General William T Sherman began to march through the Confederate state of Georgia . General Sherman led the army to Georgia .
 They tore up railroad tracks, burned crops and ‘buildings, drove off cattle.’ ‘Drives off cattle’ They ‘took over railroad tracks and burned crops’ and burned buildings .
 He marched through the Carolinas, burning and destroying again as he made for Richmond, North Carolina . He marched into the city .
 The Confederate capital was already in danger from another Union army led by General Grant . General Grant led the Union army to the Confederate capital .
 By March 1865, Grant had almost encircled the city and on April 2 Lee was forced to abandon it to save his army from being trapped . Lee's army was trapped in the city .
 He marched south, hoping to fight on from a strong position in the mountains . He marched down the mountains to fight for his country's survival .
 Lee followed Grant, but Grant followed close behind and other Union soldiers blocked Lee’s way forward . Lee's advance was blocked by Grant and other soldiers, but Lee was able to get past Grant .
 On April 9, 1865, he met Grant in a house in a tiny village called Appomattox . He surrendered his army to Grant and surrendered his troops .
 After they had given up their weapons and promised never again to fight against the United States, he allowed them to go home . After they'd given up weapons, he let them go home.
 As Lee rode away, Grant stood in the doorway chewing a piece of tobacco and told his men; ‘The war is over.’ The war was over, Grant said .
 In 1865 this was abolished everywhere in the U.S. by the 13th Amendment to the Constitution .
 The U.S. decided finally that the United States was one nation, whose parts could not be separated . ame an independent nation. ame .
 The United States fought other wars later, but all were outside its own boundaries . The U.S. fought in the early years of the Vietnam War .
 More Americans died in this war than any other, before or since . And more Americans died than in any other war before or after .
 By the time Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox, the dead on both sides totaled 635,000 . By the end of the war, Lee had more than 600,000 people dead .
 Gettysburg in Pennsylvania is remembered for two things: The Gettysburg Address and the Gettysburgsburgsburg Address . Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, was the birthplace of the Civil War .
 Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg address was a speech that he made there a few months later . Abraham Lincoln made the Gettysburg speech at Gettysburg in 1863 .
 Lincoln traveled to Gettysburg in 1863 to dedicate part of the battlefield as a national war cemetery . Lincoln dedicated part of Gettysburg to the Gettysburg battlefield on November 19, 1863 . Gettysburg is now a national cemetery .
 Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation can long endure . We are met on a great battlefield of that war. Now we're engaged in that war, testing whether the nation can endure .
 We have come to dedicate a portion of that field as a final resting-place for those who here gave their lives, that that nation might live . We are dedicated to those who died in that field .
 Grant sits at the table behind Lee in this contemporary painting, we can not dedicate, we cannot dedicate, to this ground . The men, living and dead, have consecrated it, far above our poor power . Grant sits behind Lee's table in this painting, "We can not
 Lincoln’s speech at Gettysburg became even more famous than the battle . Lincoln's speech became more popular than the Gettysburg battle .
 At the time it was seen as a statement of what the North was fighting for . The North's image of North Korea is seen as an image of what it is fighting for in North Korea .
 Tn later years it came to be n as a moving expression of faith in the basic principles of democratic government .
 Lee’s surrender at Appomattox is celebrated in Washington, D.C. on April 13, 1865 . Lee's surrender was the surrender of the Union Army in 1865, ending the Civil War .
 Lincoln's bodyguards watched the play themselves from seats in the gallery . Lincoln was safely in his seat, his bodyguards moved away to watch the play .
 A pistol shot rang through the darkened theater at 10:13 a.m. ET . The play was part way through, when the play was half through .
 He waved a gun in the air and shouted “Sic semper tyrannis” [Thus always to tyrants] and then ran out of the theater . The author of the novel "Theodore Roosevelt’s War of the Year" was assassinated in 1968 .
 It was discovered later that the gunman was an actor named John Wilkes Booth . The gunman was later identified as Booth, an actor .
 He was captured a few days later, hiding in a barn in the Virginia countryside . He was found hiding in the countryside .
 Lincoln succeeded as President by his Vice President, Andrew Johnson . Lincoln was succeeded by Johnson .
 The biggest problem the new President faced was how to deal with the defeated South . President Obama faced the challenge of dealing with the South .
 Only a few weeks before his death he had begun his second term of office as President .
 In his inaugural address he had asked the American people to help him to “bind up the nation’s wounds” and rebuild their war-battered homeland .
 Lincoln blamed individual southern leaders for the war, rather than the people of the seceding states whole . Lincoln blamed individuals, not the people, as well as the entire nation .
 He intended to punish only those guilty individuals and let the rest of the South play a full part in the nation’s life again, he said . He said .
 He began to introduce plans to reunite the South with the rest of the nation . He introduced plans for reuniting the South .
 He said that as soon as the citizens of the seceded states promised to be loyal to the government of the United States they could clect new state assemblies to run their affairs .
 When a state voted to accept the 13th Amendment to the Constitution (the one that completely abolished slavery) Johnson intended that it should be accepted back into the Union as a full member .
 White southerners were determined to resist any changes that threatened their power to control the life of the South . But they were determined not to let it happen .
 They were horrified at the idea of giving equal rights to their former slaves . They were especially horrified that they would not be able to give equal rights .
 Walt Whitman is perhaps the most famous American poet of the nineteenth century . Walt Whitman was born in New York City, New York, in 1881 .
 During the Civil War he worked in military hospitals, helping to take care of wounded soldiers . He also worked in hospitals during the war .
 O the bleeding drops of red, Where on the deck my Captain lics, Fallen cold and dead. Where on deck my captain lics. Fallen cold, dead, dead. That's where I'm going to find my Captain .
 All their assemblies passed laws to keep blacks in an inferior position . The laws were passed by African-American assemblies in the South .
 “Federal bayonets” might have them to remain unskilled, uneducated and landless, with no legal protection or rights of their own . Such laws were called “Black Cod made the blacks free, but the ruling whites intended » ‘Black Cod’
 Black Codes refused blacks the vote, said that they could not serve on juries, forbade them to give evidence in court against a white man . Black Codes also forbade blacks from giving evidence against white men in court .
 In Louisiana they had to agree to work for one employer for a whole year . They could be imprisoned and made to do forced labor if they refused . In Louisiana, they could be jailed and forced labor .
 With no land, no money and no protection from the law, it was almost as if blacks were still slaves . The poem was written by the poet in response to the death of the President .
 The “fearful trip” in the opening line is the Civil War, the “Captain” is Abraham Lincoln . The ‘ship’ is the United States and the ‘prize” for peace and national unity is peace .
 "Walk the deck my Captain lies, Fallen cold and dead. But I with mournful tread, Walk the deck with mourned tread" "I walk the deck in mournful footsteps"
 Radical Republicans believed that the most important reason for fighting the Civil War had been to free the blacks . Radical Republicans in the South believed that freed blacks were the only reason for the war .
 Having won the war, they were determined that neither they nor the blacks were now going to be cheated . They were determined to not be cheated, they said . They said they would never be cheated.
 They said that President Johnson was treating the defeated white southerners too kindly . They said he was treating them too kindly and that they were taking advantage .
 In July 1866, despite opposition from the President, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act . Despite opposition from President, the act was passed by Congress in 1866 .
 Both these measures were intended to ensure that blacks in the South were not cheated of their rights . Both measures were meant to ensure blacks in South did not get cheated of rights .
 The 14th Amendment gave blacks full rights of citizenship, including the right to vote . It also gave them full rights to vote, including right to citizenship .
 All the former Confederate states except Tennessee refused to accept the 14th Amendment . In March 1867, Congress passed the Reconstruction Act .
 This dismissed the white governments of the southern states and placed them ‘under military rule.’ The white governments were placed under military rule by the South .
 They were told that they could again have elected governments when they accepted the 14th Amendment and gave all black men the vote . The 14th amendment was the first time black men were allowed to elect governments .
 Most were made up of blacks, a few white southerners who were willing to work with them . White men from the North also worked with blacks and white men in the North .
 The name came from the large, cheap bags made of carpeting material in which some of the northerners carried their belongings . The name was the name of a cheap carpeting bag made of the material .
 The word “scalawag’’ still means scoundrel, or rogue, in the English language today . The word still means rogue, or a rogue .
 These southern Democrats claimed that Reconstruction governments were incompetent and dishonest . They claimed that they were incompetent or dishonest . This southern Democrats said they were dishonest .
 Many of the new black members of the state assemblies were inexperienced and poorly educated . Many new black state assembly members were inexperienced, poorly educated, they say .
 In Louisiana, a carpetbagger official was accused of stealing 100,000 dollars from state funds in his first year of office .
 Reconstruction governments also contained honest men who tricd to improve the South . Reconstruction governments were honest men, but they were also corrupt .
 None of these improvements stopped southern whites from hating Reconstruction . Reconstruction was a form of slavery in the South .
 This was not because of the incompetence or dishonesty of its governments, it was because of their governments. This was because they were incompetent or dishonest . This is not the case of any of the world's most incompetent governments .
 Reconstruction aimed to give blacks the same rights that whites had . Reconstruction was aimed at giving blacks the right to equal rights as whites had. Reconstruction was based on Reconstruction .
 They organized terrorist groups to make white men the masters once more . They organize terrorist groups, made white men masters once again .
 The main aim of these groups was to threaten and frighten black people and prevent them from claiming their rights . The group's main aim was to frighten and prevent black people claiming rights .
 The largest and most feared terrorist group was the Ku Klux Klan . It was a secret socicty called the KKK . The KKK was the KKK's largest organization .
 Its members dressed themselves in white sheets and wore hoods to hide their faces . Members of the group dressed themselves as white sheets .
 They rode by night through the southern countryside, beating and killing any blacks who tried to improve their position . They rode in the countryside, riding by night, killing and killing blacks . They killed and killed any blacks trying to improve the position .
 Their sign was a burning wooden cross, which they placed outside the homes of their intended victims . Their sign is a burning cross, and they placed it outside their intended targets .
 By 1876 Republican supporters of Reconstruction held power in only three southern states . The Ku Klux Klan was established in 1915 in the United States .
 When Congress withdrew federal troops from the South in 1877, white Democrats won control of these, too . White Democrats took control of federal troops in the South, too, when they withdrew .
 Some southern states prevented blacks from voting by saying that only people who paid a tax on voters could do so . The poll tax was a poll tax, a form of a tax imposed on black voters .
 They then made the tax so high that most blacks could not afford to pay it, they then made it so high they couldn't afford it . The tax was then made so high most blacks couldn't pay it .
 If blacks did try to pay, the tax collectors often refused to take their money . The tax collectors would often refuse to take the money .
 The yote was only available to people whose grandfathers had been qualified to vote in 1865 . The claus or rules allowed the yote only to people who had been eligible to vote for the first time .
 Most blacks had only obtained the vote in 1866 so the grandfather clauses automatically took away their voting rights . Most blacks were only granted the right to vote in the 1866 .
 The effects of grandfather clauses could be seen in the state of Louisiana . The grandfather clause is a grandfather clause in Louisiana .
 Any black who dared to break these segregation laws was likely to,end up in prison or dead . Any . black who . dared to . break these . segregation laws were likely to . end up cither in prison . or dead.
 It seemed that the improvements the Civil War and Reconstruction had brought black people were lost for ever . The improvements were lost to ever .
 It had been the boldest attempt so far to achieve racial justice in the U.S. It was a bold move so far in the United States, it had been a bold attempt .
 In 1896 the Supreme Court announced its decision in a case called Plessy vy. Ferguson . The decision was made in 1896 in the case known as "Plessy. vy."
 It ruled that the Constitution allowed separate facilities and services to be provided for black and white people, so long as the facilities were of equal quality . The Constitution ruled that separate facilities should be provided to black, white people .
 The Plessy Ferguson decision made racial segregation a legal part of the American way of life for more than half a century . The decision was made in the decision to allow racial segregation in America .
 Southern states immediately began making sepa ate but unequal provision for blacks . Southern states began making provisions for blacks in the 1930s .
 They passed laws to enforce segregation in* every possible aspect of life, including public transportation, theaters, hotels, eating places, parks, schools, schools . Segregation laws were passed by segregationists in the 1930s .
 The “separate but equal’ decision reached in Plessy Ferguson was overturned by another Supreme Court decision in 1954 . The decision was overturned in 1954 by the Supreme Court .
 In the case of Brown Topeka, the Supreme Court ruled that it was impossible for black children to receive an equal education in segregated schools . The case was the result of a Supreme Court ruling in the Brown case in which black children received equal education .
 It ordered that all public schools in the United States should be opened to children of all races . The U.S. Supreme Court also ordered that public schools should be open to all children of any race .
 1954 decision to abandon Plessy Ferguson was a landmark in the black Civil Rights movement of the 1950s . This 1954 decision was the first to abandon Ferguson . The decision was made in 1954 in a landmark decision in the civil rights movement .
 It marked the beginning of a campaign to end all forms of legally enforced segregation in U.S. life . The end of segregation in America was marked by the end of legal segregation .
 In March 1848, a group of workmen was building a sawmill beside a stream in California for a landowner named John Sutter . The sawmill was built in 1848 for Sutter, California .
 One day the foreman in charge of the workers saw golden specks glittering in the water . Picking up a handful of black gravel from the bed of the stream, he looked more closely at the specks in the stream .
 The governor of California reported to Washington that “mills are lying idle, fields of wheat are open to cattle and horses, houses vacant and farms going to waste” as men and women from all Panning for gold in California. 58 over the territory .
 By the spring of 1849, people from all over the world were rushing to California to look for gold .
 Others traveled overland overland, enduring the same kind of hardships that faced settlers on the way to Oregon . Others traveled to Oregon on foot .
 In the next twenty years gold discoveries attracted fortune-seckers to other parts of the far West .
 By the late 1850s they were mining in the mountains of Nevada and Colorado, by the 1860s they had moved into Montana and Wyoming . By the 1870s, they were digging in the Black Hills of the Dakota country, and by the 18th century they had been mining in Montana
 The first mining settlements were just untidy collections of tents and huts, scattered along rough tracks that were muddy in winter and dusty in summer . Today's mining settlements are still untidy, but the first mining settlement was in the 1930s .
 The present city of Denver, the capital of Colorado, began life in this way . Denver was the first city to be named after Denver .
 Thousands of miles separated these western mining settlements from the rest of the United States . The mining settlements are located in western U.S.
 Look at a map of the country at the end of the Civil War in 1865, You will see that white settlement in the East stops a little to the west of the Mississippi and Missouri rivers .
 Thousands of miles of flat or gently rolling land covered with tall grass stretched west to the foothills of the Rocky Mountains . Beyond these last farms, thousands of miles were covered in tall grass .
 Early travelers who passed through this region described it as a “sea of grass,” for hardly any trees or bushes grew there .
 Geographers call these grasslands the Great Plains, or the Prairies, of North America . The grasslands are the most populous grasslands of the continent .
 Rainfall ranges from about forty inches a ycar on the wetter, eastern edge to less than eighteen inches a year in the western parts of the country .
 Summer rain often pours down in fierce thunderstorms and can bring sudden and destructive floods . Summer rain is often followed by heavy thunderstorms that can cause flash floods .
 These long, dry periods bring the danger of prairie fires, which race across the grasslands and burn everything in their path . These long periods of dry periods are dangerous for prairie fire experts .
 Temperatures drop as low as —40° Fahrenheit Fahrenheit . Violent, windy snowstorms sweep across the flat, open land .
 In the middle of the nineteenth century the Great Plains were the home of wandering Amerindian hunters such as the Sioux .
 The lives of these people depended upon the vast herds of buffalo that grazed on the sea of grass . The buffalo herd was the main source of food for many of the buffalo population .
 They stretched its skin over poles to make the tepees they lived in . The skin was stretched over poles and used to make them live in tepees . The animals also stretched their skin to make their own tepees in the shape of their skin .
 In the 1840s and 1850s thousands of white people crossed the Great Plains to reach the farms of Oregon and the gold fields of California . In the 1850s and 1840s, thousands of people traveled to Oregon and California .
 To them the region was not somewhere to settle and make new homes but a place to pass through as quickly as possible . To them, they were not settled and made new homes .
 They saw it as unwelcoming and dangerous, and were happy to leave it to the Amerindians . They saw the area as unwelcome and dangerous and left it to be left to the indigenous .
 Within 25 years of the end of the Civil War, practically all of the Great Plains had been divided into states and territories . They agreed with mapmakers of the time, who wrote the name ‘Great American Desert” across the whole area .
 Ranchers were feeding large herds of cattle on the “sea of grass” Farmers were ploughing the ‘Great American Desert’ to grow wheat . Sheepherders were grazing their flocks on the foothills of the Rocky Mountains .
 By 1890, separate areas of settlement on the Pacific Coast and along the Mississippi River had moved together . By 1890 the separate areas had moved along the riverbed .
 The frontier, that moving boundary of white settlement that had been one of the most important factors in American life ever since the time of the Pilgrims, had disappeared. The frontier had disappeared .
 During the Civil War, Congress had become anxious to join the gold-rich settlements along the Pacific Coast more closely to the rest of the U.S. Congress had been anxious to .
 The Union Pacific Railroad Company built a railroad west from the Mississippi towards the Pacific . In 1862 it granted land and money to build the railroad . The railroad company built the railroad in 1862 .
 At the same time it gave a similar grant to the Central Pacific Railroad Company to build eastwards from California . The grant was also given to the California Railroad Company .
 Throughout the 1860s gangs of workmen labored with picks, shovels and gunpowder to build the two lines .
 Most of the workers on the Union Pacific were Irishmen or recent immigrants from Europe . The Union Pacific was founded in 1903 by President Roosevelt .
 The railroad workers’ progress depended mainly on the land over which they had to build . The railroaders' progress depended on the location of the land .
 On the flat Great Plains they could move forward quickly, building up to six miles of railroad in a day . The Great Plains could be built up to 6 miles of railroads in a single day .
 Among the rocks and cliffs of the Sierra Nevada mountains their progress was slower . Among the rock and cliffs, the group made their way through the mountains .
 Sometimes it would take days of difficult and dangerous tunneling to move forward a few yards . Sometimes the tunneling is so dangerous that it takes days and dangerous to move .
 The whole country watched with growing excitement as the two lines gradually approached one another . Years Or Growru will be the first time they will be able to see each other .
 The grants of land and money that each company received from the government depended upon how many miles of railroad track it built it built . Both moved forward as fast as they could, for the grants and money .
 On May 10, 1869, the Central Pacific and the Union Pacific lines met at Promontory Point in Utah . Union Pacific and Central Pacific lines first met in 1869 .
 By 1884 four more major lines had crossed the continent to link the Mississippi valley with the Pacific Coast . The Mississippi was the first major railroad link between the Mississippi and the Pacific coast .
 These transcontinental railroads reduced the time that it took to travel across the U.S. from weeks to days . The time it took for travelers across the United States to travel from week to day .
 As the railroads pushed west, cattle ranchers in Texas saw a way to make money . Cattle ranchers saw the railroad as a way of making money from cattle .
 They could feed cattle cheaply on the grasslands between the Mississippi and the Rockies . The cattle could be fed cheaply on grasslands that stretch the Mississippi to the Rocky Mountains .
 Golden spike ceremony at Promontory Point, Utah, in 1869 marks the completion of the first transcontinental railroad . The golden spike ceremony was held in Utah .
 In the years after the Civil War, Texas cattle owners hired men called “drovers” or “cowboys” to drive their half-wild longhom cattle north to the railroads . The cowboy’s life was one of exhausting work, poor food
 Many cowboys were former Confederate soldiers who had moved west after the Civil War . Many of the cowboys in the early 1900s were Confederate soldiers .
 Others were boys from farms in the east who wanted a life with more adventure than farming could offer them . Others wanted to live on a farm in the East of the world .
 As they came closer to the railroad they slowed down, traveling only about twelve miles a day . They traveled only about 12 miles per day .
 This was to give the cattle plenty of time to graze, so that they would be as heavy as possible when they were sold . This was given to them so they could be heavy when they sold .
 In 1867, cowboys drove 36,000 cattle there along the Chisholm Trail from ‘Texas’ to ‘Cattle Heaven’ in Scotland . The trail was also known as the ‘Chisholms Trail’ and the name ‘
 Dodge City reached the height of its fame between 1875 and 1885 . Dodge City was one of the most famous cities in the world . The best known city was Dodge City from 1875 to 1886 .
 In this period of ten ycars a quarter of a million Texas cattle traveled the trail to Dodge City .
 From there they went by rail to the slaughter houses of Chicago and Kansas City . From there, they were sent to slaughter houses in Kansas City and Chicago .
 Such cities grew rich from killing western cattle and preparing their meat for eating . Such cities were once rich from slaughtering western cattle .
 On the trail 14 Miners, RAILROADS and Cattlemen . Meat from the Great Plains was feeding people in Europe as well as the castern United States .
 The grass of the Great Plains was earning the U.S. as much money as the gold mines of its western mountains . The grass earned the United States more money than gold mines .
 The Stampede by Frederic Remington, A cowboy trying to control his herd of cattle which has been stampeded by lightning . George Duffield was a cowboy .
 "Swam our cattle and horses and built rafts and rafted our provisions and blankets" over . Swam our cows and horses, built rafted rafts over . built raft and rafts our provisions, blankets and so on over .
 Lost most of our kitchen furniture, such as camp kettles, coffee pot, cups, etete. furniture, including coffee pot and ete.
 In 1862 Union and Confederate armies were fighting some of the bloodiest battles of the Civil War . Made them leave, but fear they have gone for others . 61 ee FARMING THE GREAT PLAINS .
 Congress found time to pass a law that had nothing to do with the war . But that same year Congress also passed a law not related to the war.
 The Homestead Act offered free farms in the West to families of settlers . Families of settlers were given free farms by the government . The act was passed by Congress in 1877 .
 All that homesteaders had to do was to move onto a piece of public land and live on it for five years . The land became theirs after five years of living on it .
 Ifa family wanted to own its homestead more quickly than this it could buy the land after only six months for a very low price of $1.25 an acre .
 These companies had been given land beside their tracks by the government . The government had given them land beside the tracks by government .
 To increase their profits they were keen for people to begin farming this land so they advertised for settlers . To increase profits they wanted people to start farming the land . The land is now being used as a farming site .
 They did this not only in the eastern United States, but as far away as Europe, they did this far away from the U.S. It's not just the east, it's also the east and west .
 They shipped immigrants across the Atlantic, gave them free railroad transport to the West . They often helped them to start their farms and communities . They were often helped by the immigrants to start farming and farming .
 East of the Mississippi, small family farms were the usual way of cultivating the land . Small family farms used to be the usual method of cultivating land .
 From the 1870s onwards farms of this sort began to spread over the Great Plains . The Great Plains began to be populated by men and women .
 As a boy, Hamlin Garland was taken to live on the Plains by his parents . Garland's parents took him to the Plains to live with them as a child .
 "They had to do this themselves, for there was no one else else to do it for them," says President Obama . Obama: "There were no other options"
 No trees grew on the plains, only mile after mile of long, waving grass . "No trees grew," says the author of the book, "No Trees grew"
 They cut thick pieces of earth and grass roots—‘sods’ —from the dry ground and used them as building bricks . ‘‘'sods” are used to build bricks .
 These same tangled grass roots also gave homesteaders a lot of trouble . Homesteaders often struggled to get out of their homes and gardens .
 The roots of the roots of its grasses formed a tangled mat at least four inches thick . The roots were found in the grasses at the center of the storm .
 The Great Plains had few streams and the rainfall was so low and unreliable that farmers often watched their crops shrivel up and dic in the dry ground . Lack of water was another problem, the Great Plains has few streams .
 A lightning flash, or even a small spark, could start a fire that would race across the prairie faster than a horse could gallop . A small spark or lightning flash could start the fire in a prairie fire .
 In some years plagues of insects caused even more destruction than fire . Insects were even more destructive than fire in some years .
 Between 1874 and 1877 grasshoppers swarmed across the plains in millions, eating everything they found . Crops, leather boots, clothing, clothing and wooden door frames were eaten by millions .
 In one place they stopped a railroad engine by covering the track until the rails became too slippery for the engine to move . In another place they covered the rails until they were too slippery to move.
 Ploughs with steel blades enabled them to cut through the prairie sod and cultivate the soil beneath . They began to overcome their carly difficulties .
 Mechanical reapers made it possible to harvest wheat crops ten times faster than before . They harvested wheat crops 10 times faster and ten times more efficiently .
 Pumps driven by the prairie winds raised life-giving water from hundreds of fect below the dry surface of the land . Pumps drive the water to the surface of dry prairie land .
 Barbed wire fences stopped straying cattle from trampling crops into the ground . Barbed fence fences stopped cattle from trashing crops into ground .
 Homesteaders and cattlemen often quarreled with cattlemen . The railroads were used by the first homesteaders of the 1800s .
 The different ways in which the two groups used the land made trouble almost certain . Cattle ranchers and cowboys complained that homesteaders were blocking the cattle trails . Homesteaders said that their ploughed fields were a waste of good grazing land .
 Homesteaders became angry when their crops were eaten or trampled upon by the ranchers’ cattle . The ranchers' cattle trampled on their crops .
 This made the cattlemen even more angry, especially if the land that was fenced off included a stream that their cattle depended upon for drinking water . The cattlemen were even more angered by the fenced-off of the land .
 They would plant a crop alongside the trail and plow a furrow around it for a fence . When the cattle got into their wheat or their garden patch, they would come out cussing and waving a shotgun and yelling for damages .
 In some places people were killed in ‘range wars’ as both cattlemen and homesteaders used guns to protect their interests . The range wars were also known as "range wars" in some places .
 It took years for the two groups to learn to live peacefully side-by-side . The two groups have been living together for years .
 The invention of barbed wire and fencing of the prairies threatened the life of the cowboy 63 years ago . Joseph Glidden patented the invention of the wire in 1874 in Illinois .
 His invention provided prairie farmers with something that, in a land without trees, they desperately needed . He invented a cheap and efficient fencing material .
 Barbed wire consists of two strands of plain wire twisted around one another, with short, sharp wire spikes held between them . Short spikes are held between the strands .
 Barbed wire fences meant that prairie farmers could plant crops knowing that straying cattle would not trample and eat the growing plants . The fence was erected in the prairie to prevent cattle from trampleing and eating crops .
 By the end of the century thousands of miles of barbed wire fences had divided the open prairie into a patchwork of separate farms and fields . also carried away the farmers’ crops .
 This made it possible for farmers to sell their produce in faraway places . This made them possible for the farmers to have their produce sold in far away places .
 Before the end of the nineteenth century wheat grown on the Great Plains of North America was feeding millions of people, not only in the United States but thousands of miles away in Europe .
 The Homestead Act gave them land, but it failed to give them a sure living . The homesteaders are still struggling to find a way to survive .
 On the rain-starved Great Plains no farmer could make a living from a farm of that size . The farm is located in the heart of the country's Great Plains .
 If the rains fail, the sun burned up their crops and the prairic winds blew away their dusty top soil, leaving the land poorer and less productive . But if the rains failed, the soil burned up and the wind blew away the land, leaving it poorer .
 Even when enough rain fell for the crops to grow well, farmers could still be in trouble . Farmers could still face trouble if they don't get enough rain for their crops .
 In such years the land produced so much wheat that the prices for which individual farmers were able to sell it were too low to give them a decent living . The prices for the sale of wheat was too low .
 In the last thirty years of the nineteenth century such “over-production” became a big problem for American farmers . The problem was a problem for farmers in the late 1800s .
 Improved agricultural machines are also making farms more productive every year . Improved farm equipment is also making farmers more productive .
 Giant machines called “combine harvesters’ cut and threshed wheat in one operation . Giant machines cut and thrash wheat in a single operation . ‘Combine Harvester’s’ combine harvester combines wheat and wheat into one operation
 Farmers formed political action groups to try to improve their position . Farmers have formed political groups to help improve the position of farmers . Farmers say they have been forced to take responsibility for their actions .
 Laws set up government bodies to control railroad freight charges and look after farmers’ interests in other matters .
 Some of these cooperatives failed because the farmers who ran them lacked business experience . The farmers who run them failed because of their lack of business experience, experts say .
 In many western farming communities cooperative organizations still compete with privately owned firms . Cooperative organizations compete with private firms both to supply the farmer's needs and buy his produce .
 It became a habit with Americans to use natural resources carelessly and wastefully, wastefully . It's a habit of using natural resources recklessly, wastelessly .
 As settlers spread across America, all of them robbed the land and destroyed its resources . "All of them, including miners, ranchers, lumberjacks, stole the land," says historian John Sutter .
 Vast buffalo herds were almost entirely destroyed, as were many other wild animals, including wolves, sea otters and fur seals . The loss of buffalo herds was almost entirely wiped out .
 The government and people of the United States should conserve the nation’s natural heritage, they said . They demanded that the government and the people should conserve their natural heritage .
 Muir, who had been born in Scotland, trilled about the American West studying and describing its natural wonders . Muir was a naturalist who spent most of his life in the West .
 He worked hard to persuade people to protect these wonders for the benefit of future generations . He campaigned for the protection of the wonders .
 Muir’s efforts to save Yellowstone National Park were largely thanks to his efforts . Muir's efforts were largely successful in the park's historic success .
 The heart of Yosemite is a beautiful valley surrounded by cliffs and mountain peaks . Yosemite National Park is located in the heart of the valley .
 In 1890 Yosemite became a national park belonging to the whole nation . Yosemite is now a national national park . Yosemite was the first national park in the United States .
 This is a 3,458 square-mile area of volcanic rocks and forest in the Rocky Mountains . It became a national park in 1872 . This is the largest national park on the Rocky Mountain .
 Bears, mountain sheep, buffalo, moose and more than two hundred kinds of birds make their homes there . Bears and mountain sheep also live in the area .
 Theodore Roosevelt set up more big national parks and forests in 1901 . established the National Parks Service to look after them . National parks Service was set up in 1903 .
 The American system of national parks became one of the world's most admired in the world . The U.S. national parks are considered one of America's most beautiful national parks .
 When the cowboys and homesteaders arrived on the Great Plains, Amerindian peoples like the Sioux had been roaming across them for hundreds of years . Amerindians had been living in the area for centuries .
 In the early part of the nineteenth century an estimated twelve million of these gentle, heavy animals wandered the Great Plains . An estimated 12 million of the animals were found in the early years of the century .
 Sometimes the herds were so big that they stretched as far as the eye could see . Sometimes these herds stretched so far as far away from the eye that the world could see.
 The buffalo provided the Sioux with everything they needed—food, clothing, tools, homes, homes . The buffalo also provided them with everything that they needed .
 In the 1840s wagon trains heading for Oregon and California began to cross the Great Plains . Wagon trains headed for the U.S. and California crossed the plains in the early 1840s .
 The railroads carried white people who stayed on the prairics and began to plough them . White people were carried by the railroads and began ploughing them .
 Amerindians tried to drive the newcomers away from thcir hunting grounds . At first the Amerindian people tried to keep the newcomers from hunting grounds.
 The Native Americans gave up large pieces of their land for white farmers to settle on . So they made treaties with the government in Washington, giving up pieces of land .
 In 1851 the Pawnee people signed away an area that today forms most of the state of Nebraska . The area was part of the area where today most people live .
 In the 1860s the Comanche and the Kiowa gave up lands in Kansas, Colorado and Texas . The Kiowa and Comanche gave up land in Kansas and Colorado, Colorado, Texas .
 In return for such agreements, the government promised to leave the Amerindians in peace on the lands that remained theirs . The Amerindian people were promised peace in return for their lands .
 In this treaty, the government declared that large areas between the Missouri River and the Rocky Mountains belonged to the Sioux .
 Six years later, American soldiers found gold in the Black Hills of South Dakota . Six years after the discovery of gold, the U.S. soldiers found it in the area .
 The Black Hills were sacred to the Sioux and when the government tried to buy them, the Sioux refused to sell them . The government was unable to buy the Black Hills because of their sacredness .
 It broke the Fort Laramie treaty and allowed prospectors and miners to enter the Black Hills . The treaty broke the treaty, allowing prospectors, miners and miners into the area .
 By this time the Amerindian peoples of the Great Plains were facing another serious problem . The Amerindians were facing a serious problem in their homeland .
 More and more of the land that the big animals needed to graze on is being taken by ranchers and farmers . The land is becoming more and more available to farmers and ranchers .
 White hunters were shooting down the buffalo in thousands of years . The buffalo were shot down by white hunters in thousands .
 They killed them for their hides or for sport and left their flesh to rot . They were left to rot in their flesh .
 In just two ycars between 1872 and 1874 the hunters almost completely destroyed the great herds . The hunters killed just two of the animals .
 General Sheridan, the officer who commanded the army in the West, saw the extermination of the buffalo as a way to end Amerindian resistance to the occupation of their land . The extermination of buffalo was a way of ending Amerindians resistance .
 As more settlers claimed homesteads in the West the U.S. government needed more land for them . The American government needed to provide more land to settlers .
 To obtain this it decided to force the Amerindians to give up their way of life .
 These reservations were areas of land that were usually so dry or rocky that the government thought white settlers were never likely to want them . The reservations were usually thought to be so dry and rocky that white settlers would never want them.
 They won their best known victory at the Battle of the Little Big Horn in June 1876 . They won the best known battle at the battle of the Big Big Horn .
 The Battle of the Little Big Horn was also the last stand for the Amerindians . The battle was also also the final stand for Native American tribes .
 The American government and people were angry at the defeat of their soldiers . The U.S. government and the American people are angry at their soldiers' defeat . The United States was angry that their soldiers were defeated .
 With the buffalo gone, more of their people were dying every day of starvation and disease . More of the buffalo died every day in the area .
 The Sioux surrendered and the soldiers marched them away to the reservations . The soldiers marched the Sioux away from the reservations to the reservation .
 By 1890 most of the American West, from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean, was occupied by cattle ranchers, farmers, or miners . By 1890, most of America's West was largely occupied by ranchers or farmers .
 The United States government said that it would help and protect the reservation Amerindians . The U.S. government said it would protect and help the reservation Americans .
 It 67 Years Or Growtu Ghost Dancers promised them food, materials to build homes, tools to cultivate the land . The Ghost Dancer promised them that they would be able to live on the land for 67 years .
 In 1890 a religious prophet told the Sioux to dance a special dance called the Ghost Dance . The dance was created by a religious leader in 1890 .
 The dead warriors would come back to life, the buffalo would return and all the white men would be swept away by a great flood . Their dead warriors and buffalo warriors would be killed by the flood, the tribesman says .
 Some of the dancers waved rifles above their heads as they danced . So did the fact that some of them waved rifles over their heads .
 Led by a chief named Big Foot, they set off to join another group nearby for safety . They set off with a group led by Big Foot . The group was led to safety .
 Soldiers stopped them on the way and marched them to an army post at Wounded Knee Creek . But a party of soldiers stopped them from the way .
 We are dancing as you wished Because you commanded us. Take pity on us, Father, Father . We dance as you wish because you commanded them. We dance in praise of you .
 Have pity, Father, help us You are close by in the dark Hear us and help us. We dance hard, we dance long — Have pity . Have pity. Father, Father .
 Take away the white men Send back the buffalo We are poor and weak We can do nothing alone . Help us to be what we once were, Happy hunters of buffalo .
 The soldiers began shooting down the Sioux women and children as well as the men . The soldiers shot down the men and women . The men were killed by the soldiers .
 Many of the wounded who crawled away from the camp died later in a blizzard that swept over the camp . Many of those who survived the storm died in the blizzard .
 Whatever the events at Wounded Knee are called, one thing is certain, is that it will be called . The Native American tribe is still at the center of Native American history .
 For the Sioux they marked the end of all hope of a return to their old way of life . But the Sioux, like other Amerindians, survived .
 This recognized Amerindians as full citizens of the United States and gave them the right to vote . Amerindian Indians were given the right of voting rights in the U.S.
 In 1934 the Indian Reorganization Act encouraged them to set up their own councils to run the affairs of their reservations . The act was passed by the Indian Council of Reservation .
 Amerindians remain far behind most other Americans in health, wealth, and education . Amerindian Americans still lag behind most others in many areas, including wealth, education .
 The unemployment rate among Amerindians was 39 percent, more than five times the figure for the population as a whole . Amerindian unemployment rate is 39 percent . The rate is five times that of the population in the United States .
 25 percent of Amerindian families were living on incomes too low to buy the food, clothing, and housing they needed to keep in good health . Almost 25 percent were living in low-income homes .
 Discases like diabetes, pneumonia, influenza, and alcohol addiction were killing twice as many Amerindians as other Ameri ‘ans . Diabetes, pneumonia and influenza were among the most common causes of death .
 Amerindians from all over the U.S. joined together to try to improve their position in the 1970s . Amerindi Americans joined together in an effort to help their position .
 The next year a group armed with rifles occupied the small South Dakota village . The village now stands on the site of the Battle of Wounded Knee .
 Their aim was to draw attention to their demand for the return of lands unjustly taken away from their ancestors . Their aim is to raise awareness of the lands taken away by their ancestors, the villagers .
 The courts decided in their favor and awarded them $122. million in compensation for the loss of their land . The family was awarded the money in compensation .
 When [ook back now from this high hill of my old age, I can still see the butchered women and children lying heaped and scattered all along the crooked gulch as plain as when I saw them with eyes still young .
 And I can see that something else died there in the bloody mud, and was buried in the blizzard . "Something else died in the mud," says the author .
 In the year 1831 a baby boy was born in a tepee village on the Dakota grasslands . The story of Sitting Bull is told by Sitting Bull . Sitting Bull was a Native American man who lived in the tepee community .
 He did not take part in the fighting at the 1876 Battle of the Little Big Horn . He died in 1876 at the hands of his family .
 After their victory at the Little Big Horn the Amerindians were pursued by the army . The Amerindian army was led by the American Indians .
 Sitting Bull led some of his followers to safety across the border in Canada in 1877 . In 1881 he returned to the U.S. Sitting Bull returned to his homeland in 1881 .
 Sitting Bull continued to fight for the rights of his people in other ways . Sitting Bull was a leader of the Native American tribes .
 He criticized the U.S. government for neglecting and cheating the Amerindians on the reservations . He also criticized the American government for cheating the American people .
 Sitting Bull was offered a job by Buffalo Bill Cody in 1885 . Sitting Bull is believed to have been Sitting Bull's last employer . Cody was famous for offering Sitting Bull a job as a performer .
 He wanted the old leader to be one of the attractions of his traveling Wild West Show . He wanted to become one of his "Wild West" attractions .
 Sitting Bull was given permission to leave the reservation . The reservation authorities were glad to be rid of Sitting Bull and 16 Turinians’ Last Stand .
 The following year Cody asked Sitting Bull to join him on a tour of Europe . Cody again asked him to join Sitting Bull on a European tour in 2012 .
 Government accused Sitting Bull of being the leader of the Ghost Dance movement . Sitting Bull was accused of being its leader by the government . The Ghost Dance is a Native American dance movement .
 Sitting Bull stepped out of the door of his cabin on the reservation one of the policemen shot him dead . Sitting Bull was a Native American leader of the Native American community .
 The main attraction of the Centennial Exposition was the Machinery Hall . It was organized to celebrate the United States’ 100th birthday as an independent nation .
 Machinery Hall includes machines for sewing, grinding, screwing, printing, printing and drilling . Visitors could see such recent American inventions as the typewriter and the telephone .
 Even the normally patronizing British newspaper The Times was impressed with the film . The film is set to be released in London on Friday .
 At the time of the Centennial Exposition, the United States was still mainly a farming country . The Exposition was held at the U.S. National Agricultural Exposition .
 These were the most important industrial raw materials in the nineteenth century . They were important raw materials for industrial production .
 In a range of low hills at the western end of Lake Superior, for example, some brothers named Merritt found the great Mesabi iron deposits . In the Mesabi region, the great iron deposits were found in Mesabi .
 The Merritts made their discovery in 1887 and the Mesabi soon became one of the largest producers of iron ore in the world . The Mesabi iron ore is the largest producer of the world and is the world's largest .
 It was cheap, easy to mine, and remarkably free of chemical impurities. It was remarkably free to mine .
 Mesabi ore was being processed into high quality steel at only one tenth of the previous cost . Mesabi is now being processed in high quality ore at a tenth of its cost .
 By 1900 ten times more coal was being produced in the U.S. than in 1860 . The United States produced ten times as much coal as it did in 1860s .
 Roads were both a cause and a result of a rapid growth of American manufacturing industries in these years . roads were very important in this growth of facturing. roads were important in the growth of roads .
 Vast amounts of coal and iron were used to make steel for their rails, locomotives, freight wagons and passenger cars . Coal and iron was used in the construction of the railways and trains .
 Without them big new centers of industry like Pittsburgh and Chicago could not have developed . Without them they would not have been able to develop as much as they did in the past .
 It was the railroads that carried cattle to Chicago from the Great Plains to keep its huge slaughter houses and meat processing plants busy . The railroads were used to transport cattle to the city's slaughter houses .
 It was the railroads, too, that took reapers, windmills and barbed wire from Chicago’s farm equipment factories to homesteaders on the prairies . The railroads were used to transport farm equipment from Chicago to the prairie .
 During the nineteenth century they developed thousands of products to make life easicr, safer or more enjoyable for people . During the 19th century, they developed many products that made life easier or safer .
 Up to the middle of the ninetcenth century the inventors of such products often had little scientific knowledge . Inventors of these products had little knowledge of science .
 Many later developments, however, called for an understanding of basic scientific principles in clectricity, magnetism and chemistry . Many of these later developments called for the understanding of scientific principles .
 One man above all others showed an ability to use such knowledge to solve everyday problems . One of the world's greatest inventions: The ability to solve daily problems .
 Thomas Alva Edison ison was born in 1847 and died in 1931 . He was the founder of the Edison Electric Company . He died in 1932 .
 Edison’s laboratory contained every material and chemical that was then known . He would work for days without cating or sleeping when he was close to solving a problem . Some of Edison's sayings became as well known as his inventions .
 On the day he got married, he forgot his bride and spent the night working in his laboratory . He spent the day working in the lab during his wedding night .
 Edison had his greatest success in making practical use of electricity . Edison's greatest success was to make electricity practical . Edison had the most success in using electricity .
 He had a clear commercial aim—to capture from gas the huge market for lighting homes, streets and places of work .
 By 1890 the industries of the United States were earning the country more than its farmlands . By 1890, the U.S. was earning more from its industries than its farms .
 In the twenty years that followed, industrial output went on growing, faster and faster . In the 20 years after the war, the world's largest industrial output was still booming .
 By 1913 more than one third of the whole world’s industrial production was pouring from the mines and factories of the United States . The U.S. was one of the world's most powerful industrial powers .
 The problem was to find a suitable material for the filament of the bulb . The bulb's filament is made of a material that can be used to make a bulb .
 What was needed was a filament that would glow brightly when the current of electricity passed through it, but without burning out . The filament was needed to glow brightly, but not burn out .
 "Some glowed for minutes, some for hours, but none for long enough to satisfy him," he said . "None of these glows for minutes or hours"
 When he gave a public demonstration of his light bulb the value of shares in the Edison Electric Light Company rose from $100 .
 Edison built electrical generating systems to provide his bulbs with power . Edison then built complete electrical generators to provide power to his bulbs . Edison's bulbs were powered by electricity .
 Soon electricit would not only light ‘streets, but heat hous. power machines, drive railroad engines, drive trains . Electricit would be used to heat houses, power machines and power trains .
 The growth of American industry was organized and controlled by businessmen who found the money to pay for it. It would become what it has remained ever world’s chief source of energy. nce .
 A mixture of hard work and ability, and by ignoring the rights of others, they made themselves wealthy and powerful . They made themselves rich and powerful by ignoring others' rights, they say .
 Andrew Carnegie was one of the best known of these men . Their critics called them “robber barons’ —or wor wor Andrew Carnegie —or ‘robbers’
 Carnegie was born in Scotland in 1835, but immigrated to America at the age of 13 . He began his life there working for one dollar twenty cents a week in a Pittsburgh cotton mill . Carnegie immigrated from Scotland to the U.S.
 Carnegie concentrated his investments in the iron and steel business . Carnegie started at the age of 30 . Carnegie was an early success in the telegraph office .
 By the 1860s he controlled companies making bridges, rails, and locomotives for the railroads . He controlled companies that made bridges and rails .
 In the 1870s he built the biggest steel mill in America on the Monongahela River in Pennsylvania . The mill was built on the banks of the river .
 He bought coal and iron ore mines, a fleet of steamships to carry ore across the Great Lakes . He also bought a railroad to connect the port to his steel works in Pennsylvania .
 Nothing like Camegie’s wealth and industrial power had ever before been seen in America. Nothing like came before, it was never before seen in the United States .
 The great wealth of men like Carnegie came partly from their success in swallowing up rival firms or driving them out of business . By 1900, Carnegie's annual income was estimated to be over twenty-23 million dollars .
 Businessmen like Carnegie and Rockefeller realized that they could greatly increase their profits by doing this . Rockefeller was the ‘king’ of the growing oil industry .
 Eli Whitney, the man who invented the cotton gin, made much money from it . With no competitors to challenge their position they could raise the prices of their products .
 Too many people copied his original machine without paying him anything, he says . "Too many people copy him up," he says of the original machine . He says of his original machines: "I don't want to pay him anything"
 Each gun was individually made, entirely by one man and a part from one gun would notnecessarily fit another . Each gun is individually made and the gun is made by a single man .
 At a factory he opened in Newhaven, Connecticut, he began to use machines to make guns . He opened a gun factory in New Haven, Connecticut .
 His machines made individual parts for guns i arate Operations and in large numbers . The machines were made in large quantities of parts .
 Most important, they made parts that were exactly alike, so that any part would fit any gun . Most important of all was that the parts were made so that they could fit each other .
 This made it possible for guns to be put together in stages, with different workers each carrying out one particular task . It was the first time guns had been assembled in stages of assembling .
 Whitney’s way of working meant that guns could now be made by men without enough skill to make a complete gun . Whitney's way of making guns meant that men without skill could now make guns without skill .
 Without it the standard of living of today’s U.S. and that of the entire industrialized world, would not be possible . Without it, the standards of living in the United States would not have been possible .
 In 1903 he was talking to a friend about the best way to do this. One day in 1903, he was in conversation with a friend . He was talking about how to get the best out of the world . He said: 'I'm going to do it. I want to
 Ford tried out his idea with an automobile called the Model T . Every Model 'T was put together or “assembled” from exactly the same parts .
 It does this by positioning workers in a factory in one place and taking work to them . The factory is located in a one-in-one place in order to make it easier for workers to work .
 By the early twentieth century trusts controlled large parts of American industry . Trusts controlled many of America's largest industries .
 One trust controlled the steel industry, another controlled the oil and meat-packing industry . The trust controlled many of the major industries, including the meat and meatpacking industry, it has been revealed .
 By their wealth and power they controlled the lives of millions of people, they controlled their lives . By their power they decided wages and prices, they control millions of Americans' lives . They also controlled their decisions on prices and wages .
 The United States was a land that was supposed to offer equal opportunities to everyone . The U.S. is supposed to be a place that offers equal opportunities for everyone . It's a land of opportunity for all .
 It seemed that the country was coming under the control of a handful of rich and powerful men who were able to do more or less anything they wished . Yet now it seemed that . well-connected men were being able to . do more than anything they wish .
 Ford first used an assembly line to make magnetos for his Model Ts . Some bribed politicians to pass laws which allowed the line to be used to make magnets .
 By the old method one man on his own did this job from start to finish . The old method was used to do this job by a man on an old man .
 The change reduced the time taken to put together a magneto from twenty minutes to five minutes . The change was made to reduce the time it takes to build a magnet from twenty to five .
 In 1913 Ford started to use assembly-line methods to make the complete Model T . Dozens of workmen each carried out a single operation—tightening nuts or fixing parts .
 Making a car in this new way took 1 hour and 33 minutes . It was filled up with gasoline and driven off ready for the road . The new car was filled with gasoline .
 By combining standardization and assembly line Ford showed manufacturers how to produce goods cheaply and in large quantities . Ford's assembly line was the beginning of the Ford era .
 He is seen as the father of twentieth-century mass production. favored them. Because of this, he is considered to be one of the world's most prolific mass producers .
 Others hired private armies to crush any attempt by their workers to obtain better conditions . Others hired armies to fight back against any attempt to improve conditions .
 Their attitude to the rights of other people was summed up in a famous remark of the railroad “king” William H Vanderbilt .
 Vanderbilt was asked whether he thought that railroads should be run in the public interest . Vanderbilt said he did not think railroads were in the best interests of the public .
 It strengthened the feeling that something ought to be done to limit such men's growing power over the nation’s life . The feeling was that something should be done .
 Many people came to sce this matter as the most important problem facing the U.S. in the early years of the twentieth century . Many people thought this matter was the biggest problem facing America in the first century .
 Unless done about it, th d, the U.S. would become a nation whose life was something v controlled by a handful of rich businessmen . 75 THE GOLDEN Door: The United States would become something controlled by the rich .
 She is the Statue of Liberty, one of the best-known landmarks in the world . She is one of America's most famous landmarks .
 It was given by the people of France to mark the hundredth anniversary of the War of Independence .
 For millions of immigrants, the Statue of Liberty has been their first sight of America . For millions, it was their first glimpse of America. For many, it has been a symbol of the country .
 Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free The wretched refuse of your teeming shore Send these, the homeless tempest-tossed to me, Lift my lamp beside the golden door . Give me my tired and your poor: Your h
 More than 75 percent of all the people in history who have ever left their homelands to live in another country have moved to the U.S. The United States is one of the most populous countries in history .
 In the course of its history it has taken in more people from other lands than any other country in the world . In the past, the country took in more than 100,000 refugees .
 Since the founding of Jamestown in 1607 more than fifty million people from other lands have made new homes there . More than 50 million people have made homes there.
 Poor crops, hunger and political unrest caused an estimated five million Europeans a year to leave the lands of their birth at this time .
 For five years after 1845 these became diseased and rotted in the fields . The fields were rotted and died in 1845 after the outbreak .
 During the Civil War in the 1860s, the federal government encouraged more emigration from Europe . The government encouraged emigrants from Europe during the war in the U.S.
 It did this by offering land to immigrants who would serve in the Union armies . The land was given to those who would be soldiers in the Confederate armies .
 One in five soldiers in the armies of the North was a wartime immigrant . By 1865 about one in five of the soldiers was a war immigrant .
 Until about 1880 most immigrants to the U.S. came from these regions . Most immigrants came from the regions .
 More emigrants from lands in the south and east of Europe began to arrive . Italians, Poles, Grecks, Russians, Hungarians, Czechs and Czechs were among those arriving .
 By 1896 more than half of all immigrants entering the U.S. were from eastern or southern Europe . By 1896, more than 50 percent of all the immigrants were from Europe . More than 50 per cent of the immigrants from Europe were from the continent .
 Jewish people came to the United States at this time . Immigrants sailing to America came from around the world .
 He was just getting by, making a living working twelve to fourteen hours a day . He was working twelve-to-twelve hours of a day. He said he was getting by .
 Lint got down the throat and into the lungs and caused the same coughing, the same diseases . The same sickness as dust as dust is also caused by dust . Lint caused coughing and the same symptoms as dust .
 "If you were Jewish, you didn’t count as a human being and you had no rights at all," he said . Remember, he had come from a place where, if you were a Jew, you were not a human . He said .
 In America they gave my father the vote, they allowed him a place to live, and they let his children grow up as Americans . In America, he says, they gave him the vote and allowed his children to live .
 Between 1880 and 1925 about two million Jews entered the U.S. Between 1880-1925 about 2 million Jews arrived in the United States .
 There are about 5. million Jewish Americans in the United States . Jewish Americans make up about 2.5 percent of the total population of the U.S. Today there are 5.million Jewish Americans .
 In certain states along the Atlantic coast the percentage of Jews is higher . In some states, Jews are higher in certain areas of the country .
 So many immigrants wanted to enter the U.S. in the late 1800s that the government found it difficult to keep check on them . The government was unable to keep tabs on them in the 1800s .
 All intending immigrants were examined before they were allowed to enter the U.S. The examination was carried out at the request of the president .
 Leon Stein’s mother was born in a small Lithuanian village in Lithuania . During its busiest times it dealt with almost 2,000 immigrants a da da .
 "I was excited a little bit, but mostly rather miserable and frightened," she said . She said she was "rather miserable" and "rather terrified"
 As the cart got to the end of the village street I could see the group of villagers who were waving us goodby was getting smaller and smaller . But I kept my cyes fixed on my mother in the front of that little group .
 "I tried to get out of the cart and run back to her and stay with her. I didn’t take my eyes off her .., Then, just before the cart turned the corner and I lost sight of them, I saw my mother faint and fall ro the ground
 Immigration officers asked these people questions to find out if they were criminals or mentally abnormal . Immigration officers ask people if they are mentally abnormal or criminals .
 A letter chalked on their clothing could end their hopes of a new life in Ame Ame Ame . But most passed the examinations .
 Almost half of all present-day Americans have ancestors who entered the U.S. by way of Ellis Island . Ellis Island is the birthplace of the first Ellis Island settlement .
 Ellis Island’s echoing, empty Great Hall made him think of the way that it made him feel . “My parents came through this place at the turn of the century. My parents came to Ellis Island at this time,” he said .
 "I think if you become really quiet you can actually hear all the crying, all the feeling, the impatience and all the misunderstanding that went on in this hall," says the author . "If you become very quiet, you can hear the crying and the feeling," she says .
 Being born again is not an casy thing and the people who came through here were being, born again, says the pastor . "Being born again" is not a thing, he says, but it's a sign of God's love .
 They worked hard because they wanted to make a success of their new life . The couple is now raising money for a new life in New York .
 Only the hardest and lowest paid jobs were open to them . Often they could not find the jobs they wanted to take .
 Like Leon Stein’s father, they had to work for long hours in dangerous conditions and to live in overcrowded slums . Yet bad as conditions were, they often seemed preferable to those the immigrants had left behind in Europe .
 In the United States they were free from religious and political persecution . In the U.S. they were not persecuted for their beliefs .
 They were often better dressed and better fed than they had ever been before . They had to be better dressed, better fed and more comfortable .
 By 1910 it was estimated that 14. percent of the people then living in the United States had been born in other countries . By 1910, 14 percent of people in the U.S. were born in foreign countries .
 They accused immigrants of taking jobs away from American-born workers, of lowering standards of health and safety . They accused them of threatening the country’s traditions by bringing in “political ideas like anarchism and communism”
 The Cliff Dwellers is a painting that shows the slum conditions in which many immigrants lived . It shows the conditions of many immigrants living in slums .
 The hero, a refugee from persecution in Czarist Russia, escapes to the United States . The hero escapes from persecution to escape to the U.S. The hero is a Russian refugee .
 Many in the audiences who came to see it found its message reassuring . This was perhaps because many in the audience found it reassuring . It was perhaps perhaps because of its message .
 At a time when poor and uneducated immigrants from Europe were flooding into the United States in millions, it was comforting for Americans to be told that their country could turn the newcomers into Americans like themselves . In fact this never really happeneed, at least not completely .
 The United States turned out to be more of a salad bowl than a melting pot . The U.S. is more of an "Arab-American melting pot" than a "melted pot"
 Groups from similar national and ethnic backgrounds often stayed together, keeping alive their old identities and many of their old customs . Groups of similar national or ethnic backgrounds stayed together .
 They lived in “Chinatowns” or “Little Italys,”’s areas populated almost entirely by Americans of similar ethnic origins . The area was known as ‘Little Chinatowns’
 Americans from different immigrant backgrounds do mix together in time . Americans from various immigrant backgrounds often mix together .
 It has been estimated that about 80 percent of the great-grandchildren of early-twenticth-century European immigrants marry out of their own ethnic groups .
 Third generation Americans cling with pride to important elements of their ethnic heritage . Yet such third generation Americans often cling to important parts of their heritage .
 Many Americans have immigrant origins far back in the U.S. So do many Americans whose immigrant origins are even further in the past .
 In the 1860s, Chinese workers had been brought to California to build the railroads . Chinese workers were brought to the state to build railroads in California .
 The fact that Chinese laborers were willing to work for less pay caused American workers to dislike them . American workers dislike them.
 Chinese communities in the West were attacked and their buildings were burned down . Chinese communities attacked and burned down in China in the 1930s .
 Japanese and other Asian immigrants were refused entry as well . By 1924 no Asian immigrants had been allowed into the United States .
 The Reed—Johnson Immigration Act of 1924 was the one which had most effect on immigration . The Reed-Johnson immigration Act was one of the most significant pieces of legislation .
 Th was an answer to the law and prejudices of Americans who were descendants of arlicr north European immigrants . Th was the answer to law ars and prejudices .
 It said in the future no more than 150,000 immigrants a year would be let into the U.S. It said that in the United States. would be allowed into the country .
 Each country which sent as given a “quota’s” number of its people already living in the United States . Each country was given a quota based on the number of people it had already lived in the U.S.
 1924 system was designed mainly to reduce immigration from southern and eastern Europe . It was designed to reduce the number of immigrants to southern Europe .
 87 percent of the immigration permits went to immigrants from Britain, Ireland, Germany and Scandinavia . The ancestors of most 1920s Americans had come from the countries from which they had come .
 By 1900, the United States was the richest and most productive industrial country in the world . By 1900 the U.S. was the world's richest industrial country .
 It produced 31. percent of the world’s coal, 34. percent . percent of its iron and 36. percent its steel . It also produced the majority of its coal, iron and steel exports .
 About twenty million ofits seventy-four million people earned a living from jobs in industry . About twenty . million of those who work in industry are employed in the U.S.
 Men, women and children labored for long hours in factories, mines and workshops . Men and women labored in factories and mines .
 Growing industrial centers like Pittsburgh and Chicago needed more and more workers . Many lived in cities, for growing industrial centers such as Pittsburgh .
 Years later the son of immigrants from an Italian village remembered his mother’s unhappiness . Years later he remembered his mom's unhappiness. Years later, he remembered her unhappiness as a child .
 In 1900 the average industrial worker was paid nine dollars for working fifty-nine hours a week . In 1900, industrial workers were paid 9 dollars per week for working nine hours per week .
 In cotton spinning mills, the usual working week was sixty-two hours for wages of ten cents an hour . In cotton spin mills the usual week was 60-60 hours for ten cents per hour .
 Forty-six men were killed in one plant belonging to the U.S. Steel Corporation in 1906 .
 If workers were killed or injured like this, neither they nor their families received compensation . If workers died or were injured, they would not have received compensation. If they were injured or killed, they will not receive compensation .
 Workers tried to form trade, or labor, unions to improve the conditions of their lives . The unions were formed to improve conditions of workers' lives .
 One reason for this was the competition for jobs between American-born and immigrant workers . One reason is the competition between the jobs between U.S. and immigrants, says CNN.com .
 If a worker’s name appeared on one of these lists, other employers would refuse to give him a job . Ifa worker's name appeared . on one . list, other . employers would not hire him . Other employers would also refuse to employ him .
 Employers were determined to allow neither their workers nor anyone else to interfere in the way they ran their businesses . Employers are determined not to let anyone else interfere with their business .
 Sometimes they persuaded politicians to send soldiers to break up strikes . They persuaded them to send troops to break-up strikes . Sometimes they convinced politicians to intervene in strikes .
 At other times they hired their own private armies to control their workers . At times they also hired private armies of their own .
 Andrew Carnegie’s Homestead Steel Mill in Pennsylvania went on strike in 1892 . This happened when workers at Andrew Carnegie's Homestead steel mill in Pennsylvania were going on strike .
 The A.F.L. was formed in 1886 by Samuel Gompers, a leader of the Cigarmakers’ Union . Samuel was also a leader in the Cigarakers' Union .
 Gompers believed that unions of skilled workers were the only ones with a real chance of success . He believed that union of skilled people was the only way of success in his career .
 The A.F.L. grew steadily as it brought more and more skilled workers together . Carpententers, printers, iron molders, glassmakers were among those who worked together .
 By 1904 it had 1.75 million members and was the United States’ biggest labor organization . By 1904, it was the U.S. biggest labor group .
 At this time many workers in Europe were joining revolutionary labor movements . At this point many workers were in unionized labor .
 Twenty people were killed in European clashes between detectives and strikers . These European clashes were between the detectives and the strikers .
 Employers and the government were not the only enemics labor unions faced . Employers, the government and the unions faced. The unions say they are proud of their efforts to improve the economy .
 Americans have always seen their country as a land where individuals should be free to improve their lives by their own efforts . Americans had always seen themselves as a nation of people who can improve themselves by themselves .
 Millions dreamed of owning a farm or a business of their own . Millions more dreamed of the day when they too would own a business or a farm . Millions of people are still dreaming of owning their own businesses .
 People such as these were unlikely to favor organizations which aimed to limit businessmen’s freedom of action and opportunities . People such a person would not be likely to favor these organizations .
 In the early years of the twentieth century a stream of books and magazine articles drew people’s attention to a large number of national problems . In the 1930s, people were concerned about a number of issues facing the country .
 Some dealt with conditions of life in the slums of the great cities, others with the dishonesty of wealthy businessmen . Others dealt with bribery and corruption in government in government .
 Some movements called for the overthrow of capitalism and replacement by a socialist economic system . This caused some people to describe their authors with contempt as “muckrakers”
 They were not interested in destroying the existing economic system, they simply wanted to'make it work more effectively for their benefit . They wanted to make it work better for their own benefit, they said .
 What they wanted was a bigger share of the wealth they helped to produce . They wanted to be able to produce more of the money they helped produce .
 He believed that unions should concern themselves with the day-to-day welfare of their members, not with politics . He said unions should not be concerned with politics, but with their members' welfare, not their welfare .
 But practical demands for higher wages, shorter working hours and safer working conditions would not go far enough . It would be better for workers to demand shorter hours and shorter hours .
 This gave a horrifying description of life among immigrant workers in the slaughter houses of Chicago . The slaughter houses are notorious for their brutal practices .
 The Jungle revealed to many middle-class Americans a side of their nation’s life that they hardly knew existed . The Jungle was a reality show for the first time .
 Government investigators said what Sinclair had written was correct . Sinclair's breakfast sausages were found to be the correct recipe .
 Meat companies begged the government to inspect their premises in order to convince people that their products were fit to eat . The meat companies begged for inspection to convince them that their food was safe .
 "This pressure brought about an important change in American economic and political life," says Hillary Clinton . Clinton: Pressure brought about important change to American economic, political life .
 Before 1900 most Americans believed in “laissez faire’’—the idea that governments should interfere with business, and with people's lives in general, as little as possible . Before 1900, most Americans had believed in the idea that government should interfere in business .
 A Progressive was someone who believed that, where necessary, the government should take action to deal with the problems of society . A Progressive is someone who believes that government should deal with problems .
 Robert Koehler wanted to allow businessmen enough freedom of action to make their firms efficient and prosperous, but at the same time to prevent them from taking unfair advantage of others .
 Anthracite coal miners go on strike to obtain better wages and working conditions . Anthracites coal miners went on strike in bid to get better wages, working conditions.
 He said unless they agreed to negotiate with their workers, the federal government would take control of the coal mines . The federal government is threatening to take over the mines, he said .
 Roosevelt forced the big railroad companies to charge all their customers fair rates . Instead of allowing large customers like the oil and meat-packing trusts to pay less than farmers and small businessmen .
 He also supported laws which 19 REFORMERS and PROGRESSIVES compelled manufacturers to make sure that their products were pure and harmless before selling them .
 Roosevelt and Wilson belonged to different political parties, some of their ideas were very similar . Wilson, too, supported the Progressive movement . Wilson and Roosevelt were both presidents .
 As Governor of the state of New Jersey he had fought successfully to make sure that the state was run for the benefit of the people . As Governor he fought to ensure that the New Jersey state is run for its people .
 He had reduced bribery and corruption there, he said . He had introduced reforms such as giving workers compensation for injurics .
 In March 1913, Wilson stood before the Capitol building in Washington, the home of the U.S. Congress . Wilson stood in front of the Capitol in March 1913 . Wilson was the president of the United States .
 Wilson believed many ordinary Americans were not given a fair chance to get on in life . Wilson believed that the cost of life was the near destruction of ordinary Americans . Wilson: America's "human costs" have been the "near destruction"
 Workers, farmers, owners of small businesses had seen their opportunities shrinking in recent years owing to the continuing growth of the power of ‘big business’ over the nation’s economic life . People such as those such as these had seen opportunities shrinking .
 Despite Theodore Roosevelt’s attempts to bring the trusts under control, they were even more powerful in 1913 than they had been in 1900 . Theodore Roosevelt tried to bring them under control in 1913 .
 Real equality of opportunity seemed in danger of disappearing in the U.S. The United States is a nation of opportunity, but it's not all about equality .
 Wilson believed that only action by the federal government could halt this process . Wilson believed only action could be taken by the government to halt the process .
 Wilson’s first step was to reduce customs duties in order to encourage trade between the U.S. and other countries . One of Wilson's first steps was to cut customs duties . Wilson: "I'm not afraid to say I'm not sure what I'm going to do
 He introduced a system of federal taxes on high incomes . Then he reformed the banking system and introduced a new banking system . He also introduced a tax system on high income .
 Other laws reduced the powers of the trusts, gave more rights to labor unions and made it easier for farmers to borrow money from the federal government to develop their land .
 They forbade factories to employ children, introduced secret voting, improved safety at work, and protected their natural resources . They also banned factories employing children .
 The Senate refused to pass a law giving the federal authorities more control over the buying and selling of business shares . For example, the Senate would not have passed a law that would give the government more control .
 Another law, stopping child labor in factories everywhere, was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court . The Supreme Court declared that the law was unconstitutional .
 The Progressive movement changed and improved American life in many ways . It was the first movement of its kind in the country .
 Many people still distrusted too much government ‘interference’ in the nation’s life . But many people still still distrust too much "interference" in government .
 Theodore Roosevelt's most important service to his country was to persuade Congress to pass a number of conservation laws . Roosevelt was a conservation leader in the early 1900s .
 These were laws to save the country’s natural resources from being used up carelessly and greedily . The laws were designed to stop the use of natural resources in the country .
 Roosevelt pointed out that unless action were taken to slow down the destruction of the country’s forests, mineral resources and soil fertility, Americans would soon discover that much of the natural wealth of the United States had been destroyed .
 It passed conservation laws under which millions of acres of Jand were protected and their forest and mineral wealth preserved for the use of future generations . Millions of acres were protected under conservation laws .
 A war was being fought in Cuba at this time and the Maine had been sent to Havana as a demonstration of American power . The Maine was sent to Cuba as part of a show of U.S. power .
 Three weeks later, on the night of February 15, a huge explosion shook the city . Three weeks after the explosion, the city was hit by a massive explosion .
 To this day, the cause of the explosion that destroyed the Maine remains a mystery . The Maine explosion is still a mystery.
 Some believe that it was set off by an accidental spark in the ship’s magazine, or ammunition store . Others believe that the explosion was an accident .
 Many Americans believed that the explosion had been caused by an enemy mine . At the time, many Americans believed it was caused by a mine .
 William Randolph Hearst was a newspaper owner who made the claim most loudly . Hearst's claim was made by Hearst, the owner of the Hearst papers .
 Hearst said the “enemy” in the headline was Spain . Hearst’s "enemy" was Spain, which Hearst described as the Spanish Republic .
 Mexico gained control of California and the Southwest in the Mexican War of 1846 to 1848 . Apart from this it had brought no additional land under its rule since then .
 In the 1890s, a new spirit started to enter U.S. foreign policy . A new spirit was started in American foreign policy in the late 19th century .
 Britain, France and Germany were busy claiming colonies, foreign lands which they could rule and exploit . These were years when Britain and France claimed colonies .
 In the early nineteenth century most of Central and South America, or Latin America, was ruled by Spain . Many Americans believed that ‘the Anglo-Saxon race’ – by which they meant Americans as well as North Europeans~ – had a right and a duty to bring western
 The Spanish government asked the great powers of Europe to help it defeat the rebels . Spanish government has asked for the help of the world's powers to defeat rebels .
 They did not want the armies and navies of powerful European nations in their part of the world . They wanted to protect themselves from the armies of powerful Europeans .
 Americans felt that it was important to their country’s safety to make sure that no foreign enemies gained influence in them . Americans felt important to making sure that their country was safe .
 In 1823 President Monroe warned European nations not to interfere in Latin American affairs . President Monroe also warned Europe not to meddle in Latin America .
 From 1895 onwards feelings of this kind were focused more and more upon Cuba, which lay only ninety miles from the American coast . Cuba was one of the most important countries in the world .
 Many Americans had invested money in sugar and tobacco plantations there . Many Americans invested money on plantations . The plantations were plantations of tobacco and sugar .
 In 1895 the people of Cuba rose in rebellion against their Spanish rulers . The Cuban people rose in revolt against the Spanish government .
 The rebels raided and burned villages, sugar plantations and railroad depots . They burned villages and burned sugar plantations . The rebels were in control of the area .
 To cut off rebels’ supplies, Spanish soldiers moved thousands of Cuban civilians into prison camps . Spanish soldiers cut off supplies to cut off the rebels' supplies .
 Hearst and another American newspaper owner named Joseph Pulitzer published sensational accounts 20 AN American Empire of the struggle in Cuba . Hearst, Pulitzer and other American newspaper owners published sensational stories 20 AN CENT CENT CENTERS CENTERS OF THE CENTER OF THE YEARS of Cuba .
 Day after day millions of Americans read how, according to Hearst and Pulitzer, Cubans were being badly treated by the Spaniards . Hearst, Pulitzer, Pulitzer and Hearst both published stories about Cuba .
 By 1898 many Americans felt that the U.S. should do something to help the Cubans . By 1898, the United States should help the Cuban people .
 It was to show its sympathy for the rebels that the U.S. government sent the Maine to Havana . The Maine was sent to Havana to support the rebels .
 In April President McKinley demanded that Spain should withdraw from Cuba . A few days later Spain and the United States went to war .
 The Philippines was another big Spanish colony near the coast of Southeast Asia . The Philippines is now one of several Spanish colonies .
 President McKinley had to search a globe to find out exactly where it was . McKinley was said to have had to look at a globe in order to find it out .
 The islands would be useful for the U.S. to control, the president says . But he saw that the islands would benefit the United States more .
 From bases in the Philippines American soldiers would be able to protect the growing number of American traders in China . The original Monroe Doctrine told Europeans not to interfere in Latin America .
 In 1904 President Theodore Roosevelt made an addition, or “corollary’’ to it . Roosevelt added an addition to the original version of the Constitution .
 President Obama said the United States would intervene there whenever it thought necessary . He said the U.S. would intervene in the region whenever it felt necessary .
 Roosevelt believed that by doing this the United States would be able to ensure the internal stability of its Latin American neighbors . The U.S. would also remove any excuse for Europeans to interfere in their affairs .
 In the next twenty years American governments often acted upon Roosevelt’s Corollary . In the 1950s and '60s, American presidents often acted on Roosevelt's idea .
 American soldicrs landed in countries like Nicaragua, Haiti and the Dominican Republic, and took over their governments for years at a time . The U.S. took control of some of the world's most violent countries .
 Often Americans made big improvements, including paying off debts, draining swamps, building roads . Often Americans paid off debts and drained swamps in order to improve their country .
 Latin Americans resent the interference of their governments . But this did not stop Latin Americans from resenting their interference .
 The first battle of the Spanish— Amcrican War was fought in the Philippines . The Spanish-Amcamerian War was started in Manila .
 A few weeks later American soldiers occupied Manila, the chief city in the Philippines, and Spanish resistance came to an end .
 Other American soldiers occupied Puerto Rico, another Spanish-owned island close to Cuba . The U.S. troops occupied the Spanish-occupied Puerto Rico .
 When peace was signed, Spain gave most of its overseas empire to the United States . Puerto Rico, Cuba, the Philippines, Puerto Rico and a small Pacific island called Guam were all given to the U.S. when peace was reached .
 Before this it had been independent, but Americans owned profitable sugar and pineapple plantations there .
 In less than a year the United States had become a colonial power, with millions of non-Americans under its rule .
 In rebelling against British rule they had claimed that colonial peoples should be free to rule themselves . They had claimed they should have been free to govern themselves .
 Filipinos who had fought for independence from Spain were soon fighting against American occupation troops . Filipinos fought against the U.S. occupation troops in the Philippines .
 Most Americans answered this question by claiming that they were preparing underdeveloped nations for civilization and democracy . Most Americans said they wanted to prepare underdeveloped countries for civilization .
 The Americans built schools and hospitals, constructed roads, provided pure water supplies and put an end to killer diseases like malaria and yellow fever in the lands they now ruled . They also built schools, hospitals, roads, schools and water supplies .
 They continued to rule most of them until the middle years of the century . They continued their rule of the country until the end of century .
 Puerto Rico became self-governing in 1953, but continued to be closely tied to the United States . Puerto Rico is now self-governed by the U.S.
 Congress declared war on Spain in 1898 to help the Cuban people win independence . Congress said it was only doing so to help Cuban people to win independence from Spain .
 Before the Americans took away their soldiers in 1902 they made the Cuban government give them land at Guantanamo Bay on the Cuban coast .
 The U.S. could send troops to take control of Cuba any time it believed that American interests were in danger . This said that the United States 20 AN AMERICAN EMPIRE could . send troops .
 In 1906, President Theodore Roosevelt set up a military government in Cuba to stop a revolution . President Roosevelt did this in 1906, for example, in Cuba .
 In 1912, 1917 and 1921 American marines were again sent to stop revolutions in Cuba . In 1912 and 1917, the U.S. marines were sent to Cuba to stop revolts .
 For many years the country continued to be little more than a protectorate of the U.S. The country was little more of an American protectorate . It is now a nation of its own .
 In economic and business affairs the United States has long been strongly internationalist . The U.S. has a long history of being strong internationalists .
 American foreign policy has often tried to proyide businessmen with fresh opportunities . U.S. foreign policy often tries to proease businessmen with new opportunities .
 In the carly years of the twentieth century, the industrial nations of Europe were dividing the trade of China between them . In the 1930s, China was divided between Europe and China .
 The close relationship between American foreign policy and American business interests has shown itself in other ways . The U.S. has a close relationship with business interests in the world .
 Political leaders have sometimes encouraged American businesses to invest abroad as a way of strengthening the political position of the United States . Political leaders sometimes encourage businesses to do so to strengthen the U.S. position .
 This cncouraged Americans to invest in areas that were strategically important to the U.S., such as Latin America . This encouraged investment in areas of Latin America, such as Brazil .
 American firms which have established themselves in other countries have often received a mixed welcome in the U.S. American firms are often greeted with mixed welcome .
 Critics accuse them of using their economic power to influence foreign governments to follow U.S. policies . Critics say they use their economic influence to influence governments to serve U.N. interests of the U.K. rather than those of the country in which they are working .
 They see such investment as a way of obtaining new jobs and new technology, and so of improving their countries’ living standards .
 The isthmus is the neck of land that joins North and South America and separates the Caribbean Sea from the Pacific Ocean . It is also known as the 'Isthmus' - the neck-line that joins the Caribbean and the Pacific .
 Building a canal across it would mean that American ships could travel quickly between the east and west coasts of the U.S. instead of having to make a long sea journey around South America .
 The main problem was that the U.S. did not own the isthmus; Colombia did . Colombia did, and the United States didn't own it . Colombia was a Latin American country called Colombia .
 In 1903, President Theodore Roosevelt sent warships to Panama . The Colombian government was slow to give the U.S. permission to build the canal . The canal was built in 1903 .
 The warships helped a small group of Panamanian businessmen to rebel against the Colombian government . The warships were involved in the rebel movement in Colombia .
 A few days later they gave the Americans control over a ten-and-a-half-milewide strip of land called the Canal Zone across their new country . The Canal Zone is a ten and a half-mile-wide stretch of land known as Canal Zone .
 The first ships steamed through the completed canal in 1914 . They began digging in 1904 and the canal was completed by 1914 .
 Most Latin Americans thought that the Panama tebellion had been organized by Roosevelt . Most Latin American thought that . Roosevelt had organized the event .
 It was the beginning of a struggle that lasted for more than four years, brought death to millions of people and changed the history of the world . The struggle was the start of a four-year struggle that brought death .
 The main 88 countries were Germany and Austria, who were called the Central Powers . On the other side were the main 88 nations called the German and Austrian .
 President Wilson said that they should be ‘impartial in thought as well as in action,” most people were ready to agree with him . President Wilson told them to be impartial in thought and action .
 In the first days of the war the German government sent its armies marching into neutral Belgium . In the early days of war, the government of Belgium sent its troops into Belgium .
 Belgian citizens shocked when newspapers printed reports of German cruelty towards Belgian civilians . They were even more shocked when they were printed reports — often false or exaggerated — of cruelty towards German soldiers .
 From the beginning of the war the strong British navy prevented German ships from trading with the U.S. From the very beginning of this war the British navy kept German ships out of the United States .
 By 1915 American factories were making vast quantities of weapons and munitions and selling them to Britain and France . The U.S. factories made vast quantities and sold them to France and Britain .
 German leaders were determined to stop the flow of armaments to their enemies . German leaders wanted to stop this flow of arms to the enemies .
 They announced in February 1915, that they would sink all Allied merchant ships in the seas around the British Isles . The British Army announced they planned to sink Allied ships .
 The Lusitania was nearing the end of its voyage from the U.S. to Britain . The ship was a British passenger ship from the United States .
 Without any warning, it was hit by a torpedo from a German submarine . It was hit without warning, without any warning .
 Some began to think that Germany would do 21 A War AND A PEACE anything to win the war . Some thought it would do anything in order to win it .
 Wilson was re-elected in the autumn of 1916, mainly because he had kept them out of the war . Wilson was the first president to win a re-election in 1916 .
 Germany feared that unless the flow of supplies was stopped, their country would be defeated . Germany’s war leaders feared that, unless they stopped, they’d be defeated.
 Only nine days after Wilson’s speech they again ordered their submarines to begin sinking ships sailing towards Allied ports . The action was ordered by the British government nine days later .
 A poster recruiting soldiers to fight for “Uncle Uncle Uncle’s” was posted on the Internet . A few weeks ago German submarines sank five American ships .
 Wilson felt that he had no choice. German torpedoes were sending American sailors to their deaths in the grey waters of the Atlantic .
 At the beginning of 1917 many Americans were still strongly against becoming involved in the First World War . The Zimmermann telegram was sent to Zimmermann in Germany .
 To people on the Great Plains, in Texas or California, Europe seemed very far away . Europe seemed far away to those living in Texas and California .
 The story claimed that Arthur Zimmermann, the German Foreign Secretary, had tried to persuade Mexico and Japan to attack the U.S. It was claimed that Zimmermann had been trying to persuade the two countries to attack .
 Zimmermann sent a secret telegram to the German ambassador in Mexico . Zimmermann had sent the telegram in secret to Mexico's ambassador .
 A telegram told the ambassador to invite the Mexican government to sign an alliance with Germany . The telegram was sent to the ambassador in Mexico .
 The idea was that if the U.S. went to war with Germany, the Mexicans should attack the Americans from the south . The Mexicans would attack the United States from the north .
 Mexico's reward would be the return of all the lands it had lost to the U.S. in 1848 . Mexico would return the lands they had lost in the United States .
 Zimmermann also wanted Mexico to invite Japan to join the anti-American alliance . Zimmermann wanted to invite Mexico to join anti-U.S. alliance with Japan .
 The British gave Wilson a copy of the telegram . Wilson was angry at Germany for starting submarine attacks again . The telegram was sent on February 24 .
 People who wanted to keep the U.S. out of the war, and those who favored Germany, said that the telegram was a forgery, a British trick . The telegram came from a telegram sent to the White House by President Roosevelt .
 Zimmermann telegram turned American opinion more strongly in favor of the Allies . Zimmermann's telegram helped turn American opinion against the Allies of Germany's invasion .
 This was especially true in the previously uninterested western parts of the country . This was particularly true in western parts, the BBC says .
 These were the very areas that would have been threatened most if Zimmermann’s plan had worked . Zimmermann's plan would have saved some of the most vulnerable areas in the country .
 He saw the war as a great crusade to ensure the future peace of the world . He saw it as an attempt to ensure that the world was safe .
 When the United States declared war on Germany the U.S. army was a small force of only 200,000 soldiers . The U.K. declared war against Germany in 1941 .
 Millions more men were recruited, trained, equipped and shipped across the Atlantic to Europe . Millions more had to be recruited and trained to be sent to Europe to fight the Nazis .
 A full year passed before many American soldiers were available to help the European Allies . A year after the war, the U.S. troops were finally available to fight for the Allies .
 In the spring of 1918, the German armies began a last desperate offensive against the French and the British . The German armies fought for their lives against the British and French .
 Their aim was to win the war before the new American army was ready to fight . The British army was not ready to take on the American army .
 They placed all their armies under one commander, the French general Foch . All their armies were placed under one French general, Foch. The French general led the French army .
 American soldiers began to arrive at the battlefront to strengthen Foch's forces . Luckily for Foch, American soldiers were arriving to strengthen his forces . U.S. troops arrived at the front of the battle front .
 Over a million of them joined in the battles against the Germans . Soon over a million had joined in .
 On November 11, 1918, German and Allied leaders signed an armistice, an agreement to stop fighting . It was the first time the two sides had agreed to end fighting in the war .
 The bloodiest and most destructive war in the world had ever known was over . The end of the bloodiest war was over, and the end was complete .
 Wilson met other Allied leaders to work out the details of the treaty . But when he met other leaders to discuss the treaty, the welcome became less friendly .
 The French leader, Georges Clemenceau, thought that Wilson lacked experience in international affairs . Wilson was assassinated in 1945 .
 Wilson and Clemenceau wanted to make sure that a war like the First World War never happened again . Both Wilson wanted to ensure that the war was never repeated in the future . The war was fought in France and Germany .
 Wilson wanted to do this by writing a treaty that did not leave the Germans with lots of grievances . Wilson wanted this treaty to leave Germany with a lot of grievances, he says . Wilson: "I want to make sure that the Germans do not have a long list of grievances"
 He believed that if the Germans thought they had not been treated fairly, they might one day start a war of revenge . He said that if they thought they were not treated fairly they might start a battle of revenge.
 The Germans had to be made so weak that they would never have the strength to fight again . The Germans were made so strong that they had to never fight again, the author says .
 Without consulting the Germans, the Allied leaders agreed on a peace treaty . After much arguing, and without consulting, the Germans agreed on the treaty . The treaty was signed without consulting the German government .
 The Versailles Treaty was signed in May 1919 near the palace near Paris where it was signed . They called it the VersAilles Treaty, after the palace where it signed in 1919 .
 The Versailles Treaty was harder in its treatment of the Germans than Wilson had wanted . Wilson wanted the treaty to be tougher on Germany than he'd wanted .
 It also made them agree to pay for all the damage that the war had caused . It also forced them to accept responsibility for the damage caused .
 This was a scheme that he believed could still make his dream of a world without war come true . He believed it could still be a way to make a world of peace come true.
 The League of Nations was to be an organization where representatives of the world’s nations would meet and settle their differences by discussion instead of war . It was intended to be a group of representatives of nations who would meet to discuss their differences .
 It had taken Wilson months of hard bargaining to persuade the other Allicd leaders to accept this plan . Wilson: 'It had taken months to persuade others to accept'
 President Barack Obama has been elected to the presidency . He faces a battle to persuade Congress and the American people to accept it .
 Many Americans were against their country becoming permanently involved in the problems of Europe . The U.S. was against its involvement in Europe's problems .
 President Obama has been trying to keep his reputation in Washington, D.C. But as the months passed it seemed that he was failing to do so .
 He boarded a special train and set off on a speaking tour of the western U.S. to plead for the League . But he was not in the United States at the start of the tour .
 In March 1920, the Senate voted against the United States joining the League of Nations, and the idea was dropped . The idea was later dropped .
 From his inyalid’s armchair in the White House a sick and disappointed Wilson spoke the last words on the subject . Wilson spoke from his armchair at the end of the day .
 President Wilson always insisted that the U.S. was fighting the First World War not against the German people but against their warlike leaders . Wilson’s Fourteen Points: War against German leaders is Wilson's Fourteen points .
 In January 1918, he outlined his ideas for a just and lasting peace in a speech to the U.S. Senate . He outlined ideas for peace in the United States Senate .
 Wilson’s Fourteen Points required nations to stop making secret agreements, reduce their military forces and armaments, to trade frecly with one another .
 It was in the Fourteen Points, also known as the League of Nations, that Wilson first suggested the League . Wilson was the first president of the United States .
 When the German government asked for peace in October 1918, it hoped that the Allies would base their terms on the Fourteen Points . The Fourteen points were agreed by the Germans and the Allies .
 Other Allicd leaders regarded some of Wilson’s ideas as idealistic nonsense . Wilson's ideas were rejected by other leaders .
 French leader, Clemenceau, compared the Fourteen Points sarcastically to the Christian religion's Ten Commandments . The French leader compared the 14 points to the 10 Commandments of the Bible .
 The Fourteen Points had less influence on the terms of the Versailles Treaty than Wilson had hoped for . In the end the Fourteen points had much less influence than Wilson hoped .
 They say that the post-war world would have been a better and a safer place if the Fourteen Points had been followed more closely .
 These are some of the pictures that come into people's minds when they think of the U.S. in the 1920s . The United States was a relatively small part of the world during the Great Depression .
 Because of the First World War, other countries owed it a lot of money . Because of that, other nations owed it much more than they did before .
 Britain's national income was much higher than that of Britain, France, Germany and Japan put together .
 Between 1922 and 1927, the number of cars on the roads rose from under eleven million to over twenty million . Over twenty million cars were on the road in the 1920s, according to reports .
 It 92 made hundreds of thousands of refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, stoves and radios . It also made thousands of vacuum cleaners and stoves .
 The United States became the first nation in history to build its way of life on selling vast quantities of goods that gave ordinary people easier and more enjoyable lives . The U.S. was the first country to rely heavily on large amounts of goods to make life easier .
 “‘Consumer goods” poured off the assembly lines of big new factories . These ‘consumer goods’ poured off assembly lines . These "consumer goods" poured off of big factories .
 Between 1919 and 1929 such mass-production factories doubled their output . Between 1919-29 such mass production factories doubled output .
 Thousands invested money in successful firms so that they could share their profits . Thousands of successful firms invested money to share profits with their owners .
 Their motto was ‘Live now, pay tomorrow’’—a tomorrow which most were convinced would be like today only better, with even more money swelling their wallets . Most were convinced that tomorrow would be a better day for them .
 Men like Henry Ford were widely admired as the creators of the nation’s prosperity . Henry Ford was widely admired for his role in America's economic prosperity .
 Coolidge’s words help explain the policies of American governments in the 1920s . Coolidge's words help to explain the policy of American presidents in the 1930s .
 Republicans believed that if the government looked after the interests of the businessman, everybody would become richer . Republicans thought that if they looked after business interests, everyone would become rich .
 Businessmen. whose firms are doing well, they claimed, would take on more workers and pay more wages . Businessmen . whose firms were doing well . were taking on more . workers and paying more wages.
 To help businessmen Congress placed high import taxes on goods from abroad . Congress placed the taxes on imports from abroad to help businessmen . Congress also placed high taxes on imported goods .
 The aim was to make imported goods more expensive, so that American manufacturers would have less competition from foreign rivals . The aim is to make imports more expensive so that U.S. manufacturers would be less competitive .
 Congress reduced taxes on high incomes and company profits . At the same time Congress reduced company profits, it also reduced tax on high income and profits .
 Some Americans feared that revolutionaries, or “reds, were plotting a similar take-over in the U.S. Some feared that a similar takeover was planned in the United States .
 People who criticized the way American society was organized risked being accused of disloyalty . People were afraid to criticize the way society organized in the U.S.
 Two people were shot dead in a $15,000 robbery near Boston . People who held them were feared and persecuted, especially if they were foreign-born .
 Two Italian immigrants named Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were arrested . Three weeks later two Italian immigrants were arrested. Three weeks after they were arrested, they were released .
 Sacco owned a gun that could have been used in the shooting . Yet there were lots of poor Americans. Sacco's gun was not used in any crime .
 A survey in 1929 showed that half the American people had hardly enough money to buy sufficient food and clothing . Half of American people were barely able to buy enough food and clothes .
 In the industrial cities of the North, immigrant workers still labored long hours for low wages in steel mills, factories and slaughter houses . In Chicago and Pittsburgh, immigrants still laboring long hours .
 In the South thousands of poor farmers, both black and white, worked from sunrise to sunset to earn barely enough to live on . Thousands of farmers in the South worked from dawn to sunset for decades .
 The wealth that Republicans said would benefit everybody never reached people like these . Republicans said that wealth that they promised would benefit everyone never reached them like these. The wealth they promised never reached these people .
 Sharecropper gave the landowner part of what he grew — often so much that he was left with hardly enough to feed his family . For rent, a sharecropper often gave the owner part of the money he grew . Sharecroppers were often left with little to feed their
 During the First World War they had been able to sell their wheat to Europe for high prices . But now they have been forced to sell it to the continent for a profit during the war . During the war they were able to get their wheat back to Europe .
 By 1921, the countries of Europe no longer needed so much American food . The U.S. was no longer supplying enough food to feed the world .
 Both Sacco and Vanzetti were sentenced to death . Sacco told friends that he was going to get “those anarchist bastards” and eventually sentenced .
 Many believed that Sacco and Vanzetti had been condemned for their origins and political beliefs, not because of the evidence against them . Many believed they were condemned because of their political beliefs .
 For six years people both in the U.S. and abroad fought for their release . People in the United States and abroad have fought for them to be released .
 To this day neither the guilt nor the innocence of Sacco and Vanzetti has been finally proved . Neither the guilt or innocence of the two men has been proven .
 Their case is remembered as an example of how racial and political prejudice may cause justice to suffer . But their case will be remembered as a case of racial prejudice against justice .
 Farmers are finding it more difficult to sell their produce at home . Farmers are also finding it harder to sell produce in the UK than usual .
 Immigration has fallen, so the number of people needing food is growing more slowly . Immigration had fallen, and so the need for food has grown more slowly, immigration has fallen .
 American farmers found themselves growing products they could not sell . U.S. farmers have been forced to grow products they couldn't sell . American farmers had to grow crops that couldn't be sold in the United States .
 To Americans who own shares or “‘stock,” in industrial companies, the future looked bright . But to Americans who owned shares or "“” stock,’s ‘stock’ in industrial firms the future was bright .
 This meant bigger profits for the firms that made them, which sent up the value of shares in such firms . This in turn sent up shares in shares of such firms, such as Apple .
 Hoover was sure that American prosperity would go on growing and that poverty in which some Americans still lived would be remembered as something in the past . Hoover: "I'm sure that U.S. prosperity will continue to grow and that the poverty of some Americans will be forgotten"
 Americans thought that their standard of living had risen during the 1920s . Looking at the way their standards had risen, many other Americans thought the same .
 Most of the films were made in Hollywood, a suburb of Los Angeles, California . Most were shot in Hollywood .
 Hollywood’s big attraction for filmmakers was its clean air and plentiful sunshine . Hollywood was a big draw for filmmakers in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The men who ran these studios were businessmen and their main aim was to make as much money as possible . The men ran the studios in the 1960s and 1970s .
 They soon found that one way to do this was to standardize their films . They found that standardizing their films was the best way to achieve their success .
 When audiences had shown that they liked a certain kind of film, the studios made many more of exactly the same kind . The studios made more films based on the fact that audiences liked certain films .
 The artist gives his view of American society in the 1920s . Stars were actors who were so popular that people went in crowds to see any film they appeared in, no matter how popular .
 They set up special publicity departments to get stories about their actors into the newspapers . They also set up publicity departments for their actors .
 They spoke in pictures, not words, and so their language was international . They spoke to each other not only in pictures but in pictures .
 All over the world, from Berlin to ‘Tokyo, from London to Buenos Aires, tens of millions of people lined up every night of the week to sce their favorite Hollywood stars .
 Hollywood movies showed people a world that was more exciting, more free, more equal, than their own . Hollywood movies were more exciting and more free than they were in their own world .
 To most people this world of the movies remained a dream world, separate from real life . To most . people this . world, it remained a . dream world . separate from reality .
 It made them realize, however dimly, that perhaps their own conditions of life could be improved, they said . "It made them . realize that perhaps they . realize they . need to improve their lives," she said .
 In 1919 the American people voted in favor of a new amendment to the Constitution . Al Capone and the bootleggers were the subject of Prohibition in the 1920s .
 The Eighteenth Amendment prohibited the making or selling of alcoholic drinks in the U.S. The Amendment was passed in 17th Amendment .
 Millions began to break the prohibition law deliberately and regularly . Millions of people broke the law deliberately, regularly, breaking it .
 Illegal drinking places called “speakeasies’” opened in basements and backrooms all over the U.S. All over the country. illegal drinking places .
 The bestknown mob was one in Chicago led by the gangster “Scarface” Al Capone . Capone was the leader of the Chicago mob in the 1920s and '50s .
 Competition between rival mobs sometimes caused bloody street wars, fought out with armored cars and machine guns .
 They used their wealth to bribe police and other public officials to do nothing about their law-breaking . They also used their money to bribe public officials, but did not do anything about their crime .
 He had a private army of nearly a thousand thugs equipped with machine guns . He had to have his own army of about 1,000 thugs armed with machine-gun guns .
 By the end of the 1920s most Americans regarded prohibition as half scandal, half joke . Prohibition was half scandal and half joke at the time of prohibition .
 Many used the money they had made as bootleggers to set up other criminal businesses . Many of the bootlegs used the proceeds to start other businesses .
 Workman outside Wall Street window of 1929 Wall Street office found himself staring into the eyes of four policemen . Four policemen were involved in the incident .
 Stockbrokers called stockbrokers buy and sell valuable picces of paper . Dealers called stock brokers buy & sell valuable paper in order to make money .
 Each certificate represents a certain amount of money invested in a company . The certificates represent a certificate of value invested in the company .
 Every year in the 1920s the sales of cars, radios and other consumer goods rose . Sales of cars and other goods rose every year in 1920s .
 Owning shares in a business gives you the right to a share of its profits . Owning a business can give you the chance to share your profits .
 You can buy them at one price, then, if the company does well, sell them later at a higher one . You can also buy them for one price then sell them at a later price .
 By 1929 “playing the market” had become almost a national hobby . By 1929 buying and selling shares had become a national obsession .
 You could see this from the rise in the number of shares changing hands . Share prices have risen in the last year, according to analysts .
 You could buy shares on credit in the U.S. in the 1920s, you could buy them on credit . You could also buy shares in the United States in the 1930s .
 A hundred dollars cash would “buy’t a thousand dollars’ worth of shares from any stockbroker’s . A hundred dollar cash would buy a thousand shares from a stock broker .
 Many people borrowed large amounts of money from the banks to buy shares in this way . “‘on the margin”, as it was called, was called . People borrowed large sums of money to purchase shares on the margin .
 This cartoon accurately predicted the stock market crash that occurred three weeks later . The cartoon was accurate to predict the crash three weeks after the crash .
 Their idea was to spot shares that would quickly rise in value, buy them at one price and then resell at a higher one a few weeks later . Their idea is to buy shares that are quickly rising in value and then sell them at another price .
 Stockbrokers pushed and scrambled to buy shares for their customers . One visitor to Wall Street was reminded of a strect fight, as stockbrokers scrambled to get shares .
 By the fall of 1929 the profits being made by many American firms had been decreasing for some time . The profits were decreasing for many of the American firms .
 If profits were falling, thought more cautious investors, then share prices, too, would soon fall . Share prices would also fall if profits fell, thought cautious investors thought .
 On Thursday, October 24, 1929—Black Thursday —13 million shares were sold, On the following Tuesday, October 29— Terrifying Tuesday—16. million were sold . By the end of the year, the value of all shares had dropped by $40,000 million .
 Thousands of people, especially those who had borrowed to buy on the margin, found themselves facing debt and ruin . Some committed suicide, some committed suicide . Some of those who borrowed on margin found themselves .
 Police thought window cleaner was planning to use window cleaner to clean windows . The window cleaner has been arrested and charged with robbery .
 This collapse of American share prices was known as the Wall Street Crash . The collapse of U.S. share prices is known as 'Wall Street Crash' The Wall Street crash was the largest collapse in American history .
 Some blamed the blindness of politicians for the Crash . Others blamed the greed of investors and stockbrokers . Some blamed politicians, others blamed investors .
 The fact was that by the end of the 1920s not enough people were buying the products of America’s expanded industries . Not enough people would have been able to afford to buy the products .
 Too little of the U.S.’ increased wealth was finding its way into the hands of the country’s workers and farmers, says President Obama . Because too little of this wealth is finding its . way through, too little is getting into the . hands of workers and
 Too few Americans were carning enough money to buy the goods that they themselves were producing . The most important cause of the Wall Street Crash was simply this—that too few Americans had enough money .
 Many decided to save any money they had instead of spending it on such things as new cars and radios . Many decided not to spend it on new cars or radios .
 American factories were already making more goods than they could sell . U.S. factories were making more than they needed to sell, the government said .
 In the 1920s American goods had sold well overseas, especially in Europe . In the 1930s U.S. goods sold well in Europe, especially .
 Britain and Germany had not prospered after the war as the U.S. had . But countries such a nation had not done so well in the war .
 They had often paid for their purchases with money borrowed from American banks . They often used borrowed money from U.S. banks .
 European buyers became short of cash and American overseas sales dried up almost completely . European buyers needed cash to buy U.S. goods .
 Unlike unemployed workers in countries such as Germany and Britain, they received no government unemployment pay . Unlike unemployment pay in Germany and UK, they receive no government pay .
 Free food was paid for by money collected from those who could afford it . The children were given free bread or bowls of soup by the charity .
 Industrial production has fallen by half and wage payments have fallen by 60 percent . Industrial production had fallen by 50 percent, wage payments had also been cut .
 Twelve million people, one out of every four of the country’s workers, were unemployed . 12 million people were unemployed in 2007, according to the OECD .
 The city of Chicago alone had almost three-quarters of a million workers without jobs . Chicago had almost 3.75 million people without jobs in 2012 .
 The Depression was easiest to see in the towns, with their silent factories, closed shops and slowly moving breadlines . The towns were the most affected by the Depression, with silent factories and closed shops .
 With the number of people out of work rising day by day, their customers in the cities could no longer afford to buy . With the increase in unemployment, the demand for goods has also increased .
 They banded together to drive away men who came to throw them off their farms for not paying their debts . They took out shotguns and banded up to drive them away from their farms .
 "It’s cold, and you shiver and stand in doorways or sit in railroad stations," she says . "It's cold. You shiver," she said. "You shiver"
 By 1932 people of every kind were demanding that President Hoover take stronger action to deal with the Depression . President Hoover was forced to take action against the Depression in 1932 . Hoover's response to the Depression was met with resistance .
 The first was to ‘balance the budget’’—that is, to make sure that the government’s spending did not exceed its income . The first goal was to balance the budget, but to ensure that spending didn’t exceed income .
 The second was to restore businessmen’s confidence in the future, so that they would begin to take on workers again . The first is to restore the confidence of businessmen in their businesses, the second is to help them take on jobs .
 To masses of unemployed workers Hoover seemed uncaring and unable to help them . Hoover was seen as uncaring . Hoover seemed to be uncaring. Hoover seemed unfazed by the jobless .
 Roosevelt gave an impression of energy and determination, and of caring deeply for the welfare of ordinary people . Roosevelt gave the impression of . caring deeply, he said . Roosevelt .
 All over the United States anxious men and women felt that here at last was a man who understood their troubles, who sympathized with them —and, most important, all, who sounded as if he would help them .
 Roosevelt's main idea was that the federal government should take the lead in the fight against the Depression . Roosevelt’s main idea is that the government should lead the fight . Roosevelt's idea: The government should help fight the Depression.
 Thousands of unemployed ex-servicemen poured into Washington, the nation’s capital, in the spring of 1932 . He was sure that such policies would, he said, “destroy the very foundations of our American would only make things worse .
 They wanted the government to give them some bonus payments that it owed them from the war years . They wanted them some bonuses from the government . They said they were owed them a bonus .
 The bonus army were determined to stay in Washington until the President did something to help them . The men of the bonus army wanted the President to do something more for them . President Barack Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House .
 Similar camps could be found on rubbish dumps outside every large’ American city by this time, experts say . Similar camps have been found in every large' American city .
 The homeless people who lived in them named their camps “Hoovervilles,”’ after the President . Homeless people lived in the camps called their camps after the president .
 They would cause people to lose their ability to stand on their own feet and bear their own responsibilities . They would be causing people to 'lose their ability' to bear responsibilities, says the minister .
 On November 9, 1932, they elected Franklin Roosevelt as the next President of the United States by the largest majority in American history . Franklin Roosevelt was elected by a majority of Americans in 1932 .
 In only six of the nation’s fortycight states did Hoover gain a majority of the votes . Hoover gained the majority of votes in only six states . Hoover was elected to the presidency in 1916 .
 He ordered soldiers and the police to burn their camp and drive them out of Washington . The camp was burned by soldiers and police, and they were driven out .
 As smoke billowed up from the burning, huts of the bonus army, government spokesman defended Hoover’s decision .
 Only two courses were open, As anyone can see: To vindicate law and order Or yield to anarchy . Only two course was open, as anyone could see: Or yield anarchy .
 For a hundred days, from March 8 to June 16, President Obama sent Congress a flood of proposals for new laws . For the 100 days, he sent Congress proposals for the first time .
 Many of the new laws set up government organizations called “ ’ to help the nation to recover from the Depression . Many of these organizations were set up by the government .
 The Civilian Conservation Corps found work for many thousands of young men . The Corps was formed in the 1930s and 1940s .
 A judge was hearing a case against a farmer who was in debt . It told of a judge who was due to hear a case in a debt case . The judge was a judge in the case of a farmer in debt who had been in debt.
 Other farmers dragged the judge from his courthouse and almost killed him . Other farmers had dragged him out of his courthouse . The judge was almost killed by the incident .
 Selling a wagon load of oats carned them less than the price of a pair of shoes . Selling oats for less than $1,000 a year is the lowest price of selling a wagonload of oats . The price of oats is $1.5 per wagon load .
 Many other crops were too low even to cover harvesting costs . The price of many other crops was too low to cover harvest costs .
 During the Hundred Days, Roosevelt set up the Agricultural Adjustment Agency to help farmers . The agency was set up to help the farmers .
 AAA aimed to persuade farmers to produce less meat, corn, cotton and other main crops . AAA said the AAA wanted farmers to reduce their production of meat and other crops . The AAA said farmers need to reduce production of livestock and crops .
 The idea was to make such products scarcer, so that selling prices would rise and farmers would be better off . It was hoped that such products would increase selling prices and help farmers benefit farmers .
 Farmers who agreed to grow less were given money by the government to make up for having less to sell . Farmers were given the money to cover up for the loss of their crops .
 The crop limitation scheme, as it was called, did its job . But for the farmers, it did not do its job. The scheme was a success for farmers .
 The Tennessee Valley Authority built a network of dams to make electricity and stop floods in a poor southeastern region of the U.S. The authority built the network to stop floods and make electricity .
 The National Recovery Administration worked to make sure businesses paid fair wages and charged fair prices . The agency also worked to ensure that businesses pay fair wages .
 Roosevelt believed that his most urgent task was to find people work . Let us look more closely at the work of some of these “alphabet agenc ‘‘The American people knew both thes . Roosevelt .
 Thousands of people were stealing rides on freight trains and wandering about the country searching for jobs . Thousands of them were on the country looking for jobs when they were found to be unemployed .
 By August 1933, the CCC had already placed 250,000 young men in camps all over the country . The CCC was the largest organization in American history .
 They were hard at work cutting fire-lanes through forests, strengthening river banks against flooding, planting trees in places where the soil is being blown away .
 Like the CCC, it aimed to set people to work on jobs that were useful to the community . The CCC was set up in a bid to set up jobs that could be useful to community .
 By 1937 its workers had built thousands of miles of new roads and thousands of schools and hospitals . By 1937 it had built tens of thousands of roads and schools .
 Alphabet agencies like the CCC and WPA put millions of people to work . Alphabet agencies such as the WPA and CCC helped create millions of jobs .
 He believed putting moncy into people’s pockets was like pouring fucl into an engine that had stopped to make it start again . He believed that pouring moncy in people's pockets would be like pouring it into a new engine that was stopped .
 The engine could then once more drive the economic machinery that earned the country its living . The engine of the engine could once again drive the country's economic machinery .
 The valley of the Tennessee was once a country of tréccovered slopes . But generations of farmers cut down the trees and ploughed the slopes to grow corn, tobacco and cotton .
 All crops were planted in the spring and harvested in the autumn . All these crops were grown in the summer and were harvested in autumn .
 The same rains often caused floods which drove people from their homes . Floods were often caused by the same rains which often drove people out of their homes.
 The very names that farmers gave to the countryside, Hard Labor Creek, Long Hungry Creek, Poorland Valley, showed how hopeless they were . The names of these rural areas were given to the landscape by farmers .
 Roosevelt set up a special alphabet agency to organize help for the Tennessee Valley’s millions of people . Roosevelt's alphabet agency was set up to help those in need of help .
 The TVA had three main aims: to stop floods, make electricity and make the land fertile again . TVA was created in 1903 to stop the floods, to make electricity, and to make it more fertile .
 From 1933 onwards the valley of the Tennessee echoed to the roar of heavy machinery . The valley was filled with heavy machinery from the 1930s onwards .
 When heavy rains fell the dams held back the flood water in great man-made lakes . Dams held back water in some of the world's largest man-built lakes . The dams are now holding back flood waters .
 The electricity was also used to power new factories making paper, aluminum, chemicals and fertilizer .
 These factories meant jobs and a better life for the Tennessee Valley’s people, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The Tennessee Valley is home to many of the poorest people in the state .
 TVA also planted millions of trees and persuaded farmers to plant crops like grass and clover . TVA has also persuaded millions of people to plant grass, clover and grass .
 These covered the ground all year round and prevented winter rains from washing away the soil . Winter rains prevented the soil from being washed away from the ground .
 The fields and hills of the Tennessee Valley became green again as the scars of erosion were healed . The Tennessee Valley was once green again .
 T'VA's achievements were achieved through the way they were won in the 1960s and '90s . The organisation was formed in 1968 and '80s .
 In times like these the TVA was a startling demonstration of what democratic methods of government could achieve .
 TVA encouraged people to take a more active part in running their own lives . Far from limiting the part people were able to play in running themselves, TVA encourages them to do so .
 It set up yoluntary cooperative groups to sell elect y, for instance, and to organize the marketing of the farmers’ produce . The government set up a number of cooperatives to help the farmers .
 Roosevelt regarded this aspect of TVA as one of the most important things about it . Roosevelt himself regarded it as a very important aspect of the TVA .
 In 1940 the armies of the German dictator Hitler seemed about to destroy the last remnants of democracy in Europe . In 1940, Hitler's armies seemed to be destroying the last remaining remnants of European democracy .
 That September, Roosevelt traveled to the Tennessee Valley to open a new dam . Roosevelt opened the Tennessee River Dam in Tennessee .
 "No citizen has lost a single one of these human liberties that we prize so highly," says President Obama . Obama: "No one has lost one of the human liberties"
 In 1935 he persuaded Congress to pass a law to protect their right to join labor unions . In 1935 Congress passed a law protecting their rights to join unions .
 He hoped this would give workers a better chance to bargain with employers . He said he hoped it would give them a chance to negotiate with their employers .
 Strikes and fighting broke out in industrial areas of the country as unions struggled to win recognition . Strikes and clashes broke out as unions struggle to get recognition from unions .
 This was called the Wagner Act, after the man who guided it through Congress . The Wagner Act was passed by Congress in 1903 .
 The Wagner Act gave every worker the right to join a union . It set up a body called the National Labor Board to protect this right . The board was set up by the Wagner Act in 1903 .
 Despite New Deal reforms, millions of still lived in fear . Millions of people still live in fear of terrorism .
 One part gave government pensions to people unable to provide for themselves . Old people, widows and the blind, for example, were given pensions . One part of the pension system was set up to help those who couldn't provide themselves .
 Another part of the U.S. gave the United States its first system of unemployment insurance . Another part gave the country the first unemployment insurance.
 The money to pay for these benefits came from special taxes paid by both workers and employers . The money was raised through special taxes .
 Not all Americans supported Roosevelt’s New Deal poli . Some said that the country could not afford the money that he was spending .
 They feared that Roosevelt’s policies would make people idle and stop them standing on their own feet . They feared, too, that Roosevelt's policies would stop them from standing up .
 Roosevelt’s popularity with the voters made little difference to his popularity with voters . Roosevelt was a popular candidate for the White House in the 1930s and 1940s .
 To millions of Americans he was the man who had given them jobs and saved their homes and farms . He was also a hero for many of them . To millions he was a hero .
 In 1936 they re-elected him President by the largest majority of votes in the country’s history . In 1936 he was elected President of the United States .
 Roosevelt’s New Deal ended unemployment in the U.S. Even so, it was not Roosevelt's New Deal that ended unemployment . Even though, the New Deal was not the end of unemployment .
 By 1939, despite the New Deal, ten million American workers again had no jobs . The New Deal was the first time ten million Americans had jobs again .
 In 1941 the United States joined the war itself and unemployment disappeared . Unemployment in the U.S. disappeared .
 President Roosevelt was now too busy to give attention to further reforms at home . Roosevelt was too busy with other duties to focus on the country .
 A few weeks before the end of the war, on the morning of April 12, he suffered a stroke . The war veteran suffered from a stroke just weeks before he died .
 His Vice President, Harry Truman, took over as President of the United States . Harry Truman took over from President Harry Truman in 1945 . Truman died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 By this time nearly all Americans were better off than they had been in the dark days of the Depression . Nearly all Americans now have a better life than they did in the 1930s .
 There is no argument about the importance of the New Deal in other ways . The New Deal was created in the 1930s, but it is still important today, he says .
 Before the New Deal most people thought of the government as a kind of policeman . The government is now a government agency, not a government .
 It was just there just to keep order, while factory owners and businessmen got on with making the country richer . It was there just a few jobs, but they were there to make it richer .
 President Roosevelt spoke to the American people in 1937 about wars being fought in Spain and China . Roosevelt spoke about the Spanish and Chinese wars in his speech .
 They believed that the best thing to do was to let foreigners solve their problems themselves . They believed the best way to deal with their problems was to allow foreigners to solve them themselves .
 These were people who believed that Americans should try to cut off, or isolate,” the U.S. from the problems of the outside world, the author says .
 U.S. citizens would not be allowed to sell military equipment or lend mon é y to any nations at war .
 Even nonmilitary supplies such as foodstuffs would be sold to warring countries only if they paid cash for them and collected them in their own ships . The U.S. would only sell the non-military supplies if they were collected in their ships .
 By the summer of 1940 Hitler’s armies had overrun all of western Europe . By the end of the 1940s, the German army had taken over all of Europe .
 With Hitler the ma of Europe and his ally, Japan, becoming ever stronger in Asia, Americans saw at last the dangerous position of the United States, sandwiched between the two . Roosevelt had already persuaded Congress to approve the first peacetime military conscription in American history .
 Britain sent all the military equipment that the U.S. could spare—rifles, guns, ships, ships . Now he sent Britain all the weapons and ships that the United States could spare .
 These Japanese Americans were cither “Issei’’—those born in Japan—or “Nisei” —American-born Japanese . “I-Issei'’s’ was born in the U.S. or “
 Most lived in California, where they had worked hard and been successful . Most of them were successful and had lived in the state .
 Issei were producing half of California’s fruit and vegetables in 1941 . By 1941, Issei had produced half of the state's fruit and veg .
 After the attack on Pearl Harbor white Americans began to see every Japanese American as a potential spy or saboteur . White Americans now see all Japanese Americans as potential spies and saboteurs .
 Most of the internment camps were in remote, desert areas of the country . The camps were located in remote desert areas, some of the world's most notorious .
 Japanese American men, women and children were kept in them for the rest of the war . Over 100,000 Japanese American kept in the homes for the next two decades .
 Not one Japanese American was convicted of an act of disloyalty to the U.S. during the whole of the war . Not one of those were convicted of a disloyal behavior .
 Lend Lease gave Roosevelt the right to supply military equipment and other goods to Britain without payment . The deal was made with the British government in return for military equipment .
 He could do the same for any country whose defense he considered necessary to the safety of the U.S. He could also do it for any nation whose defense was necessary .
 American guns, food and aircraft crossed the Atlantic Ocean in large quantities . U.S. guns, aircraft and food were also crossing the Atlantic .
 They played a vital part in helping Britain to continue to fight against Hitler . They helped the British fight against the Nazis .
 The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii the Soviet Union in June 1941, used the Lend Lease scheme to send aid to the Russians, too . When Hitler attacked 25 THe ARSENAL OF DEMOCRACY .
 Japanese forces had invaded Manchuria in 1931 and China in 1937 . In July 1941, they also occupied the French colony of Indochina .
 The U.S. saw the growing power of Japan as a threat to peace in Asia and to American trading interests . It also saw the Japanese power as an economic threat to the United States .
 The United States had been reducing its exports to Japan of goods that were useful in war . Aircraft and chemicals, for example, were among the items that U.S. exported to Japan .
 Tojo was well known for his belief that a sharp use of force was often the best way to solve disagreements . Tojo believed that sharp force was a good way of dealing with disagreements .
 Tojo decided that Japan must seize it and make it impossible for the Americans to use their Pacific battle fleet to stop them . The U.S. tried to seize it, but Tojo said it would be impossible for them to do so .
 On December 7, 1941, Japanese warplanes roared in over Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, the U.S. Navy’s main base in the Pacific .
 Their bombs and torpedoes sank or badly damaged cight American battleships, blew up hundreds of aircraft and killed over 2,000 men . Over 2,200 men died in the Battle of the Atlantic .
 When Pearl Harbor attack took place, the U.S. and Japan were still at peace . When the attack happened, the United States was at peace with Japan . Pearl Harbor was the first World War II invasion of Japan .
 The United States declared war on Japan on December 8, 1941 . Since Germany was Japan’s ally, Hitler declared war against the United States . Hitler then declared war .
 Britain, the Soviet Union and the United States were the main countries on one side of the war . The U.S. and Britain were involved in the conflict .
 The United States government organized the whole American economy towards winning the war . The U.S. government was organized to win the war in order to win .
 It placed controls on wages and prices, and introduced high income taxes . The country's economy is now the world's largest in terms of trade .
 The government also spent a vast amount of money on a topsecret research scheme . Two thousand million dollars was spent on top secret research .
 By 1945 scientists working on the scheme had produced and tested the world’s first atomic bomb .
 To help the Russians, American generals recommended an early invasion of German-occupicd France . U.S. generals recommended a German invasion of France .
 Winston Churchill persuaded Roosevelt to attack the Germans first in the Mediterranean region . But Winston Churchill, the British Prime Minister, persuaded Roosevelt not to do so .
 Combined U.S. and British forces landed in North Africa in November 1942 . They joined other British forces already fighting there .
 Allied armies defeated the German general Rommel’s Afrika Korps . Together, they defeated the Afrika Kompa .
 After months of bitter fighting, on June 4, 1944, they freed Rome from German control . The Italian capital was liberated from Nazi control in 1945 .
 Allied troops invaded Normandy in German-occupied France on June 6, 1944 . Two days later, the Allied forces invaded Normandy . The invasion was the first invasion of Normandy .
 Allied landing craft emptied their loads of men and weapons on to the flat Normandy beaches . From early in the morning of D-Day hundreds of Allied landing boats emptied their . men and . weapons on the beaches .
 Paris was liberated on August 24 and by September Allied forces had crossed Germany's western border . Allied forces crossed the western border of Germany and occupied Paris .
 In December 1944, they launched a last fierce attack in the Ardennes region of Belgium . The last fierce battle took place in December 1944 .
 It was a month before the Allies could organize a counterattack and drive back the Germans . The Allies could not defeat the Germans until the end of the war .
 The Battle of the Bulge proved to be the last German offensive of the Second World War . The battle was the last of the German offensive in the war .
 On April 2 1945, British and American soldicrs met advancing Soviet troops on the banks of the River Elbe in the middle of Germany .
 German soldiers everywhere laid down their weapons and on May 5, 1945, Germany surrendered . Germany surrendered to the U.S. in 1945 .
 In the Pacific Japanese armed forces won some striking early victories . In the early years of the war, Japanese forces were able to take advantage of the U.S. Pacific .
 In only a few months they overran Southeast Asia and the islands of the western Pacific . They overran the region and overran all of the world's most populous regions .
 At 15 minutes past cight on the morning of August 6, 1945, an American B29 bomber dropped an atomic bomb on the city of Hiroshima, Hiroshima . Fortyfive seconds later the bomb exploded in a blinding flash .
 At the time, and since, people have argued fiercely about whether he was right . People have argued over whether he had been right .
 Without Hiroshima, they say, the Americans would have had to invade Japan to end the war . Without Hiroshima they would have to have invaded Japan . Hiroshima is the only atomic bomb to hit Japan .
 Many more people than died at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, both Japanese and American, would then have been killed . Many more would have died if they had been killed at Hiroshima .
 The Japanese government was ready to surrender before the bombings, they say . They argue that the Japanese government had already been prepared to surrender . They say the bombings were premeditated .
 More than half a century after the destruction of Hiroshima, the argument still continues . More than 50 years after the war's destruction, the debate still continues over Hiroshima .
 Aircraft from American carriers drove back a big Japanese invasion flect that was threatening Australia . In the Battle of the Coral Sea, aircraft from American aircraft drove back an invasion .
 Their main battle fleet attacked an important American base called Midway Island . The main battle force attacked Midway island .
 In the Battle of Midway, the Japanese lost four aircraft carriers and many of their best pilots . The Japanese lost many of them in the battle, including many pilots .
 From Australia one prong would push northwards towards Japan through the Philippines . One prong could push northward towards the Philippines through Australia . Another prong is pushing northwards through Australia and Japan .
 From Hawaii another prong would strike westwards through the islands of the central Pacific . The U.S. would also strike through the Pacific .
 The two Pacific offensives would be supported by a drive through Burma into the lands that the Japanese had conquered in Southeast Asia . Finally, the two Pacific and Burial offensive would be followed by a push through Burma to reclaim the land that Japan had conquered .
 American forces advanced towards Japan by and hopping’ —thatis, they captured islands that were strategically important, but bypassed others . American forces captured islands in order to advance towards Japan .
 Allied forces fought their way closer to Japan itself during the Battle of Japan in 1943 and 1944 .
 In June 1944, an enormous American task force won control of the important Mariana Islands . The islands were taken by an American force .
 In October American troops returned to the Philippines and cut off Japan from its conquests in Southeast Asia . U.S. troops cut Japan's conquests from its Asian conquests .
 By 1945 Japan was within range of air attack American bombers made devastating raids on its cities . U.S. bombers bombed Japan's cities .
 On July 16, 1945, Allied scientists at work on the Manhattan Project tested the world’s first atomic bomb . The test took place on July 17, 1945 .
 On August 6 an American bomber dropped an atomic bomb over the Japanese city of Hiroshima . The Hiroshima bomb was dropped by a U.S. atomic bomb on August 6 .
 A few days later, on August 9, a second atomic bomb was dropped on the city of Nagasaki . Nagasaki was the first city to be bombed by the Japanese government .
 Americans were the only people in the world that the Second World War had made better off. But Americans were only people who were better off after the war, he said .
 Between 1947 and 1971 the value of their wages in buying power more than doubled . The value of buying power has doubled in the past decade .
 Americans bought more houses, cars, television sets, consumer goods, every kind of goods than ever before . Americans bought most of the country's most expensive goods, including houses and cars .
 As early as 1960, 55 percent of all families owned washing machines, 75 percent owned cars . 75 percent of families had cars, 90 percent had television sets and nearly all had refrigerators .
 Kennedy told the American people that they were facing a “new frontier,” one with both opportunities and problems . Kennedy said the U.S. faced a ‘new frontier’ with both opportunity and problems. Kennedy told Americans that they would face a new frontier .
 Although most Americans were well-off, millions of others were too poor to lead decent lives . Millions of Americans were too impoverished to lead a decent life, says CNN.com .
 Others lived in places like old coalmining districts where the mines had closed . Some lived in areas where mines were closed . Others were in coalmining areas .
 The late 1940s and the 1950s were anxious years for Americans . McCarthy witch hunts were the result of a McCarthy witch hunt . He also wanted to help other groups who were targeted by McCarthy .
 President Truman and President Eisenhower believed that the Soviet Union’s communist way of running a country was cruel and wrong . Truman and Eisenhower believed the way was wrong .
 They made up their minds to stop it from spreading to other countries . To “contain” it, they decided to "contain" it. They decided to stop the spread of it .
 They believed that it threatened both the freedom of individual Americans and the “capitalist” economic system of the U.S. They said it threatened individual Americans' freedom .
 When communist North Korea invaded South Korea in June 1950, their fears became stronger still .
 Joseph McCarthy used these fears to win fame and power for himself . McCarthy was an ambitious and unscrupulous politician named Joseph McCarthy . McCarthy used the fears of McCarthy to gain fame and gain power .
 He started what came to be called a “witch hunt’s”—a search for people he could blame for the supposed threats to the U.S. He started the "witch hunt" in the 1980s .
 McCarthy accused government officials, scientists, famous entertainers of secretly working for the Soviet Union . McCarthy accused all kinds of people, including government officials and scientists, of working for Russia . McCarthy was accused of being a traitor to the United States .
 Americans were so full of fears about communism that many believed him . He never gave proof, but Americans never believed him.
 People grew afraid to give jobs or even to show friendship to anyone he accused . People were afraid of giving jobs or showing friendship to those accused .
 ‘McCarthyism’ had done serious damage to the U.S. reputation for justice and fair play . But “McK McCarthyism” did serious damage . ‘It was a mistake for the United States,’s reputation for fair play,
 This happened while he was driving through the streets of Dallas in November 1963 . This is the first time he has been in Dallas since 1963 .
 He had spent years as a member of Congress, making political friends and winning influence there . He was elected to the House of Representatives in 1994 .
 One of his first actions was to persuade Congress to pass Kennedy’s plan to improve the position of American blacks . Kennedy's plan was passed by Congress in 1964 .
 He said he wanted to turn the U.S. into ‘the great society” —a country where everyone received fair and decent treatment . He said that he wanted the United States to be the "great society" with everyone receiving fair treatment .
 In the later 1960s he involved the U.S. more and more deeply in war in Vietnam . In the late 1960s, he was involved in the United States more than ever .
 The huge cost of the war forced Johnson to give up many of his plans for improvements . Johnson gave up many plans to improve the country .
 Riots and protests flared up all over the country —against the war, against poverty, against continuing racial injustice . Protests were held against war, poverty, and against racial injustice.
 He became so unpopular that he decided not even to try to get re-elected . He decided not to run for re-election . He became unpopular .
 He was much less interested than Kennedy and Johnson in helping the poor . He was more interested in the poor than those of his predecessors .
 The government was paying out more than cnough money on welfare schemes already, he said . He said it was paying more than £1.5 billion to the taxpayer already .
 The main reason for this was that by then he was close to getting the U.S. out of the hated war in Vietnam . "By then, by then, the United States was out of Vietnam," he said .
 Journalists on the Washington Post newspaper started to look into the burglary .
 The burglars were paid to steal information to discredit President Nixon’s Democratic opponents . They discovered that the burglars had been paid for their work . President Nixon's Democratic opponents were Democrats .
 In February 1973, the Senate set up a committee to look into the Watergate affair . The committee was set up by the Senate in 1973 .
 The committee uncovered a network of lies and dishonesty at the very heart of the nation’s government . Day by day viewers watched the committee uncover a . network of . lies .
 Nixon vowed time and time again that he had known nothing about the Watergate break-in . Nixon vowed to never be involved in the Watergate scandal .
 As the investigations went on, fewer and fewer people believed him . But he said he was innocent . "I'm not sure what happened to me," he said .
 Many began to demand that he should be impeached for misusing his powers as President . Many called for him to be removed from the White House .
 A tape recording made in Nixon’s office proved that he had known all about the Watergate affair . Nixon's impeachment and even imprisonment now seemed certain .
 Nixon resigned as President of the United States part way through his term of office . He was the first man ever to do so . Nixon resigned to avoid a repeat of Watergate scandal .
 Watergate seemed to show clearly that the U.S. political system had gone rotten . To many people at home and abroad, the Watergate affair seemed to be a sign of a rotten political system .
 Parts of the system brought the misdeeds of the President and his advisers to light . But it was parts of that very system, the newspapers, the law courts, the Congress .
 Nixon himself best summed up this aspect of the Watergate affair . Ironically, it was Nixon himself who perhaps best summed it up in Watergate . Nixon himself himself was the president of Watergate .
 President Nixon has been stabbed by the quill pen of the Washington Post's investigative journalists . It was Nixon’s moment of greatest triumph. Nixon's moment of triumph.
 Congress threatened to put him on trial— ‘impeach’ him— for misusing his powers . Congress threatened the president with a ‘prosecutive’ term of impeachment .
 One reason for this was that both found it difficult to control inflation . One reason is that both the government and the country's economy struggled to cope with inflation .
 After Arab—Israeli war in 1973 international oil prices rose steeply . Oil prices rose after Arab-Israeli conflict in 1973 .
 By 1980 prices in the United States were rising by 13. percenta year and this was making life difficult for many people . Prices in the U.S. rose by 13 percent a year, making life in the US difficult .
 Ronald Reagan was a former film actor named Ronald Reagan . Reagan was elected President of the United States in 1980 . Reagan is a former President of America .
 He said he aimed to make Americans depend less on government help and more on self-help . He said that he wanted Americans to rely on less government help .
 Reagan was determined to make the U.S. stronger than its old rival, the Soviet Union . Reagan wanted to make it stronger than the old rival .
 He spent millions of dollars on developing powerful new missiles and research into weapons to knock out enemy missiles from space . He spent much of the money on developing new missiles .
 Reagan’s policies — including the spending on weapons —helped more Americans to find jobs . Reagan's policies helped more Americans find jobs, including weapons spending . Reagan: "I’m not the president of the United States, but the president's policies will be remembered for
 His relaxed and friendly manner, which came over well on television, was well-received by viewers . So did his relaxed manner .
 His simple “stand on your own feet and act tough” policies made many Americans feel proud of their country again . After the shame of Vietnam and Watergate, Watergate was made many feel proud again .
 In 1984 they re-clected him as President by one of the biggest majorities in American history . In 1984 he was re-elected by the U.S. Senate .
 He was still popular, and for much the same reasons, when his second term as President ended in 1989 . His second term ended in 1988 .
 It was the result of being treated as a second-class human being, she said . She said: "I was told no, you can’t attend this school, have this job, live in this house, sit on this park bench"
 The official term for all this was segregation -that is, separating blacks from the rest of the community and refusing them many of the rights enjoyed by other people . This was segregation .
 In 1940 ten million of the country’s total black population of 13 million still lived in the southern U.S. Most of them were in great poverty .
 The country’s total black population was now about twenty-24 million and twelve million lived outside the South . Most of them lived in big northern industrial cities .
 More than 4. million southern blacks had caught buses and driven to the North and to California . The southern black population was growing in the 1960s .
 The big attraction for migrants was well-paid jobs in the factories of citi ¢ Chicago, Pittsburgh and Detroit .
 Taking the road north or west promised an escape not just from poverty, but from the miseries and humiliations of segregation which were part of every southern black’s daily life .
 During the Second World War, segregation started to break down, at least outside the South . As one black migrant wrote, “I don’t care where so long as | go where a man is a man,”
 Black workers carned more money than ever before before working alongside whites in the busy wartime factories . Black workers were able to earn more money in the war's factories .
 Black servicemen not only fought and died, but ate and slept alongside their white fellow countrymen . They ate, slept and died alongside white fellow citizens of the United States .
 That September the United States began to draft young men into the armed forces . The draft is the first time the U.S. has ever drafted young men .
 Fewer than 4,000 blacks were serving in the U.S. army before the war .
 Most were in support units—digging ditches, loading and unloading ships and trucks, serving food . Most of the troops were involved in digging ditches and loading ditches .
 Eleanor Roosevelt, the wife of the President, attended the ceremony . The ceremony was held at the White House in Washington, D.C. Roosevelt .
 On December 1, 1941, the American army and air force opened all types of positions to qualified blacks . The U.S. Army and Air Force opened the doors to all qualified blacks for all positions .
 During the Second World War black combat units fought in both Europe and the Pacific . Black combat units served in the Pacific and Europe during the war .
 In March 1945, the whole group was awarded a Distinguished Unit Citation .
 332nd Group came to symbolize the struggle of all blacks for equality . The 332nd group became a symbol of the struggle for black equality .
 Its wartime achievements helped to end segregation in the U.S. armed forces . Its war achievements helped end segregation .
 Brown Topeka the Supreme Court declared that segregated schools were illegal and ordered that black children should be allowed to attend any school as pupils . The court also declared that segregation was illegal in the wake of the Brown decision .
 In September 1957, black children tried to enrol at the previously all white high school in Little Rock, Arkansas . Little Rock was previously all-white high school .
 President Eisenhower sent troops to enforce the Supreme Court decision of 1954 . Black passengers choose their own seats on buses after the success of the Montgomery bus boycott were admitted .
 Rosa Parks got on a bus in the strictly segregated southern city of Montgomery, Alabama . Rosa Parks was a black woman named Rosa Parks . She was the first black woman to be allowed to board a bus .
 She took a scat towards the back of the bus, as blacks were supposed to do . She took it to the back, as black people should do, as they should .
 White workers and shoppers filled up the front section of the bus and the driver ordered her to give up her seat . But then white shoppers and white workers filled up . The driver ordered the driver to give her seat, but she refused to give it .
 The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People helped them to persuade a judge to release Mrs. Mrs. Brown . The judge released her from jail .
 Led by a young clergyman named Martin Luther King, they began to stop using, or “boycott,” the city’s bus services . The city's bus services were used in the 1960s and '60s .
 In November 1956, the Supreme Court declared that segregation on public buses was unconstitutional .
 The success of the Montgomery bus boycott encouraged blacks in other places to act together against segregation . The success in Montgomery, Alabama, encouraged blacks to take action .
 They boycotted stores where black workers were refused jobs, refused to pay rent until landlords improved housing conditions . Held “sit-ins’s” in restaurants that would not serve black customers . Boycotries were held in restaurants where black customers were not served .
 On a hot August day 200,000 people, black and white, took part in a mass demonstration in Washington . The demonstration was held to demand full racial equality .
 "I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia the sons of former slaves and former slaveholders will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood," says Georgia native .
 He sympathized with the blacks and worked out a plan to ensure that all Americans, of any race, would receive equal treatment . The plan was designed to ensure equal treatment for all Americans .
 In 1964 the Civil Rights Act became the law of the land . Lyndon Johnson made getting the law passed one of his first aims, but he was murdered before this could happen .
 Many Americans hoped that its passing would mark the beginning of a new age of racial harmony and friendship in the U.S.
 The racial difficulties of the U.S. were too deep-rooted to be solved by simple alterations in the law, or by demonstrations and marches, the author says . The racial problems of the United States were too big, he says .
 Changes are needed in human attitudes and in underlying economic conditions . Changes needed to be made in attitudes and attitudes to the world's economic conditions, says the author .
 In the 1960s most American blacks were still worse housed, worse educated, and worse paid than other Americans . Most American blacks still live in poverty and are still worse educated and worse educated .
 Some rejected with contempt the ideas of leaders like Martin Luther King that blacks and whites should learn to live together side by side in equality and friendship . Some rejected those ideas with contempt .
 Other black Americans are becoming impatient at their lack of progress towards real equality . But other black Americans were becoming increasingly impatient at progress towards economic equality, especially .
 In the hot summers of the mid 1960s this impatience boiled over into violence . In the summer of that year, violence was rife in the city .
 In August 1965, Watts, a black ghetto in Los Angeles, became a battlefield . The streets of Watts, the city's black ghetto, were a battleground in August 1965 .
 For six days police and rioters fought among burning cars and buildings . Police, rioters battled for six days among cars, buildings .
 To Hughes it seemed that the people of Harlem’s hopes of better treatment had been delayed —‘“‘deferred” —for too long, he said .
 Langston Hughes was shot dead on the balcony of a motel in Memphis, Tennessee, by a white sniper . He was shot by a sniper at a motel . Hughes was the son of African-American civil rights activist Langston .
 Black Power taught that the only way for blacks to get justice was to fight for it . "Black Power" was a movement that fought for justice for black people .
 In the 1970s and 1980s most blacks decided that voting was a more effective way to improve their position . But in the 1980s and 1990s, most blacks voted to vote for the first time in their lives .
 Their idea was to elect blacks to positions of power--as city councilors, as mayors of cities, as members of Congress . Their idea is to elect black leaders in power, as well as politicians and politicians .
 Jesse Jackson, a former assistant of Martin Luther King’s, became the chief spokesman for this idea . Jesse Jackson is a former aide to King's aide .
 By 1985 more than 5,000 of the 50,000 elected officials in the U.S. were black . By 1985, more than five,000 had been elected to office .
 This number included the mayors of such large cities as Los Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia and Washington . The mayors of those cities included Chicago, Los Angeles and Philadelphia .
 In the late 1980s black unemployment was still higher than white unemployment . The unemployment rate in the late 80s was higher than black unemployment . In the 1980s, unemployment rates were still higher for blacks than whites .
 The average incomes of black Americans are still lower than those of whites . The average income of black people still remains lower than that of whites.
 Blacks and whites studied side by side in schools and colleges, they worked together in all kinds of occupations . Blacks and white studied side-by-side in schools, colleges and colleges . They worked side by-side for all sorts of jobs .
 People seemed to be learning to judge each other more by the content of their characters than by the color of their skin . As King had dreamed, people seemed to judge people more than by their skin, he said .
 In the 1960s black Americans began taking new pride in their African ancestry . Jesse Jackson: "Black is beautiful" Jesse Jackson announced his candidacy for the 1988 presidential election .
 Bushy African hairstyles became the fashion for black America and were adopted by white youngsters . It became fashion~ able to take African names, to wear long African robes .
 Schools were set up to teach black child's history, languages and customs of their African ancestors . Black pride and racial awareness showed itself in more than dress and appearance .
 Arthur Mitchell founded a ballet school for young dancers . The school was founded by a young dancer named Arthur Mitchell .
 Harlem learned to create new and exciting dances which combined the techniques of classical European ballet with the beat of African drums . Harlem's Harlem dancers combined techniques of European ballet and African drums to create their own dances .
 The Dance Theater of Harlem is famous for its performances in Harlem . They are now internationally famous for their dance performances .
 His ways of trying to improve the position of his fellow blacks were very different from Martin Luther King’s. His ways were different from that of King's. He said, “His ways of . trying to . improve the . position of [his fellow blacks] were very
 His underlying view of people's hopes and needs was not so different, he said . Yet his underlying view was that of people, of their needs, not so much different .
 "I discovered that black or white, green or purple, all kids are the same," she says . "I found out that I'm not alone," she writes. "I'm not going to be afraid of the future."
 The United States was the strongest country on earth in 1945 . The U.S. was the strong country on Earth in 1945. The United Kingdom was the world's strongest country .
 Soviet soldiers were the masters of all Europe from the middle of Germany eastwards . The Soviet Union was victorious in the early 1950s and 1960s .
 After driving out Hitler’s armies they had helped communists to take over the governments in country after country there . They had helped take over governments in countries after country were taken over by the communists .
 Winston Churchill spoke of an ‘Iron Curtain’ across Europe, separating communist-ruled nations of the cast from the countries of the west . Winston Churchill’s wartime leader, Winston Churchill, spoke of the Iron Curtain across Europe in 1946 .
 The Americans and the Russians had fought Hitler’s Germany together as allies . The U.S. and Russia were allies in the fight against Germany .
 The Russian dictator, Stalin, knew that many Americans hated the Soviet Union’s communist way of life . Stalin knew that Americans hated his regime . The Soviet Union was known for its totalitarianism, but the U.S. has never been able to replicate that .
 He feared the United States might drop atomic bombs on his country at any moment . He feared that the U.S. might bomb his country . He was killed by a bomb blast in 1945 .
 The new American President, Truman, was just as suspicious of the Soviet Union as he became President . The new President was also suspicious of Russia .
 He suspected that Stalin’s actions in eastern Europe were the first steps in a plan to convert the world to communism . He also suspected that his actions in east Europe were part of a plan for communism .
 The United States and the Soviet Union became deeply suspicious of each other . The U.S. and the USSR were deeply suspicious each other in the early 1950s .
 Although the two countries were not actually fighting, they were always quarreling . The two countries had a long history of quarrelling .
 Truman decided to use American power and moncy to “contain’t Soviet influence-that is, to stop it from spreading . Truman used U.S. power to stop the spread of Soviet influence in Russia .
 In 1947 he sent money and supplies to help the government of Greece to beat communist forces in a civil war . In 1947, he sent funds and supplies for the government to help them beat the communist forces .
 From this time on, containing communism became the main aim of the U.S. in dealing with the rest of the world . Containing communism was the United States' main aim, according to historian John Avlon .
 Because Truman started the policy, containment is sometimes called the Truman Doctrine . Containment is sometimes known as containment .
 The Allics intended the whole country to be ruled again by one government . Once the Allics could agree on the details, they intended to rule the whole of the country .
 Each wanted to be sure, however, that this united Germany would be friendly towards them . Each wanted the united Germany to be friendly to them .
 The only friendly Germany Stalin could think of was a Germany controlled by communists . Stalin thought of a friendly Germany as a state controlled by the communists .
 The United States, Britain, and France were determined to prevent this. The United Kingdom, France and the U.S. were determined not to allow this.
 The result was that little progress was made in the many discussions that were held about Germany’s future .
 By 1946 it was already becoming clear that not ‘one but two Germanies were beginning to take shape . A communist one in Russia-controlled cast of the country and a non-communist one in the west .
 Since Berlin was Germany’s old capital, it, too, had been divided between the Allies and the Allies into arcas called sectors . Berlin was Berlin's old capital and divided into sectors .
 Russians agreed to let goods and people pass freely through their zone of Germany . To link the western sectors of Berlin with the outside world, the Russians had agreed to allow them to pass freely .
 By the summer of 1947 two years had passed since the last shots had been fired .
 Millions of people are still without work, without decent homes, without sufficient food . Yet millions of people still need work, food and housing, they say .
 In France and Italy communist parties won lots of support by promising reforms to make things better . In Italy and France communist parties promised reforms to improve the country .
 In the summer of 1947 his government put forward a scheme that he hoped would help Europe’s people and also make communism less appealing to them . It was hoped that the scheme would help people in Europe and make them less appealing .
 The scheme was called the Marshall Plan, after General George Marshall, the Secretary of State who announced it .
 To solve this problem Marshall offered to give European countries the goods they needed . Marshall offered the goods to help them cope with the problem .
 Stalin refused to have anything to do with it . Buta Sovict newspaper described his scheme as “‘a plan for interference in the home affairs of other countrics”
 He also made sure that none of the countries on the Soviet Union’s side of the Iron Curtain accepted help either .
 American food, raw materials and machinery started to pour into western Europe . Millions of dollars’ worth of American food and raw materials began to pour in from the U.S. But millions of dollars of American goods are still being shipped to Europe .
 By the time the Marshall Plan ended in 1952, western Europe was back on its feet . Western Europe was beginning to prosper .
 When Japan surrendered in 1945, the north of Korea was occupied by Sovict forces and the south by Americans . The north and south of Korea were occupied by Russia and the United States .
 The boundary between the two areas was the earth’s 38th parallel of latitude of latitude . It was the boundary between two areas .
 Without German industrial production and German customers for their goods other European nations are finding it very difficult to revive their own economies . Germany's industrial production has been a key factor in Europe's economy .
 Something had to be done about German moncycy . But before this problem could be solved, something had to do about it .
 In June 1948, the Western Allies announced that in their zones they were calling in all the old money and making a fresh start with new currency . The new currency was introduced in June 1948 .
 Stalin’s Forcign Minister, Molotov, had already attacked the Western plans to rebuild Germany's industries . Stalin's Forcien Minister had already said that the West needed to rebuild its industries .
 Russians stopped all traffic between west Germany and west Berlin in 1948 . On June 24, 1948, a few days after the new money came into use, the Russians stopped traffic in west Berlin .
 To start with they may have intended simply to persuade the Western Allies to change their economic policies . But they may also have intended to persuade them to change the policies .
 They blocked all the roads, railway lines and canals between Berlin and the western zones of Germany . They blocked the roads and railway lines .
 Their aim now was to make it impossible for the Western Allies to supply the two million people living in their sectors of Berlin with sufficient food and fuel . The aim now is to make the West Allies unable to supply them with sufficient supplies .
 The Russians hoped that this would force the Western troops and officials to go, leaving the city to the Russians . They hoped that the Western forces and officials would leave the city, leaving it to be left behind .
 The leaders of the United States and Britain felt that they could not accept defeat in this matter . In 1948 the occupation of Korea ended .
 The Sovict army left behind a communist government in the north and the Americans set up a government friendly to themselves in the south . The Russians were defeated by the Americans and the Russians .
 Soldiers crossed the 38th parallel in a full-scale invasion of South Korea . Their soldiers crossed the . 38th . parallel in the . invasion of . South Korea in the 1950s .
 On its busiest day nearly 14,000 aircraft landed on the city’s airfields . The city's busiest day is when it is at its busiest with planes landing .
 Over two million tons of supplies were delivered, including a daily average of 5,000 tons of coal . Over 2 million tons were delivered to the region, including daily coal deliveries .
 In February 1949, secret talks began and in May Stalin stopped the blockade . In May 1949, the blockade was lifted and Stalin stopped it .
 Berlin blockade finished all hope of uniting Germany under one government . Berlin blockade was the end of hope for uniting German unity government . The Berlin blockade ended all hope for unification of Germany .
 In 1949 the Western Powers joined their zones together to form the Federal German Republic, or West Germany . West Germany was formed from West Germany in 1949 after the war .
 Stalin replied by turning the Russian zone into the German Democratic Republic, or East Germany . Stalin turned the zone into East Germany after the war . East Germany is now known as East Berlin .
 Truman sent American soldiers and warplanes from Japan to fight for the South Koreans . President Truman sent troops and war planes from Japan from Japan .
 He persuaded the United Nations Organization, which had taken the place of the pre-war League of Nations, to support his action . Then he persuaded the U.N. Organization to support him . The U.S. Organization was in charge of World War II .
 16 nations eventually sent troops to fight in the United Nations’ forces in Korea . Sixteen nations ultimately sent troops .
 Nine out of every ten 28 Cotp War anp Korea United Nations soldiers in Korea were Americans .
 Three months of hard fighting pushed the communist armies back across the 38th parallel . The Americans pushed them back into North Korea after three months .
 By this time the American aim was no longer simply to protect South Korea . The U.S. did not want to protect the South Korean people .
 North Korea wanted to unite all of Korea under a government friendly towards the U.S. They wanted to unify all of the Korean peninsula under a new government friendly to the United States .
 Only a year earlier communists led by Mao Zedong had won a long struggle to rule China by driving out Chiang Kaishek . Only one year earlier the communists had won the long struggle for power .
 The Americans had backed Chiang in the struggle and in 1950 they still recognized him as China’s rightful ruler .
 Mao feared that if all Korea came under American control they might let Chiang use it as a base from which to attack China . Mao feared the U.S. might use the Korean peninsula to launch attacks on China .
 When his warning was ignored he sent thousands of Chinese soldiers to help the North Koreans . When he was ignored, thousands of soldiers were sent to help North Korea .
 A new and fiercer war began in Korea . It was really between the United States and China, although neither country officially admitted this .
 U.S. approaching North Korean army as United States troops advance to the battlefront . One reason it approaching North Korea army is approaching U.N. troops . North Korea has not been able to reach out to North Korea .
 Non-communist governments of Western Europe looked uneasily at the huge Russian armies in the years after 1945 . The birth of NATO was the birth of the NATO alliance .
 With Russian support a communist government took control of Czechoslovakia . The Czech Republic was founded in 1961 . Czechoslovakia was invaded by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Truman convinced President Truman that Western Europe needed more than economic aid . Truman: Western Europe needs more than just economic aid. Truman: "Western Europe needs help. It needs help"
 This was an alliance of nations who agreed to support one another against threats from the Russians . This was a combined armed forces to do this. This is analliance of nations .
 The following September Americans heard the news that the Russians, too, could now make atomic bombs . Americans were shocked to hear the news .
 Congress voted to spend millions of dollars to equip NATO's armed forces . This persuaded Congress to vote for NATO's weapons armament .
 General Eisenhower was one of the United States’ best known generals of the Second World War . He was placed in command of these forces in 1951 .
 Thousands of American soldiers were in Europe once more . The death of Stalin ended was the death of the Chinese .
 Eisenhower hinted that the U.S. might use atomic weapons if the Chinese did not sign a cease-fire . Another was the fact that the newly-elected President Eisenhower hinted at the threat .
 The Chinese said that they had proved that nobody need to be afraid of opposing the Americans . The U.S. government said that nobody should be afraid to oppose the American government .
 Americans said they had shown communists everywhere that it did not pay to try to spread their rule by force . The Americans said that they had showed communists everywhere .
 More than 33,000 Americans had died in Korea and over 100,000 more had been wounded . More than 30,000 U.S. soldiers had been killed in Korea .
 American scientists testing a new weapon had blasted a whole uninhabited island out of the Pacific Ocean . The island was blasted into the ocean by American scientists in the Pacific .
 Just one H-bomb had five times the destructive power of all the bombs dropped in five years of the Second World War .
 The fact that both the U.S. and the Soviet Union had H-bombs determined how they behaved towards one another for years to come . The fact of the H-bombing in the Soviet-U.S.-Russia relations was a key factor in how the two countries
 American Presidents appoint a Secretary of State to take charge of the United States’ dealings with foreign countries . American presidents appoint a secretary of state to take control of the U.S.’s dealings with international countries .
 Instead of being content simply to contain communism, the U.S. should set out to “liberate’s nations already under communist rule . The United States should not be content with ‘a cringing policy of the fearful,” as he called it, as
 In a broadcast in 1953 he told the peoples of Europe that they could trust the United States to help them . In 1953 he said the U.S. could help them in Europe .
 When Russian tanks rolled in to crush them they sent out desperate appeals for help . When they were crushed, they appealed for help to get help .
 Thousands of refugees fled across the Iron Curtain to safety in the neighboring country of Austria . Thousands of people were forced to flee to the neighboring nation of Austria in the 1960s .
 Dulles failed to help the Hungarians because he knew that doing so would mean war with the Soviet Union . Dulles did not want to help Hungary because he feared war with Russia . The Hungarians were killed by Soviet forces in 1945 .
 The devastation of nuclear war was, too high a price to pay for ‘rolling back” the Iron Curtain, he decided . “Rolling back’ was a mistake, he said. “The devastation of nuke war was too high .”
 This was because he seemed ready to take the U.S. to the brink of war to contain communism . "This was because of his willingness to take on the edge of war," he said .
 If the U.S. or any of its allies were attacked anywhere, he warned, the Americans would strike back . If the United States or . any ofits allies attacked anywhere in the world, he said .
 President Kennedy’s proposal in May 1961 that the U.S. should send a man to the moon was eagerly welcomed by politicians and the American people . President Kennedy's proposal in . May 1961 was eagerly anticipated by politicians .
 The Apollo program was another move in the ‘space race’ between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . It was part of the "space race" between the two countries .
 Russia and the U.S. are accused of paying the Russians to spy on a Russian spy network . But the Russians were willing to pay the Americans to do so, and the Russians did not want to be held accountable .
 First, there was the question of international prestige—of gaining the respect of the rest of the world by achieving something calling for immense scientific and technical skill . First, the question was: "Of course there was a question of . international prestige"
 Both Americans and Russians felt that to let the other side get too far ahead in space technology would endanger their security . Russia and the U.S. didn't want to let other countries get ahead of them .
 The rockets capable of carrying people into space could also be used to carry nuclear warheads . More frightening still, they could be used in space missions .
 Up to the mid-1960s cach side matched the other’s achievements in the space race . The space race began in the early 1960s .
 Apollo 11 was the first mission to put the first men on the moon . The mission was the Apollo 11 mission to take men to the moon in 1969 .
 The Apollo 11 spacecraft was launched from Cape Canaveral on the coast of Florida . It was the first time the spacecraft had been launched from the launch pad .
 It carried three men as its crew— Neil Armstrong, Edward “Buzz ‘Buzz” Aldrin and Michael Collins . The mission to the moon was the first time the Apollo One landed in space .
 The first two would necessary they would drop nuclear bombs on the Sovict Union and China . They would drop bombs on Russia, China and the Soviet Union . The first bomb would be dropped on the first two .
 By the mid-1950s the U.S. had a powerful force of nuclear bombers ready to do this . By the 1950s the United States had a strong force of bombers .
 On airfields all round the world giant American planes were constantly on the alert, ready to take off at a moment of notice .
 On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union sent into space the world’s first spacecraft . Neil Armstrong on the moon. pilot the section of the spacecraft that would actually land on the lunar module . Collins had the job of circling the moon .
 Armstrong and Aldrin spent three hours collecting rock samples and setting up scientific instruments on the moon’s surface to send information back to earth after they left .
 Three days later they splashed down safely in the Pacific Ocean . Helicopters carried them off to a heroes’ welcome to the Sputnik. earth satellite, the Sputsnik. Earth satellite .
 A rocket powerful enough to do that could also carry an H-bomb to its target . A rocket capable of carrying a rocket that could carry a nuclear bomb could carry H-bombs to its targets .
 The Polaris, another missile, was carried by nuclear-powered submarines cruising deep beneath the oceans . The Polaris missile was carried out by nuclear submarines .
 By the end of the 1950s, the U.S. and the Soviet Union had enough nuclear missiles to kill everybody on earth . The United States and Russia had enough nukes to kill all of the world .
 Russian and American leaders came to see that in a full-scale war between their two countries there could be no winner . Russia and the U.S. have been at odds for years .
 Nikita Khrushchev, the man who took Stalin’s place as leader of the Soviet Union, realized this . The man who became the man in charge of the country realized this.
 In a world of H-bombs he believed that they had to try to live peacefully, side by side . He believed that in the world of bombs, he had to live side-by-side . He said: "I'm not afraid of the bombs, but I'm
 Just after midnight on Sunday, August 13, 1961, trucks rolled through the silent streets of East Berlin . The Berlin Wall was built on top of the Berlin Wall .
 At the border with West Berlin soldiers jumped out and blocked the streets with coils of barbed wire . The streets were blocked with barbed-wire at the border .
 By morning they had closed off all but twelve of the eighty crossing points to West Berlin . All but twelve crossing points had been closed .
 Workmen replaced barbed wire with a lasting barricr of concrete . Within days workmen were replacing the wire .
 The easiest way to do this was to catch a train from East to West Berlin and not bother to come back . The best way to get out of the city was to go to East Berlin and leave .
 By July 1961, the number of East Germans making one-way trips to Germany had risen to 10,000 a week . The number of one way trips to the U.S. by East Germans in 1961 had risen by more than 100,000 .
 A Russian missile shot down an American aircraft over the Sovict Union in May 1960 . As the leaders were on their way to the Soviet Union, an American plane was shot down .
 The aircraft was 2 U-2 spy plane, specially designed to take photographs of military targets from the edge of space . The plane was designed to photograph military targets .
 Krushchev angrily accused Eisenhower of planning for war while talking peace . Krushiev angrily accused him of planning to war while discussing peace . Eisenhower was president of the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 President Obama has made the U.S. look like hypocrites . But maybe he was rather pleased at having made the Americans look hypocrites, he says .
 Paris summit mcecting was over before it even started . The Paris summit was over in any case, but it was over quickly .
 President Kennedy was not prepared to risk war by demolishing the Berlin Wall . President Kennedy did not want to risk a war with the West .
 The U.S. would not let the communists take over West Berlin, President Eisenhower said . But he made it clear that the United States would not allow the communists to take over .
 It was not until 1989 that its people tore down the Wall as a first step towards re-uniting their city . The Wall was torn down in 1989 as part of an attempt to unify the city .
 Fidel Castro took over Cuba in 1959 after a revolutionary reformer took over its government . Castro's government was overthrown by a revolutionary government in 1959 .
 Cuba's banks, railroads and many other businesses were owned by Americans at this time . Cuba was owned by U.S. during the time of the Cuban Revolution .
 Castro needed money to make changes in Cuba . To obtain it he began to take over Americanowned businesses . Castro needed it to obtain it . He took over American businesses .
 In the opinion of the United States government this was stealing American property . The U.S. government says this is theft of American property. "In the opinion, this was stolen American property"
 Castro seemed to be organizing a communist state right on the doorstep of the U.S. Not only this, he seemed to have organized a state of communist state . Castro was not only this but he was organizing a state in the United States .
 In 1960 President Eisenhower agreed to give weapons and ships to refugees from Cuba who wanted to overthrow Castro . In 1960, President Eisenhower gave weapons to Cuban refugees who wanted an overthrow of Castro .
 When Eisenhower retired in January, 1961, the plan was supported also by the new President, John F Kennedy . The plan was also supported by President Kennedy .
 On April 17, 1961, a force of 1,400 anti-Castro Cubans landed at the Bay of Pigs on Cuba’s south coast . The Bay was the site of the first Cuban invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 Castro believed that Kennedy would attack again, so he asked the Soviet Union for help . Castro believed he would be attacked again, but asked for help from the Soviets . Castro asked the Soviets to help .
 Khrushchev sent him shiploads of rifles, 29 A BALANCE OF TERROR tanks, and aircraft . Khrushvic sent him weapons, tanks, aircraft, rifles and tanks .
 On October 14, 1962, an American U-2 spy plane flew high over the island taking photographs . The plane was flying over the U.S. island to take photographs .
 Khrushchev had been making threats against the U.S. ever since the U-2 incident of 1960 . The U.2 incident was the first time the two countries had been at risk of being at risk .
 The U.S. already had more long-range missiles than the Russians . Kennedy ordered nearly a thousand more . The missiles were ordered by the president of the United States .
 The new missiles tipped the “balance of terror” strongly in favor of the U.S. The missiles were launched in 2007, the Pentagon says . The missiles are believed to have tipped the balance of terror in the Middle East .
 When Castro asked for help, Khrushchev saw a chance to level up the balance of terror . Khruschev saw it as a way to level the balance up the terror balance . Castro asked to help .
 He would threaten the U.S. from missile bases on its own doorstep—Cuba . The Cuban leader would threaten to the United States from his own doorstep .
 He also thought about sending American soldiers to capture them, but instead he ordered American ships and aircraft to set up a blockade . Instead of sending soldiers, he ordered a blockade, he sent American ships, aircraft and aircraft .
 They were to stop any Soviet ships carrying more missile equipment to Cuba . The Cuban government was trying to prevent the Soviet ships bringing more missiles .
 Kennedy then told Khrushchev to take away the Soviet missiles and destroy the bases . Kennedy then ordered the removal of the missiles and the destruction of the bases.
 For ten terrifying days in October 1962, the world trembled on the edge of nuclear war . The world was on the brink of a nuclear war for 10 terrifying days .
 People waited in fear for the next news flash on their radios, televisions and radios . People waited for fear that the news would break out .
 Khrushchev ordered his technicians in Cuba to destroy the launching sites and return the missiles to the Soviet Union . The missiles were returned to the USSR .
 Kennedy called off the blockade and promised to leave Cuba alone . In return, Kennedy promised to end the blockade . Kennedy also promised to give Cuba a better life .
 The most dangerous crisis of the Cold War was over . Privately, he also agreed to remove American missiles sited on the border of the Soviet Union in Turkey .
 Close by, almost hidden ina hollow in a hollow in the ground, stands another memorial . Close by is another memorial. Close by stands another .
 It is a long wall of polished black marble and on it are carved many thousands of names . On it is carved by the carved names of thousands of people .
 In 1954 the French were driven out by the soldiers of a communist leader named Ho Chi Minh . The French had been driven out of the country by the communist leader in 1954 .
 The election never took place in Vietnam because the government feared that Ho Chi Minh and his communists would win . The election was never held because it was feared that the communists would take power .
 As part of their worldwide plan to contain communism, the Americans had already helped the French against Ho .
 If one of them— Vietnam, say —fell under communist rule, others would follow . Others would follow if one of these countries fell into communist rule .
 "They would be knocked over one by one, like a line of falling dominoes," says David Cameron . Cameron: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do, but I'm sure we're going to get it."
 Americans were afraid that communist China might try to take control in Southeast Asia as the Soviet Union had done in eastern Europe . Americans were especially afraid that China might take control of Southeast Asia .
 President Eisenhower and then President Kennedy poured American money and weapons into South Vietnam in the 1950s and early 1960s . So, first President Eisenhower poured money into Vietnam .
 Kennedy sent soldiers to Vietnam to advise and train the South Vietnamese forces . Kennedy also sent soldiers, too, not to fight, themselves, but to train them .
 By the early 1960s, it was clear that the government of South Vietnam was losing the war . The government of Vietnam in Vietnam was winning the war in the 1960s .
 Ho Chi Minh had a guerilla army of 100,000 men fighting in South Vietnam by then . Ho Chi-Minh had been fighting in the country for more than a decade .
 Many were communists from the North who had marched into the South along jungle trails . Many of them were communists who had infiltrated the South .
 He could leave Vietnam and Iet the communists take over, or he could send in American soldiers to try to stop them . He could also send in U.S. troops to stop the communists .
 Johnson was too worried about the domino theory —and too proud —to make the first choice . Johnson was proud of his choice, but he was too proud to make the decision .
 He had already ordered U.S. aircraft to bomb railways and bridges in North Vietnam . He had ordered American planes to bomb railway and bridges .
 The Russians and the Chinese sent more weapons and supplies to Ho Chi Minhh . The Russian and Chinese forces were involved in the war in Vietnam .
 Thousands more communist troops marched south to do battle with the Americans . Thousands more of his communist troops were deployed to battle against the U.S.
 After an attack the Vietcong would melt away in the jungle, or turn into peaceful villagers . The Vietcong were attacked by the U.S. Army in the 1960s and 1970s .
 A guerilla war like this meant that the Americans often had no enemy to strike back at . The Americans had no enemies to fight back at, especially in the U.S.
 They sprayed vast areas of countryside with deadly chemicals to destroy the Vietcong’s supply trails . The Vietcong's supply trails were destroyed by the deadly chemicals .
 They burned down villages which were suspected of sheltering Vietcong soldiers . Villages were burned down because they were believed to be sheltering the Vietcong .
 It continued even when Johnson stepped up or “escalated” the war by bombing cities in North Vietnam to try to force the communists to make peace . Johnson's bombing campaign continued even after he stepped up the war .
 Film reports of the suffering in Vietnam were shown all over the world on television . Film reports from the Vietnam war were shown in Vietnam on TV .
 For the first time in history people far away from any fighting were able to see in their own homes the horror and cruelty of modern war . The first time they had been able to do so in their homes they saw the horror of modern warfare .
 Millions began to believe that the Americans were cruel and bullying monsters . Millions of Americans believed that the U.S. was a bully . Millions believed that they were cruel, bullying monsters. Millions believed they were a bully.
 In 1970, after riots there in protest against the war in Vietnam, any further demonstrations were banned . After riots in 1970, protests were banned in the country .
 When a group of about 1,000 students defied the ban, they were fired on by soldiers . Soldiers fired on the students after they defied a ban on students entering the country .
 A ten-second burst of rifle fire killed four students and wounded another ten . Four students were killed and ten wounded in the shooting .
 The Kent State tragedy showed how deeply the Vietnam War was dividing the U.S. people . The Vietnam War divided the American people, and the nation was divided by it .
 By the end of the 1960s, many Americans were sick and ashamed of the killing and the destruction of the war . The United States was proud of the Vietnam War .
 President Johnson saw that by sending American soldiers to fight in Victnam he had led the U.S. into a trap . President Johnson said by sending Americans to fight he led the United States into trap .
 The war was destroying his country’s good name in the world and setting its people against one another, he said . He said . The war had destroyed his country's good name and set its people on one another .
 In 1968 he stopped the bombing of North Victnam and started to look for ways of making peace . In 1968, he stopped bombing and started looking for ways to make peace .
 These have been songs about the concerns of farmers, miners, cowboys, union members . These songs have been written by the likes of Willie Nelson and others . They include: "These are the songs that have been sung about farmers and miners"
 All have had a common purpose-to express and relieve people's feclings on subjects that are important to them . All have been used to express and to relieve people of their fecling on subjects important to themselves .
 Their writers and performers have sometimes hoped that the songs might even help to change people’s attitudes .
 Bob Dylan used protest songs to support the anti-war movement of the time . Bob Dylan was a young writer and singer named Bob Dylan in the 1960s .
 By the 1970s, Dylan had become a very popular, very rich, international entertainer . Dylan's career spanned more than 40 years .
 For many young people he was the voice of the conscience of their generation . He was also a voice of conscience of many of his generation .
 His lyrics were ironic comments on what he saw as the deceit and hypocrisy of those who held power . His lyrics, often set to old tunes, were ironic .
 The cavalries charged, The Indians fell. Oh, the history books tell it so well, They tell it well, The Cavalries charged .
 The cavalries charged, The Indians died, Oh the country was young With God on its side. The country's young was young with God on his side.
 He set out to strengthen the South Victnamese army to make it seem strong enough to defend South Vietnam without help . He wanted to make the army stronger enough to take control of the country .
 This gave him an excuse to start withdrawing American fighting men from Vietnam . This was an excuse for withdrawing American troops from Vietnam.
 Nixon sent Kissinger to secret talks with North Vietnamese and Russian leaders in Moscow . Nixon then sent Kissinger, his adviser on foreign affairs, to secret meetings with North Vietnam and Russia leaders . Kissinger was Kissinger's adviser to foreign affairs .
 In return for a ceasefire he offered to withdraw all American troops from Vietnam within six months . In Vietnam, the U.S. troops were withdrawn from Vietnam in exchange for a truce .
 When the North Vietnamese were slow to agree he started bombing their cities again in order to ‘persuade” them . The North Vietnamese government was too slow to back down on the bombing .
 A sort of agreement was finally put together in January . The reason for fighting I never did get. The reason was the reason for the First World War .
 But I learned to accept it, Accept it with pride, For you don’t count the dead When God’s on your side . Accepting it, accept it with Pride . Acceptance with pride .
 I’ve learned to hate Russians all through my whole life, If another war starts It’s them we must fight. All through my life, if another . war starts it's them we . must fight, says Putin . Putin: "If another war . starts It
 "To hate them and fear them, To run and hide, I accept it all bravely, With God on my side. To hate them, I fear them," she writes .
 "If fire them we're forced to then fire them, then we must," says Obama . But now we got weapons Of the chemical dust, If fire them they must, we must, he says .
 One push of the button And a shot the world wide, And you never ask questions When God's on your side. One push the button. And one push of a button is a shot of the world .
 Victorious communist tanks rolled into Saigon, the capital city of South Vietnam . Vietnamese supporters of the Americans scrambled for the last places on rescue helicopters .
 In Korea, twenty years earlier, the U.S. had claimed that they had made containment work . The Americans had claimed containment work in Korea, but the Korean conflict was still raging .
 Rocks and iron bars thudded against its roof and shattered its windows . Inside the car Richard Nixon, Vice President of the United States, was in great danger . The car was hit by rocks, iron bars and broken windows .
 Nixon was visiting Caracas as part of a goodwill tour of Latin America . But he found only hatred on the streets of Caracas .
 Nixon’s life was saved when a truck forced a way through the barricade and his car was able to accelerate away . Nixon was killed in the incident on Sunday .
 When news of the attack reached the U.S. the American people were shocked and angry . The American people are still angry about the terrorist attack in Afghanistan .
 It made them realize how much some Latin Americans hated and resented their country, they said . But it also made them think of how much they hated their country .
 The United States has taken a special interest in what happens in these countries since the early nineteenth century . The U.S. has taken an interest in the region since the 1800s .
 The U.S. needs to make sure that no foreign enemies gain influence in Latin American countries . In the past this has often meant that the rulers of these Latin American . countries have been little more than American puppets . They arc its closest neighbors and so it .
 Their agriculture and industry have frequently been American-controlled, too .
 Up to the 1950s its railroads, banks, electricity industry and many of its biggest farms were all American-owned . The city's railroads and banks, banks and electricity industry were all U.S.-owned .
 President Roosevelt promised that the U.S. would respect the right of Latin Amcrican countries to control their own affairs . In 1933 President Franklin Roosevelt promised to respect that right .
 Roosevelt ordered home the American soldiers and officials who had been running the affairs of Latin Amcrican countries at one time or another for much of the past thirty years . Roosevelt ordered them home .
 Nicaragua, for example, had been occupied by American troops from 1912 to 1933 .
 He also gave up the United States’ claim to interfere in Panama and Cuba whenever it wanted . The U.S. no longer wants to interfere with Panama or Cuba .
 Many Latin Americans were not convinced by Roosevelt's talk about being a good neighbor . Roosevelt's visit to the U.S. was the first time he had visited Latin America .
 The Somoza family, who held power in Nicaragua from 1937 to 1979, usually did what the Americans expected of them . But the rulers who took over when the soldiers left often did what Americans expected .
 All the raw materials that the U.S. could produce were used by the war factories of the United States . The United States was able to produce copper, tin, tin and countless other materials .
 The result was more money and more jobs, but also even more American control . The result of the result is even more U.S. control of the government .
 In the 1970s it was ruled by a right-wing dictator named Somoza, who had close ties with the U.S. The country is now in a state of war with Russia .
 The rebels called themselves Sandinistas, after a guerilla leader named César Augusto Sandino . Sandino fought against the American occupation of Nicaragua during the 1920s and 1930s .
 The Sandinistas were supported by peasants, workers, priests, priests and many business people . The Sandinsistas were backed by peasants and workers .
 In 1979 they drove Somoza from the country and set up a new government . In 1979, they drove the country from the former regime of the Soviet Union .
 The government promised land reform, social justice and democratic government . They promised the people of Nicaragua land reform and social justice .
 As soonas the war ended fresh calls of “Yankee, go home” were heard . Bott was a Nicaraguan Contra rebel with Redeye missile supplied by the United States . Bott is a former U.S. citizen of Nicaragua .
 The idea of the OAS was to encourage the countries of Latin America to cooperate with one another, and with the United States, as partners . The OAS is based in Latin America and aims to encourage cooperation with each other .
 A poster in Managua, Nicaragua proclaims that Reagan is on his way out, but the revolution is here to stay . The revolution is still in the grip of Nicaragua .
 Reagan believed the Sandinistas were under the influence of the Soviet Union and Cuba . Reagan believed that the Soviet-Cuban influence was behind them .
 Soon he was describing their government as a com-, munist dictatorship . Soon he described the government as an 'com-murdered dictatorship'
 Its aim, he said, was to spread revolution to other parts of Central America . He said he gave money and weapons to rebels who were trying to overthrow it .
 They warned that his enmity was forcing the Sandinistas into the arms of the Soviet Union . They said he was forcing them to join forces with the USSR .
 The safety of the U.S. depended on stopping Sandinista ideas from spreading to other nearby countries . They believed that the safety . of the United States depended . on stopping the Sandinistas ideas .
 When the Sandinistas lost, they handed over power to a new government whose leaders were more acceptable to the U.S., hopes for peace increased . The Sandinista lost power to the United States in the 1980s .
 In most countries there, extremes of poverty for the many and wealth for the few existed side by side . In most of the world, the extremes of wealth and poverty were not seen side-by-side .
 Oppressive governments controlled by the rich and backed by soldiers did little to improve the lives of the people, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 By the mid 1980s this number had increased to 17. million people in the U.S. and was still rising fast . By the end of the 1980s it had reached 17 million people worldwide .
 Reformers accused the United States of helping to keep these groups of wealthy tyrants in power . Reformers accuse the U.S. of helping these groups to keep them in power.
 The American government often seemed more concerned with suppressing, communism in Latin America than with improving conditions of life there . The U.S. government was often more interested in suppressing, rather than improving conditions in Latin American .
 In 1954, the American secret service (the Central Intelligence Agency) encouraged the overthrow of a reforming government in Guatemala . The U.S. secret service has been involved in overthrowing the government of Guatemala .
 When Guatemala’s deposed President asked the U.N. to look into this, the Americans used their Security Council veto to prevent an investigation . The Americans also prevented an investigation into the death of the deposed Guatemalan President .
 The remainder of the group came from other Latin American countries, such as Cuba and Colombia .
 The newcomers’ usual reasons for coming were the same as those of earlier immigrants from Europe— to escape from poverty or political persecution in their homelands . The newcomers came to the U.S. in the 1930s to escape poverty and political persecution .
 The increase in the number of Hispanics was partly the result of an important change in the American immigration system . The increase is partly due to a change in American immigration policy .
 The old immi-~ gration laws, which dated back to the 1920s, had favored Europeans . The old laws were set up in the early 1930s .
 In 1965, a new law said that what would count in the future was who applied first . But in 1965, the law was changed to allow people to apply for a job .
 The result was a big increase in immigration from non-European countries . The result of the rise in immigration to non-Europeans was seen as a result .
 By the 1980s the United States was accepting 270,000 newcomers a year . The U.S. was accepting more than 270,500 new immigrants a year, according to immigration statistics .
 Forty percent of these were coming from Asia and another forty percent from Latin America . The majority of these are coming from Latin American countries, including Asia .
 In 1985 the government estimated that the country had between two and ten million of these illegal immigrants . Half a million had arrived in the previous year .
 Many waded across the shallow Rio Grande River that formed the border between the U.S. and Mexico . Many were Hispanics, who had waded into the shallow river .
 In later years American governments went on interfering in Latin American affairs . In Latin America, the U.S. went on to interfere in Latin America affairs .
 In 1965 President Johnson sent 22,000 American marines to the Dominican Republic to stop a leader he distrusted from regaining power . In 1965, President Johnson's troops were sent to the country to stop the leader from taking power .
 CIA agents helped generals in Chile overthrow President Allende in 1973 . CIA agents were involved in the overthrow of Allende's government .
 Allende was sympathetic towards communist ideas and had nationalized some American-owned mining companies . Allende had been sympathetic to the communist ideas .
 Many Latin Americans continued to dislike their North America’s Back YarD American neighbor . Actions like these help to explain why many Latin Americans still dislike North America .
 All over Latin America, it seemed, the U.S. was propping up oppressive and unpopular governments . The United States seemed to be supporting oppressive governments in Latin America .
 American dealings with Latin America had a more positive and humanitarian side . American relations with Latin American had a positive side . America's relationship with the region has a long history .
 The Americans built hospitals, supplied towns with pure water and wiped out killer diseases like malaria and yellow fever . During their earlier occupations of countries such as Cuba and Nicaragua the Americans had built hospitals and provided clean water .
 Kennedy set up an organization called the Alliance for Progress in 1961 . Kennedy was the president of the United States' first state of the union .
 The U.S. gave millions of dollars to improve the lives of Latin America’s poor . The United States gave millions to improve lives of the poor .
 The moncy was used to build roads, homes and schools, and to improve water-supply and sanitation systems . It was used in the construction of roads, schools and homes .
 The Alliance advanced money to peasant farmers, so they could buy more land . The Alliance also advanced money for peasant farmers to buy their land .
 Kennedy hoped that aiding Latin America like this would enable governments there to make improvements to stop people turning to communism . Kennedy hoped the aid would enable the governments to improve their ability to prevent communism .
 The generals running much of Latin America continued to rely more on guns than on reforms to keep power . But the generals in Latin America continue to rely on guns more than reforms, keep power.
 Despite the generosity of schemes like the Alliance for Progress, many people saw little basic difference between the attitude of the U.S. towards Latin America and the Soviet Union towards eastern Europe .
 In one way or another, both superpowers seemed determined to protect their own interests by controlling their smaller neighbors .
 In their rivalry with the Soviet Union, American governments never forgot the lesson of the Marshall Plan . Kennedy’s Peace Corps was a model for the U.S.
 They knew that communism is often most attractive to the people of countries where food is short and life is hard . The Communist Party knew that it was attractive to people living in countries with food short and hard times .
 From the 1950s onwards, they spent millions of dollars on modernizing farms, constructing power stations and building roads in countries as far apart as Turkey and Colombia, Pakistan and Chile .
 The idea of this “foreign aid’’ was to give poor people all over the world better lives, says President Obama . The idea was to help poor people but partly also to win new friends and supporters for the U.S.
 Sometimes human skills were sent, in the form of teachers and technical experts . Sometimes human. skills were also sent, as well as technical experts.
 John F Kennedy set up a new scheme of this kind when he set up the Peace Corps . The Peace Corps was set up in 1961 .
 All members of the Peace Corps were volunteers, who agreed to work for two years in poor countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America . The Peace Corps is a volunteer group of volunteers .
 They said the idea of sending immature young Americans to show the people of distant lands how to live was naive and arrogant . They said that the idea was both naive and arrogance .
 The Peace Corps gave a human face to the bare financial statistics of American foreign aid . Whoever was right, the Peace Corps achieved at least one thing . For a while it gave a glimpse of America's foreign aid budget .
 Both men knew that for ten days they had been close to bringing death to millions of people . Both men were aware of the danger of bringing death .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Thursday .
 In August 1963, the U.S. and the Soviet Union signed a treaty agreeing to stop testing new nuclear weapons in the atmosphere or under water . The treaty was signed by the United States and the USSR in August 1963 .
 Moscow and Washington set up a special telephone link between Washington and Moscow . The two countries also set up special telephone links between their countries .
 On this "hotline" American and Soviet leaders could talk directly to each other . On this ‘hotline’ American and . Soviet leaders were able to speak directly to one another . The phone line was used by Soviet and American presidents .
 In future any dangerous crisis would be dealt with more quickly and with less risk of misunderstanding . In future, the crisis would have been dealt with with less misunderstanding, says the PM .
 The United States was friendly with Israel, and the Soviet Union with Egypt . The U.S. and Egypt were friendly with each other . The Soviet Union and Israel were friendly .
 Both took great care not to let their friendships drag them into fighting one another .
 Even the long and bloody war in Vietnam was not allowed to interfere with ‘détente,” as these moves were called . Even the bloody Vietnam war in which the war was bloody, the Vietnam peace talks were not allowed .
 He accused Sovict leaders of ‘revisionism’ — that is, of altcring some of communism’s most important ideas . He also accused them of alt-crying some of the ideas of communism's most important idea .
 He declared that the only way to deal with American capitalism was to be ready to fight it to the death . He declared: "The only way of dealing with U.S. capitalism is to be prepared to fight"
 A lot of the arguing about whether Russians or Chinese were the best communists was just a smoke-screen hiding the real quarrel between them, which was about land . But a lot of arguing about who was the best communist was a smokes-screen .
 The enmity between China and the Soviet Union had important effects on both countries’ relations with the United States in the early 1970s . Big armies watched and sometimes fought on the long frontier between the two countrie .
 In May 1972, President Nixon flew to Moscow to sign the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty with the Russians . President Nixon signed the treaty in May 1972 .
 It was intended to save both countries money as well as to make war between them less likely . It was meant to make the two countries less likely to engage in war .
 Each agreed how many missiles of various types the other should have, how many submarines to fire them from, and so on . Each agreed to have missiles, submarines, missiles, missiles and submarines . The U.S. and Russia agreed on the number of missiles each should have .
 The first sign that China, too, was interested in détente with the U.S. came in 1970 . China's first sign of interest came in the 1970s, when it was first seen in China .
 For years the Chinese government had made it very difficult for anyone from western countries to visit China . For years, it had been very difficult to anyone from outside of China .
 The American government, correctly, took this as a hint that the Chinese wanted to settle some of their differences with the United States . The U.S. government took it as a clue that this was a hint .
 Zhou Enlai, China’s Prime Minister, was the man behind the Chinese move . The move was made in response to criticism of the move by President Obama .
 Zhou believed tha needed friends on the international scene, especially while the Soviet Union was so unfriendlyly . Zhou believed that he needed friends in the world, especially in the USSR .
 He persuaded Mao Zedong to try to end the twenty-year-old feud with the U.S. The two nations have been at odds for decades .
 President Nixon’s adviser, Henry Kissinger, flew to China for secret meetings with Zhou . Kissinger's secret meetings were secret meetings between Kissinger and Zhou . Nixon's adviser, Kissinger, traveled to China to meet Zhou in secret .
 Late in 1971 the United States agrees to communist China joining the United Nations . The U.S. had vetoed for President Nixon with Zhou Enlai in China, 1972 .
 China and the U.S. made important agreements on trade and other matters after Mao’s death in 1976 . Mao was still suspicious of the Americans, but in the years that followed, they made important deals .
 As China and the U.S. become more friendly, tension grew again between Russia Americans . Russia Americans are divided between Russia and America .
 Russians feared that the U.S. wanted to wipe out communism . Russians still feared the United States wanted to kill communism .
 Americans still feared that the Soviet Union wanted to conquer the world . American fears grew stronger when Russian soldiers marched into Soviet Union’s neighbor, Afghanistan, in 1979 .
 Because of the Soviet action, Congress refused to renew the SALT agreement . Congress refuses to renew it because of the action .
 Both the Soviet Union and the U.S. had continued to develop new and more deadly nuclear missiles during the years of détente . Both countries had developed more deadly missiles during that period .
 Henry Kissinger was forced to flee from Germany with his parents in 1938 to escape imprisonment in onc of Hitler's concentration camps . Henry Kissinger is considered a super power figure in the world .
 The family moved to the U.S. where the boy got a job cleaning bristles in a shaving-brush factory . The family went to live in the United States where the family lived . The boy worked as a cleaning brush cleaner in a factory .
 President George W. Bush was Secretary of State of the U.S. in the early years of his presidency . He was appointed by the President of the United States in 1973 .
 Kissinger’s rise to importance began when Richard Nixon became President in 1969 . Kissinger's rise to prominence began when he was President Richard Nixon . Kissinger is a former Secretary of State of State John Kerry .
 He became Nixon’s personal adviser in all of the United States’ dealings with the rest of the world . He became the president of the country .
 In 1973 Kissinger officially became Secretary of State, he held a position until Jimmy Carter became President in 1977 . Kissinger was President of the U.S. from 1973 to 1977 .
 Kissinger played a central part in shaping U.S. foreign policy in the 1970s . Kissinger was a key figure in shaping American foreign policy . Kissinger is credited with helping shape the world's foreign policy for decades .
 He helped to form and direct the Nixon government’s policy in the later years of the Vietnam War .
 He prepared the way for détente with communist China . He worked to bring peace between the United States’ ally Isracl and its Arab neighbors .
 Some people believed that Kissinger’s boyhood experiences in Germany played an important part in forming his ideas about the kind of world he wanted to shape as Secretary of State . Kissinger's boyhood experience in Germany helped form his ideas .
 By the middle of the 1980s President Reagan had increased American military strength so much that he was ready to start talking seriously about slowing down the arms race .
 Gorbachev believed that the huge cost of the arms race was crippling the Soviet Union’s economy . The Soviet Union was eager to reduce it . The arms race cost the country much more than anything else .
 Gorbachev traveled with his wife to the U.S. in December 1987 . In December 1987, the Soviet Union leader traveled to the United States .
 People in these experiences have a real memory of chaos, of violence and brutality, like the world is collapsing under them, says the author of the book . "People in these . experiences have real memories of chaos," she says .
 Kissinger’s critics saw him as a showman, whose achievements were more apparent than real . Kissinger's critics said he was an obvious showman rather than a real man .
 His admirers believed that he was one of the most cffective statesmen of the twenticth century . He was a member of the British House of Representatives . He died at the age of 92 .
 In the INF treaty both countries agreed that within three years they would destroy all their land-based medium and shorter range nuclear missiles . In the treaty both sides agreed to destroy the missiles . The treaty also covers the destruction of all land and short range missiles .
 President Reagan gave Gorbachev a pair of cufflinks to celebrate the signing of the treaty . Reagan gave the former Soviet Union leader the cufflinks . The treaty was signed in 1987 .
 To symbolize their two countries turning away from war and towards peace, the cufflinks showed swords being beaten into ploughsares .
 In May 1988, Gorbachev began to withdraw Soviet troops from Afghanistan . The withdrawal was part of a plan to withdraw from the country .
 All over central and eastern Europe the communist political systems imposed by Stalin in the years after the Second World War crumbled away . Stalin's rule of Soviet-style political systems crumbled in the aftermath of the war in Russia .
 While Gorbachev's Soviet Union looked on without interfering, countries such as Hungary, Poland, East Germany, and Czechoslovakia set up multi-party systems .
 The Sovict Union and the United States have been at odds for years . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were at odds with each other in the Cold War .
 The country which for most of its existence had been an importer of influences has become in the twentieth century a major exporter of them . The country had been in the process of importing influences .
 In many areas of life, American popular tastes and attitudes have conquered the world . In many ways, American culture has conquered world, says CNN.com .
 You have read carlier about the part that American movies played in this process . American movies have played a key role in the creation of the U.S.
 After the Second World War the spreading of American influence was continued by a powerful new force—television . Television was a key part of the American empire .
 As carly as 1947, around 170,000 American families had television sets flickering in their living rooms . 170,00 American families still have television sets in their homes .
 Millions of people were organizing their activities around the programs on television that evening . Soon millions of people had planned their own activities .
 Comedy and game shows, stories about policemen and detectives, the adventures of fictional western heroes like the Lone Ranger, were very popular in the 1930s .
 By the 1960s filmed television programs had become an important American export . In the 1950s, filmed television shows were an important U.S. export .
 Other countries found it cheaper to buy U.S. programs than make their own . Other countries bought American programs .
 exported programs were being watched by viewers all over the world . Soon such exported programs began to be viewed by viewers across the globe .
 "I Love Lucy" is a 1950s comedy series featuring a red-haired comedienne named Lucille Ball . The series was one of the most popular comedies in the 1950s .
 When Lucille Ball died in April 1989, “I Love Lucy” was still being televised . Lucille's death was the last of the series .
 It had seen by then in seventy-nine different countries and had become the most watched television show ever . It had been seen by . nine different countries . The most watched TV show ever, it was seen in . nine countries .
 In music, the process of Americanization could be seen most clearly in the huge international popularity of rock . The process is most clearly evident in the popularity of Americanized music .
 Rock began as ‘rock-and-roll’, a music that was first played in the 1950s . Rock began in the 1960s as a popular form of music .
 It came from the American South, and combined black blues with the country music of working class whites to produce a heavily rhythmic—“rocking’’—sound that appealed especially to young people . It was combined with black blues and country music .
 Many of rock and roll’s first stars were black performers such as Chuck Berry and Little Richard . Little Richard and Chuck Berry were the first black performers .
 Elvis Presley was the unchallenged “King of rock-and-roll’s young southern white named Presley . Presley died at the age of 50 at a hospital in Memphis, Mississippi, in August 1968 .
 To rock-and-roll enthusiasts, Presley came to symbolize a new culture of youth . Presley became a symbol of rock and roll in the 1960s .
 Among other things, this culture developed its own vocabulary, ways of dressing, even hair s les .
 By the 1970s rock-and-roll had blended with protest songs of the 1960s to become rock, a music that was harder and less escapist . More significantly 3 THE AMERICAN CENT CENT CENTY for the future, it began to reject socially approved ideas .
 Rock became an international as well as an American phenomenon, one that millions of younger people worldwide saw as their natural cultural language . Rock is now an international and American phenomenon .
 A large part of its appeal was that it symbolized opposition to officially approved ideas and standards even more strongly than its ancestor, rock-and-roll, had done in the 1950s . "Rock and Roll" was an opposition to official standards more strongly .
 The Americanization of popular taste and habits was not restricted to entertainment . It was not only the entertainment industry, but also the social aspect of American culture .
 The growing popularity of hamburgers, fried chicken and other easily prepared “fast food’s” spread American cating habits all over the world . The fast food industry has spread over the globe .
 Bluc jeans and T-shirts Americanized the dress of people on every continent . Bluc is the name of the clothing worn by people in the United States .
 Supermarkets have Americanized the everyday experience of shopping for millions . Supermarkets are Americanizing the everyday shopping experience .
 The first supermarkets appeared in the U.S. in the 1950s . The first supermarket in the United States was opened in the 1960s .
 With their huge variety of foods and other consumer goods, supermarkets gave shoppers a much wider range of choices . Supermarkets gave shoppers much more of a variety of choices than supermarkets .
 In the 1950s many Americans saw their loaded shelves and full freezers as visible proof of the superiority of the American way of organizing a nation’s economic life .
 When supermarkets proved a commercial success in the U.S. they quickly spread to other prosperous countries, first in Europe and then in other parts of the world . Supermarkets proved successful in the United States and Europe .
 Buildings with outer walls of glass and metal were a common feature of U.S. cities in the 1930s and '60s . So did buildings with glass-covered walls of metal?
 By the 1980s such buildings were dominating city centers all over the world . By the mid-1980s, such buildings had been dominating city centres .
 The origins of the American Midwest can be traced back more than a hundred years to the Midwest .
 During the 1880s a number of high, narrow buildings began to rise in the center of Chicago . Chicago's narrowest buildings were built during the same period .
 Similar buildings —so tall that people called them ‘skyscrapers’ — were soon rising over other American cities . Similar buildings soon began to be built in New York City .
 In the first half of the twentieth century they became one of the principal visual symbols of the modern U.S. They became a principal visual symbol of the United States .
 Instead of using a lot of expensive space on the ground, the builders used the free space of the sky . The project was designed to use the sky as an alternative to the expensive ground .
 New industrial techniques, and the availability of plenty of cheap steel, made it possible for them to do this . It was made possible by new industrial techniques and cheap steel .
 Each skyscraper was built around a framework of steel beams, or girders, which carried the weight of the building . This inner skeleton was constructed before the outer walls, which were added later .
 The walls of the early skyscrapers were often made of stone, not for practical reasons, but to make the buildings look solid and strong . The walls were used to make them look solid .
 In the 1950s architects working in the U.S. began to design skyscrapers whose steel skeletons were covered by outer walls . Outer walls — or “curtains” — of outer walls were covered with outer walls of steel and metal .
 Such buildings gave visual expression to the impact of the U.S. on the world, some historians were giving to the century even before it reached its end .
 Russell was a cowboy who taught himself to paint, and he became one of the best known artists of the American West . Russell was an artist of the West .
 Blackfoot Amerindian tepees were painted by the German artist Karl Bodmer .
 In the 1830s Bodmer followed the route of the Lewis and Clark expedition across the Great Plains to the Rocky Mountains . Bodmer was the first person to follow the Lewis & Clark expedition to explore the Rockies .
 Kiinstler carries out detailed research to make his historical paintings as accurate as possible . T] is a twentieth-century re-creation of the painting .
 This is an Aztec drawing of an event in the Spanish conquest of Mexico during the expedition of Nuno de Guzman in 1530 . The Tlascalans aided the Spaniards in punishing another tribe which had hanged a Spaniard . See also paintings on pages 22, 30,
 A romanticized impression of the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers was created by a ninetcenth-century artist . The artist created a romanticized version of the historic landing .
 Pilgrims going to church painted by George H, Boughton in 1867 . Pilgrim going to a church painted in the same style .
 An impression of the first Thanksgiving by a nineteenth-century artist . The first Thanksgiving was created by a 19th-century painter .
 A contemporary English cartoon shows the burial of the Stamp Act . The Stamp Act was introduced in 1903 .
 A contemporary portrait by James Peale is published in New York City, New York, USA .
 Page 36 An impression by a nineteenth-century artist, Page 38 A contemporary painting . Page 38 is a contemporary painting. Page 36 is an impression of an impression by an artist .
 Miller sketched the Amerindians and mountain-men of the Rocky Mountains while traveling there in the 1830s . Miller was traveling in the U.S. when he drew the pictures .
 A late nincteenth-century painting of Yellowstone National Park by Thomas Moran . Thomas Moran painted the park in 17th century .
 The artist's representation of the tensions between labor and capital in the late nineteenth century . The artist was the subject of a series of works by the artist .
 A British propaganda poster made use of the sinking of the Lusitania in 1915 to arouse American sympathies .
 A contemporary painting by Sir William Orpen of the signing of the Versailles peace treaty . The peace treaty was signed by the French Republic in 1919 .
 Graffiti artist has painted a view of East Berlin through a hole in the wall . The skull-shaped hole in a hole has been painted in East Berlin .
 Washington, Lincoln, Edison, Lincoln and Edison all play parts in the play . The play examines the contributions made by the less famous figures . It also examines the role of African-American slaves on southern cotton plantations and student protesters .
 An Illustrated History of the USA shows how the U.S. has developed from small beginnings into the most powerful nation on carth with far-reaching influence .