 The Cuban missile crisis of 1962 is frequently described as the moment the cold war turned hot . The crisis occurred in 1962, when the Cold War turned hot in Cuba .
 Many believe that this thirteen-day period was the closest the world came to nuclear conflict . Many believe this is the closest to a nuclear war .
 The essay will focus on many individual factors, such as the Berlin blockade, and will attempt to answer one of the most controversial questions in the Cold war period . The essay is based on the history of the Cold War, including the blockade of Berlin .
 The Berlin dispute was a pivotal factor throughout the cold war period . It should be considered a primary cause of the Cuban crises . The Berlin crisis was a key factor in the Cuban crisis .
 In 1948 and 1958 war had seemed near as the Soviet Union tried to force the west out of the country . In 1958 and 1950s, the west had seemed to be on the verge of war .
 In 1961 the Berlin Wall had been built to prevent a mass exodus from the East to West Germany . This was humiliating for the Soviets . In 1961, the Berlin wall was built in order to prevent an exodus to the West .
 Stalin forced to resort to trapping people in East Berlin to stop them from escaping, not the best propaganda image for communism . Stalin was forced to . resort to trap people in Berlin to . stop them escaping .
 Soviet leadership was clearly intent on protecting Soviet interests at this juncture . The Soviet leadership viewed the west with increasing suspicion of the west .
 It was a catalyst to conflict between the west and communist states and therefore a possible cause of the Cuban missile crisis . It was also a catalyst for conflict between western states and communist countries .
 Khrushchev may have placed missiles in Cuba to use them as a bargaining tool with the U.S. in the hope that discussions would lead to the West staying out of Berlin, in exchange for the removal of the missiles .
 Khrushchev believed that by placing missiles on Cuba he would force the west out of Berlin . The Soviet Union hoped to use the situation as leverage to force the West to leave Berlin .
 If the U.S. did strike at the missiles, it would give the Soviets an excuse to attack United States outposts closer to the Soviet Union . If the United States did strike it would be an excuse for attacks .
 The one outpost that most concerned the EX COMM was West Berlin, where the Soviet Union had built a wall one year earlier . West Berlin was the one outpost where the EXCOM was concerned .
 The missiles could be employed either to deter the U.S. from declaring war or to use bargaining purposes . They could be used to deter war or be used for bargaining .
 Kennedy surmised that Khrushchev knew the placing of missiles was too big a risk just to restore the balance of power . Kennedy said he must have been using them to solve the Berlin problem . Kennedy: "I think he was trying to solve it"
 Khrushchev saw Cuba as a political pawn, says historian . Berlin dispute was prime factor in Soviet Union's decision to place missiles on Cuba, he says .
 Khrushchev needed to restore Soviet dignity after the Berlin crisis and the country’s international recognition especially with the Chinese who thought that the Soviets were trying to appease the Americans . The Chinese believed that the Soviet government was appeasing the Americans.
 Khrushchev’s decision to place missiles on Cuba resulted in heightening the threat of nuclear war and resulting in the Cuban missile crisis . Hostility between the East and the West, evidenced by the construction of the Berlin Wall, was a causal link in the decision .
 Another possible reason as to why the Soviet Union decided to place missiles on Cuba was to re-establish the balance of missile power . The Soviet Union placed the missiles in Cuba in order to keep the balance in balance .
 Kennedy announced that he would increase the number of missiles and warheads that could be launched against the Soviet Union . Kennedy made the announcement in 1963 .
 By the end of 1962, the United States had ten times more missiles and warheads than the Soviet Union . The U.S. had 10 times more missile and nuclear weapons than the Soviets .
 Soviet analysts believed the U.S. military build-up was the preparation for a nuclear attack against the Soviet Union . The United States believed it was an effort to intimidate the Soviet Russia .
 Given the U.S. build-up of weaponry – an aggressive move and a clear threat to Russia and its satellites– it is logical to assume that Khrushchev put the missiles in Cuba to try and prevent nuclear attack from the Americans .
 Khrushchev may have felt the need to stand up to America and to show that the Soviet Union was not a country to be cowed . Given his desire to improve his country's international standing .
 The United States also had twice as many nuclear submarines and Soviet missiles . The U.S. also had two more nuclear submarines than the Soviet Union .
 The United States had a far greater missile advantage and first strike advantage . The U.S. also had the first strike advantages . The American missile advantage was far greater than any other missile advantage .
 Deploying the Soviet missiles on Cuba could be considered a means of going some way to re-addressing this balance of power with the USA, but it was in fact another factor that led to the missile crisis .
 The biggest blow to the Soviet Union’s military confidence was the placement of United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey in 1961 . The U.S. Jupiter missiles were placed in Turkey on Russia's border .
 The missiles became operational in 1962, under the Kennedy administration . The missiles were launched in 1961 .
 The missiles were not the strongest missiles in America’s vast arsenal, but they could still pack a punch . The missiles are not the most powerful missiles in the US arsenal .
 Clearly the Soviets did not want missiles right outside their front door even if they weren’t the best America had . The Soviets didn't want missiles in the U.S. even if it were the best American missiles .
 The Soviet's might have placed missiles in Cuba to level the playing field, Russia had missiles on it’s border and now so did America . This means that Russia were no longer at a disadvantage, both countries were of equal footing . Both countries were at an equal footing, both
 Russia desperately wanted the missiles to be removed from Turkey . America was eager to get rid of the Cuban missiles . Russia wanted to remove the missiles from Turkey and America wanted them removed .
 Khrushchev hoped that putting the missiles in Cuba might have lead to both countries removing the missiles from Turkey and Cuba reducing the tension between the two superpowers . The missiles were placed in Cuba in 1960s and 1961 .
 "Placing the missiles in Cuba generated more tension and was significant factor for the cause of the missile crisis," says President Obama . "Unfortunately placing the missiles ... generated more tensions," says Obama .
 The Soviets felt that they needed to protect themselves and redress the balance of power . Another reason commonly used to explain the decision to put missiles on Cuba was for Cuba’s defence .
 Cuba was the only western country to turn communist during the cold war . Khrushchev wanted to show the west that communism could thrive anywhere, especially after Berlin crisis .
 Khrushchev had many reasons to believe that Kennedy was threatening Cuba . Kennedy had many of the reasons he was threatening the country .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, despite its failure, did show America’s intent on overthrowing Fidel Castro . Despite the failure, the invasion showed the U.S. intent to overthrow Castro .
 Kennedy believed that Castro endangered the whole western hemisphere and had to be stopped . Kennedy believed he had to stop the Castro regime .
 This is true the Soviet’s might have used the bay of pigs as an excuse to place missiles in Cuba in order to protect it . This is not the case, but the Soviet's might have placed missiles there .
 The Bay of Pigs frightened Castro, causing him to make concessions to the U.S.R, which wanted to place military bases on the island of Cuba . Castro made concessions after the Bay of Pigeas led him to give concessions .
 It included the start of the economic embargo against Cuba, which continues today . The embargo was included in the early days of the Cuban revolution .
 Operation Mongoose aimed to harass and undermine the communist regime in Cuba . The Cuban government was overthrown by the CIA in 1994 .
 There was also a military operation named Ortsac, which was a trial run for an invasion of Cuba . The operation was also known as a trial-run for a Cuban invasion .
 In February 1962, renewed attacks against Cuba by CIA-trained commandos seemed to indicate that the U.S. were prepared to act aggressively against Cuba, thereby undermining Soviet interests . The attacks on Cuba in February 1962 were believed to have been directed by the CIA .
 Protecting Communist Cuba played a part in the decision to place missiles in Cuba . The U.S. placed missiles in the Cuban territory in 2009 .
 The country showed the world that even in the west, communism could thrive . The country also showed that even though the West was not communist, communism thrived .
 Soviet credibility would have suffered significantly if the leadership permitted Cuba to be invaded by the U.S. The Soviet leadership would have been weakened significantly if it had allowed Cuba to invade Cuba .
 The attacks, and the suspension of Cuba from the Organization of American States, appeared to be a forewarning of such an invasion . Cuba's suspension of the OAS suspension was seen as a warning of an invasion by the West .
 Given the circumstances, it would have been hard for Khrushchev not to place missiles in Cuba, says historian . "It would be hard for him not to put missiles there," he says .
 The sabre rattling actions of the U.S. and the Soviets were designed to protect the interests of both countries . The actions were borne out of suspicion and fear .
 It was inevitable that these actions would lead to escalation as no one sign could climb down . However, it is inevitable that it will lead to an escalation . No one sign can climb down.
 The U.S. should be considered a main reason for the missile crisis . The North Korean missile crisis was a major cause for the crisis, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 Cuba was a conveniently close, tourist resort; and low paid Cuban labour made it an attractive investment area . Much of the island’s agriculture and industry was American-owned . Cuba was conveniently close to a tourist resort .
 Castro felt he needed to harm U.S. interests if he was to tackle the dire issues in Cuba such as poverty, ill-health and illiteracy’s . Castro felt that he needed . to harm . United States interests .
 Castro turned to communism in the face of U.S. hostility . This eventually led to Castro turning to communism . Castro eventually turned to the Communist Party .
 Economic sanctions and the United States trade embargo were imposed on Cuba in 1962 . Cuba was the subject of the U.S. trade embargo that was imposed on the island nation .
 The trade embargo would have bankrupted the island because exporting sugar to America was Cuba’s biggest money earner . Sugar exports to the U.S. was the biggest revenue earner in Cuba .
 In 1960 Castro referred to himself as a socialist not a communist and there was no real intention of teaming up with communist Russia . In 1960, Castro referred himself as the socialist not communist .
 The trade embargo brought the two countries together . Russia stepped in to by Cuba’s sugar and other exports .
 The actions of America as a result of Castro’s Cuban revolution drove Cuba towards Communism and in the long run lead to the Cuban missile crisis . The actions were the result of the Cuban revolution and led to the missile crisis in Cuba .
 Khrushchev may have placed missiles on Cuba to prove to hard line communists like China that they weren't being soft on capitalism . The missiles may have been placed to prove that the communist government wasn't soft with capitalism .
 Khrushchev faced a lot of opposition from hard liners who accused him of being weak and appeasing the Americans . The former Soviet Union leader was accused of being a weak leader . He faced criticism from hard-liners who said he was weak .
 Khrushchev was desperate to maintain relationships the Soviets had with other Communist countries like China . The only way they could keep this friendship going was to assert Soviet dominance and prove that communism does not back down to the West .
 The Berlin dispute and U.S. actions in Cuba could have been another reason for the placement of missiles on Cuba and the cause of the missile crisis . Linked to other factors such as the Berlin .
 Russia’s relationship with China was strained during this cold war period . Russia and China were at odds during the Cold War .
 Increasing competition between Beijing and Moscow for influence in the Third World and the international communist movement intensified and soured relations .
 Khrushchev may have placed missiles in Cuba causing the missile crisis . Placing missiles on America’s doorstep would certainly make this abundantly clear .
 Economic conditions in the Soviet Union were a factor in the Cuban missile crisis . The Soviet Union's economic conditions contributed to the crisis in Cuba . The U.S. did not provide a clear explanation for the crisis .
 Russia was spending a huge amount of money on its nuclear weapons program, roughly 2. billion dollars spent per annum . Russia spent roughly 2 billion dollars a year on nuclear weapons .
 This constant expenditure was hard to maintain and the Soviets needed a way to reduce it . The Soviets needed to reduce the spending and needed to find a way of reducing it .
 Khrushchev hoped that placing missiles in Cuba would stop the nuclear arms race with U.S. The risks would be too great for either side to make a move . The risk of a move by either side would be so great that either side could not move .
 This would mean a reduction in Russia’s overall cost of nuclear defences . It would allow spending in other areas to be freed up .
 The economic issue could be considered a powerful reason why missiles were placed on Cuba . The economic issues could be the reason for the missiles placed there .
 Far too much money was being pumped into nuclear weapons, which could have been spent on education, or improving living conditions for the Russians, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 More money was needed to strengthen Soviet control over satellite states so Russia could be seen as a credible power . As well as this more money would be needed, more money was also needed for Russia to see itself as credible in the world .
 Khrushchev thought he could put an end to the nuclear arms race by putting missiles on Cuba, but it just became another factor that led to an escalation in conflict and eventually the Cuban missile crisis . Possibly Khrushche tried to end the arms race but it led to escalation of conflict
 EX COMM believed Kennedy had not been firm enough with the Soviet leader in their 1961 summit meeting in Vienna . The EX COMM. believed that Kennedy . had not . done enough with Soviet leader .
 Placing missiles on Cuba may have been a way of testing how strong a president Kennedy was . Placing the missiles may be an opportunity to see how Kennedy reacted in the face of danger .
 Khrushchev was an adventurer who was testing the United States in general and Kennedy in particular . Kennedy was tested by the Soviet Union in the 1960s and '60s, and '50s'
 If the U.S. accepted the missiles in Cuba, it would only encourage the Soviet Union to act aggressively elsewhere . The United States would have to accept the missiles from Cuba . The Soviet Union would only act aggressively in Cuba .
 Khrushchev hadn’t previously thought about trying to spread communist influence across the volatile area of South America . The Soviet Union wanted to spread its influence in the region .
 A benign response from the U.S. would have given Khrushchev confidence to do the same in other countries and begin communist expansion in South America . The United States would have responded with a benign response .
 Khrushchev’s plan of testing Kennedy could have been a main reason leading up to the Cuban missile crisis . The plan was a plan to test Kennedy's missile program .
 A related motive would be to embarrass the United States and undermine U.S. credibility . The Soviets appear much wiser and communism a more attractive prospect for some countries, especially after the humiliation of the Berlin blockade .
 Khrushchev may have wanted to lure the young, vulnerable president into a nuclear war against the Soviet Union which had a much more experienced leader . Also may have been trying to lure him into a war against his own country .
 The missiles were so easy to spot by the American spy planes that it seemed like they were placed there just to provoke America and draw them further into a nuclear war . This seems plausible because there was no attempt by the Soviet’s to hide the missiles .
 Creating tension by placing the missiles in Cuba to provoke America would have led to increased hostility between the two countries and the Cuban missile crisis . Creating tension would have resulted in increased hostility from the U.S.
 There are many different historical perspectives of the main causes of the Cuban missile crisis . The Cuban crisis was the result of the Soviet Union's failure to launch a missile program .
 Khrushchev’s deliberately provocative placement of the missiles in Cuba to try and drag America into a nuclear war, writes Peter Bergen . One perspective is that the main causes of the Cuban missile crisis were related to the placement of missiles .
 This view is clearly shown in the film ‘Thirteen days’ by Nancy Russell . Nancy Russell's film 'Thirteen Days’ is shown in a different way of thinking .
 It portrays the Russians to be warmongers who are intent on destroying America . It portrays them as warmonger who are trying to destroy America .
 It doesn't focus on what the Soviet’s hope to achieve by putting missiles on Cuba, only anti-communist American assumptions . It doesn’t focus . Instead, it focuses on the Soviet's aim to achieve .
 This quote shows that the president and his advisors were unaware of Soviet motives for placing the missiles in Cuba and just thought Khrushchev was looking for a fight . This quote was taken by President Richard Nixon as a joke .
 Gaddis uses this quote to show that Khrushchev was unhappy with the Jupiter missiles in turkey aimed at Russia . The Jupiter missiles were intended to target Russia .
 Khrushchev was using the missiles to reach equilibrium with the U.S. It shows a different perspective that maybe . maybe maybe . Maybe Khrushche was using . the missiles for bargaining purposes to reach . equilibrium .
 Some Historians think that the missile crisis was caused by the oppressive American grip on Cuba that dominated the way of life there . There is also the Cuban perspective; some Historians believe that the crisis was brought on by the American grip .
 This resulted in the Cuban revolution and Castro finding an alternative trading partner with the Soviet’s, a powerful backdrop to growing conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union and a convincing trigger of the Cuban missile crisis . The Cuban revolution was the result of the U.S. finding
 I don't believe the primary cause of the Cuban missile crisis was the Berlin dispute . To conclude, I don’t believe the Berlin-Cuban dispute caused the crisis, but I think it did .
 I agree that it could have been a contributory factor in the sense that the Soviet administration might have been looking for a bargaining chip with the United States to remove Berlin from Berlin, and also to reduce military expenditure .
 The Soviet Union’s desire to protect a fellow communist state, Cuba, while defending its own personal interests, was the prime factor that triggered subsequent events that ultimately led to the missile crisis . But I believe that it was the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev claimed that he was motivated by the desire to defend the Cuban revolution and Fidel Castro from aggression by the U.S. The Bay of Pigs disaster was the result of a coup by the former Soviet leader .
 There were many other important factors that definitely led to the crisis, such as the Jupiter missiles in Turkey . There were also many other factors, including the presence of Jupiter missiles, the author says .
 Khrushchev was determined to be on equal footing with the U.S. and did not want Russia to fall behind in the arms race . In addition to being determined to compete with the United States, he also wanted to be equal .
 Khrushchev thought that by placing missiles in Cuba he would be able to redress this military imbalance, to degree . The Soviet Union wanted to redress the military imbalance in Cuba, but failed .
 Suspicion and the desire to defend an ideology resulted in a build-up of tensions between the two nations . Ultimately, suspicion and the need to defend ideology led to tensions .
 Cuba was the poster child of communism – to be defended and propagated at all costs by the Soviets . Cuba was a failed state of Soviet Communism . It was to defend and propagate the Cuban people at any cost .
 Between 1958 and 1961, the dispute over Berlin was one of the main issues between the USA and USSR, and caused a considerable amount of growing tension between the two states . The dispute was a major issue between the U.S. and USSR .
 The dispute over Berlin was a continuing issue over who was to occupy Berlin . Berlin was the capital city of Germany .
 The city was seen as an important area for both states and led to several conflict issues throughout the time period . The city is one of the most important areas in the history of both states .
 The Soviet Union and the United States of America were close to starting WWIII in October, 1962 . The United States and the Soviet Union were in the midst of a war .
 The existence of Soviet Nuclear war missiles were located in Cuba just 90 miles off the coast of Florida . The cause was because of the existence of nuclear war missiles in Cuba .
 The Cuban missile crisis is considered the closest time the world has ever come to nuclear war . The Cuban crisis was considered to be one of the closest times the world was at risk of war .
 There are many causes that led the world to such confrontation that was ultimately the product of the hostility and secrecy between the nations. There were many causes, including hostility, secrecy and hostility .
 Nikita Khrushchev and President Kennedy came to a compromise . The world sat on the brink of mass destruction, all hope lied with Nikita .
 A Cycle is a Biological Pathway or Process in which the End Product of One Cycle Becomes the Starting Point for the Next . Society Killed Tom, Not the Shooter alone, says author .