 Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, 1958&ndash;1964'' adds information from Russian sources . Fursenko, Aleksandr and Timothy Naftali.
 JFK was President of the United States from 1961 to 1963 . JFK was Vice President Lyndon Johnson of the U.S. Vice President Dwight Eisenhower of the White House from 1961-1963 .
 James Michael Curley died January 3, 1947 . Thomas P O'Neill, Jr. succeeded Curley as president . Curley was succeeded by Curley's successor Thomas ONeill Jr. Curley served as president of the State of New York .
 He was the youngest person elected president and one of the most glamorous and popular . He was also the most popular and glamorous person in the world .
 After his assassination he became a legendary figure in whom admirers saw the ideals of American mythology incarnated . His record of presidential accomplishments remains a subject of debate among historians and the public .
 In Congress the Conservative Coalition blocked nearly all of his domestic programs, so there were few changes in domestic policy, even as the civil rights movement gained strength . In Congress, the conservative Coalition blocked most of his programs .
 Kennedy style called for youth, dynamism, vigor and an intellectual approach to aggressive new policies in foreign affairs . Kennedy style calls for youth and dynamism in foreign policy .
 The downside was his inexperience in foreign affairs, standing in contrast to the vast experience of the president he replaced, Dwight D Eisenhower .
 At the Bay of Pigs, all the invaders were killed or captured, and he was forced to negotiate for the survivors release giving Cuba medical and food . He was forced by Cuba to give Cuba medical, food and give it back .
 Kennedy's supporters blamed the fiasco on Eisenhower, for JFK inherited the plan; but Kennedy took the blame himself . Kennedy supporters blamed Eisenhower for the fiasco .
 Nikita Khrushchev threw up the Berlin Wall as the Soviets escalated the Cold War regarding the status of Berlin, predicting correctly that Kennedy's response would be weak . Nikita predicted that Kennedy would respond weakly .
 Khrushchev went too far in 1962 when he sent nuclear missiles into Cuba aimed at the United States . For the first time since Pearl Harbor, the U.S. was vulnerable to a major attack by an enemy power .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev reached a compromise whereby the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba publicly, while Kennedy secretly removed American missiles from Turkey aimed at the Soviets . The two sides also agreed that America would never invade Cuba .
 Historians uncertain whether Kennedy would have avoided the failures of Lyndon Johnson in Vietnam . Historians are uncertain whether JFK would have survived the failures .
 He was assassinated on November 22, 1963 while riding in his convertible limo in Dallas, Texas .
 A Communist sympathizer, Lee Harvey Oswald, was allegedly the only assassin, and afterward Kennedy became a national icon and martyr . Kennedy was a national hero and martyr, and after his assassination he became an icon .
 Kennedy was an indifferent student until the war in Europe focused his attention . He was indifferent at private schools and Harvard College, but focused on the war .
 As second son in the powerful Kennedy Family, he was marked for intellectual career as a writer or journalist . His older brother Joseph was slated for politics by their hyper-manipulative father, Joseph P Kennedy .
 His brother’s death in combat, combined with his heroic war record as skipper of the PT-109, set the stage for his political debut as a Congressional candidate in 1946 . JFK was elected to Congress in 1946 after his brother died in combat .
 Medical Kennedy was the sickest president since William Henry Harrison . Kennedy successfully kept his multiple maladies a secret from the press and policy makers . Kennedy's medical history was a mystery to the press .
 Besides Addison's disease, Kennedy's most serious problem was chronic back pain . He strained an unstable back a number of times, both in youth and during his PT boat service during the war .
 As a teenager, Kennedy was in and out of hospitals for chronic colitis, stomach problems, and an undisclosed blood condition . Surgery in 1944 only worsened the condition; by 1954 Kennedy found the pain so acute that he underwent back surgery once again despite the risk of an Addisonian crisis
 Janet Travell, a specialist in the treatment of muscular disorders, was his primary physician after 1955 . Other specialists tried any number of different treatments .
 As president he took seven powerful prescription drugs daily . Meticorten for Addison's disease, a malfunction of the adrenal glands; and T3 for hypothyroidism .
 In addition he regularly took Equanil for anxiety and tension . For his gastrointestinal problems he took anti-spasmodics Lomotil and Bentyl . For weight gain he took a daily dose of testosterone .
 White House physicians were alarmed when they learned he was seeing Dr. John Sutter . White House physician was alarmed when he learned of Dr. Sutter's treatment .
 Historians have not identified a single policy decision that seems to have been affected by his physical condition or medical treatments . Historians believe he never took any illegal drugs; they believe he took none .
 JFK's return to Boston restored the family's traditional power base among the large and powerful Irish-American community in Massachusetts . The father had abandoned Boston in frustration .
 Strong family connections with Chicago Irish political community augmented his national Catholic base . Strong family ties with the Chicago .
 JFK always had two sets of advisors, an inner circle of Irish politicians who planned his campaigns, and a Protestant-Jewish coterie of intellectuals who promoted his stature as the intellectual in politics .
 JFK fought his way into the Senate in 1952 by defeating incumbent Republican Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., Jr., the archetypal Yankee . JFK won the Senate seat in 1952 .
 Kennedy largely ignored the old-boy Senate to display his talents through newspaper and television interviews, magazine articles, and highly publicized speeches around the country . Kennedy's career spanned six decades .
 JFK appealed to conservatives by tolerating Joe McCarthy and launching attacks on corrupt labor leaders, especially Jimmy Hoffa of the Teamsters Union . Aided by his closest advisor, Robert Kennedy, his brother Robert Kennedy was JFK's closest advisor .
 The Kennedy family represented the conservative wing of the Democratic party, known for its anti-Communism and close ties with Republican Senator Joe McCarthy . Many liberal Democrats, led by Eleanor Roosevelt, distrusted JFK primarily because they could never forget the father’s break with Franklin Roosevelt or
 With the fading away of Adlai Stevenson, liberals lacked a viable candidate . Yet with the fading . away of . Adl . Stevenson , liberals lacked . viable candidate. Yet with . the fade away of the . fading away from Adlace Stevenson .
 JFK was the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination to face Richard M Nixon . JFK's Catholic base of support would be outweighed by anti-Catholicism of the sort that hurt Al Smith in 1928 .
 Fear of Tammany-like bossism had faded away with the demise of most big city machines . Of course prohibition was no longer an issue, and fear of bossism has faded away .
 The Kennedy juggernaut defeated rival Hubert Humphrey, a liberal, in the West Virginia primary . The state has so much poverty and so few Catholics that party leaders were convinced they had a winner .
 Kennedy won over the party’s intellectuals by his effective academic connections, while shaming doubters by a brilliant performance before the Protestant ministers of Houston . Kennedy won the party's intellectuals by . his effective . academic connections .
 The pope said he did not speak for the Catholic Church on matters of religion . He said it didn't speak for him on public affairs, but it did for the church .
 He was able to take that position because there were no high intensity moral issues such as abortion at that time, he says . "There was no high-intensity moral issue such as . abortion at . that time," he adds .
 JFK’s religiosity consisted of nominal attendance at Sunday Mass . He excited tens of millions of Catholics who saw his election as president as confirmation of their full recognition as true Americans .
 With 8 of 10 Catholics voting for Kennedy, he ran up majorities in ethnic strongholds like Chicago . Chicago provided the narrow margin of victory against Richard Nixon .
 Kennedy gets credit for bringing Catholics into the American political mainstream . Fears of Catholicism largely disappeared from the voting booth after 1960 .
 In 1961, he was forced to pay ransom of $53 million United States dollars in food and medicine in exchange for 1,113 prisoners and 76 other exiles being held in Cuba .
 He launched the Peace Corps by executive order in 1961, putting his brother-in-law Sargent Shriver in charge . The Peace Corps was launched by President Kennedy in 1961 .
 It was designed to be a new weapon in the U.S. Cold War arsenal, one that could reach the people directly at the grass roots not merely their national leaders . It was mainly designed for the Cold War .
 Peace Corps has been endorsed by all subsequent presidents . Nearly 200,000 Americans have served helping underdeveloped nations through personal humanitarian aid .
 President Kennedy paid a state visit to Ireland in 1963 . It was the first state visit of an American President to the country . Ireland had secured independence from Britain forty years earlier . Kennedy's state visit was in 1963 the first of its kind .
 Kennedy visited his ancestral home in County Wexford and was greeted by huge crowds in the cities of Dublin, Limerick and Cork .
 He told crowds that once he had completed his term as president, he would like to become United States Ambassador to Ireland, and live there . He said he would also like to be the United States ambassador to Ireland .
 In his greatest moment, Kennedy rejected invasion plans but imposed a blockade and demanded the missiles be removed immediately . Kennedy imposed the blockade and ordered the missiles removed immediately.
 Khrushchev publicly backed down, but privately got Kennedy to agree to remove the older U.S. Jupiter missiles from Turkey . Castro secured the promise that the United States would never invade his island .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev became friendlier in public after their war broke out . Realizing how close they had come to war, the two became friendly .
 In 1963, they signed a test ban treaty which eliminated nuclear testing above ground or in space . The treaty was further designed to hobble China and other countries trying to build their first bombs .
 The Cuban missile crisis reversed JFK’s image of ineptness in foreign policy, but his quiet, escalation of military involvement in Vietnam set the stage for the whirlwind reaped by his successor . JFK's quiet escalation of Vietnam in Vietnam helped set up the Vietnam War .
 JFK had shown limited interest in domestic affairs apart from labor union corruption . JFK had been a senator for more than 30 years .
 President Obama proposed a Keynesian program to stimulate the economy, not by higher spending, but by tax cuts . Tax cuts were proposed by his high-powered advisors .
 Congress was effectively controlled by a conservative coalition of Republicans and southern Democrats . It was controlled by Republicans and Democrats in the South .
 He boosted the NASA space program and pledged to put a man on the moon before the end of the 1960s . He boosted NASA's space program .
 JFK had confrontations with segregationist Democrats, especially Governors George Wallace of Alabama and Ross Barnett of Mississippi . Civil rights movement in the South led by Martin Luther King produced dramatic confrontations .
 The 1963 confrontation in Alabama was nonviolent, and although Wallace did back down, the event boosted his visibility as a leader of southern Democrats . Wallace was a prominent Southern Democratic leader .
 JFK ignored the risks to his southern base and spoke out in favor of civil rights legislation . The bill was passed after his death .
 Kennedy’s assassination in November, 1963, was a stunning shock to all Americans . Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963, 1963 .
 Pierson argues that the liberal media turned Kennedy's death into a martyrdom against racism . Pierson says the media ignored Kennedy's weaker interest in race and his strong opposition to Communism .
 Lee Harvey Oswald's strong Communist ties were downplayed, and instead, the conservative city of Dallas was made the guilty party . Oswald's ties to the Communist Party was downplayed and instead of the city being blamed .
 Incoming president Lyndon Johnson used the martyrdom theme to rally support for his liberal programs, painting them as memorials to Kennedy . Johnson won reelection in 1964 by a landslide over Barry Goldwater .
 The Catholic community took his assassination hard, and immediately elevated JFK to a sort of sainthood status . Catholics celebrated the miracle that he had liberated them from second class citizenship .
 Johnson in 1964 successfully retained the Catholic base JFK had fostered, but that was the last hurrah . The Catholic base in the U.S. remained strong in the 1960s .
 By 1966 Catholics started showing their disillusionment with Johnson, who never recovered from the wave after wave of urban riots, nor from the disillusionment of his Vietnam War policy .
 With the assassination of Robert Kennedy in 1968, the Kennedy legacy increasingly became the romantic memory . With the failure of youngest brother Ted Kennedy to recover his brothers’ national base, Ted Kennedy's national base has become the romantic legacy .
 Disclosures of JFK’s affairs fascinated the public but failed to break the myth that if JFK had lived, his second term would be a story of political triumphs restoring people's faith in government . JFK's medical history was a mystery to the public .
 Kennedy was basically a conservative, but he had to appeal to a primarily liberal base . He offered symbols for the liberals while following a conservative course in foreign and domestic policy . Kennedy's foreign policy was a conservative .
 After his death Kennedy's legacy was picked up by liberals, and there is a vague notion to the effect that Kennedy was a liberal .
 To be a liberal in the days when Kennedy was in politics, 1946-63, meant supporting the programs of the New Deal . He was actually more of a conservative, following in the footsteps of FDR .
 In foreign policy liberals had turned away from Roosevelt's détente with the Soviets and adopted the containment policy . The containment policy was adopted by liberals in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Liberals reject rollback, that is efforts to remove Communists regimes from power . Liberals rejected rollback . Liberals are trying to remove Communist regimes from office .
 Verbal support for the U.N. was standard rhetoric, but in practice it meant little . The United Nations was a major source of support in the Middle East .
 The symbolically most important issue of them all for liberals was opposition to Joe McCarthy and his style of aggressive anti-Communism . Joe McCarthy was a symbolically important issue for liberals in the 1950s .
 He had a base in Massachusetts with many strong liberals in academe and labor unions that had to be appeased, so he never attacked liberalism too loudly . He never attacked liberals too loudly.
 He solved the state problem by a close alliance with the Democratic party organizations in the cities, controlled mostly by Irish politicians, he says .
 JFK's campaign manager and chief confidante was his brother Bobby . Bobby was a devout Catholic who was in close touch with the Catholic establishment and the local machines . JFK's brother Bobby was JFK's top campaign manager .
 JFK maintained very close ties to the Catholic establishment . JFK carefully followed the required public rituals of the Catholic church . JFK was very closely associated with the Catholic Church .
 It was a major achievement by Kennedy in 1960 to resolve the religious issue and bring Catholics into the mainstream of American life and to the top ranks of national leadership . On foreign policy he was a leading anti-Communist hawk .
 Liberals have misread the Cuban invasion was Eisenhower's idea; that in Vietnam he might have changed his mind in a second term . Liberals say Eisenhower was liberal because he did not blow the world up; in Cuba he was liberal .
 To combat Communism in Latin America, he proposed a liberal program of financial and technical assistance and free-food programs .
 Kennedy tried to cut taxes and blocked his liberal advisors who wanted deficit spending in 1961 . Kennedy explicitly exempted any such movements dominated by "external" forces, thereby shutting the door on renewed diplomatic relations with Fidel Castro's Cuba .
 Kennedy sponsored policies such as tax cuts and low inflation that conservative businessmen wanted . Kennedy had a pro-business reputation and sponsored policies that conservatives wanted .
 On taking office he called for a ""full-fledged alliance" with business . He called for an ""full fledged alliance"" with business partners .
 Kennedy never proposed major legislation that business opposed . He did get into a brush-up with the steel industry when the steelmen broke their promise to keep prices down .
 He named Douglas Dillon, a leading Republican businessman, as his Secretary of the Treasury .
 Crime was a signature issue for Kennedy, and on taking office he promised a crackdown on organized crime . On dealing with unemployment, he never proposed New-Dealish programs but instead had a package that was acceptable to conservative Republicans .
 Kennedy asked Congress for federal aid for school construction and more money for federally assisted housing . Kennedy also asked Congress to provide more money to help build federal housing and school construction .
 Liberals hated McCarthy and that carried over to the entire Kennedy clan . Liberals intensely hated McCarthy . Kennedy clan was the target of McCarthy's ire .
 JFK was not close to McCarthy, but he refused to attack him publicly or vote for his Senate censure in 1954 . JFK refused to vote for McCarthy's censure when McCarthy's career was collapsing . JFK did not attack McCarthy publicly or voted for censure .
 O'Brien, Michael. John F Kennedy, 1917-1963 , a standard scholarly biography; stress on medical issues excerpt and text search . Kennedy's biography is published by Michael. Kennedy died in 1963 at the age of 50 .
 Herbert Parmet's biography is the most detailed scholarly biography excerpt and text search . Parmet, Herbert. Parmet. A Biography .
 A History--How Faith Shaped the Presidency from John F Kennedy to George W Bush. A History of Faith Shapes the Presidency . A History . of Faith .
 John F Kennedy and the Struggle for Black Equality excerpt and text search . Bugliosi, Vincent. Vincent. Buglio, Vincent . Vincent. John F. Kennedy . The Struggle for . Black Equality .
 Burner, David. Burner: Debunks dozens of conspiracy theories and concludes Oswald acted alone . Burner says Oswald was the only person to act alone .
 The Inauguration of John F Kennedy and the Speech That Changed America . An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy, 1917-1963 . A standard scholarly biography .
 Fursenko, Aleksandr and Timothy Naftali. Vietnam, Cuba, Laos and Vietnam . Vietnam. Vietnam. Berlin, Cuba. Vietnam . Cuba, Vietnam and Laos . Vietnam .
 Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, 1958–1964 excerpt and text search adds information from Russian sources . Giglio, James. Giglio: "Khrrushchev and Castro were the most powerful men in the world"
 The Presidency of John F Kennedy . standard scholarly overview of policies . Harper, Paul, and Joann P Krieg eds. The President of Kennedy . The Presidency .
 Hersh, Seymour. Seymour. The Promise Revisited . Seymour Hersh. Seymour . Hersh . Seymour. Hersh: The Promise . The Promise. Revisited. Seymour Seymour.
 The Dark Side of Camelot is highly negative assessment focused on scandals . Karnow, Stanley. Karnow: Camelot was a very dark side of the Camelot .
 David Pietrusza, David.60: LBJ vs. LBJ: How the Assassination of John F Kennedy Shattered American Liberalism . How the assassination of John. F Kennedy shattered American liberalism .
 The Epic Campaign that Forged Three Presidencies . Preble, Christopher A John F Kennedy and the Missile Gap . Reeves, Richard. Reeves, Christopher Preble and Richard. Preble .
 Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr. A Life of John F Kennedy detailed assessment of his character flaws by conservative historian excerpt and text search . The Kennedy character flaws include his "character flaws"
 Council of Economic Advisors, Economic Report of the President, complete series online . Sorensen, Theodore. The Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson Years, excellent analysis of major political issues .
 Leuchtenburg is a liberal and Hamby is a conservative; both are excellent historians . Hamby was a conservative and Leuchttenburg was a liberal . Both are excellent historian .