 The way John F Kennedy and his staff handled the crisis is still controversial . The way the way the crisis was handled by the U.S. President is still a controversial issue .
 President Kennedy was praised not only for having helped avoid such a war, but also for having provided one of the best models for the exercise of national leadership and decision-making in times of crisis .
 Kennedy's leadership in this foreign affairs crisis undeniably was successful . Nevertheless, Kennedy was successful in handling of the crisis in Vietnam .
 The Soviet Union installed missiles in Cuba to buttress Soviet political clout in world affairs at a time when the balance of power seemed to tip in favor of the U.S.
 The farthest that Soviet missiles could reach was Europe, but the United States could reach Soviet territory . U.S. missiles could also be fired at the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union redressed the imbalance by deciding to deploy medium-range missiles in proximity to U.S. territory . Thus, the Soviet Union decided to deploy .
 The U.S. had already based missiles in Turkey against the Soviet Union following this logic . The counterdeployment of missiles seemed justifiable to the Soviets .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev thought that although this counterdeployment would initially cause much commotion, Kennedy would eventually get used to the idea of having missiles situated near United States territory . The incident occurred in 1961 and 1962 .
 Khrushchev developed the idea of deploying missiles in Cuba in May 1962 . The idea was first conceived by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 The Soviet Union began clandestinely shipping missiles to Cuba and installing them . Subsequently, the Soviet Union secretly shipped missiles to the island .
 The first Soviet ship loaded with nuclear missiles and troops set sail for Cuba in July 1962 . In July 1962, the first ship, loaded with missiles, set sail to Cuba .
 Khrushchev and Castro wanted missiles to strengthen Cuba's posture of defense against the U.S. An agreement on military and industrial assistance was signed on 2 September 1962, .
 Castro had been wary of a second invasion by the United States . He had been looking for a way to defend Cuba from the U.S. forces . The Bay of Pigs incident had been the focus of Castro's thinking .
 The Soviet Union and Cuba had planned to keep the agreement secret until the nuclear missiles were installed . The agreement was meant to be kept secret until they were installed in Cuba .
 On 4 September 1962, the U.S. government began to receive intelligence information indicating that the Soviet Union was shipping missiles to Cuba and constructing missile sites . However, the United States government received intelligence that the Soviets were shipping missiles and building missile sites in Cuba .
 President Kennedy sent two public communications to Moscow on 4 and 13 September 1962 . Kennedy warned against any offensive weapons the Soviet Union might introduce .
 Kennedy had rebuffed all claims that the Soviets were bringing missiles into Cuba . Yet, prior to the discovery of the missiles, Kennedy had said such missiles did not exist .
 Moscow, in response to Kennedy, stated that the missiles being shipped to Cuba were defensive in nature and were no threat to the U.S. The missiles were sent to Cuba, Moscow said .
 The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency's discovery and confirmation of Soviet missile sites in Cuba on 15 October 1962, escalated the mounting tensions into a full-fledged crisis . The discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba escalated the tensions .
 U-2 surveillance photographs had spotted sites for SS-4 medium-range missiles a mere 90 miles from the U.S. mainland . The Soviet Union's public explanation was the reason for the discovery of the sites .
 The launch pads at the sites were capable of firing ballistic missiles up to a thousand miles . The deployment was an offensive one, which meant that the deployment was not only an offensive .
 This information was reported to the U.S. National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy and to President Kennedy . President Kennedy also reported the information to Bundy and Bundy .
 Kennedy had asserted that the Soviets would not place offensive weapons in Cuba . Kennedy had said that they would not be placing offensive weapons on Cuba .
 Khrushchev had assured Kennedy that he would do nothing to worsen the problem . Khruschev was aware of Kennedy's domestic political problems, Kennedy said . Kennedy was assured that Khruschchev would not worsen the situation .
 U.S. advisers spend the first week of the crisis canvassing possible courses of action and weighing the costs and benefits that those courses entailed .
 Soviet Union would attempt to reverse the strategic imbalance in its favor by installing cheaper, shorter-range missiles . The Soviet Union wanted to reverse its strategic imbalance by installing shorter, shorter, longer-range missile bases .
 Other courses of action were considered, such as a secret approach to Castro, an invasion, a surgical air strike, and a naval blockade . Other options were considered .
 Members of the committee included Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, CIA Director John McCone . Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Gen. Michael Hayden .
 Maxwell Taylor, Assistant Secretary of State for Latin America Edward Martin, Adviser on Russian Affairs Llewellyn Thompson, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, and occasionally Lyndon B Johnson, appear .
 ExComm was ordered to set aside all other tasks to promptly consider all possible courses of action . The ExComm has been ordered to consider all options .
 Initially, the president and most of his advisers supposedly preferred a clean, surgical air strike on Cuba . Initially, President Obama wanted a clean-surgical air strike . Initially the president wanted to strike Cuba .
 A U.S. naval blockade emerged as a way to impede Cuba without an air strike or invasion . Through a process of active debate and discussion, the blockade emerged .
 Republican members of Congress were critical of the Kennedy administration for not having taken a hard stance against Cuba prior to the crisis .
 Members of ExComm in favor of the air strike appealed to President Kennedy by emphasizing his responsibility as the leader of the free world . They said he had the obligation to destroy the missiles, whatever the cost . ExComm members of the ExComm said President Kennedy had to destroy missiles .
 At first President Kennedy favored an air strike as an option, but soon a coalition of the most influential members in the ExComm began to support a naval blockade . President Kennedy and a majority of the . ExComm members favored a . air strike, but a coalition began to . support a
 No one was certain that an air strike could be surgical or successful, he says . Air strike would not be justified under international law, whereas a blockade would be authorized by international institutions such as the OAS .
 The arguments for and against an air strike and a naval blockade created tensions that could be felt within the ExComm and by President Kennedy . President Kennedy was in the middle of the war in Vietnam .
 In the meantime, the Soviet Union denied all charges regarding the missile sites .
 Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet foreign minister, met with Kennedy on 18 October 1962, to assure him that Soviet military actions in Cuba were purely defensive . The Soviet government assured Kennedy that military action was purely defensive.
 Kennedy decided not to tell Gromyko that the U.S. already knew of the missile sites under construction in Cuba . Kennedy had decided, at this point, not to say what was being told .
 Kennedy spent 19 October 1962 preparing two speeches: one on an air strike and the other on a blockade . Kennedy spent that day preparing speeches on air strikes and a blockade of Cuba .
 ExComm chose to abandon the air strike option because of the moral and legal implications . An air strike would surely lead to a nuclear war between the two world powers, he says .
 On 20 October 1962, Kennedy decided on a naval blockade and scheduled an address to the United States public on 22 October 1962 . Kennedy scheduled the address for the public .
 He ordered the U.S. Air Command to be ready to carry out an air strike against Cuban bases any time after the morning of 22 October .
 On 22 October 1962, U.S. personnel were evacuated from Cuba's Guantanamo Naval Base . United States forces in Florida and around the world were put on a DEFCON-3 alert .
 President Kennedy delivered a seventeen-minute speech on national television, informing the public of the discovery of the nuclear missile sites and announcing a naval blockade to prevent the delivery of offensive weapons to Cuba .
 Kennedy urged the Soviet Union to dismantle its missile sites immediately and withdraw all missiles from Cuba . Kennedy also urged the Soviets to dismantle all missile sites in Cuba .
 Kennedy warned that if the quarantine should fail, further action would be justified . Kennedy: "If the quarantine fails, it will be justified"
 Cuba declared combat alarm and had moved antiaircraft batteries and artillery along the Havana waterfront . Shortly before Kennedy's speech, Cuba had declared a combat alarm . The Cuban government had declared the alarm .
 Kennedy called for other measures, such as convening an OAS meeting and calling an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council to gather support for the U.S. Kennedy also called for convening OAS meetings and convening U.N. Security Council meeting .
 Initially the Soviet Union rejected the U.S. demand to remove the missiles, saying that the demand violated Cuba's rights to self-determination . The Soviet Union initially rejected the United States' request to remove missiles .
 Fidel Castro emphasized Cuba's right to strengthen defenses with any weapon of its choice . Castro did not clarify whether nuclear missiles were present in Cuba .
 On 23 October 1962, President Kennedy officially signed Proclamation 3504, declaring the creation of a naval blockade . The blockade was the first of its kind .
 This hemisphere has seen many revolutions, including the one which gave my own nation its independence . The hemisphere has also seen revolutions, such as that which gave Britain independence .
 "My nation has lived happily with other countries which have had thorough-going and fundamental social transformations, like Mexico and Bolivia," says President Obama . "My country has had a thoroughgoing social transformation," he says .
 The whole point of the Alliance for Progress is to bring about an economic and social revolution in the Americas . The Alliance is bringing about a social and economic revolution, the president says .
 States of the Americas object to Castro regime not because it is revolutionary but because it's socialistic and dictatorial . Not even because Mr Castro perverted a noble revolution in the interests of a squalid totalitarianism, they say .
 It is because he has aided and abetted an invasion of this hemisphere, he says . This comes at the time when the hemisphere is making a new and unprecedented effort for economic progress and social reform .
 Cuba has given the Soviet Union a bridgehead and staging area in this hemisphere . Cuba has invited an extra-continental, antidemocratic and expansionist Power into the bosom of the American family .
 The United States has arrogated to itself, and has so stated, the right to attack the ships of other States on the high seas, which is nothing less than undisguised piracy . Insolently flouting the rules of international conduct and the principles of the Charter, the U
 The landing of additional U.S. troops has begun at the United States Guantanamo base in Cuban territory . The United States armed forces are being placed in a state of combat readiness . At the same time, the landing
 On 24 October 1962, the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff raised the national alert level to DEFCON-2 for the first time in U.S. history . The alert level was the highest in the history of the country .
 On the same day Soviet ships with missiles on board could be seen approaching the U.S.-drawn line, and tensions reached their peak . The ships stopped in the water at the last moment instead of crossing the line .
 The Soviet Union conveyed its decision, through United Nations Secretary-General U Thant, to order Soviet merchant ships not to violate the U.S. naval blockade . U.N. secretary-general U. Thant made the decision .
 Khrushchev also sent two letters to the White House offering to withdraw missiles from Cuba and pledging that the Soviet Union would not interfere in the internal affairs of Turkey if the United States were to end the naval blockade, pledge not to invade Cuba, and remove United States missiles from Turkey .
 Kennedy sent a letter to Khrushchev proposing that the Soviet Union immediately begin withdrawing its missiles and that the U.S. would end the naval blockade and pledge not to invade Cuba .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy delivered a private assurance to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobryinin that the U.S. would withdraw its missiles from Turkey . The United States would pull missiles out of Turkey .
 On 28 October 1962, Moscow Radio broadcast Khrushchev's acceptance of Kennedy's proposal . The proposal was broadcast by Moscow Radio on October 28 .
 The Soviet Union began dismantling its missile sites and withdrawing missiles without consulting the Cuban government . The decision was made without consultation with the government .
 Both the U.S. and Soviet governments were skating on thin ice during the Cold War . It was an effective strategy when both the United States and the Soviet Union were skating in thin ice .
 The blockade was advantageous in that it was a middle choice between inaction and aggression . Khrushchev had the burden of making the choice of whether or not force would be used .
 Removal of missiles was voluntary decision on Khrushchev's part and thus less humiliating . Removal of the missiles was a voluntary decision . Removal was voluntary and thus more humiliating .
 The Soviet Union also benefited from the crisis by being assured that the U.S. would withdraw its missiles from Turkey . The United States also assured the Soviet Union that the missiles would be removed .
 The greatest success of Kennedy's leadership in the crisis is that he didn't repeat his mistake of the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy's greatest success was that he did not repeat his mistakes, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He made a mistake in the Bay of Pigs invasion by accepting the advice of experts who were overconfident that the mission would succeed . He reshaped his foreign policy decision-making process .
 He called on a wide array of advisers to get unfiltered and multifaceted information rather than call on a narrow array of experts .
 Kennedy achieved success by allowing his staff members to freely discuss the options . Kennedy's staff members were able to freely talk freely about the options, he says .
 At the initial stage of the crisis, only two options—inaction or an air strike—appeared to exist . At the start of the conflict, only one option was to attack or go to the ground .
 In the process of debating and canvassing all the options, a blockade emerged as another option . The blockade is another option that could be used to block access to parts of the country .
 Discovering this new option was the key to successful foreign policy in resolving the crisis, says David Cameron . Discovering new option is key to success in resolving crisis, he says .
 Kennedy also effectively communicated with the American people on the crisis . Kennedy also used his ability to effectively communicate with the public on crisis .
 Before and after the crisis, he skillfully used televised press conferences to express his vision and to excite young people to believe that politics is interesting business and worth pursuing .