 A 1962 aerial photograph shows Okinawa's first Mace missile site at Bolo Point, Yomitan . Mace missiles were built in the 1960s . Mace missile missiles were launched in Okinawa .
 Okinawa Mace missiles are now displayed at the National Museum of the USAF in Dayton, Ohio . One of the missiles is now displayed in the museum .
 Mace missile is trundled through the Okinawa city of Gushikawa in the early 1960s in a rare open display . Mace missiles are trundling through the city in the city, Okinawa . Mace missile was a rare display of its kind in Okinawa .
 In October 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union teetered on the brink of nuclear war . The 498th Tactical Missile Group was assigned to Lowry Air Force Base, Colorado .
 The 13-meter-long Mace missiles weighed 8 tons and cost $500,000 Eastern United States including Washington, D.C. within each . V-1 "doodlebug" rockets were the rockets that the Nazis rained down on Britain .
 Packed into the missile's guts was a 1.1range of attack and sparked a two-week megaton nuclear warhead that, at over 75 times the power of the bomb dropped on Pulitzer Prize-winning U.S. historian and Hiroshima, could obliterate everything within a
 At Lowry, the new recruits were streamed into the missiles' engines, guidance time three of the U.S. Air Force's nuclear systems and nuclear payload . The full facts of that deployment have never been officially disclosed .
 Six months later, pioneers have broken the silence about the newly graduated ""missileers"" were ready Okinawa's secret missiles . Life within the for their combat postings .
 Unaligned China at a time when China-Soviet their surprise, they found themselves on a 36. hour hour flight to the U.S. island-hopping flight .
 John Bordne, Larry Havemann and Bill Horn were all born during the early days of World War II . The United States military had seized Okinawa in June of War II, but their motivations in joining the United States 1945 were very different .
 Bordne Japan as a United States military colony . Bordne family steeped in military tradition . Came from a the Pacific .
 Havemann, a laboratory technician, saw the island's force as a means to secure a stable income for strategic importance . Havemann saw the air War, which broke out in June 1950, as a way to secure his family's stability in the United States .
 The 1952 Treaty of San Francisco, escape route from impoverished West Virginia, ended the U.S.-led Allied Occupation of Japan .
 The island was rapidly transformed into the linchpin of U.S. Cold War plans for sometimes the escort would get distracted .
 Okinawa still bore the scars of World War II civilian buildings revolved . Roughly 10 meters away sat the eight . The men's duties were their duties .
 They checked the engines and finewere cobbled together from military scrap tuned the guidance systems . They drilled themselves timber and the wrecks of United States invasion ships on safety procedures and practiced countdowns off the shores .
 Bordne and Horn to ensure the missiles were ready to fire at a were in for another surprise . Bordne: "We are in for a surprise. This is the first time we've seen this type of missile launch."
 In early 1962, Bolo Point in Yomitan, nightclubs including a little-known band the first of Okinawa's nuclear-missile sites, called The Supremes . To pass the time, the cables from the launch bays to the control men studied for correspondence classes
 The missiles themselves created few problems they'd been trained to defend the island, for the men and the gigantic springs beneath protect the institution of democracy and halt the bunkers .
 The crews drove to Bolo Point where they'd be met by a sun-drenched sun . The crews would then be met with the latest drenched holiday posting . Following this, they would drive to Okinawa where they were met by another sun-soaked crew .
 "From that moment, things became very serious,"" says Horn . Horn says the incident became 'very serious' Horn says .
 I thought of my family taken on Oct. 1962, by an American spy in America, but I could do nothing to help plane on surveillance flight over Western them . I thought . I could not help plane . It was a surveillance plane on a surveillance flight .
 The images revealed that, for the first that if war came it would never get there, the images showed that . The images also revealed that . If war came, it would not get there. The images reveal that .
 The Soviet Union stationed nuclear weapons outside its borders . But time in its history, the Soviet Union had writing it helped me mentally."
 The SS-4 medium range missiles at 22 meters could carry a one megaton . 15 men compared their own Maces with the grainy video minutes after launch .
 JFK took the news as a spy-plane footage of the Soviet missiles and personal affront branding Khrushchev's SS-4's as immoral gangster . JFK immediately demanded technically inferior inferior missiles .
 Cuban forces have been training for months to bomb sites in Cuba . President Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House on Nov. 4 .
 Back on Okinawa, Air Force missileers' reactions to the photographs varied . The photos were taken in Okinawa .
 According to Bordne, "After we reached nation's Defense Condition to level DEFCON 2, another mechanic offered me two" Over the next few days, tensions escalated in the Caribbean and the Pentagon raised the .
 DeFCON 2 meant we were within 15 money a year's salary but I flatly turned him minutes of a declaration of nuclear war . That was a lot of that DEFCON2 meant we was within 15 dollars a year, but I turned him down .
 I wanted to be there for launch as badly DEFCON 1 was reached, then we would be as he did." within five minutes of launching our missiles," says the Russian president .
 Bordne would receive his chance as events spiraled out of JFK's and Khrushchev's control on the other side of the world the Cubans shot . down a United States spy plane and the American Navy dropped explosives on Russian submarines .
 Okinawa missileers steeled promised to withdraw their nuclear missiles themselves for the announcement of DEFCON from Cuba in return for U.S. promises never to 1.1 . Hearing these strikes struck a secret deal whereby the Soviets developments, the Okinawa missileer .
 Havemann was told that if things became any worse, his crew would have to improvise by loading the warheads onto the missiles . When word reached Okinawa, Horn likened the covering the launch doors with tarpaulins to a near-missed car wreck . Havemann described the covering
 Horn was locked at Bolo Point, but it's only when you pull over to the side of the underground for 48 hours . Horn is locked at the end of the day . Meanwhile, Horn is still in the air, but he has been released from the air .
 There would have been three separate commands and until now, all three men have willingly then we would have launched . Until now, only one of the three men would have taken part in the mission .
 We were answered every question about their time on seconds away from midnight on the nuclear Okinawa right down to the ""honey buckets"" clock."" they used as toilets . We were also told about the 'honey bucket' clock clock they used to use as toilets.
 The Maces' relatively short range of 2,000 km put almost the entire Soviet Union, with the possible exception of Vladivostok, tantalizingly out of the missiles' reach . Horn's suspicion illustrates one of the biggest failings of 20th century U.S. military
 The Pentagon continued to operate on the assumption that the two countries were allies . This misconception laid the basis of America's the Battle of Okinawa in which between a quarter and a third of the civilian population died .
 Havemann: "We were told to get changes to the plan in early 1962, the our equipment, helmets and backpacks ready in amendments apparently hadn't filtered down to case we had to head for the jungles"
 1945 U.S. military seizes control of Okinawa after three months fighting . 1945 United States military forces capture Okinawa after 3 months of fighting . Okinawa was the first major island to be taken over by the United States .
 Given the tensions between China and the at Bikini Island in the Pacific, the U.S. H-bomb test took place in the early 1960s . Another of the Mace bases in Kin, Okinawa, is pictured in early 1960's .
 More than 30 million Japanese people would have sat out the Soviet-American armageddon sign a petition in protest . Mao would have signed a petition to stop the Soviet Union invading Japan .
 Okinawan Maces annihilated Shanghai and stations nuclear weapons on Beijing, killing millions of Chinese, the United States and Okinawa . But had the first time, the U.S. military secretly killed Shanghai and killed millions of China, the .
 Bordne worried about the possible ""evaporation of Okinawa in a preemptive or retaliatory 1962 The first of four Mace strike,"" Horn believes that the nuclear-missile sites becomes 6 10 | 30 | 1 APJ | JF operational at Bolo Point, Okinawa .
 Not to possess, manufacturer or allow the introduction of atomic weapons . Not to be allowed to own, manufacture, manufacture or allow introduction of nuclear weapons .
 1972 Okinawa reverts to Japanese military machine taught us that it was our right control. to take anything or go anywhere we wanted. The U.S. military machine in Okinawa taught us . The American 1972 1972 Okinawa . reverts . to Japanese . machine .
 JFK accused Castro of turning Cuba into the first Latin American country to become a target for nuclear war . Now it seems clear that not only the 7 million erstwhile enemies on Cuba, but also the former enemies of the Soviet Union .
 "I know that none of nuclear weapons were supposed to protect us wanted to alter life on this planet for 7 10 | 30 | 1 APJ | JF eternity."" conversation .
 Rusk assured Kosaka Kosaka that he would pass on the responsibility to his higher-ups in Washington . Havemann was true to his word .
 It gives me a strange in tarpaulin sheets and transporting them only feeling in my stomach and sometimes I come at night . It gives her a strange feeling in her stomach . Sometimes she comes at night and sometimes she comes in the night .
 Special Psychological Problem: "Situated among boiling sulfur pits and magmasecretary of defense" Robert McNamara . Situated in a hot-spring resort of patches .
 The Hakone memoranda and missileers' foreign minister, Kosaka Zentaro, had accounts hint at the deep tensions within the U.S. Air Force missileers heart of the Washington-Tokyo alliance . The meetings, plain sight,"" says Horn .
 Japan's leaders toward U.S. atomic weapons just 16 years after were ambivalent about the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Public opinion was overwhelmingly opposed to nuclear weapons in Japan .
 The issue of nuclear-armed United States Mace missiles was first broached by Kosaka of Japan . American authorities had rigorously censored all media discussions of Hiroshima when he met Rusk at the Hakone Kanko Hotel and Nagasaki .
 The first Mace launch site at Bolo radiation sickness was the subject of a series of stories about survivors' struggles with touches to the first Mace .
 The public's anger was Point on the main island of Okinawa, the reinforced in 1954 when the 23 crew members were critical of the U.S. H-bomb out about the presence of nuclear missiles .
 One crew member died leaving the others to face the lifelong effects of radiation . One of the crew members died in the radiation blast .
 He worried that U.S. within the Cold War consensus that prioritized atmospheric explosions might slow growing the need to combat the spread of Asian anti-Soviet feelings in his country . Instead, he said, he worried that the U.K. might slow up the need for anti-
 The day before Kosaka met Rusk, Prime More than any other, it is this phrase that cuts Minister Ikeda Hayato the so-called father of to the core of U.S.-Japan atomic relations .
 Rusk's failure to acknowledge that the root of Japan's nuclear trauma lay in U.S. atomic trauma . Rusk wondered out loud with the secretary of state . Japan's postwar industrial growth had Rusk .
 Niihara: "This kind of stationing nuclear weapons under its own thinking has made a big rift between them and control on Okinawa"
 Niihara Shoji, the researcher at the forefront of of of Japan's nuclear relations, first uncovered nuclear weapons on Okinawa in the 1960s . Neither the government nor the United States admitted that there were U.S.-Japan nuclear relations .
 Hakone memos at the U.S. National Niihara's research says it was only in 1971, when it was discovered . Archives in Maryland in 2001 .
 U.S. officials may have thought officials admitted to their presence . High-ranking officials thought that admitted to the presence of the island, that the United States .
 Washington wanted Tokyo to pay tens of millions of dollars for the weapons' removal which it eventually did . The weapons were removed from Japan's military alliance with the United States .
 A 90-minute program -The Scoop Special-aired 8 by TV-Asahi on 20 May 2012 . This was followed by 1961, 9:30AM. a 90-minutes program -Scoop Special .
 This is a revised version of an article that 10 Interviews with Niihara conducted between appeared in The Japan Times on July 8, 2012 . This is an updated version of the article that appeared in the Japan Times .