 In October 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union stood at the brink of full-scale nuclear warfare . The world held its collective breath while the U.S. and the . Soviet Union were on the verge of nuclear warfare.
 Recent disclosures show that the prospect of annihilation was even closer than most realized . The prospect of annihilating the world is closer to extinction than most people realized .
 At issue was the discovery that the Soviets were installing nuclear weapons in Cuba, which had been subject to an ongoing campaign of harassment, including the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, Operation Mongoose's sabotage and subversion activities .
 U.S. officials were adamant that a Communist nuclear beachhead not be established in the Western hemisphere . Although the United States had nuclear missiles in foreign countries pointing at the Soviet Union, particularly in Turkey .
 President Kennedy convened the so-called ExComm meetings in tight secrecy . Participants debated what course of action to take . Kennedy convened meetings in secrecy .
 Most advised air strikes followed by an invasion of Cuba to take out the missiles . Most of the Cuban missiles were believed to have been hit by Soviet missiles .
 After much deliberation, Kennedy opted for a naval blockade of Cuba coupled with demands that the Soviets withdraw the missiles, and also private communications with Khrushchev to try to defuse tensions .
 The missiles in Turkey were becoming obsolete anyway with the advent of a nuclear-armed submarine fleet . He also made assurances that the missiles would be quietly removed at a later date .
 Many hawks in the U.S. were furious over Kennedy's failure to seize the event as a justification for invading Cuba and removing Castro . Kennedy was president of Cuba in 1961 .
 Air Force Chief Curtis LeMay told Kennedy that this was ""almost as bad as the appeasement at Munich,"" referring to the British government's failure to confront Hitler over his invasion of Poland .
 Soviet field commanders in Cuba had tactical nuclear weapons at their disposal . A Cuban invasion would almost certainly have triggered a nuclear response .
 1963 State Dept. memo for the President presents a plan for future policy in Cuba . It was written following the missile crisis and the abandonment of Operation Mongoose .
 Another memo, this one from the Defense Dept. in January 1963, outlines possible courses of action regarding Cuba in the aftermath of the Cuban missile crisis .
 CIA Director McCone forwarded deep concerns about U.S. Security being expressed in Congress due to the administration's failure to anticipate the placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba . CIA director McCone said the administration failed to anticipate placing nuclear missiles on Cuba .
 State Department volume covers arms control negotiations throughout the Kennedy presidency, including the missile crisis . Includes arms control talks between the Kennedy administration and the Soviet Union .
 The Federation of American Scientists has a collection of photos taken in 1962 upon discovery of the missiles in Cuba . The photos were taken in Cuba in 1962 .
 Carlos Lechuga, Theodore C Sorensen and Theodore C. Sorennsen wrote about the Cuban missile crisis . The author also wrote a book on the Cuban crisis .