 A CIP catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress .
 Assyrian Conquests 18: The empire created by the Assyrians stretches as far as Egypt . Assyrian conquerors conquered Egypt, conquered Egypt and conquered Egypt .
 It falls to the Babylonians, who in turn are conquered by Achaemenid Persia . The Babylonians are then conquered by the Persians .
 In the 5th century bce, the Persian empire makes two attempts to conquer Greece . The Greco-Persian Wars took place between 5th and 7th century .
 The Peloponnesian War 22 is a complex conflict between Athens and its allies and the Spartan-led PelopOnnesian League . Athens and allies fought in the war between the two sides of the war .
 The spectacular campaigns of Alexander the Great of Macedon were captured by Alexander's armies . Alexander was the most successful Macedonian ruler to conquer the world . Alexander died at the age of 130 years old in August .
 He subdues opposition in Greece, then carves out a vast empire stretching from Egypt to northern India . He was victorious in Egypt, Egypt and India, and ruled for centuries . He conquered Greece, conquered Egypt, ruled Egypt and ruled India .
 The wars between Alexander's generals to decide who will inherit his empire began in Alexander's reign . ISSUS 26 Alexander's Successors: Alexander's wars between his generals and his successors .
 Roman wars against the Samnites and the Greek king Pyrrhus establish Roman domination of Italy by the 3rd century bce . The rise of Rome was the first Roman invasion of Italy in the Roman empire .
 The titanic clashes between Rome and Carthage for control of the western Mediterranean . Carthage and Rome were the two most powerful cities in the world . The Roman city of Carthage was founded in the Roman Empire .
 The Gallic Wars 34 Julius Caesar's successful campaigns in Gaul and his two military expeditions to Britain . Caesar's success in Gaul led to his successful and profitable military campaigns in Britain .
 Rome is riven by power struggles between rival generals, notably the civil wars between Caesar and Pompey, then Octavian and Antony . The Roman capital was founded by the Roman Roman Empire in Rome .
 The Late Roman Empire is a look at the wars that led to the fall of the Roman empire in the West . The late Roman Empire was one of the most successful periods of Roman rule .
 Rival feudal states vie for domination of China . The Warring States period 48 . The warring States Period .
 Qin Shi Huangdi was the 3rd century bce victory in China . The victory goes to the ""First Emperor"" Qin Shi . Huangdi . Qin Shi was the first Emperor of Qin .
 The Three Kingdoms 50 Fragmentation of China in the 3rd century ce following the collapse of the Han dynasty . China's Three Kingdoms was the birthplace of the Three Kingdoms .
 Chandragupta founds a north Indian empire . The Mauryan Empire was ruled by the Mauryans and ruled for centuries .
 The Ascent of Islam was the first wave of conquests by the Arabs in the first century after the founding of Islam . The Arab conquests were the most significant conquests in the world .
 The Frankish Expansion Battles of Charles Martel, Pepin, and Charlemagne, and the rise of the Carolingian dynasty, are the Frankish expansion battles of the Frankans . The Caroling dynasty was formed from the Carolinian kingdom .
 The voyages and raids of the Scandinavian Vikings from the 8th century and the rise of the Normans as a major European power . The Viking Raids and the Norman Conquest are a look at the Viking raids and Norman Conquest .
 Turkish tribal warriors employed by Islamic rulers assert their independence . The Ghaznavids and the Seljuks were among those who fought for independence from Islamic rulers .
 The capture of Jerusalem in 1099 and the foundation of the crusader kingdoms . Capture of Jerusalem and the creation of the Crusades . First Crusades.
 Crusaders lost Jerusalem to Saladin . Crusaders were expelled from the Holy Land . Crusades were driven from Jerusalem by Saladin.
 The Minamoto and Taira clans were involved in a power struggle in 12th-century Japan . The Gempei Wars were the result of a war between the two clans .
 Genghis Khan ruled the Mongol Empire in the early years of his reign . He ruled a vast empire in which he ruled over the world's most populous regions .
 Settled city-dwellers have no answer to the fast-moving Mongol horsemen . The Mongolian horsemen are known to be the fastest-moving horsemen in history .
 Genghis Khan's grandson completes the conquest of China, founding the Yuan dynasty . The Wars of Kublai Khan 56 Genghi's grandson completed the conquest and founded the Yuan Dynasty .
 The struggles for control of Italy in the 12th and 13th centuries, from the wars of Frederick Barbarossa to the War of the Sicilian Vespers . Guelphs and Ghibellines battled for control in Italy from 12th to 13th century .
 Crusades in Europe were fought against heretics and against pagan peoples of the Baltic region . Crusades were fought in France, Bohemia and against the Albigensians and Hussites .
 Scotland managed 72 to assert its independence from England in the 14th century . Anglo-Scottish Wars Confused conflict .
 The Spanish Reconquista is a long series of wars in Spain and Portugal that finally drove out the Muslim rulers from the Iberian Peninsula in 1492 . The Spanish reconquista was a series of battles that drove out Muslim rulers .
 Sporadic outbreaks of war in the 14th and 15th centuries over English kings' claims to the French throne .
 The End of the Byzantine Empire is The terminal decline of the Byzantium, successor to the Roman empire . The end of the empire is shown in the book, The Last Emperor .
 Fighting between Britain and France extends to India and North America . France and India are the most powerful nations in the world . The two countries have been engaged in a bitter rivalry for decades .
 A focal point of the war is the siege of the Russian Black Sea port of Sevastopol . The Russian city is located in the Black Sea Sea .
 Early Confederate successes in the eastern theatre do not lead to a decisive victory . Early Confederate success in eastern theatre does not end up being a decisive win for the Union .
 China is also subject to vast popular uprisings such as the Taiping Rebellion . It is also a vast popular uprising against the government .
 First victory in modern times for a non-European country over a European power . First win for non-Europeans in modern history . First victory for non European countries over European powers .
 Bulgaria falls out with its allies over division of the territory taken from the Ottomans . Bulgaria is one of the most powerful countries in the world to have taken part in the process .
 Franco's Nationalists backed by Germany and Italy defeat Soviet-supported Republicans . Spanish Civil War was a rehearsal for World War II . Franco's Spanish Nationalists defeated the Republican Party .
 The Arab-lsraeli conflict has been the source of the Arab-Israeli conflict . Arab-Arab conflict began in 1948, 1967, 1973, and hostilities that have continued since then .
 Britain sends a large seaborne task force to recapture the islands from the Argentinians . The Falklands War was fought in the Falklands between Argentina and Britain .
 World War II: The Turning Tide . America's entry into the war, Allied success in North Africa, and Soviet victory at Stalingrad . The turning tide of the war will be followed by the Battle of the Atlantic War .
 Wars in Afghanistan include the Soviet invasion of the 1980s, through the Taliban era, to the ongoing conflict of today . Afghanistan is the longest-running conflict in the country .
 European powers line up for a long-awaited war . World War I was the start of World War One . European powers lined up for war .
 Germans halted at the Marne, but defeat Russia at Tannenberg . In France, Germans halt Russia at Marne but defeat them at TANNenberg . Germans win 1-0 at the French capital .
 The Chinese Civil War Victory of Mao's Communists over Jiang Jieshi's Nationalists is completed in 1949 . Mao's Communist Party won the war over the Chinese Nationalists .
 At the Somme and Verdun hundreds of thousands of lives were lost but offensives come to nothing . Hundreds of thousands lost their lives in the Battle of the Meududan . The Somme was one of the most famous off-the-line battles of the Great War
 U-boat campaign against British and U.S. merchant shipping puts Allied war effort in grave peril . Battle of the Atlantic neutralizes threat of German surface raiders, but U-boats continue to attack merchant shipping .
 Axis and Allied bombing campaigns against civilian populations as well as strategic targets . Axis bombing campaigns in World War II . Axis and Allies bombing campaigns . Allied bombing .
 United States and UN troops face Communist forces of North Korea and China . U.S. and UN forces in North Korea, China and North Korea .
 The progress of the war on other fronts, principally the Eastern Front, the Balkans, Gallipoli, the Middle East, and Italy . The Wider War . The progress . of the . war .
 After swiftly deposing Saddam Hussein, United States and UK have less success in countering insurgency . U.S. and UK failed to defeat insurgency in Iraq after Saddam Hussein's capture .
 Air and Sea Battles Germany's U-boat campaign and the battle of Jutland . The battle was the first of its kind in the history of the U.S. Navy .
 Hitler resists almost to the bitter of U.S. in war between North and South Vietnam . Hitler resisted almost to bitter of United States in war with North and . South Vietnam.
 United States fought Uprisings against European rule, notably in French back at Midway and Guadalcanal . United States was defeated in the Battle of the American Revolution .
 Atomic African states, such as Angola and Congo, bombed Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Congo and Angola were among the most bombed by Japanese bombs .
 The Allies' greater resources and the arrival of United States troops in the line determine the war's outcome . The arrival of U.S. troops will determine the outcome of the war .
 Bolsheviks defeat White Army and other antirevolutionary forces, but lose war with Poland . Bolsheviks defeated White Army, but lost war against Poland .
 After swift initial conquests and victory at Wuhan in 1938, the war becomes a stalemate . In 1938, China's first war with the U.S. began with swift victories in China, but ended in a draw-down .
 The earliest communities fought each other for control of food and land . The earliest community fought for control over land and food .
 The first recorded wars between organized armies were fought by the city-states of Sumer in the third millennium bce . Sumer was the first recorded war of organized armies against organized armies .
 Since then, states have habitually used war as a means of achieving their political ends when all peaceful options have been exhausted . Since then it has been used by states to achieve political ends . The U.S. has used war to achieve its political ends in the past .
 Scarcely a generation passes in any nation without some exposure to war . The war has been a constant source of conflict for generations of generations .
 Between 1500 bce and 1860 ce there were in the known world, on average, thirteen years of war to every one year of peace . The average war lasts 13 years to every 1 year of war .
 Most previous civilizations and empires have expired because of them . Virtually all frontiers between nations, races, and religions have been established by wars .
 The carnage of the 20th century has made conflict between major powers both undesirable and unthinkable . Two world wars and numerous instances of genocide have led to the advent of nuclear weapons have made conflict with the major powers unthinkable .
 It mobilizes our resources of love, compassion, courage, courage and self-sacrifice, but also our capacity for hate, xenophobia, brutality, and revenge, it's said . The U.S. has a long history of hatred and violence .
 This impeccably researched, well-written and beautifully illustrated volume covers more than 5,000 years of warfare . One of the strengths of the book is that it covers the Sumerians to the modern day, in such a multi-faceted way .
 It shows how armies were organized, and equipped; how battles, campaigns, and wars were won and lost; and how technology has gradually changed the face of battle from brutal hand-to-hand encounters with axes and swords to impersonal computer-guided weaponry today .
 It looks at war from the perspective of politicians, generals, ordinary soldiers, and civilians . It also looks at politics, generals and ordinary soldiers .
 It charts attempts to regulate war and make it less brutal . And it charts the attempts, not always successful, to regulate it . It charts attempts to make war less brutal and less violent .
 St. Thomas Aquinas thought that those who fought for the Allies in World War II would surely agree . St. Aquinas was a Catholic Catholic .
 Wars are sometimes a necessary evil—to topple dictators, curb aggression, and protect the weak . Wars are often necessary evil, to topple dictators and curb aggression .
 If a nation is unwilling to fight in what it believes is a just cause, it will not deter others from going to war . The U.S. will not be deterred from fighting in the Middle East, it says .
 The Assyrian emperor Ashurbanipal commemorated his victories in reliefs on the walls of his palace at Nineveh .
 Most of his army were spearmen and archers who fought on foot, while he and his elite warriors rode in chariots . Most of the king's army fought in foot, with some riding chariots, while most of his troops rode on chariots.
 Mesopotamia, Egypt, and China saw the development of complex urban civilizations . Their rulers protected their wealth by conquest and exacting tribute .
 Their example was followed by the later empires of the Persians, Greeks, and Romans . Their example of the empires were followed by those of the Greeks and Romans.
 Fighting between different groups of people was frequent in societies of hunter-gatherers and Stone Age farmers .
 If encounters seemed designed to minimize casualties, there is also evidence of genocidal warfare, aimed at the extermination of another people to take over its land and resources . If some encounters seemed . designed to . minimize casualties—two bands of villagers hurling missiles at one another from a distance
 As more complex societies developed, they provided the resources for largerscale armies to be deployed in sustained warfare . Warring states and empires provided resources for long-term warfare .
 Wherever early civilizations emerged, military success was the basis of imperial power . Mesopotamia, Egypt, China, northern India, or Central America, was key to success .
 Triumph in war built up the ruler's prestige as well as his wealth in plunder, land, and slaves . Triumph in battle built up his prestige and his wealth .
 Early wars were fought exclusively on foot, but in Eurasia and Africa in the 2nd millennium bce Greek hoplites were a formidable infantry force . In their disciplined phalanxes protected by a wall of shields, they were formidable infantry .
 Many elite warriors rode in chariots and in the following millennium soldiers also began to fight on horseback . They wore well-made bronze armor and helmets and their main weapon was the long, stabbing spear .
 Rulers such as the pharaohs of New Kingdom Egypt and the kings of Assyria maintained substantial standing armies and campaigned over long distances .
 They developed the science of siege warfare, with effective machines for battering down or storming city walls . They also developed the technology to batter down city walls and storm walls .
 From the 6th century Greek city-states such as Athens and Sparta fielded armies in which every citizen over a certain age was obliged to serve . Every citizen over the age of 10 was required to do so .
 The soldiers fought in dense spear-armed infantry formations known as phalanxes . The phalanx was formed in dense, spear-armred infantry formations .
 In the eastern Mediterranean naval warfare developed as the Phoenicians and Greeks built fleets of oared galleys, with rams for sinking their opponents .
 Alexander the Great conquered the Persian empire and extended Macedonian-Greek rule from Egypt to India . By combining an elite cavalry force with an infantry phalanx, he conquered the mighty Persian empire . The Macedonian the Great extended his rule of Egypt-to-India to India and extended
 The Roman army was transformed into a permanent force of professional soldiers during the 1st century bce . The subsequent rise of Rome as a major power was built on the Greek citizen-soldier concept .
 Romans extended their rule over a wide-ranging empire through military skill and ruthless willpower . The Romans were known for their ruthless military style and ruthless leadership .
 The superior flexibility of their legion infantry, armed with sword and javelin, rendered the phalanx obsolete . The superior mobility of the legion infantry led to the death of the phalalix .
 It was among nomadic societies of Central Asia that horses were first domesticated and where they were first ridden in battle . The Scythian horseman was the first horseman to be domesticated .
 The fall of empires proved, in the long run, difficult to sustain . The larger empires proved hard to sustain, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Varieties of catapult and crossbow — especially highly developed in China — gave imperial armies a technological edge, as did their engineering skills .
 Neither the Roman empire nor that of Han China could ever guarantee its frontiers against incursions by tribal warbands and nomadic peoples . The Roman empire and Han China were unable to guarantee their frontiers .
 The armies of both empires were often defeated by steppe horsemen in battle . However, they had considerable success in drawing these so-called ""barbarians"" into their service .
 The ancient empires also suffered from the tendency of their armies to fragment into independent sources of power, leading to destructive civil wars between rival generals or regional warlords .
 The rule of the warlike Assyrians extends over most of Mesopotamia and Lebanon . C.900 BCE was ruled by the Assyrians .
 The city of Rome begins to extend its control over the neighboring Latin-speaking tribes, becoming a local power center . C.C. C.500 BCE
 Pyrrhus failed to prevent Rome from taking control of the Greek cities of southern Italy . Pyrrhu failed to stop Rome taking over the cities of Greece from taking over .
 2300 BCE Sargon of Akkade builds an empire by conquest in Mesopotamia . 2300 BC S.C. C. is first known to have conquered Mesopotamians .
 The legions, a citizen militia, abandon the infantry phalanx for more flexible tactics . The legions are the citizens of the Roman Empire .
 Phoenicians and Greeks develop specialist oared warships—penteconters, biremes, and triremes— some armed with rams . C.700-500 BCE Phoenician and Greeks developed specialist oaring warships . Some of the world's most famous warships were
 Warfare is on a large scale, with the widespread use of crossbows and heavy siege weapons . The use of siege weapons and siege weapons is also widespread in Afghanistan .
 War chariots drawn by horses are introduced into the Middle East by the steppe pastoralists of Central Asia . C.C. C.1700 BCE war chariots were introduced to the region by steppe nom nom nomads in Central Asia.
 Porus's use of war elephants impresses the Macedonians, who later imitate it . The use of elephants was copied by the Greeks and later by the Macedones .
 Pharaohs such as Thutmosis III (reigned 1479-1425) and Ramesses II fight campaigns of conquest . Pharaohs like Ramesses I and Thutmoss III fought for control of Egypt .
 The fighting continues until 276, by which time the Ptolemys rule in Egypt, the Seleucids in Persia, and the Antigonids in Macedonia and Greece . The fighting continued until 276 .
 The war advances the transformation of the legions into a professional standing army . The legions are being trained to become a professional army .
 Antony and Cleopatra commit suicide after a naval defeat at Actium in 31 . Both commit suicide in Egypt, where they flee to Egypt .
 Julius Caesar campaigns in Gaul, invading Britain on two occasions and defeating the Gallic leader Vercingetorix at Alesia . Caesar invaded Britain twice and defeated Vercingetusorix .
 1 09 BCE Han China conquers northern Korea, destroying state of Wiman Joseon . Battle of Actium was a key victory in Octavian's rise to power . Under his rule Roman legions take on permanent structure .
 Cassius are defeated by Antony and Octavian at The armies of Han China Philippi . Cassius and Antony are defeated in Mark 43 CE Antony . Antony is the first Roman general to defeat Cassius .
 Rome is ruled by crush nationalist uprising a triumvirate in Vietnam led by the Trung sisters . Rome was ruled by Rome . in Rome, Rome was . ruled by a nationalist uprising . in Vietnam . led by a . Vietnamese sisters .
 He leads them on aggressive campaigns, including incursions into the Roman empire from 441 to 441 . He is known for his aggressive tactics .
 Rome is again plunged into civil war as legions support different candidates for the imperial throne . Rome was once ruled by the Roman Empire and ruled by Roman legions . Rome is now in a state of war with the Roman empire .
 The revolt was crushed with great severity . Most Jews in Judaea were killed, enslaved, or exiled .
 He stabilizes the empire, creating the Tetrarchy, with two emperors and two junior co-emperors . He was the first emperor of the Roman Empire .
 They also warred with hunter-gatherers and nomadic pastoralists who preyed upon their settled societies . They also fought with hunter and pastoralists .
 As societies became larger and more complex, warfare similarly increased in sophistication . WALLED TOWNS as societies become larger and larger, warfare increased sophistication .
 The earliest evidence of defensive fortifications was 1“ /''X The number of bodies ' found by archeologists at Jebel Sahaba in Egypt . /''''X /''I’ve found a total of 1,000 bodies found in the area .
 Walls were built at the ancient town of Jericho near the Jordan River, where walls were built around 8000 bce . Many had been killed by arrows and were probably victims of warfare conducted 13,500 years ago .
 In the first half of the third millennium bce the first cities emerged in Mesopotamia and Egypt, as well as in the Indus Valley and China .
 Ancient Egyptians typically tipped their arrows and spears with flint, copper, or bronze . Ancient Egyptians used flint or copper to tip their arrows or spears .
 Shapes varied from barbed, which was hard to extract from a wound, to leaf-shaped . Shapes were barbed which were hard-to extract from wounds .
 The valleys of the Euphrates and Tigris rivers in Mesopotamia and Egypt were the birthplaces of hierarchical societies . Powerful rulers used warfare to found empires at the expense of weaker neighbors .
 War brought in plunder and slaves, as well as glory to the victorious leader . War brought a rich reward in plunder, slaves, and glory for the victorious .
 The first recorded wars between organized armies were fought by the city-states of Sumer in southern Mesopotamia in around 3000-2500 bce .
 Even the largest of these states was only capable of fielding a small army for a short campaign . Even the larger states were only able to field a very small army .
 The bulk of their forces consisted of helmeted foot soldiers armed with spears . They were led by foot soldiers with spears and helmeted helmeted soldiers .
 There were also trundling carts drawn by asses that carried aristocratic warriors or archers to the battlefield .
 Conflicts between city-states were motivated by disputes over territory and scarce water supplies . Conflicts were likely to have been motivated by territory disputes over water supplies and territory .
 A number of inscriptions, including one on a monument known as the Stele of the Vultures, record wars fought between Lagash and its neighbor, Umma, around 2500 bce .
 Stele shows Lagash's ruler, Eannatum, advancing at the head of his troops . The stele shows a tight-packed infantry formation .
 According to the inscription, Eannatum was wounded by an arrow in the fighting but triumphed over Umma . According to an accompanying inscription, he was wounded in the battle . The inscription says he was injured in the fight, but survived .
 There is no mistaking Lagash's joy in the slaughter of war, for the stele depicts carrion birds feasting on the entrails of the enemy dead . Lagash is no doubt .
 Early Sumerian wars took a heavy toll, even on the lives of the defeated . Yet it is doubtful that these early Sumeranian wars took heavy toll .
 The deaths of foot soldiers are unrecorded and these may have been far more numerous . On the other hand, the deaths of soldiers may be unrecorded, and there may be more .
 The double-edged copper sword was crafted for an elite soldier during the New Kingdom era in Ancient Egypt . The Akkadian Empire was not until the campaigns of Sargon of Akkade around 2300 bce that the empire was established .
 Building became the impulse behind war-making . It was a thrusting weapon worn on a belt around the warrior's waist .
 Sargon seized power in Kish, a Mesopotamian city well to the north of Lagash, and then founded his own power base at Akkade . Sargon took over Lagash from Kish and established his power base in Akkad .
 From there he imposed his rule on the other Mesopotamian city-states as far south as the Persian Gulf . He continued his career of conquest northwest to the Mediterranean coast of Syria and eastern Anatolia, and east to Elam .
 Sargon maintained a standing army of 5,400 soldiers and won 34 battles during a reign that lasted over 40 years .
 Its last great leader, Naram-Sin, ruled from the Taurus Mountains in the north to the south of the Persian Gulf . Naram Sin ruled from north to south of Persian Gulf, ruled by the last great ruler .
 Around 1760 bce Hammurabi, ruler of Babylon, defeated the Elamites and then subjugated the cities of Mesopotamia to create an empire from Syria to the Persian Gulf . The empire was created by the Babylonian Empire of Babylon .
 Egypt was a center for the development of imperial warfare . Egypt was one of the world's most important centers for warfare development .
 In the Middle Kingdom era (about 2040 to 1785 bce) Egyptian pharaohs campaigned southward into Nubia and built strings of fortresses to define and defend their conquests .
 Their weaponry included bows, spears, maces, and throwing sticks made of wood, stone, copper, and bronze . They also used maces and maces .
 The Middle Kingdom ended in a troubled period when Egypt was dominated by the Asiatic Hyksos . After this the pharaohs of Sargon of Akkade Naram-Sin, ruler of the Akkadian empire, is represented as a god trampling mercilessly upon
 The civilizations of west Asia and the eastern Mediterranean almost certainly learned the use of war chariots from nomadic pastoralists who occasionally irrupted from the steppe into the lands of settled agriculture and cities .
 The composite bow is a more powerful alternative to the simple self-bow . It was probably from the same source that they adopted the composite bow .
 The 17 campaigns of Thutmosis III recorded by his royal scribes ranged from as far south as the fourth cataract of the Nile in Nubia to Syria and the Euphrates in the north .
 Ramesses II, in a long reign from 1279 to 1213 bce, battled with a rival power, the Hittites, for control of Palestine and Syria . The Hittite were expanding to the south from their native lands in Anatolia, Anatolia . Ramesses
 The common soldiers of the Egyptian New Kingdom were a mixture of volunteers and conscripts . Some of them were long-serving professional soldiers rewarded for their services with a grant of land .
 New recruits were trained in fighting technique, drill, and maneuvers at ""boot camps,"" where beatings were common . Beatings to instill discipline were common during training .
 The corps of bowmen was an elite, the use of the composite bow in particular requiring exceptional skill . The composite bow required exceptional skill to be used in the bow .
 The aristocracy and the pharaoh himself rode in chariots that were armed with a bow or mace . The pharaoh's chariots were armed only with a mace and a bow .
 The soldiers were supported by administrative staff that kept records, organized supplies of supplies . Unknown Akkadian ruler was likely to have been king of Nineveh .
 It was made at the time of Sargon of Akkade, and is often given that name. in some detail.
 Around 1460 bce Thutmosis III led a punitive expedition against the rebellious princedoms in Palestine . The expedition was part of a punitive campaign against rebellious Princedoms .
 Marching 12‘A miles a day across deserts and mountains, the Egyptians emerged in front of the city of Megiddo in force, catching their enemies unprepared . The Egyptians were marching across the desert and mountains in preparation for the invasion .
 The battle that followed later was a swift rout, the enemy bolting to seek safety behind the city walls . The Egyptians plundered their abandoned camp while the rampant Egyptians looted the abandoned camp . The battle was a quick rout, with Egyptians fleeing behind the walls .
 By the 12th century bce the Hittite Empire had collapsed and Egyptian power was on the wane . Egyptian power had been on wane at the end of the century .
 Egypt underwent political disintegration that destroyed its unity and left It prey to invaders . Egypt underwent . political disintegment that destroyed . its unity, left it prey to . invaders . Rise of ASSYRIA V Egypt .
 The country was conquered by the Kushites in the 8th century and the Assyrians in the 7th century . The Persians in the 6th century bce. The Kushites, the Assyrian and the Persians also conquered the country .
 In Mesopotamia the Babylonian empire founded by Hammurabi was overrun by the Hittites around 1530 bce . The Hittite empire was founded by the Hammabi empire in Mesopotami .
 It was overtaken by Assyria, a city-state on the northern Tigris . By the 13th century bce, Assyria had developed into a major power .
 Food and weaponry for their campaigns, and ensured wells were dug along lines of march . Well-dwelled wells dug along line of march.
 Wall paintings depicting battles of the period show medical personnel attending to the wounded . Wall paintings depict medical personnel treating the wounded during the battles .
 Egyptian warfare had religious sanction from the god Amun and was fought with the ruthlessness of a crusade . Egyptian warfare was fought in the midst of a religious war .
 Soldiers were known to collect body parts from slain enemies . Prisoners were sometimes impaled or burned alive . Soldiers were also known to have collected body parts .
 A more tightly contested battle was fought between Ramesses II and Hittite ruler Muwatalli at Kadesh around 1275 bce . The battle was in the course of a war for control of Lebanon and Syria . The Egyptians kept records of their campaigns .
 Both sides were able to deploy large numbers of chariots . Possibly 2,000 of the lighter two-man Egyptian vehicles were involved .
 The Hittites achieved surprise, attacking the Egyptians while their forces were divided . The Egyptians were attacked by the Hittite forces while they were divided.
 Hittite chariots were halted on the brink of victory by a bold counterattack led by the pharaoh himself . The maneuverability of the Egyptian chariots and the skill of their archers with the composite bow carried the day .
 This battle was followed by the first recorded peace treaty, a settlement that reflected the even balance between Hittite and Egyptian forces . This battle followed by a peace treaty between the two sides .
 The later history of the Egyptian New Kingdom is dominated by defensive wars . Egypt's New Kingdom was dominated by defence wars .
 The occasion for the first recorded "naval battle" in 1176 bce was fought in the mouth of the Nile Delta between raiders traveling by sea and Egyptian river vessels packed with soldiers .
 By then, the power of Egypt and its armies was falling into steep decline . Egypt's power was in decline .
 Built of wood and leather, the Egyptian war chariot was a lightweight vehicle that was designed for maximum speed and maneuverability . EGYPTian war chariots were built of wood, leather and wood and were made of lightweight materials .
 It was pulled by a team of two horses and could execute very tight turns . The car had widely spaced spoked wheels and the axle well to the rear, could execute tight turns.
 The two-man crew consisted of a driver and a warrior who shot arrows or threw javelins . The two men were able to shoot arrows or throw javelin arrows .
 The charioteers were supported by armed runners who sprinted alongside the vehicles on the battlefield . Armed runners were also involved in the battle in Afghanistan .
 The chariot warriors were wealthy aristocrats and would embellish their vehicles with precious metals . They would sometimes embellish the cars with precious metal .
 Even without this extra expense, chariots were costly to build and maintain . Chariots are costly to maintain, and chariots are expensive to maintain .
 The Egyptians seem to have used chariots in a looser harassing and skirmishing role in support of the infantry . While the Hittites used their heavier threeman chariots as a shock force in massed charges, the Egyptians used their chariots to harass and skirmish .
 Assyria was originally a relatively small Mesopotamian kingdom that ruled the area around the cities of Ashur and Nineveh on the Tigris River . The kingdom was originally ruled by Assyria and ruled by the Assyrian Empire .
 Assyrians created a powerful, brutal army as a tool for campaigns of conquest . The Assyrian empire sustained their empire through the exploitation of the conquered .
 Rulers such as Tiglath-Pileser III and Ashurbanipal were particularly fearsome military leaders with a clear-headed sense of the efficacy of terror .
 In its early history, Ashur was subject to conquest by more powerful Mesopotamian states . Ashur is now known as one of the largest cities in the world .
 The Assyrians had a tradition of war-making, carrying out expeditions . The number of campaigns carried out by King TiglathZ Pileser 1 against the Aramaeans is unknown .
 Their soldiers were part-timers, who could only campaign for short periods before returning to work in the fields . The soldiers were only part-time soldiers, who only returned to work after short periods .
 Assyrian military and diplomatic action became more expansive during the reign of Ashur-uballit I . Assyrian expansionistism began in the early years of the Assyrian Empire .
 Assyrians ruled Babylon after their king, Tikulti-ninurta I, sacked the city in 1235 bce . Once subsidiary to Babylon, the Assyrians became its rulers after the city was sacked .
 Assyrian power continued to wax and wane, subject to Babylonian resurgences and incursions by peoples from outside Mesopotamia .
 An early peak was reached under Tiglath-Pileser I , but by the end of his reign the Assyrians were again under pressure, this time from invading Aramaeans . It was not until the late 1 Oth century bce that the Assyrian drive for empire
 The Assyrian army was reorganized into a fighting machine of unprecedented efficiency and ruthlessness . The frontiers of the empire extended south and east to include southern Mesopotamia, Palestine, and part of eastern Anatolia .
 Tiglath-Pileser III preferred to form a standing army . Instead of levies raised for short-term service, he wanted to form an army of standing forces . The army was formed in the early years of his reign .
 The majority of the foot soldiers were a mix of Assyrians and foreigners . The majority were mercenaries employed for their specialist military skills, mercenaries and prisoners .
 The Scythians were among the steppe nomads who taught the Assyrians to ride horses into combat . They were equipped with bows, spears, shields, and armor by the Scythian warriors .
 Assyrians gave pride of place to missile weapons, including composite bows and slingshots . The Assyrian army was known for its missile weapons .
 Each archer was accompanied by a spearman who held a large wicker shield to defend the bowman against enemy missiles . The spearman would also protect him against close-quarters attack .
 At its greatest extent, the Assyrian empire included all of Mesopotamia, southwestern Anatolia, western Iran, and the entire eastern seaboard of the Mediterranean . Assyrian territory included Mesopotam, Anatolia and western Iran .
 The elite of the army were the native Assyrians who formed the corps of charioteers and, with the passage of time, the cavalry were the cavalry .
 Assyrians developed heavy four-horse chariots with a four-man crew, probably two elite warriors and their shield-bearers . The Assyrian chariots were likely to be used by elite warriors, the latter also driving the vehicle .
 Used en masse, these chariots constituted a formidable shock force on the battlefield . Used in masse, the chariots were used en masse to provide a shock force in battle .
 The advantages of cavalry were something the Assyrians probably learned from their contact with nomadic horsemen such as the Scythians . The Assyrians fought as skirmishers using the composite bow fired from horseback .
 Assyrian armies campaigned deep into southern Egypt, destroying the city of Thebes in 663 . Thebes was destroyed by Ashurbanipal Assyrian forces under the reigns of Thebans .
 Even during AshurbanipaTs reign the pressures on Assyria were growing . Assyria was ruled by the Assyrian state of Assyria .
 In the new imperial heartland of Cyrus the Great, Parsa lived tribes who become known to the world as the Persians .
 Cyrus built a grand columned palace around great gardens at Pasargadae . Cyrus built the palace in a columnated palace .
 Assyrian bowman draws his bow, protected by his shield-bearer . Assyrian archer draws bow protected by shield-protecting shield .
 Invented by steppe nomads, the composite bow was made from several pieces of wood . The composite bow is made from wood and made of several pieces .
 Whether in combat or its aftermatlr, they readily practiced massacre and despoliation . Whether in battle or aftermatror, the men were quick to practice massacre .
 The strains of maintaining a large empire with restive subject peoples were eventually to prove too much for Assyria . Assyria was ruled by the Assyrian Empire in 1883 .
 Roads were built to allow the easy movement of armies and a post system was created for rapid and effective military communications . Roads and post systems were built for rapid military communications.
 Conquest itself fed the military machine, giving control of strategic resources . Iron from Anatolia for weapons, horses for chariots, and cavalry from western Iran .
 Domination was maintained by the exercise of terror against those who dared to rebel, says Stalinist leader . "Domination" maintained by 'exercising terror on those who dare to rebel," he says .
 The origins of Ancient Greek civilization are in many ways obscure, but the Greeks themselves confidently traced their history back to the era of the Trojan War . Ancient Greek culture is in its prime form .
 Homer's epic poem, the Iliad, probably created in the 8th century bce, tells the story of the siege of the city of Troy . Homer's poem is the most famous epic poem in the world, and was probably written in 8th Century .
 Historians have surmised that although mythologized, the Iliad refers to a real event, probably a war between the Mycenaeans, who flourished in Greece from1500 to 1200 bce, and the Hittites .
 The site of Troy has been tentatively identified in the west of modern-day Turkey . It is tentatively believed to be located in modern-modern Turkey .
 The Mycenaeans fought with bronze weapons and chariots, in the manner of their time . The bronze weapons were used in the battle of the Mycenean .
 Homer describes a style of warfare in which single combat between elite warriors was common, but also the use of missile weapons and group combat with spear and shield . Homer describes the style in which he describes as a form of warfare where single combat was common .
 The disappearance of Mycenaean civilization in the 12th century bce was followed by a period of disruption, which is often referred to as the Greek Dark Ages .
 Out of obscurity Greek city-states such as Athens, Thebes, and Sparta began to re-emerge around the 8th century bce . Out of this obscurity Athens and Thebes began to emerge from obscurity .
 By the 6th century bce the Persians could claim with much justification to come from the heart of civilization, compared with Greeks who lived on its periphery .
 At Marathon, Thermopylae, and Salamis, Greek forces demonstrated their skill and courage against superior opposition . The battle was fought at the Battle of Salamis and Marathon .
 His predecessors had conquered Anatolia and had gained control of the Ionian Greeks who lived on the eastern side of the Aegean . His predecessor had taken control of Anatolia .
 At the start of the 5th century bce the Ionian cities rose in revolt against Persian rule . The revolt was a revolt against the Persian empire .
 Darius sent an army and a navy to crush the revolt . The ships were supplied by another of his subject peoples, the Phoenicians . Darius sent the army and navy .
 Ionians received some support from Athens and Eretria but they were still humbled . The Ionians were humbled by the support they received from the Greek state .
 Persians decided to extend their empire so it would cover the Aegean islands and mainland Greece . Carried forward by the momentum of this campaign, the Persians expanded their empire .
 Darius mounted a seaborne expedition to bring the city-states to heel . When Athens and Sparta rejected a demand for formal submission to Persian authority, Darius mounted an expedition .
 Athens and Sparta were exceptional societies . At this time Athens and Spartan cities were exceptional society . Athens was exceptional societies.
 Frieze from the palace of the Persian king Darius I at Susa depicts soldiers on parade . Over the previous century Athens had evolved its own democratic system of government .
 Sparta was a militarized society in which male citizens were raised as soldiers and lived in barracks from the age of 20 . Male citizens of Sparta were raised in a military-militant society .
 On land both Spartans and Athenians fought chiefly as armored infantry, or hoplites . On land, they fought mainly as armor-heavy hoplite infantry .
 The focus on the tight-knit phalanx of citizen-soldiers contrasts with the forces of the Persian empire . Although the Greeks did also employ auxiliaries equipped with bows and slingshots as skirmishers, the focus was on the Greeks .
 Bowmen were a vital element in their style of warfare, which gave missiles primacy over close combat, as were cavalry and chariots . Bowmen are a vital part of their style, which included missiles and close combat .
 Persian armies were large and well organized, operating under professional generals . Persian campaigns were well planned and well planned with due attention to logistics . Persian armies operated under professional general generals .
 The Athenians appealed to Sparta for support, but the Spartans claimed to be unable to dispatch soldiers immediately for religious reasons . The Spartans said they were unable to send soldiers immediately . The Spartan army was defeated by the Athenians .
 Athens sent its hoplites to challenge the Persians while they were still on the beach . Rather than wait for Sparta to finish its religious festival, Athens sent the hoplite to the battle . The Persians were defeated by Athens .
 The Greeks were outnumbered by at least two to one, but they formed up in phalanxes and attacked . They formed up phalanx and attacked, despite being outnumbered by only two .
 The onrush of the Athenian infantry turned the battle into a close-quarters melee . Persian archery and horses could play no effective part in the battle . The battle was fought by the Greek army against the Persian army .
 The shocked invaders extricated themselves with difficulty and at heavy cost in lives . They extricled themselves from the scene of the first attack in the Philippines .
 They also provided an opportunity for display with their fine horsehair crests .
 This time there was to be no hastily organized seaborne expedition, but a wellplanned, full-scale land invasion with naval support . This time, there was not a hastily organized . The invasion was a well-planned, well planned land invasion .
 The preparation of the invasion route by Xerxes's engineers was astonishingly thorough . Xerxes was the first Persian king to conquer the Persian kingdom .
 Two pontoon bridges were built across the narrow but treacherous straits of the Hellespont so that the massive army could march from Asia into Europe . The massive army was able to march through the narrow straits to Europe .
 The Persian fleet that was accompanying the army on its journey would not have to sail around a notoriously dangerous promontory . They also dug a canal cutting across an isthmus by Mount Athos in Macedonia, so the Persian fleet could not sail around the dangerous peninsula .
 Persian preparations took four years, giving Athens and Sparta plenty of time to look to their defenses . The Persian preparations were made four years before the invasion .
 Most of the city-states in northern Greece gave their allegiance to Persia, but the Peloponnese allied themselves with the Athenians and Spartans . The city-state cities of northern Greece were allied with the Spartans .
 Themistocles was a political leader in Athens . He persuaded his fellow citizens to devote the wealth from a newly discovered silver mine to building a large fleet .
 More than 1,000 war galleys, supply ships and supply ships follow offshore . It marched south down the coast toward Athens, with a fleet of more than a thousand war ships following .
 The Athenians persuaded their allies to advance north to meet the invaders . The invaders invaded the city of Athens, Greece, in the 4th century . The city was defeated by the Greek invasion .
 The Greek fleet fought an indecisive battle with the Persians off Cape Artemisium . 7,000 hoplites and skirmishers commanded by the Spartan ruler Leonidas took up a strong defensive position in a narrow pass at Thermopylae .
 Persians fought a three-day holding action for three days in a restricted battlefield . The restricted battlefield prevented the Persians exploiting their vast superiority in numbers .
 Eventually, the Persians found a path through the mountains that brought them down on the rear of the Greek position . The Persians eventually defeated the Greeks in the battle .
 Leonidas and the cream of his hoplites fought on heroically until they were annihilated . Leonidas was killed by his troops in the Battle of Leonidas .
 Athens was evacuated to the safety of the island of Salamis, where the Greek fleet was now stationed . The Persians continued their advance, and the city was evacuated .
 Persian army sacked and then occupied Athens . Greek army withdrew further to the south so that it could defend the Peloponnese . Persian army occupied Athens, as the Greek army retreated further south to defend the area .
 The Spartans were keen to pull back the fleet as well, but Themistocles was insistent that the triremes stand and fight .
 After defeating Xerxes's invasion force the Greeks launched a counter-offensive . The city-states were often as eager to fight one another as to attack the Persians .
 Athens formed the Delian League of city-states to prosecute the war . Athens led the offensive against Persia, which was led by Athens .
 The main goal was to free the Aegean islands and the Ionian Greek cities of Anatolia from Persian rule . Persian rule was the first Persian invasion of the region .
 The Egyptian expedition was a disaster, but in general Athens was successful in extending its own power and weakening Persian influence in Anatolia and the Aegean . The expedition was an attempt to extend Athens' power in the region .
 As a result of its participation in these wars of Greek against Greek, Persia regained control of the Ionian cities and part of the Aegean . As a consequence of this war, Persia was able to regain control of parts of Greece .
 Persian soldiers were killed in the battle of Marathon . They were killed by a wrongly anticipated Greek withdrawal . The battle was fought in Marathon .
 When battle was finally joined off Salamis, the reduced Persian fleet was routed . The rams of the rapidly maneuvering triremes with their skillful teams of oarsmen .
 Xerxes abandoned all hope of victory that year and withdrew northward to winter his quarters . Xerxes was defeated by the Persian forces in the Persian winter .
 Xerxes left for the east with part of his army, leaving his general, Mardonius, to continue the campaign the following year with the remainder . Xerxes was called away for other imperial duties .
 The Greek allies gathered all their manpower resources to field an army probably numbering 80,000, not greatly inferior to the force available to Mardonius . The army was probably not much inferior to that of the forces available .
 Persian fleet beached at Mycale . At the same time, a seaborne raid destroyed remnants of the Persian fleet . Persian fleet was destroyed .
 The original purpose of the league was to fight the invasion of the Persians, but it turned into an informal Athenian empire . The other league members provided troops and tribute for Athens to use as it wished .
 Cities that rebelled were ruthlessly crushed by Athenian military action . Cities rebelled by the ancient city of Argenea were brutally crushed by the Athenians .
 The wealth extracted from the league during this period underpinned the Golden Age of Athens under the leadership of Pericles . Pericles believed that the interests of the city lay in developing trade around the Mediterranean . The wealth of the league was extracted by Pericles, and the city's interests lay
 The Spartans, traditionally acknowledged as the leading military power in Greece, were affronted by the rise of Athens . They turned the Peloponnesian League of city-states into a counter-balance to Athenian power .
 T he fragmentation of the Greek world into independent city-states presented many opportunities for conflict . Disputes over allegiance, territorial boundaries, and affronts to honor were frequent .
 Megara revolted against its overlord, Corinth, a member of the Spartan-led Peloponnesian League . Athens backed Megara; Athens backed the city-state of Megara .
 Thebes aspired to leadership of the cities of Boetia . Athens denied it a role denied it by Athens . Spartans backed Theban aspirations .
 The Athenians backed the Corcyrians and sent a force of triremes to prevent the Corinthians from re-imposing their rule . The Corinthians were defeated by the Athenians .
 Pericles devised a strategy based upon the naval power of Athens and its Delian League allies . Pericles' strategy was based on a strategy that relied on the naval strength of Athens .
 Withdrawing within the walls of their city, the Athenians would survive sustained by supplies brought in by sea . They would use their fleet to raid the shipping and coasts of the Peloponnesian League states . The Athenians were able to survive by raiding the shipping of the
 Five times the Spartans rampaged through the territory around Athens, but without decisive effect . Five times in five years, the Spartans were unable to defeat the city .
 The Athenians made good use of their naval strength by establishing a base at the town of Pylos on the Peloponnesian coast . From which they raided Spartan territory and encouraged revolt among the helots .
 The two sides fought with essentially the same equipment and tactics . The warfare was characterized by the similarity between the opposing sides .
 The hoplites were supported by | large numbers of skirmishers, the peltasts, men of lower social status who used missile weapons—bows, slingshots, and javelins . They used weapons such as bows and slingshot, and missiles .
 Campaigns were short because part-time soldiers needed to return to their farms . Campaigns are short because of the fact that part-timers were returning to work .
 A fleet was far more expensive to maintain than an army, and made heavy demands on manpower . A fleet of ships was more expensive than a military, and required more manpower .
 A trireme required a crew of 200, most of them experienced oarsmen, although they were typically lower class citizens rather than hoplites . The crew of a trireme was typically lower-class citizens .
 The naval dominance of Athens depended on its superior financial resources and its skilled population of seafarers . The armored Greek hoplite infantry fought in a tight formation called a phalanx .
 Hoplites usually advanced close enough together for each man's right flank to be protected by the shield of the comrade to his left . Carrying shields and spears wielded overarm, the hoplites carried overarm .
 When phalanx met, opposing hoplites stabbed at one another from behind their shield wall or clashed shield to shield in a shoving match .
 Most casualties occurred when a phalanx broke up, exposing the hoplites to piecemeal slaughter .
 As on land, there were no adequate supply arrangements, triremes beaching regularly to forage or buy food from coastal towns . Triremes often beached regularly to buy food or forage from towns .
 At this point the Athenians extended the %• LV’:■ W',r;V ‘ war into a new theater, with disastrous consequences. At this time the Athenian extended the . Athenians .
 Syracusans resisted an Athenian siege for two years . Supported by a relatively small Spartan force under Gylippus, they fought back for 2 years . They were supported by a small force under Spartan forces .
 A failed breakout attempt ended in the destruction of the majority of their warships . The Athenians vainly tried to escape overland overland .
 The remnants of the expeditionary force surrendered, ending their lives as slaves laboring in Sicilian stone quarries . They were harassed by cavalry and light troops with bows and javelins .
 They made an alliance with Persia, which provided funding to build a fleet . They built a fleet that could compete for naval supremacy . Persia provided funding for the fleet .
 Athens was unable to make good the loss of experienced oarsmen and sailors at Syracuse . Athens was in trouble, riven by political disputes and unable to recover the loss .
 Under Lysander, the Spartan fleet seized the straits and, at the battle of Aegospotami, crushed an Athenian fleet sent to win them back . The battle took place in the Battle of Aegotami .
 The Spartan victory in the Peloponnesian War did not bring peace or unity to the Greek city-states . The Spartan defeat in the war was not the end result of the war .
 Ten years after the end of the Peloponnesian War, a new conflict broke out in Greece . The Peloponian War lasted 10 years and ended in a bloody conflict .
 The Corinthian War set Sparta against Corinth, Athens, Thebes, and Argos . Sparta was defeated in the war by Athens and Thebes .
 Persia re-imposed its rule on the Ionian cities of Anatolia . These allies were dependent upon the support of Persia, which re-imposing its rule .
 Thebes aspired to leadership in its own region, Boeotia, but this was resisted by Sparta . Sparta resisted Thebes' attempts to take over the region, but resisted by Thebes .
 Athens aligned itself with Sparta in reaction to the threat of Theban hegemony . Sparta allied with Athens to Sparta from Sparta . Athens was defeated by Sparta and Sparta during the First Persian War .
 As a young man he had lived in Thebes, he had witnessed a change in Greek warfare . Professional soldiers were replacing the part-time citizen hoplites, and cavalry and skirmishers were playing an increasingly important role .
 He assumed leadership of the Greek cities grouped in the League of Corinth . He began preparations for an invasion of the Persian empire in Greece .
 Alexander headed eastward across Anatolia in 333, Darius advanced to meet him with a large army . When this plan failed, Alexander was forced to retreat, Darius attacked him . Alexander died in 333 .
 Alexander's instinct was to seek out, engage, and destroy his enemy's army, whatever the odds . Alexander sought out, engaged, and destroyed his enemy, whatever odds .
 The two forces met late in the year at Issus near the Syrian-Turkish border . The two sides have been involved in fighting in Syria .
 The battle ended in a shock defeat for the Persian king, leaving the eastern Mediterranean open to Macedonian conquest . The Persian king was defeated by the Macedonian king in the battle .
 Alexander Alexander took great care to control his public image . The face of Alexander Alexander was the subject of much of the world's most famous photo shoot .
 Darius led the cavalry and elite infantry units in a thrust through the Persian center where Darius himself was positioned . The sculptor Lysippos was engaged to create an idealized image of the conqueror that was then imitated by all subsequent artists .
 Alexander turned his cavalry back to overwhelm the army abandoned by its leader . Alexander turned the cavalry back and turned the army around . The emperor fled and the army was overrun by Alexander .
 Darius's murder by his own satraps opened the way for Alexander to claim the succession to the Persian imperial throne . Alexander claimed the throne after the victory at Gaugamela .
 Three years of campaigning required to establish his control over the satrapies of Bactria and Sogdiana further to the east .
 Alexander of Macedon was a military leader endowed with skill, daring, and ambition . Just as he had adopted local symbols of power in Egypt, Alexander now took on some Conquests of Alexander .
 Only 32 years old when he died, he created an empire that stretched from Greece and Egypt to northern India . Only 32, he was only 32 when he was killed by his death .
 Napoleon's heroic campaigns of conquest influenced imitators as distant as Napoleon and Hitler . Napoleon's conquests inspired imitations of Napoleon and other world leaders . Napoleon was one of the world's greatest conquerors .
 It was heavily damaged by fire at that time, whether deliberately or accidentally, not certain . It is not known whether it was deliberately set alight or accidentally .
 Alexander practiced siege warfare, overcoming resistance of the coastal cities of Tyre and Gaza . Alexander punished their inhalritants with enslavement or massacre for the trouble they had caused .
 The Egyptian king founded Alexandria as a future capital for his Egyptian realm . He founded the city of Alexandria as an Egyptian capital .
 Persian army was mainly Asiatic, with Indian war elephants, Scythian horsemen, and chariots . Recruited mostly from Persia's central and eastern domains .
 Alexander devised a battleplan that would allow the shock effect of his Companion cavalry to negate the numerical advantage of the Persian host . Alexander devised the battleplan to counterbalance the strength of the host .
 Aged 18 he had led the Macedonian cavalry charge at the battle of Chaeronea . He was the first Macedonian to lead a cavalry charge in the battle .
 His initial moves as king were decisive and ruthless, killing his main rival for power in Macedonia . He also crushed a rebellion by the city of Thebes, crushing a rebellion .
 Alexander led the army across the Hellespont into Persian-ruled Asia Minor . Alexander's army was a hybrid force . Alexander led a hybrid army to invade Asia Minor in the first Persian invasion .
 Alexander led the cavalry in person into battle with Macedonians . The cavalry was led by Alexander himself . Alexander led his cavalry into battle in person .
 Thessaly provided light cavalry, Thrace javelin-throwers, and Crete archers . Crete also provided heavy cavalry, light cavalry and heavy archery .
 The first victory of his campaign was won at Granicus in western Anatolia, against a Persian satrap whose army contained a large contingent of Greek mercenaries .
 Alexander then proceeded to liberate the Greek cities of the region from Persian rule . Alexander freed some of the cities, even if they did not want liberation, which some did not . Alexander then freed the Greek city of the Persian cities of Greek cities .
 Darius III perceived only an irritating local disturbance on the western edge of his vast empire . The Persian king, Darius III, at first perceived only a local disturbance in Persepolis . Darius III at first thought it was only an irritation .
 Alexander launched a naval counter-offensive in the Aegean . He plotted to raise Athens and other Greek cities in revolt against Alexander . Alexander was killed by the Persian forces in the Persian Persian war of the year .
 His conquests left a long-term legacy of political and cultural changes . Nonetheless, his conquests have left long-lasting legacy .
 Later commentators viewed Alexander's conquests as a means of extending Greek civilization throughout the world . Alexander was the first Greek king to conquer the world, and his conquests were seen as extending his empire . Alexander is credited with extending Greek culture throughout world .
 He envisaged integrating his empire ethnically, by marrying his Macedonian officers to Persian wives and training young Persians to fight as hoplites . While at the same time imposing Greek culture and values, he also imposed Greek culture .
 Ptolemy took Egypt, Seleucus gained Syria and Iran, and Antigonus controlled Anatolia, but they did not control Syria or Iran .
 Roman mosaic representation of the battle of Issus was probably copied from a 4th-century bce wall painting . It is thought to have been copied from an earlier version of the painting .
 Alexander and Darius fought in a battle dominated by sarissa spears . Alexander and Alexander were victorious in the Battle of Alexander III . Darius and Alexander died in the battle . Alexander was killed by Darius in the death throes of Darius's death .
 Alexander's great desire was to wage war on behalf of all Greeks . Alexander fought for the right of all Greek people .
 Alexander's army conquered much of Asia, as well as parts of northern India, North Africa, and Europe . In only ten years after succeeding Philip II, his father, Alexander's armies conquered most of the world .
 He won a grueling battle against the rampaging chariots and war elephants of King Porus at the Hydaspes . But his soldiers were becoming exhausted and he turned back at the Beas River in the Punjab .
 Thousands died in Gedrosian desert in present-day Iran . Thousands died from dehydration and exhaustion in desert desert .
 Alexander was still full of plans for further expeditions and campaigns, but his health had suffered due to his battle wounds and from the strains of years of campaigning . Alexander's health had also suffered from the strain of campaigning and battle wounds .
 In 323, a month short of his 33rd birthday, he died in Babylon . Rumor said of poisoning, but it was probably of a fever . He died in 323, probably of fever .
 They abandoned his projects for integrating Persians and other ethnic groups into the upper ranks of the empire . They were ruled as Macedonians over conquered peoples .
 The influence of Hellenic culture and the Greek language was extended deep into Asia . For example, Indian sculptures of Buddha reflected Greek representations of Apollo . However, the influence of the Greek culture was extended to Asia .
 Alexander's victory was a triumph of the attacking spirit of the Macedonian cavalry and the inspirational leadership of Alexander, who always led from the front . Alexander was a warrior who always had the courage to lead his troops to victory .
 Battle took place near the modem Turkish border on the strategically crucial route to the Levant coast . T he battle took place in the region near the Turkish border .
 Alexander's forces were surprised to find Darius's army behind them in Persian territory . Alexander's army was surprised to discover Darius's forces had been behind them . Alexander and Darius were victorious in the battle .
 Persians take up a defensive position behind a steep-banked stream . The Persians took up a defence position behind the steep-banked stream in the first half .
 Alexander was not outflanked by a numerically superior enemy . Alexander's battle against the Russian army was a success story for Alexander . Alexander died at the hands of Alexander in the Battle of Alexander III .
 He stretched his line thinly across a 1.6-mile front from the Mediterranean shore on the east to the foothills of the mountains inland .
 When the Persians sent men into the mountains to bring them down in the Macedonians' rear, Alexander dispatched his Thracian skirmishers, skilled in the use of the javelin .
 Like Alexander's army, the Persian forces were ethnically diverse, including Greek mercenaries . Greek mercenaries formed a phalanx alongside Persian infantry in the center of the Persian army .
 Darius commanded from behind the front line, positioned in a chariot among imperial guard . Alexander, on horseback with spear and sword, led the Companion cavalry . While Alexander led the companion cavalry, Darius commanded behind the line .
 On the left of Alexander's line were his Thessalian horsemen, unarmored light cavalry . The left of the line were Alexander's Thessian horsemen . Alexander's son was killed in the battle .
 The infantry phalanx in the center consisted primarily of Macedonians armed with the long, two-handed pike known as the sarissa . The long-held pike was used by the Macedonian army .
 Because of the stretching of the line, the phalanx was far shallower than the usual 16 ranks . The phalanix was stretched to 16 ranks, rather than 16 .
 Alexander's armored Macedonian horsemen, the Companion cavalry, held pride of place on the right of the line, supported by Greek Macedonian triumph Alexander ordered a general advance . Alexander ordered the general advance, and the result was a success .
 The tight formation of the Macedonian infantry phalanx lost cohesion moving forward over rough ground and crossing the stream .
 Darius's infantry were able to penetrate gaps in the bristling barrier of spears and to cut and stab at men in the exposed core of the phalanx . Darius's son was killed in the Battle of the Danes .
 Alexander led a charge of the Companion cavalry that swept all before it . Thessalian horsemen performed well against the strongest concentration of Darius's cavalry . Alexander led the charge on the right .
 Alexander's horsemen bore down upon the rear of the enemy infantry . The enemy infantry were driven onto the anvil of the Macedonian phalanx . The battle was fought on the flank of Alexander's army .
 Much of the infantry was trapped and cut down where it stood, while large numbers of fleeing cavalry and skirmishers were pursued and massacred . Many of the fleeing cavalry was pursued and killed, including many of the survivors .
 Roxanneresented by his Macedonian followers because she was Bactrian—was pregnant . Roxanne was pregnant . She was also pregnant .
 Alexander's only candidate from Alexander's family was a feeble bastard half-brother, Arrhidaeus . Otherwise the only candidate for Alexander was the only . Alexander's wife was his wife .
 Alexander had adopted the Persian system of satrapies to rule his empire . Alexander adopted the satrapie system to rule the Persian empire . The Persian system was adopted by Alexander III of the Persian Empire .
 The Macedonian generals continued this system, authorizing various of their number to run different parts of the empire as satraps . The aging Antipater became viceroy of Macedonia, while the aging antipater was viceroys of Macedonia .
 Alexander the Great's successors, known in Greek as the Diadochi, fought over his inheritance . For 50 years after his death, Alexander's successors fought for control of his estate .
 Alexander Alexander's generals hardly needed this invitation to a power struggle after his death . Alexander's general was likely to be involved in a battle for control of the throne in Alexander's last year .
 Macedonian aristocrats were hard-fighting, hard-drinking men, and naturally quarrelsome . The Macedonian aristocracy was known for its quarrelsome tendencies .
 At first all assumed that one man would end up controlling the whole empire, and several believed their chances were good . At first, many believed that one of them would control the empire .
 Ptolemy gained appointment as satrap of Egypt and carried off the body of Alexander with him . He carried off Alexander's body with him and became a satrap .
 Embalmed and displayed, the corpse became a great tourist attraction and brought Ptolemy much prestige . The corpse was displayed in a public gallery in the town of Ptoilemy .
 Antigonus One-Eye, a bluff old warrior of limitless energy, also set about staking a claim to the succession . Based in Anatolia, he also staked a claim in the succession to the throne .
 The settlement sketched in Babylon on Alexander's death swiftly unraveled . Alexander died in Babylon in 2010 . Alexander's son, Alexander III, died in 2012 .
 Perdiccas, self-appointed regent of the empire, tried in vain to assert his authority over Ptolemy and Antigonus . He tried to assert himself as the ruler of the Empire .
 Apamea was one of many Hellenistic cities in Asia founded or enlarged by Seleucus I . Vast stables were built here to house his war elephants and cavalry horses . He invaded Egypt but his troops were destroyed .
 The coins bear the heads of Pompey I , Seleucus I , and Demetrius Poliorcetes, son of Antigonus . The three principal generals who fought to inherit the vast empire created by Alexander the Great . lost in the Nile Delta, many becoming
 Alexander's son and wife were killed by Cassander, son of the now deceased viceroy Antipater, who seized control of Macedonia . She was then herself killed, along with her son and her wife, after Cassander seized control .
 Macedonian generals competed with scant regard for the inhabitants of the lands they fought over . Macedonians fought over the land they were fighting for .
 The only subjects whose support they actively sought were those of the Greek cities, which were also the most troublesome source of rebellion against them . Antigonus looked the likely winner at first, but was soon defeated .
 He built a fleet in Phoenician shipyards to extend his dominance on land to the sea . He gained control of most of the empire in Asia and built his fleet of ships .
 With Ptolemy's aid the Rhodeans held out, despite Antigonus's deployment of the latest siege engines, including giant catapults and siege towers . The Rhodeans fought back, with the help of Ptoilemy's help from Ptolemius .
 Antigonids invaded Greece and threatened Macedonia . This setback did not prevent the Antigonid invading Greece and threatening Macedonia .
 The success of Antigonus and Demetrius drove the other Diodachi to combine . The success led to the formation of the two Diodchians . The two later merged into one of the world's most powerful factions .
 Antigonus and Demetrius could not ignore. They decided to defend Macedonia indirectly, by an offensive in Asia . The Macedonian state of Macedonia was invaded by the Roman Empire in the 4th century .
 Ptolemy snapped up Palestine and Syria, Cassander, Lysimachus, and Seleucus marched into Anatolia . Cassander took over Palestine, Syria and Syria .
 The Antigonids had some 80,000 men, the alliance that opposed them a slightly smaller army of 70,000 . Seleucus used his elephants to block Demetrius's horsemen from coming to the aid of the Antigonid infantry, which wilted .
 The 80-year-old Antigonus was killed by a javelin . Many of the foot soldiers decided it was a good moment to change sides, and many of them did .
 He emerged in control of most of the empire in Asia, which he shared with his son, Antiochus . His son Antiochus also ruled the empire .
 The successors might now reasonably have settled for kingship in their respective regions . But they might now be happy to settle for kingdomdom .
 Seleucus did not live to enjoy his victory, however, being assassinated the moment he set foot in Macedon to claim the throne . He was assassinated when he arrived in the Macedon .
 Ironically, it was the defeated Antigonids who ended up as rulers of Macedon . Ironically, they were later rulers of the Macedon dynasty .
 The successors' armies were primarily composed of Macedonians and Greeks . They were mercenaries who readily deserted any leader who seemed to be losing or lacked the money to pay them . Macedonian and Greek armies were mainly composed of mercenaries .
 Alexander's style of warfare continued with battles conducted by an infantry phalanx armed with long pikes, supported by cavalry and skirmishers with missile weapons .
 Their armies were much larger than any Alexander led, and they employed war elephants, introduced after contact with India . War elephants were introduced in India in the 17th century .
 The empire had been carved up into three main successor states, which remained mutually hostile . The empire was divided into three states, including Greece, Greece and Greece .
 The Ptolemies and Seleucids disputed control of Syria through the 3rd century bce . The Seeseses and Ptolemsies were the two main rivals in the region .
 Antigonid Philip V of Macedon came to the aid of Antiochus . Their combined power was enough to push Egypt back on the defensive .
 After the Carthaginian defeat in 201, Philip was the target for Roman vengeance . Philip was also the target of Roman vengeance after the defeat of Carthaginians .
 Roman legions cut apart the Macedonian phalanx at Cynoscephalae in 197 . The Roman legions fought off the Macedonians in the Phalanx in 197.
 Antigonid dynasty came to an end after a final defeat by Rome at Pydna in 168 . The Antigonids dynasty was defeated by Rome in 168 at the end of the dynasty .
 War elephants served as elevated command posts, platforms for soldiers armed with bows and javelins, and chargers to trample infantry underfoot . First used in south Asia, war elephants were used as command posts for soldiers .
 They were effective against cavalry, because horses disliked their smell . The smell was so strong that horses disliked the smell of them .
 The Seleucids used Indian elephants, while the Ptolemies deployed smaller, African forest elephants . The Selemies used smaller, smaller, forest elephants, to protect their elephants .
 The elephants were themselves easily panicked, running amok and causing havoc among their own troops . Although they inspired terror, elephants themselves themselves often panicked .
 Hellenic cities kept alive the heritage of Alexander across Asia . Hellenistic cities kept the legacy of Alexander alive in Asia .
 Finds at Ai Khanoum have revealed a fascinating blend of Greek and Persian art styles and religious beliefs . Ai Kahnoum is the largest collection of artworks in the world and is located in the Persian capital of Tehran .
 A comparable fusion of Eastern and Western cultures is found at the hilltop shrine of Nemrut Dag, built in the 1st century ce by the ruler of Commagene in present-day Turkey . A similar fusion of Western and Eastern cultures can be found in the shrine built in
 The growth of the city into a significant regional power took centuries . It took centuries for the city to become a regional power .
 The dominant people in Italy during the early years of Rome were the Etruscans . Rome was Rome's first city of Rome .
 Rome was merely one of many small Latin communities of central Italy whose warrior bands fought one another over land or livestock . Rome was only one of a number of small communities of Latin communities in central Italy .
 By the 5th century bce, under the influence of the Greeks, who had founded cities in southern Italy, the Romans had adopted a new style of warfare . The Romans were under attack from the Greeks and the Greeks .
 By the early 4th century they had established their independence of the Etruscans and their dominance over other Latin cities . The city was the birthplace of the first Roman city of Etruscus .
 With allies they would now have to face more formidable enemies, including the Greeks . The Greeks had flourishing colonies in southern Italy .
 The Roman Republic was not a likely contender for imperial power in the 4th century bce . The rise of Rome was the birth of the Roman Empire . The Roman republic was not likely to be a likely imperial power .
 Rome's relentless fighting spirit and refusal to accept defeat enabled Rome to subject Samnite tribes and Greek colonies to its rule . Rome's continued fighting spirit allowed Rome to impose its rule on Samnites, Greek and Samnitans .
 Rome was occupied and the Gauls left only after being paid a large sum in gold . The Gauls only left Rome after they were paid large sums in gold by the Romanians .
 Rome's city walls were modeled upon the Greek phalanx . This humiliation revealed the defects of the city walls and its battle tactics, says historian .
 4th century military reforms produced a more flexible and effective army that would win the Romans a far-flung empire . In the course of the 4th Century military reforms, the Roman army became more flexible .
 The Roman army was a militia of part-time soldiers, structured according to the social status and age of the citizens . Etruscan infantry wore bronze helmets and armor of bronze plates, and carried a round shield and a spear .
 PLUTARCH ON the BATTLE OF ASCULUM in his ""LIFE OF PYRRHUS"" in its ranks . In its ranks.
 The richest formed the cavalry, being able to afford a horse, and the poorest served as lightly armed skirmishers . Citizen-soldiers had to supply their own equipment . The richest served as the armored heavy infantry .
 That such an amateur arrangement should have proved an empire-winning force was partly due to weapons and tactics . That such a . amateur arrangement . should . prove an empire winning force, it was partly because of weapons and . tactics, it said .
 The soldiers accepted rigorous discipline and training, forming a tight-knit, highly committed force .
 Rome's legions were supported by auxiliaries recruited from Rome's subordinate Italian allies . The legions were also supported by auxiliary troops recruited by Rome's allies .
 Apennine mountains often fought in alliance with other peoples resisting Roman expansion, such as the Gauls and the Umbrians . Apennines were often allied with other people resisting Roman invasion .
 At the battle of the Caudine Forks in 321, a Roman army was ambushed in mountain terrain and forced to surrender . Samnite warriors rained missiles down upon the trapped legionaries from impregnable heights .
 The Romans accepted humiliating peace terms to secure the soldiers' release . They then refused to carry out the terms once the men were freed . The Romans refused to comply with the terms after the soldiers were released .
 Rome was sometimes beaten on the battlefield but it never accepted defeat . Rome was never beaten but it didn't accept defeat, and Rome never did . Rome never lost its battles but it refused to accept defeat .
 Samnites eventually took a place as allied auxiliaries of F the Roman legions . The Samnite eventually became allied allies of the legions .
 Pyrrhus was the king of Epirus in Greece . He was an experienced campaigner who often led from the front . Pyrus was the most successful king of the ancient Greek kingdom .
 He fought against the Carthaginians in Sicily as well as the Romans in Italy . In support of Greek colonies, he fought in support of the Greeks .
 The city appealed for help to one of the most experienced war leaders in the Greek world . The city of Athens has appealed to the head of the Greek government to help .
 The army with which he arrived in Italy was typical of the post-Alexander era in the eastern Mediterranean . The army he arrived at Italy in the early 1900s was typical for the Eastern Mediterranean .
 Most of his troops were spear-wielding infantry, but he also had light and heavy cavalry, several thousand archers, and a score of war elephants . Most of the troops were spears, but also had heavy and light cavalry, heavy cavalry and archers . He also had a
 Pyrrhus went home after a final drawn battle at Beneventum in 275, allowing Rome to complete its domination of southern Italy . After the battle, Pyrrus went home and Rome was ruled by Rome .
 Roman legions successfully stood up to one of the most advanced professional armies of the day . The Roman legions had successfully fought off the threat of an advanced professional army . The battle was the first of its kind in Rome .
 The expansion of Rome took on an unstoppable momentum in the century after victory in the war with Pyrrhus . After the victory, Rome expanded into a state of power in Rome .
 Roman control of southern Italy brought conflict with Carthaginians in Sicily . Roman control brought conflict between Rome and the Carthaginian in Sicily.
 The creation of such an extensive empire put pressure on the existing Roman military system . The Roman empire was one of the largest in Roman history .
 An army of part-time citizen-soldiers was ill-suited to lengthy overseas campaigns and providing garrisons in far-flung territories .
 The Phoenicians were seafarers and Carthage grew rich on maritime trade . Carthage was known for its maritime trade, and its seafaring prowess .
 By the 3rd century bce bce its naval power allowed it to dominate much of the western Mediterranean .
 CARTHAGINIAN GOLD COIN was the Creek city of Syracuse in Sicily . It had a strong presence in Sicily, where its main enemy was Syracuse .
 At the same time, Rome was extending its power southward through Italy . Rome was expanding its power in Italy .
 This intervention escalated into a full-scale war for possession of Sicily . This intervention was the first of its kind in Sicily and escalated into war for control .
 The Punic Wars was a life-or-death struggle between the Romans and Carthaginians . In the 3rd century bce the rivalry developed into a life or death struggle for the Romans .
 The Punic Wars ended in the total destruction of Carthage . Hannibal, the Carthaginian general, Hannibal, brought the city of Rome to the brink of disaster . Hannibal's attack on Rome ended in a disaster .
 Carthaginians were dependent upon supply of reinforcement by sea from North Africa . Carthaginian were dependent on supply from sea from the sea .
 What followed was, in terms of the numbers of ships and men committed, by far the largest naval war fought in the ancient world . The battle was the biggest naval battle fought in ancient history .
 The Romans could not match the skilled seamen in maneuver, but their legionary marines were a formidable boarding force . Carthaginian seamen were skilled in maneuvering .
 This disaster left them incapable of preventing a Roman landing in Africa . It left them unable to prevent an invasion of Africa . The Roman landing was a disaster for the Roman Empire .
 If the estimate of 286,000 men on board is correct, this puts it among the largest naval battles in history . Carthaginian massed elephants at Tunis almost annihilated after a devastating charge at Tunis .
 Second spread from the Iberian Peninsula to the mainland of Italy, and finally to the North African heartland of Carthage . The second spread to the I-Peninsula, Italy and North Africa .
 Relief of Roman war galleys shows vessels with double banks of oars packed with soldiers . Roman warships are shown in relief of Roman warships .
 Roman naval tactics centerd on the boarding of enemy ships . failed African expedition, fighting was once more concentrated in Sicily .
 Carthaginian forces under general Hamilcar Barca from 247 adopted a purely defensive strategy . They resisted sieges and engaged in raids and skirmishes . The Carthaginians are known for their defensive tactics .
 Carthage agreed to abandon Sicily and pay a large indemnity in return for peace . Carthage also agreed to pay an indemnity for the loss of Sicily in the peace deal .
 Carthaginians were in no state to resume war with Rome for a long time . The second war was the second war between Rome and Carthaginia .
 Hannibal, Hannibal, inherited the desire for revenge from his father, Hamilcar Barca . Hannibal's desire to revenge was passed down a generation, Hannibal inheriting it from his son, Hannibal . Hannibal was a Carthaginian general, inheriting the desire to get revenge . Hannibal
 Spain, where both Rome and Carthage were expanding their influence, provided the flashpoint for renewed war . Carthage was expanding its influence in Spain .
 The following year he led an army from Spain through southern Gaul and across the Alps into Italy . He led the Spanish army across southern Gaul, Italy and Spain .
 Hannibal's army included Spanish tribesmen, Libyan infantry, Numidian horsemen, and Gallic warriors recruited en route . Hannibal struck toward Rome with a few surviving war elephants . Hannibal's armies included Spanish, Libyan tribesmen and Libyan infantry .
 A Roman army sent to meet them was ambushed and destroyed at Lake Trasimene . The Roman army was destroyed by the ambush . The ambush took place in the area .
 Fabius, appointed ""dictator"" to lead the Roman war effort under desperate circumstances, adopted a strategy that won him the nickname 32 THE PUNIC WARS after ""Cunctator"" He avoided pitched battle with Hannibal's superior forces .
 The outmaneuvered Romans were encircled and systematically butchered by Romans . As many as 48,000 men may have been killed in the massacre .
 Rome refused to sue for peace and resumed Fabian delaying tactics . Despite these losses, Rome continued its long-delayed war .
 Hannibal maintained his army in southern Italy year after year, living off the land . Hannibal had no clear strategy for bringing the war to a successful conclusion . Hannibal lived in the southern Italy for more than a decade . Hannibal was forced to retreat to the south of Italy .
 Syracuse in 213 was the first city to rebel against Roman domination . Some cities took the opportunity to rebel, including Syracuse . Syracuse was one of the first cities to rebel in Rome .
 ROMAN HISTORIAN LIVY ON ROME's reaction to CANNAE heat ray . LIVy: "Rome's reaction to the defeat at Cannae heat ray was very different than expected .
 When Hasdrubal led another army from Spain over the Alps in 207, he was defeated and killed by the Romans at the battle of the Metaurus . He was defeated in the same battle in 207 .
 Hannibal finally returned to Carthage in 202, he had been in Italy for a total of 16 years . Hannibal had spent 16 years in Italy before returning to his home in Carthage . Hannibal was killed in the Battle of the Amalia in 17th century .
 Hannibal's return with his army stiffened the resolve of the Carthaginians . Peace negotiations with Hannibal broke down after he returned to the city . Hannibal was the first to sue for peace .
 Scipio's forces were strengthened by the defection of the Numidian cavalry from the Carthaginian side . The cavalry defected from the Numidian side of Scipia .
 Carthage admitted defeat and was stripped of its navy and its remaining colonial possessions around the western Mediterranean . Carthage was forced to admit defeat and its navy was stripped .
 Scipio had earned the cognomen ""Africanus"" by which he is known to history . Scopio earned the cognomen "Africanus" by which is the name he is most commonly known .
 Rome's thirst for vengeance would not be satisfied until its rival had been utterly destroyed . After the defeat at Zama, Carthage was stripped of its military power, but Rome would never be satisfied with Carthage's defeat .
 The siege went badly until the arrival of Scipio Aemilianus . The siege was finally brought to an end by Scipius Africanus . Scipios Africanus died in the siege .
 Carthaginians fought desperately, a final core of resisters burned themselves to death in a temple . The Carthaginian died in the temple of Carthaginia .
 The Romans razed the city, leaving not a single building standing . The Romans then razed it, leaving no one building standing.
 Gaius Marius recruited volunteers from among the poorest Roman citizens into the legions . To strengthen the Roman forces for that campaign and for a war against the Berber Jugurtha in North Africa, he recruited volunteers .
 Roman army evolved into a professional force of full-time career soldiers . Formerly a citizen militia, the Roman army mutated into a force of professional soldiers . The Roman army is now the largest force of its kind in history .
 Celtic decorated knife and sheath found in London's Thames river . Celts of Gaul and Britain had a love of elaborate decoration .
 Julius Caesar defeated the tribes of Gaul in a series of campaigns that combined military efficiency with subtle diplomacy and ruthless massacre . The Gallic Wars was fought between 58 and 51 bce Roman general, Julius Caesar .
 Caesar exploited divisions between enemies and extended the frontiers of empire by piecemeal conquests . Caesar exploited the divisions between his enemies to extend his empire . Caesar used the division of enemies to exploit his enemies and extend his frontiers .
 Julius Caesar, a member of the aristocracy with a modest military record, served as a Roman consul . Julius Caesar was a modestly successful military record . He was a Roman aristocrat .
 This one-year appointment is traditionally followed by a posting to govern a province . The appointment is usually followed by the appointment of a governor .
 Caesar was a close ally of Rome's most successful general, Pompey, and its richest citizen, Crassus . He was given control of Cisalpine Gaul, Transalpine Gaul and Illyricum for five years .
 Caesar was an opportunity for Caesar to win military glory and find plunder to pay off his debts . It was also a chance for him to win political glory, and to find plunder .
 Cisalpine Gaul and Illyricum were peaceful, but in Transalpine Gaul Caesar found ample scope for war-making . Caesar found plenty of room for warmaking in the region .
 Among the Celtic tribes known to the Romans as the Gauls, warfare was endemic . The Gauls were known as the Romans' Gauls .
 The tribes had traditionally been led by warrior chieftains who raided their neighbors and distributed the proceeds to reward their warband . The tribes were led by warriors who raided neighbors .
 Gallic tribes formed alliances against one another to defend against pressure from outsiders such as Germanic people from east of the Rhine .
 From the Gauls' point of view, the Roman presence fitted easily into this world . The Roman presence of Gauls in Gauls fit easily into the world, says historian .
 Rome, Rome, called for military support when they needed it and joined the Romans in attacks on rival tribes . Rome was Rome's main source of support for the tribes . The Romans were known for their support for Rome's military efforts .
 They didn't expect that they would be reduced to a permanently subservient status . But they did not expect that . They were disappointed that they had been reduced to . status .
 Caesar's first wars in Gaul after taking up command in 58 bce were fought in alliance with the Aedui, tribes that lived between the Saone and Loire rivers . Caesar took command of Gaul in 58bce .
 The first enemy was the Helvetii, a people from Switzerland who set out to migrate to western Gaul . The Helveii were the first enemy of Gaul .
 Caesar fought and defeated them, forcing those that survived to return to their homeland . Caesar fought to defeat them and forced them to return home . Caesar died of his injuries in the battle .
 Caesar's legions confronted him in the Vosges and drove him back across the Rhine . Then the Aedui asked for protection against the Germanic warrior, Ariovistus . Caesar’s legions confronted .
 Roman campaigns were followed by a series of bolder operations that extended the boundaries of Roman domination . These defensive campaigns were then followed by bolder campaigns that extended Roman domination.
 Caesar invaded the territory of the Belgic tribes to the northeast in 57 bce . On the pretext again of an attack on a Celtic ally, Caesar invaded . The invasion was the result of a failed attack on an ally .
 In 55 bce he bridged the Rhine for a foray into Germany and took two legions across the English Channel on board 80 transport ships . He also crossed the English Channel on 80 transport ships .
 Caesar's landing in Britain was repeated the following year on a larger scale, the Romans advancing as far north as the Thames River . Caesar left no permanent presence in Britain, although Caesar left a permanent presence . Caesar landed in Britain again in the year of his first landing .
 Caesar expanded the Roman-ruled area of Gaul from southern France to the Atlantic, Channel, and North Sea coasts . By 54 bce Caesar had expanded the area from France to parts of the Atlantic and Channel coasts .
 Caesar's successes greatly enhanced his reputation . Publicized by Caesar himself in his written accounts of his wars . Caesar's achievements were publicized by his own account .
 The campaigns had enabled him to improve the training and combat experience of his legions and weld them into an army loyal to himself, rather than to the Republic . The campaigns helped him improve his legions' combat experience .
 The Belgic tribes revolted and the Roman column was ambushed and annihilated . Roman soldiers were ambushed by the Belgics tribes and were annihilated by the tribes .
 Following winter Vercingetorix succeeded in uniting the tribes of western and central Gaul in an uprising against the Romans . The following winter he unites the Arverni, who had established himself as leader of the Arveri .
 Caesar went on the offensive, but Vercingetorix cleverly avoided pitched battle . Caesar was victorious in the battle, but not in a pitched battle.
 His plan was to let the Romans exhaust themselves in long sieges of fortified hill towns, while depriving them of supplies through scorched earth policy and harassing them with his cavalry .
 Caesar succeeded in taking the town of Avaricum after a 25-day siege . Almost the entire population was massacred when the town fell . Gergovia, near modern-day Clermont-Ferrand, was successfully defended .
 Roman troops returned to occupy Britain in 45 ce. attack while making camp near the Sambre River . Roman troops fought back in 45 c. attack . Roman forces returned to occupied Britain in 1945 .
 All legionaries by this period fought as heavy infantry, with skirmishers and cavalry provided by various auxiliaries . Gauls and Germans, along with other peoples from as far afield as Crete and North Africa .
 Romans were M superior to their Gallic enemies in discipline, logistics, and engineering skills . But in a face-to-face fight, a Gallic warrior was still a formidable opponent . The Romans were superior to the Gallic enemy in discipline and engineering .
 Widespread resentment against the Romans began to show itself in the winter . The prestige that accrued to Caesar through his campaigns in Gaul were a threat to his rival 1 general, Pompey, in Rome .
 Caesar was not allowed the celebration of a triumph and, in 50 bce, was ordered to disband his army . Caesar was also not allowed to celebrate a triumph .
 Caesar's triumph for his Gallic victories finally took place in Rome in 46 bce . Caesar was born in Rome and died in a Roman palace in Rome .
 Vercingetorix, held prisoner since Alesia, was first displayed to the Roman public, then executed by strangulation . At the triumph, he was shown to the public and then strangled .
 Gallic and Roman armies skirmished and shadowed one another in Alesia . The Roman and Gallic armies fought for control of the Gallic kingdom .
 Vercingetorix installed his army at the fortified hill town of Alesia, where he was besieged . The siege lasted for three years .
 Some I did not undertake the war... for private ends, but in the cause of national liberty . Some of the reasons I undertook the war were for private purposes, but for national liberty, he said .
 Cesar's cavalry broke through Roman lines and rode off to call on allied tribes to send reinforcements . 52 BCE of his cavalry called on the allied tribes .
 Once Caesar's legionaries had completed the fortifications around the town, it was under total blockade and the Gauls began to starve . The Gauls were starving .
 They attempted to send away their women and children but the Romans would not allow it . The Romans did not allow them to send them away . They would not be allowed to do so .
 Vercingetorix's warriors coordinated attempted breakouts with attacks on the Roman fortifications and lines by his allies outside . The Romans found themselves attacked from both sides . The Roman city was attacked by both sides of the war .
 There was a moment when the legionaries were almost overrun, but they held on . The relief force was eventually driven off by the relief force .
 Vercingetorix had no choice but to surrender . He rode into Caesar's camp and laid down his arms at his feet .
 During the siege of Alesia in 52 bce, Caesar set his legionaries to build two lines of fortifications around the hill town . One was to keep Vercingetorix's Gallic army in and the other to defend the Roman besiegers against an attack from the
 The fortifications consisted of a series of ditches and an earth and timber rampart, with a tower every 80 ft as well as 23 forts . Totaling 22 miles in length, the fortifications were 22 miles long and consisted of 22 miles .
 Military engineers have always been at the forefront of technology . This is the latest example in a series of books by the U.S. military .
 Their skills range from map-making and constructing fortifications, to bridging rivers, building strategic roads, and blowing up enemy installations . Their skills include creating strategic roads and building fortifications .
 Even when technological levels were low, engineers were put to use on fortifications, such as those of the first walled cities of the Middle East and the Maori village strongholds of New Zealand .
 The greater resources of larger states and empires increased the scope of their military engineering . The greater scope of the military engineering was the result of the greater resources .
 Since Roman times, their work has been both defensive and offensive . Their work is a mixture of building an army's defenses and breaking those of the enemy .
 Many military construction projects are all but indistinguishable from civilian projects . Military construction projects include strategic roads and railroads, water supply systems, barracks .
 U.S. Army engineers carried out the mapping of the American West in the 19th century . The United States Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for flood defenses today .
 The key permanent works of military engineers, however, have always been fortifications . Fortifications are the key to military engineers .
 These range from border defenses such as the Great Wall of China and Hadrian's Wall through medieval stone castles and walled cities . The many elaborate 16thto 18th-century star-shaped forts of the style associated with French engineer the Marquis de Vauban .
 Ballistas were highly accurate in the 1930s along France's border with Germany . At short range on a low trajectory, ballistas could be accurate at short range .
 Engineers have long been responsible for field fortifications, siege works, and camps set up in haste . As well as permanent structures, engineers are responsible for siege works and camps .
 A daily task for Roman engineers was to march ahead of the army to construct a camp, surrounded by a ditch and a rampart, for each night's rest . The daily task was to build a camp for the Roman army to sleep in each night .
 Field fortifications (traditionally a trench or palisade) have been defended by barbed wire, minefields, and anti-tank traps . In modern times, field fortifications have been further defended by minefields and minefields .
 In World War I, soldiers lived in elaborate defensive systems in which they lived for months on end . In WWI, these evolved into elaborate systems that allowed them to live for months .
 Engineers have also historically had a vital function in enabling troops to advance or retreat at speed . The U.S. troops are bridging a river in Italy .
 Allied armies made Bailey bridges from prefabricated steel segments that they carried with them on trucks and put up across rivers . Just as Roman engineers built bridges out of boats, the Allied armies built Bailey bridges .
 Roman sappers also tunneled under enemy walls so that they would partially collapse and open breaches for an assault . The walls were partially collapsed so they could be partially collapsed and open a breach .
 The siege role of combat engineers did not fundamentally change until the gunpowder age . The role of siege engineers was fundamentally different to the siege role .
 When cannon were first introduced into warfare, they were at first the responsibility of engineers, just as catapults had been . The cannon were introduced in warfare with devastating effect on stone-walled castles .
 The creation of independent artillery services took this burden off engineers . However, the creation of separate artillery services has taken the burden off .
 Tunneling under enemy walls long continued to be a vital part of siege warfare . A small bomb called a petard was usually placed at the end of the completed tunnel and exploded to make the breach .
 Like tunneling, digging complex trench systems to approach walls in preparation for an assault was an art brought to a high pitch by engineers of the 17th and 18th centuries .
 On the Western Front engineers tunneled under enemy lines to place mines, and labored to build miles of front line, support and communication trenches . These techniques were required afresh in the trenches of World War I .
 Vast explosions were set off under German lines at the Somme, and at Messines Ridge in 1917 . 10,000 German troops were killed by the almost simultaneous detonation of 19 huge mines .
 The British Royal Engineers can trace their origins to the Norman Conquest of 1066 . The Royal Engineers were founded in 1066 and are now called the Royal Engineers .
 Military engineers have always risked their own lives in the course of carrying out their often highly dangerous duties . Military engineers risk their lives to carry out their duties .
 They can suffer high casualty rates, either because they are operating in exposed positions in advance or to the rear of the main body of the army in mobile warfare, or because of their offensive role .
 Mining under walls is a dangerous activity, as is racing forward under enemy fire to place charges against the gates of a fortress, as British sappers did during the two-month siege of Delhi in 1857 in the Indian Mutiny . Mining is similar to racing in front of enemy fire
 Combat engineers are trained to carry out small-unit raids to lay charges against enemy targets . Modern combat engineers, in the same spirit, carry out attacks on enemy targets in small-scale raids .
 In World War II, sappers were tasked with blowing up German defensive positions overlooking the Normandy beaches on D-Day . They were also tasked with clearing obstacles planted by the enemy on the beaches .
 Today, in Iraq and Afghanistan, dealing with booby-traps and roadside bombs is an equally dangerous task . Roadside bombs are two common killers in modern guerilla wars .
 Combat engineers are also known as sappers, or pioneers . They have been identified with siege warfare in Europe and Asia .
 Just as construction engineers specialize in building fortifications, sappers are the men tasked with overcoming them . Just like construction engineers, they are tasked with building fortification .
 Roman engineers built siege engines such as stone and bolt-throwing ballistas to batter enemy defenses . Roman combat engineers built and operated siege engines like stoneand bolt-throwers .
 They also built huge, iron-tipped battering rams and mobile towers . They also constructed earth and timber ramps so that these machines could be used .
 The United States Army Corps of Engineers is created in 1802 . VAUBAN'S FORT DE LA PREE on the ILE DE RE .
 Between 49 and 30 bce a series of armed struggles determined who would rule the Roman world as it mutated from republic into empire . World War II SEABEES RECRUITMENT POSTER 37 Roman Civil War .
 Julius Caesar held meetings with Crassus and Pompey in northern Italy . The eventual victor was Octavian who would later be known as the Emperor Augustus .
 The Triumvirate, the political alliance the three had formed, was under strain, but an agreement was reached . The three were able to form a political alliance .
 Caesar confirmed in his command in Gaul for a further five years . Crassus was given control of the rich province of Syria, and Pompey remained in Rome while serving as absentee governor of Hispania . Pompey was confirmed in charge of Gaul for another five years, Crass
 Caesar was at first distracted by the crisis of Vercingetorix's uprising in Gaul . But once the Gauls had been pacified, the issue of his relationship with Pompey had to be resolved .
 Cleopatra was a Macedonian descendant of Alexander's general, Ptolemy . She was often represented as the Egyptian goddess Isis . She is also a descendant of the Macedonian general who died in childbirth .
 In the 1st century bce the Roman Republic was racked by violent social conflicts in Italy and by power struggles within the ruling elite . The Roman Republic is racked by social conflicts and power struggles in Italy .
 Publius Cornelius Sulla v and Gaius Marius led the suppression of a revolt by some of Rome's Italian allies, known as the Social War, from 91 to 88 bce . The generals led the revolt from 91-88 bce.
 The dispute was not resolved until 82 bce, when Sulla defeated a Marian army outside Rome . The dispute ended when Sullus defeated the Marian army .
 This uprising was brutally crushed by the wealthy Marcus Licinius Crassus, aided by Pompey . Pompey helped crush the uprising by crushing the uprising .
 Caesar was originally the junior partner in the Triumvirate . Caesar earned fame and wealth in his Gallic campaigns . He used wealth to ensure the loyalty of his legions .
 Pompey threw in his lot with the anti-Caesar faction in the Roman Senate, which demanded that Caesar leave his army in Gaul and return to Rome . Pompey fought in favor of the Senate's call for the return of Caesar to his troops to Rome from Gaul .
 On January 10, 49 bce, Caesar led his legionaries across the Rubicon, the river that marked the border between Cisalpine Gaul and Italy proper . The river was the border crossing of the Roman frontier .
 Within weeks he occupied a largely unresisting Italy and forced Pompey to flee across the Adriatic . Pompey was forced to flee from his position in Italy . Within weeks, he occupied Italy and made it into Italy .
 Caesar headed west, securing control of Hispania . Instead of pursuing him, he headed west to secure control of his country .
 Pompey had meanwhile established himself in Macedonia, where he assembled an impressive army . Pompey's army was drawn from Rome's eastern provinces . The defeat of Pompey was the greatest loss to the Roman Empire .
 In January 48 bce Caesar succeeded in transporting seven legions across the Adriatic, joined later by four more legions under his follower, Mark Antony .
 Pompey's numerically superior army was defeated by the Romans in Dyrrachium . Pompey was victorious in the battle of the same city in present-day Albania .
 Egyptian ruler, Ptolemy XII, had Pompey killed the moment he stepped ashore .
 Caesar enjoyed an affair with Ptolemy's sister, Cleopatra, and supported her claim to the Egyptian throne . Pompeian forces rallied to support her claim, and Pompeian troops rallied . Caesar was assassinated by the Roman Empire in the Battle of Pompey .
 Caesar had to fight battles at Thapsus in North Africa in 46 and Munda in Spain in 45 bce before his victory over Pompey's faction was complete . After some brisk campaigning in Asia, Caesar had some brisk campaigns in Asia .
 Shortly after, on March 15, 44, he was assassinated by a conspiracy of Roman senators . Marcus Junius Brutus and Gaius Cassius Longinus claimed to defend freedom and the Republic .
 Caesar skillfully disengaged and marched into Greece, shadowing by Pompey . The two sides engaged in a cagey contest, constructing fortifications and fighting some costly skirmishes . Caesar successfully disengaged, leaving Pompey shadowing him in the shadow .
 Outnumbered two to one, Caesar nevertheless accepted a challenge to give battle . Caesar was outnumbered 2 to 1, but accepted the challenge to go on .
 By aggressive use of his infantry cohorts he first drove off Pompey's large cavalry force and then smashed his infantry formation . Pompey was driven from Pompey with his cavalry force, but his infantry formed a formidable force .
 Pompey escaped the debacle and fled Caesar's death opened a new round of civil strife . Pompey's escape from the debacle led to the death of Caesar's son .
 Mark Antony was an experienced officer who had served under Caesar in Gaul as well as in the civil war . Caesar's chosen heir, Octavian, was an inexperienced boy of 19; and Lepidus, a cavalry commander .
 They did not control the eastern provinces from Greece to Syria, however, which remained in the hands of the Republican forces . The Republican forces did not take control of those provinces, however .
 Brutus and Cassius took up a strong defensive 38 position near Philippi in eastern Macedonia . They confronted an army of similar size—probably around 100,000 men—led by Antony and Octavian .
 Brutus's forces overran Octavian's camp in a surprise assault that found the young triumvir absent from his post . Brutus was the first Roman general to invade the camp in the first year of his reign .
 At the same time, Antony successfully attacked Cassius's fortified position . Antony's attack on Cassius' fortified position was successful .
 Cassius believed Brutus also defeated, Cassius fell upon his sword . Cassius thought Brutus had defeated him, but Brutus died .
 Brutus felt obliged to give battle again after a three-week stand-off . The Republicans were not defeated, but their morale was wavering . Brutus was not defeated but the morale of Brutus' troops was waiving .
 Octavian and Antony fought in a vicious close-quarters fight that ended in victory . Antony won the battle .
 Brutus left with inadequate forces to continue the war, Brutus too committed suicide . Brutus committed suicide after failing to find a way to continue his war .
 After this victory Octavian returned to govern in Rome while Antony campaigned in the east . The victory was the first victory for the Roman Roman Empire .
 Sextus Pompeius had seized Sicily, deploying a war fleet to hold off Octavian's legions . He was a son of Pompey the Great, who had seized the island . Sextius Pompeius was a Roman general who died in the Battle of Sicily .
 Octavian tasked his general, Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, with building and equipping a fleet to take on Sextus Pompeius . Marcus Agippa was a general tasked with building a fleet for the Roman Roman Empire .
 Agrippa destroyed most of the rebel warships at Naulochus in 36 bce . Octavian was able to retake Sicily with Agrippe .
 Victor in the civil war, he discreetly assumed the powers of an emperor . He ended the Republican system of government in Rome . Victor in Rome was the first emperor to become emperor .
 Starved of reinforcements by Octavian, he fell back on the support of Cleopatra of Egypt, establishing himself with her in Alexandria . Starred in Egypt, he established himself in Alexandria with her .
 Lepidus had been ousted by Octavian, who then mounted a propaganda campaign against Antony and his allegedly scandalous behavior in the east . Antony had been accused of being scandalous in the East .
 In 32 bce the Roman Senate was persuaded to declare war on Antony and Cleopatra . The Roman Senate declared war on the Roman Roman Empire in 32bce .
 Antony planned an amphibious invasion of Italy, exploiting the strength of the Egyptian fleet, but only made it as far as Actium on Greece's Ionian coast . Antony made it to Actium in Actium, Greece, but was only able to reach Actium .
 The fleet that Agrippa had created was even stronger and allowed Octavian both to ferry an army across to Greece and to subject Antony and Cleopatra to a naval blockade . The fleet was used to ferry the army across and block the blockade .
 Octavian installed himself in a fortified position and refused to give battle . He waited while his opponents' forces withered through malnutrition and disease .
 In desperation Antony led a naval breakout in September 31 bce, but most of his fleet was trapped and destroyed . Most of the fleet was destroyed in the break-up . Antony's naval breakout was in desperation .
 Antony and Cleopatra escaped back to Egypt, where they were pursued by Octavian . Antony was killed in the Battle of the Nile by the Roman Empire .
 Antony took his own life after being deserted by large part of his army as the Romans approached Alexandria . Cleopatra followed by Antony, who was later assassinated by the Romans . Antony was the first woman to take her own life, followed by his wife, Cleop
 Octavian was able to establish his personal rule over the Roman empire, while maintaining a facade of Republican institutions . The Roman empire was ruled by the Roman Roman Empire .
 The defeat and death of Cleopatra in 30 bce brought Ptolemaic rule in Egypt to an end . Ptolemic ruled Egypt for more than 30 years .
 Octavian ordered her heir, Julius Caesar's son Caesarion, to be strangled, and Egypt became a province of the Roman empire . Caesarion was Caesarion's son, and Caesarion died in Rome .
 In 27 bce the Roman Senate authorized Octavian's extensive powers over the empire . He was given the title Augustus, by which he is generally known . The Roman Senate gave him the title of Augustus .
 Julius Caesar's family name Julius Caesar evolved into an imperial title . Julius Caesar stabilized this CAESAR . He stabilized this CESAR.
 It survived into modern times as the German Kaiser and the Russian Tsar force . It established fixed terms of service and turned into permanent formations .
 The lack of a formal system of succession, whether hereditary or elective, left plenty of scope for future power struggles . The country's lack of formal succession system left plentiful scope for power struggles.
 Details of his life and the lives of his men have been revealed through hundreds of letters and notes . The letters were written in ink on postcard-size wooden tablets that have survived to the present day .
 Built before the construction of Hadrian's Wall, it was a distant outpost of the Roman world . It was a base for troops policing the border between the province of Britannia and unconquered Caledonia .
 From 97 ce onwards the fort's garrison consisted of two cohorts of Batavian troops, plus a wing of cavalry from Spain . The fort was garrisoned by Batavians and Spanish cavalry from 97 ce .
 The Batavians were auxiliaries—troops drawn from the subject peoples of the empire . Batavian troops were part of the British Empire's expansion of Russia .
 They were a tough Germanic people whose homeland was in the area of the present-day Netherlands . Their homeland was the area in the Netherlands . The Dutch people were tough and tough .
 Their fighting qualities were much admired by the Romans . They had served in the invasion and conquest of Britain from 43 ce. to 43 ce . The Romans were impressed by their fighting qualities .
 It was standard practice for provinces to be garrisoned by men from elsewhere in the empire .
 The likelihood of revolts was much greater when soldiers were stationed among their fellow countrymen in their province of origin . Soldiers were stationed in their provinces of origin.
 Flavius Flavius was Batavian, but unlike them he was a Roman citizen . Flavius is Flavius' first Roman citizen, Flavius lived in Rome and died in August .
 He enjoyed equestrian status, an aristocratic rank that was only open to men who could satisfy a strict property qualification . He must have been wealthy, for he enjoyed aristocratic status .
 His wife, Sulpicia Lepidina, lived with him in his quarters at the fort .
 One of the letters is an invitation for Sulpicia to come to a birthday party thrown by the wife of Aelius Brocchus, an officer in the nearby fort of Briga .
 Flavius Flavius's fort was largely self-sufficient under Flavius . Flavius was the first Roman commander of the Roman Empire .
 It had its own shield-maker, brewed its own beer, and made and repaired its own shoes . It also made its own shields-makers, brewed and repaired itself beer .
 Accommodation for the commander was comfortable, but the soldiers slept in dormitories, probably under woollen blankets on mattresses on the floor .
 Letter found by archeologists excavating an ancient rubbish heap at Vindolanda fort . It is addressed to Flavius Cerialis by fellow officers Niger and Brocchus . Although the letter was found in a rubbish heap, it is thought to have been written by Flavius
 Clothing was issued from central stores, troops received extra items sent in parcels from their families at home .
 Food was in plentiful supply with grain and bacon prominent among items sourced locally, but luxuries were imported to liven up the diet . Luxury luxuries included imported luxuries such as wine and ice cream .
 Flavius expected to have olives, spices, and wine on his table, and even ordinary soldiers managed to procure pepper and oysters .
 The messages on the wooden tablets include requests for leave, presumably very desirable from what must have been at times a grim posting . The messages were posted in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Officers were naturally interested in personal advancement, hoping for a recommendation from one of their superiors that might bring promotion . Flavius was angling for a meeting with the provincial governor in the province .
 Flavius Cerialis was later recorded as commander of a cavalry unit in Pannonia, another distant posting . His fate is unknown, although his colleague, Brocchus, was later posted in the Eastern European province of Pannoniania .
 Frieze is from Tropaeum Traiani in Romania on the empire's Eastern European frontier . Roman legionaries were legionaries .
 Roman legionaries and auxiliaries stationed on the northernmost frontier of the empire probably faced slightly milder winters than those of modern times . Hadrian's Wall is the northernest frontier of Roman empire .
 The tablets are thin pieces of wood, with messages written on them in ink . From a letter to a letter, they were written under the name of C.100 CE .
 About the size of a modern-day postcard, they are usually less than a half-inch thick . They are usually folded to protect the contents .
 Apart from suppressing scattered internal rebellions, the legions garrisoned the empire fought wars only at or beyond its frontiers . The legions fought wars at or not beyond their frontiers.
 Romans tempted to cross the long land frontiers of their provinces in Western and Southern Europe . The Romans were tempted to press further into Asia from their . provinces in the eastern Mediterranean .
 They also traversed the English Channel to occupy much of Great Britain . They also occupied much of the Channel .
 Although the Roman legions were a formidable fighting force, the campaigns that they were engaged in were far from supplying the empire with an unbroken string of successes . The Roman legions fought for the Roman empire from the beginning of the Roman Empire .
 Romans were often vulnerable when faced with enemies employing very different tactics on what was to the Romans alien terrain . The Romans often struggled to adapt to the terrain of their new world .
 PUBLIUS FLAVIUS VEGETIUS, from his book ""DE RE MILITARIAN"", 4TH CENTURY CE Hanover .
 Arminius was commanding a body of auxiliaries fighting for the Romans, while secretly forming a tribal alliance to oppose them . He secretly formed an alliance with the tribesmen .
 At the Teutoburg Forest in 9 ce, three legions under Publius Quinctilius Varus were ambushed by Arminius's forces and massacred . At the same time, Publus Quinctilus Varu was ambushed and killed .
 The Romans had their revenge through punitive expeditions led by Germanicus between 14 and 16 ce . The tribes across the Rhine were never subdued as the Gauls had been .
 The conquest of Britain began under Emperor Claudius in 43 ce. Romans in Britain were conquered by the Romans in 43 c. They conquered the country under the Roman Empire .
 Rome had exercised influence over Britain's Celtic peoples since Julius Caesar's Cavalryman's helmet . Roman cavalry helmets often had a hair pattern on the bowl . Rome's influence on the Celtic peoples has been seen in Britain for centuries .
 The key to the power of the Roman empire was a stable, well-drilled professional army . The Roman Empire BEFORE k ___ The Roman empire BEFORE k
 All legionaries had to be Roman citizens and he established a fixed term of service for soldiers . The term was eventually set at 25 years .
 The number of I JL/jvJvJU legionaries in the army of Augustus. Completion . Completion ""I ~7 r.7 r." Completion of Augustus' legionaries .
 Around 260,000 soldiers were rewarded with a grant of land . Auxiliaries equaled this number, giving a total army strength of 260,00 .
 Non-citizen allies of Rome provided auxiliaries to fight alongside the legionaries . Non-citizens allies provided auxiliary forces to fight with Rome's legions .
 Almost all legionaries were stationed at permanent forts around the margins of the empire . The Roman Empire was ruled by the Roman Empire until the end of the year .
 The Praetorian Guard was often the force that made or unmade emperors in power struggles . Two expeditions across the Channel almost a century earlier had taken place in France .
 Roman support for an ousted allied king provided an easy pretext for military occupation . There were puppet kingdoms that paid tribute to Rome, and Roman support was easy to use .
 Caratacus, a chieftain of the Catuvellauni tribe, escaped to continue the fight further west . Four legions ferried across from Boulogne sufficed to overcome initial resistance in the southeast .
 By 47 ce the whole of southern England was under Roman rule, although resistance in Wales continued despite the eventual capture and execution of Caratacus .
 The Romans were distracted from warfare in Wales in 60 ce by a major revolt in eastern England . The revolt was led by Boudicca of the Iceni tribe, who led a revolt against the Romans .
 After this had been suppressed, it took another 16 years for all of Wales to be brought to heel . It took 16 years to bring Wales to heel, but it was only 16 years later .
 The Romans advanced into Caledonia and won a victory at Mons Graupius in 84 ce . But the tribes of the region escaped their long-term rule .
 Rome's preoccupation with maintaining and extending its imperial frontiers was occasionally disrupted by disturbances within the empire . Rome had a long history of extending and extending frontiers .
 Vespasian was an experienced military commander who had taken part in the invasion of Britain in 43 . His campaign was interrupted by an outbreak of civil war that followed the death of Emperor Nero in 68 .
 After legion once more fought legion, as in the days of Caesar and Pompey, Vespasian emerged as emperor . After legion . once again fought legion . As in . the days . of Caesar, Pompey emerged as Emperor .
 In 70 ce Jerusalem was taken by the Roman army after a long siege, its temple was destroyed and the revolt effectively ended . The Roman army took control of Jerusalem in 70 ce .
 A small Jewish group held out in the hill fortress of Masada until 73 ce. The Jewish group was forced to leave Masada in 1973 .
 The taking of Jerusalem and Masada were both classic examples of Roman siege warfare, with the use of rams, ballistas, and siege towers . Roman siege techniques were used in the taking of Masada and Jerusalem .
 At Masada, on the coast of the Dead Sea, the building of an immense ramp was required to bring the siege engines up the mountainside . The ramp was built at Masada on the east coast of Masada .
 At Masada the population finally committed suicide to avoid capture . In neither case did the city's defenders stand a chance in the face of the Roman forces .
 Dacian auxiliaries, with their distinctive oval shields, slaughter Dacians . Here, they slaughter their enemies .
 The pilum, or javelin, was a standard legionary weapon . Lance and pilum was the standard legionarian weapon .
 Legionaries threw javelins before advancing to engage with the sword . Legionaries throw javels before engaging in the sword fight .
 Roman cavalry, whether they were legionaries or auxiliaries, carried lances . Trajan the Spanish-born Emperor Trajan carried the lance on his troops .
 He indirectly owed his rise to power to King Decebalus of Dacia who had refused to be cowed by Roman military campaigns under Emperor Domitian .
 The fall of Domitian allowed Trajan to emerge as emperor, and dealing with Dacia in order to reassert Roman authority in the region was thus the first item on Trajan's agenda . Trajan was the first emperor to take control of Dacia .
 Trajan's Column, erected to mark this triumph, records exceptional feats of engineering, such as bridge building, and the defeat and enslavement of the Dacians . Trajan’s Column is a monument to the Roman Roman triumph .
 In 114, Trajan embarked upon another remarkable military venture in the east . Trajan was over 60 years old when he embarked upon his first major military venture .
 Mesopotamia fought chiefly as mounted archers, had inflicted a notorious defeat on the Romans at Carrhae in 53 bce and remained a potential threat to Rome's eastern provinces . Mesopotamians were a major threat to the Roman empire .
 Trajan died of natural causes in 117, the Roman empire had reached its greatest extent . Trajan's death was the death of Trajan, who died in 117 .
 Under his far less warlike successors, Hadrian and Antoninus, the legions pulled back to defensible borders . Hadrian, Antoninus and Hadrian's successors, pulled back from the borders of the world .
 By the end of the 2nd century ce the great age of Roman expansion was at an end . The Roman empire was at its peak during the Roman Empire .
 In the 3rd century ce the Roman empire almost disintegrated . The Roman empire was almost completely destroyed by the fall of the empire .
 Barbarian invaders overran the frontiers as rival claimants battled for the imperial throne . Barbarian invades the city in the early years of the reign .
 Four rulers acted as military commanders, based near vulnerable frontiers rather than in Rome . The four rulers were based in vulnerable areas rather than Rome .
 STATUE OF TWO claimants to the title tetrarchs of Augustus proliferated . This led to another period of civil war as STATUE of TWO claimants .
 Emperor Marcus Aurelius spent much of his reign campaigning against the Quadi, Marcomanni, and other tribes along the Danube frontier . The Quadi was one of the most powerful tribes in Roman history .
 This relief decorating a marble sarcophagus in Rome shows the helmeted Roman legionaries getting the better of their Germanic foes .
 By the time Attila the Hun ravaged Gaul and northern Italy in the 450s, the western empire was disintegrating . The western empire began to disintegrating in the early 450s .
 In 324, Constantine I established himself as sole emperor, but his death was followed by a further collapse into civil war . Constantine I died after a long series of wars against imperial rivals . The death of Constantine I followed by the collapse of the Roman Empire .
 The western empire was under constant pressure from tribes beyond the Rhine and Danube . The west empire was constantly under pressure from the tribes beyond its borders .
 Successive Roman emperors had much the worse of fighting with the Persians . Successive Romans fought with Persians in the past .
 Emperor Julian's career reveals much about the state of the Roman empire in the 4th century . Emperor Julian, known as the Apostate, was Emperor Julian from the Roman Empire .
 A nephew of Emperor Constantine I, he narrowly survived with his life in the round of massacres and usurpations that followed Constantine's death in 337 . He was a nephew of Constantine I and survived the round massacres that followed .
 Constantius II appointed Julian his subordinate co-emperor in the west while he fought Sasanid Persia in the east . Julian was Constantius' successor to the Roman Empire .
 Gallic legions refused to go and instead proclaimed Julian emperor . Constantius ran into trouble fighting the Persians and called for Julian to bring his army to the east .
 Julian led a large army deep into Sasanid territory in 363 . Julian was sole emperor, now sole emperor . Julian led an army deep in Sasanids territory . Julian became sole emperor in 363.
 Julian was killed in a skirmish and the Romans had to accept humiliating peace terms . Julian died in a bloody battle with the Romans . Julian was the first Roman to die in a battle in Rome .
 This was an empire in which emperors were elected by armies and mostly lived as military commanders . The need to campaign simrdtaneously on different frontiers led to divisions of authority . resources were stretched to cope with the military problems posed by external pressures .
 Roman army that faced pressures in the 4th and 5th centuries was significantly different from the army that had enforced the Roman Peace of the 1st and 2nd centuries . Rome's faltering army faced pressure in 4th, 5th century .
 It was divided into border forces and mobile field armies stationed deeper inside the empire . The border forces were divided into permanent garrisons for the forts and fortifications around the frontiers .
 Field armies were also power bases for their commanders who needed to uphold their slice of authority inside the empire . Field armies could be a reserve to respond to military emergencies wherever they occurred, but also a power base for commanders .
 Senior officers who commanded the armies had previously been drawn from the aristocracy of Roman senators . But by the end of the 3rd century they were career soldiers, drawn from anywhere in the empire .
 Shortages of material resources showed in a decline in the quality of equipment, and shortages of manpower were even more evident . Shortages were also evident in the production of manpower and equipment .
 The volunteers who came from the poorer strata of Roman citizens no longer dominated the ranks . The volunteers no longer dominate the ranks of the army .
 The legions were staffed mostly by conscripts . The border forces included a large number of hereditary soldiers . The children of career legionaries settled in the area where they served .
 The army had long ceased to be ethnically Roman, but was recruited from across the multi-racial empire, including from ""barbarian"" tribes who had been permitted to settle within the empire's frontiers . The army also recruited from "barbaran" tribes who settled within
 The Roman general Stilicho had a Vandal father and a Roman mother . The employment of non-citizens as The Vandal general is illegal in Roman law .
 Tribal warbands served alongside the legions under their own chieftains as allies or ""federated"" people . He served faithfully as a defender of the failing Roman empire until his execution in 408 .
 The prominence of ""barbararian"" soldiers in the Roman army was to be crucial to the development of events as the western empire declined .
 There was a growing emphasis on missile weapons, with specialist artillery units and bodies of bowmen . Although armored legion infantry remained central, there was also an emphasis for missile weapons .
 Romans deployed heavily armored horses and riders in imitation of the Persian cataphracts . The Romans deployed lighter cavalry with spears and spears and mounted archers .
 These developments were doubtless a response to the occasional setbacks the Romans suffered at the hands of enemies practised in missile and cavalry warfare, such as the Goths who defeated Valens at Adrianople .
 The mounting problems of the Roman empire did not, however, stem from such defeats . Pitched battles were rare in any case, and the empire's problems didn't stem from that .
 The issue, especially in the western empire, was a failure of political organization and resources. The issue was the failure of the Western empire, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The Romans were unfortunate to confront at this point of their history a major movement of the Germanic peoples . The Romans faced a major problem in dealing with a group of Germanic people .
 Ostrogoths and Visigoths, Vandals, Burgundians, and Lombards, Franks, Alemanni, and Saxons were driven westward or southward by pressure from nomadic steppe horsemen, chiefly the Huns, who attacked them from the east .
 C.450CE and taken into the armed forces as auxiliaries and allies, the tide was too powerful to be controlled . Callinicus, DESCRIBING THE INVASION OF ITALY BY THE HUNS, C. 450CE, was taken into
 The battle was fought between forces loyal to Emperor Theodosius, ruling from the eastern empire, and a usurper in the west . It was fought in the east and west of the Roman empire .
 Theodosius's forces were commanded by Stilicho, the son of a Vandal father and a Roman mother . Stilichich was the Vandal son of the Roman father and the Roman mother of the child of Stiloicho .
 Attila the Huns were steppe horsemen who fought mostly as mounted archers . Stilicho's Attila was Attila's first king of the steppe . The Huns fought mostly in steppe steppe and were mostly archers rather than horses .
 Stilicho defeated the usurper, but soon found himself engaged in a prolonged struggle against Alaric's rampaging followers, transformed from allies into enemies . The usurper's followers soon found themselves in a struggle against each other .
 In 410, after Stilicho's death, the Visigoths sacked Rome, the first time the city had fallen to hostile forces in almost eight centuries . The city was the first to fall under hostile forces to Rome in almost 8 centuries .
 Romans appealed to Visigoths as allies to help fight the Vandals, another S Germanic people . Yet only a few years later, the Romans were again appealing to the Visigoth as allies . The Romans were able to find allies with them again in time .
 The collapse of the Roman empire in the west was followed by the creation of new kingdoms, mostly by Germanic chieftains . The creation of the new kingdoms was created by the late Roman empire .
 Fall of western Roman empire traditionally dated to 476, when Emperor Romulus Augustus was deposed by the commander of Rome's Germanic allies in Italy, Odoacer .
 Odoacerdid not claim the imperial title, which was held by Emperor Zeno at Constantinople .
 Germanic kingdoms were established as the empire fell . Germanic kings were established following the fall of the empire .
 Visigoths ruled Spain, from which they had evicted the Vandals who themselves established a kingdom in North Africa . The Visigoth ruled Spain from the time they ruled Spain .
 In Italy Odoacer was defeated by the Ostrogoths under Theodoric in 493 . In 493 he was theoretically a viceroy of the eastern emperor in Constantinople . He ruled as theoretically a member of the Eastern Roman Empire .
 The beginnings of warfare in ancient China saw peasant soldiers armed with bronze or stone weapons . They were under the command of aristocratic warriors in chariots .
 The Shang was succeeded by the Zhou, which introduced the use of iron weapons . The Shang succeeded the Zhou in China .
 The Zhou supported a substantial standing army that campaigned against the ""barbarians"" around the borders of the realm . The Zhou was the first Chinese ruler to establish a standing army against the "barbarian"
 The Warring States Period Warfare in ancient China was refined through centuries of civil conflict . Warfare in the ancient Chinese state of war was refined by centuries of conflict .
 Feudal domains that flourished in the absence of a strong central authority competed for territory, expanding the resources devoted to war . The climactic battles of the 3rd century bce led to unification under Emperor Qin .
 The Zhou dynasty created a feudal system in which power was devolved to regional lords, who depended on the allegiance of their own vassals .
 Chu, centered on the Yangtze river, emerged as one of the most powerful players in the Spring and Autumn Period . Chu was competing with Yellow river states that included Jin, Qi, and Qin .
 There were many conflicts within and between these loosely structured states . There were also conflicts between the loosely structured state and the state itself itself .
 Ancient Chinese bronze sword dating from the 4th century bce . Shows the persistence of bronze weapons into the Iron Age of the Zhou dynasty .
 The Warring States Period proper emerged through reorganization and consolidation of the larger Chinese states . Massive state armies emerged through the reorganization .
 Chu, Yan, Qi, Qin, Chu, Qi and Qin dominated the contest for power in China . Chu was one of the four states that eventually dominated the state of China .
 He also stresses the importance of intelligence, and highlights the impact of morale on the outcome of conflict .
 Sun Tzu's theories were successfully put into practice by the Qi general . The Qi general was successful in putting his theories into practice in China .
 On each occasion, remarkably, Sun Bin relieved the enemy's pressure on an enemy's . The warplanes were probably employed only as mobile command platforms . They were probably used only to relieve pressure on enemy forces .
 armies can rarely have been large, given the limited resources of the fragmented feudal territories . But armies rarely have to be large, with limited resources given to the fragmented territories .
 Heavy siege crossbows came into widespread use, as did small crossbows carried by skirmishing infantrymen pushed out in front of the line of battle . Small crossbows were carried out by skirmishers pushed out of front of line-up .
 Chariots were still used—crewed by three men and pulled by four horses— but cavalry took over as a shock force . Chariotots still used, but cavalry was still used as a surprise force .
 Chinese learned about mounted warfare from fighting nomads on their frontiers . The Chinese learned to mountaineer warfare from the nomads .
 The core of any Chinese army was still the conscript peasant infantry . It was mostly armored for fighting in close formation with long halberds and pikes . The Chinese army is still largely based on conscripts .
 The art of war in China led to the sophisticated discussion of strategy and tactics . Constant warfare in China was the subject of the art of warfare .
 This was the period when the great military thinker known as Sun Tzu wrote his famous work . This was during this period when he wrote his work on the Chinese military thinker .
 The establishment of the Qin dynasty ended the Warring States Period, but proved short-lived . Qin was the first Chinese dynasty to establish a state of Qin in China .
 The successor to the throne, Qin Er Shi, was weak and incompetent, and rebellions soon broke out . The next generation of Chinese rulers ruled the state of China, but were overthrown by the Qin .
 A serious bid for power was made by Xiang Lang of Chu of Chu, who was contested by Liu Bang of Han . Liu Bang was a general controlling Han, and Xiang Lang was a member of Chu .
 The Han empire established by Gao was threatened by the Xiongnu, nomadic horsemen . The Xionguans were based in the northern steppes . Gao and Gao died in the early years of their reign .
 To keep the horsemen out, the Han reinforced the Great Wall that Emperor Qin had built . Emperor Qin built the wall in order to keep them out of danger .
 Han armies were sent through the wall to attack the horsemen in their home territory in an attempt to defeat them before they could get anywhere near the Great Wall .
 The combined measures succeeded, the Xiongnu were beaten, and eventually the horsemen were reduced to mere tributary status . The horseman were eventually reduced to merely tributaries .
 Emperor Wu made a feinting move toward the Wei capital, not by marching to confront the Wei army directly . Han armies penetrated south as far as the Mekong river in Vietnam and into Central Asia .
 The Wei army then of necessity went to the state that could mobilize the maximum resources for warfare with the greatest efficiency . Despite such tactical subtleties, victory in the great Chinese power struggle eventually went to state where the greatest resources were mobilized .
 Qin A state in western China, Qin underwent political and social reforms that, by the 3rd century bce, gave it a powerful centralized government . Qin had crushed the residual independence of the old feudal aristocracy . Qin was one of China's most powerful states .
 Government officials and military commanders were appointed on merit, and the population was mobilized for public works and war .
 Qin was close to the nomadic horsemen of the north . Qin also had access to a supply of good horses, a crucial edge as cavalry grew in importance . Qin was able to rely heavily on the horses of nomadic people .
 Qin's aggression forced the other states to form alliances and mobilize their own resources . Qin made the Qin state of Qin the first half of the 3rd century bce . Qin was the first Chinese state to attack other states .
 Gold-inlaid bull's head adorned a chariot shaft in the Warring States Period . Bronze chariot decoration was created in the Bronze Age .
 Sun Bin succeeded in luring Sun Bin onto terrain where it could then be surrounded and destroyed by his own waiting forces . Chariots were moved by elite warriors with a taste for ostentatious display . Sun Bin was surrounded by his waiting forces.
 The failure of anyone to win total power left China divided into three warring kingdoms . The failure to gain total power in China left the country divided into warring nations .
 It was a period of military and economic growth, and cultural achievements . It was the height of the country's economic and political power .
 Han empire probably had the world's most powerful armed forces in its day . The Han empire was one of the most powerful military units in the world .
 In the 1st century ce its armies campaigned as far south as Vietnam, Vietnam, and as far west as Central Asia . The sisters, TrungTrac and Trung Ni, led the sisters' revolt in 43 ce .
 In the course of the 2nd century ce the Han empire went into decline, undermined by the attacks of steppe nomads, corrupt officials, and the excessive privileges of landowners .
 Zhang Giao proposed a mix of religious and magical beliefs as a solution to the people's sufferings . The conditions made them responsive to the teachings of Zhang Gao, who proposed a mixture of religion and magic .
 The movement attracted hundreds of thousands of followers, who wrapped yellow scarves around their heads to mark allegiance .
 Marshaled into mass armies, they inflicted a number of severe defeats on the empire's professional forces . Marshaled in mass armies they inflicted severe defeats against the empire .
 It took Han generals close to one year to bring the revolt under control . It took the Han generals almost a year to get the rebels back under control.
 Pacification was not, however, enough to restore the stability of the increasingly fractious dynasty .
 Following the death of Emperor Ling in i89, power within the imperial palace was seized by Dong Zhuo, an exceptionally brutal military commander . The death of the Emperor Ling was the result of the seizure of power in China .
 His authority was immediately contested by other generals leading armies in the provinces . Chaos ensued and chaos ensued .
 Dong Zhuo was soon assassinated and Cao Cao took control of the imperial government . Cao Cao had led cavalry forces in the suppression of the Yellow Turbans . Cao was later assassinated and took over the throne .
 Like a Dong Zhuo, he was unable to win the allegiance of provincial warlords and the power struggle continued . He faced 100,000 troops of his rival. men confronting him .
 Yuan Shao hesitates to attack an enemy dug into a strong defensive position . Yuan's stand-off between the two armies was between Yuan and the enemy . Yuan was reluctant to attack the enemy, but his forces were eventually defeated .
 As the months passed, the outcome turned on who could keep his men and horses supplied with food and fodder . The outcome of the battle was decided on who was able to feed the men and animals .
 Cao Cao sent out detachments of troops to harass his enemy's supply lines and destroy grain stores . Cao Cao's forces were sent out to harass enemy supply lines, destroying grain stores and destroying grain supplies .
 Many of Yuan Shao's malnourished troops surrendered and Cao Cao then vanquished the weakened foe . Cao Cao defeated the weakened enemy with the help of Cao Cao . Many of the troops surrendered in the battle .
 Cao Cao's turn to be worsted in a battle won by the numerically inferior side . Eight years later Cao Cao was worsted by Cao Cao in the battle of the Cao Cao dynasty .
 Two southern warlords, Liu Bei and Sun Quan, formed an alliance to resist Cao Cao's efforts to unify China . Cao Cao was successful in unifying China, but Liu Bei was able to defeat him .
 The warlords depended upon their control of the Yangtze River . Cao Cao's forces were entirely land-based. Cao Cao fought on water while Cao Cao was entirely land based .
 Cao Cao captured the river port of Jiangling and with it enough boats to sail his troops down the Yangtze . But marching south to attack them with a large army, Cao Cao took advantage of the port's capture .
 At a point known variously as Chibi or the Red Cliffs, they encountered the warlords' forces commanded by general Zhou Yu . Zhou Yu's forces were led by Zhou Yu, a general of warlords .
 Cao Cao's northern soldiers had traveled a vast distance into an area known as Wei, one of the Three Kingdoms . The trigger is all that remains of a crossbow used by a soldier from Wei .
 Later known as the Prince of Wei (and posthumously as Emperor Wu), Cao Cao fought in two battles that are classics of Chinese military history because of the odds facing the victors . Cao Cao is known as Cao Cao, who fought in the Yellow Sea Hainan and the
 Cao Cao lashed his boats together to make a stable platform for his soldiers . Cao Cao made the boats into a platform to protect his troops from attack on his enemies .
 Zhou Yu prepared fireships and sent them to drift down to destroy Cao Cao's fleet that had become immobilized . Zhou Yu sent fireships down to burn down the Cao Cao fleet . Cao Cao had been unable to defeat Zhou Yu's forces .
 Cao Cao led his weary forces back north by land . Cao Cao's withdrawal under constant harassment turned into a rout . The resulting conflagration was enough to persuade Cao Cao to lead his weary troops back north .
 Cao Cao's armies were large by any standards, sometimes numbering in hundreds of thousands, but almost certainly short of the 800,000 attributed by the ancient chroniclers to Cao Cao at the Red Cliffs . Cao Cao is believed to have led a large army of troops at the time of
 They were equipped with iron and steel weapons and armor; horses were armored as well as the men . They were armed with iron, steel weapons, armor and armor .
 Crossbows were used both as hand-held infantry weapons and in larger versions as field artillery . Crossbows are also used as field weapons in the Second World War . Crossbows were used as weapons for both infantry and artillery .
 There were rapid-fire crossbows, known as zhuge nu, that fired bolts stored in a magazine by the simple operation of a lever . Crossbows were also used to fire bolts stored inside a magazine .
 Warfare included sieges for which various siege engines had been developed . Mobile towers, battering rams, and torsion catapults were developed . Siege engines were developed in the early 1800s .
 Incendiary devices had an important place in the Chinese armory . The fireships used at the battle of the Red Cliffs were packed with dry reeds and wax, but other substances were available for Jfc placing on the tips of arrows .
 Cavalry formed the aristocratic elite of Chinese forces . Large numbers of steppe horsemen were also recruited as auxiliaries .
 River warfare employed much the same weaponry as was used on land . The warships were propelled by oar and sail . River warfare was a form of warfare in the early 1900s .
 Cao Cao had to content himself with regional power after the defeat at the Red Cliffs . Cao Cao was forced to settle with a regional power .
 Cao's domains came to be known as Cao Wei, while Liu Be's power base was called Shu Han, and Sun Quan ruled Dong Wu . Liu Be ruled Cao Wei and Cao Wei . Sun Quan was ruled by Sun Quan .
 Last nominal Han dynasty emperor was deposed after the death of Cao Cao in 220 . Although these were known as the Three Kingdoms, they were ruled by claimants to the title of emperor .
 The Three Kingdoms were destined to fight one another, because each aspired to rule the whole of China . Each of the Three Kingdoms was destined to rule one another .
 The wars of the Three Kingdoms devastated the Chinese economy and led to depopulation . The country was left exposed to the incursions of steppe nomads, leaving the country exposed to incursions .
 Steppe tribesmen collectively known as the Wu Hu had begun migrating into lands within the boundaries of the Han empire . In a process similar to that experienced by the contemporary Roman empire, tribesmen began migrating .
 Many Han Chinese migrated to the south, into the area around the Yangtze . Han Chinese moved south to the area of China, where they lived .
 China was not reunited until 581, when the short-lived Sui dynasty established control over both the north and the south . The Sui was established in 581 .
 Chinese arrows, whether fired from crossbows or from field artillery, were frequently tipped with iron and steel . Arrow and spear heads were often tipped with steel and iron and iron .
 They would also be coated with flammable materials to set fire to vessels . Vessels would be coated in flammatable materials to be used in setting fires .
 The northern state of Cao Wei was by far the strongest of the Three Kingdoms . Its power was balanced by an alliance between the southern kingdoms of Shu Han and Dong Wu .
 The most famous general of the Three Kingdoms period was Zhuge Liang, who led the armies of Shu . He was one of the most famous generals of the period .
 Known as the Northern Expeditions, these campaigns were resisted and eventually defeated by the cautious Wei commander, Sima Yi, who avoided battle and kept his forces safe in fortified positions . Zhuge Liang was forced to withdraw through exhaustion and shortage of supplies .
 Jin prepared for the conquest of Wu by building their own fleet and by training large numbers of soldiers as marines, in order to win control of the Yangtze River . Remembering the fate of Cao Cao at the Red Cliffs, the Jin prepared .
 Increasing the degree of protection they afford has usually been at the expense of comfort, mobility, and all-around vision . Increasing the amount of protection has been seen to be at the cost of comfort and mobility .
 Sumerian helmet is 4,500 years old; made of gold, it was probably worn in ceremonies in the ancient city of Ur . As well as protection, helmets offer a chance for display .
 Chalcidian helmet, worn by Ancient Greek hoplite infantry, was made of bronze and topped by a horsehair crest . It was worn by the hoplite army and worn by hoplite hoplites .
 The Roman legionary's iron helmet is in the Imperial Gallic style of the late 1st century ce. QJ .
 The medieval knight's basinet protected the face with a hounskull hinged visor and the neck with a mail aventail . The helmet protects the face and neck from the elements of the helmet .
 The sallet, developed in Italy, was worn by foot soldiers across much of Europe in the 15th century . A sallet was developed by Italy and worn by soldiers across Europe .
 The morion open helmet was worn by the Spanish infantry of the 16th century . The close helmet offered good protection but was also a display of the wearer's wealth .
 The ""lobster-tail"" helmet of an English Civil War cavalryman evolved from the Ottoman chichak . The helmet of English cavalrymen evolved from an Ottoman chicheak .
 The Japanese samurai helmet comprised a bowl and neck protection . It was often elaborately decorated . The helmet was worn in Japan .
 The British heavy cavalry helmet of the Napoleonic period was primarily decorative rather than functional . The helmet was made of heavy cavalry helmets of the British cavalry .
 The Prussian Pickelhaube was topped with a spike for the infantry and a ball for the artillery . It was adopted in 1842, and was topped by a spike .
 The leather helmet proved inadequate as protection in World War I . The Stahlhelm steel infantry helmet was introduced in 1916 during trench warfare .
 This World War I British tankman's helmet incorporated chain mail for defense against splinters of metal .
 The M4 flak helmet was made of steel covered with green cloth . It was worn by U.S. bomber crews in 1944-45 .
 Ancient Indian civilizations developed in the swathe of territory across the north of the subcontinent from the Indus valley in the west to the Ganges in the east . Japanese SAMURAI HELMET Q JAPANESE SAMurai HELMET .
 Evidence for warfare in ancient India comes mostly from the Sanskrit epic, the Mahabharata . The epic is based on the epic, which chronicles the battle of ancient India .
 This recounts the 18-day battle of Kurukshetra between the rival clans of the Pandavas and the Kauravas . The Pandava and Kaurava clans fought each other in the epic battle .
 The Mahabharata is legend rather than history, but sketches a style of warfare that was probably true to life . It sketches a way of warfare likely to have been based in modern times, says historian .
 Both sides assembled and supplied large armies, both fought in horse-drawn chariots, and both employed war elephants . Both sides fought in chariots and elephants .
 The wars of the Mauryan emperor Chandragupta and his successors demonstrated the military sophistication of the largest Indian states in the 4th and 3rd centuries bce . The wars were the most sophisticated of the 3rd and 4th century Indian states .
 With their full-time soldiers, Indian armies were expensive to maintain but were effective instruments of conquest and domination . Indian armies cost an estimated $100,000 a year to maintain and were used as weapons of conquest .
 He was confronted by the army of a king whom the invaders called Poms, the ruler of a powerful state in the Punjab . The invaders were confronted by a king known as Poms who ruled the Punjab in Punjab .
 Porus was defeated by Alexander at the battle of Hydaspes . He was unable to cope with the flexibility of the Macedonian cavalry and the discipline of the infantry phalanx .
 Alexander's successors adopted the elephant, while in India a young man called Chandragupta Maurya was inspired to regenerate Indian military power and to emulate his campaigns of conquest .
 This was a startling achievement given the sophisticated nature of the Nanda state's armed forces . This is a startling feat given the sophistication of the state's military forces .
 The Mauryan emperor, Ashoka, built this Buddhist stupa at Sanchi in Madhaya Pradesh . Chandragupta may have -500 CE Stupa of Ashoka . The Emperor may have built the stupas in his honor .
 Ashoka may have converted to Buddhism in reaction to the horrors of war . Ashoka was a Buddhist leader of the Second Century .
 Chandragupta's authority was initially concentrated in the east of the Indian subcontinent, in Bihar and Bengal . He pressed westward, hlling the power vacuum left by Alexander's rampaging campaign and subsequent withdrawal .
 Chandragupta must have won the war, since Gandhara passed into Mauryan hands . Although there is no historical record of the hghting, there is not a historical record . Chandraagupta is believed to have won .
 Chandragupta ruled from the Ganges plain across to the Indus and the northwestern borderlands of the subcontinent, as well as part of central India . At this time he ruled from Ganges to the northwest of India .
 Megasthenes wrote an account of what he saw on his trip to Seleucus . This formidable empire was visited by a Greek envoy of Seleucaus, called Megsthenes .
 Chandragupta I was ruler of India in the 4th century ce. According to Megasthenes, Mauryan imperial legacy was Mauryans .
 He took the name of the founder of the Mauryan empire six centuries earlier . warriors were one of the seven castes into which Mauryans society was divided .
 Full-time, highly trained professional soldiers were full-time soldiers . They were men who ""practice nothing but warlike exercises"" and ""receive high pay from the state"" in war and peace alike .
 Their bow, the standard infantry weapon, was ""equal in length to the man who carries it"" and shot a long, heavy arrow that could penetrate any armor . Their bow was "equal to the length" to the person carrying it .
 Foot soldiers also carried a broad, twohanded sword and a long, narrow ox-hide shield . Foot soldiers were also carried out with a broad sword and oxhide shield. Foot soldiers carried the sword and shield .
 The horsemen were light cavalry skirmishers, riding bareback and throwing javelins . They rode bareback, riding naked and throwing weapons . They were also known as the horsemen of the Mongolians .
 War elephants were crewed by a mahout and four soldiers who shot arrows and threw javelins from atop the animal's back . Soldiers shot arrows from the elephant's back and threw them from atop their backs .
 The elephant's main military use was less as a weapons platform than as a weapon in itself . It was used to trample enemy infantry and gore them with its tusks . The elephant was used as a means of killing enemy soldiers .
 The resources provided by his conquered territories no doubt facilitated further expansion of the Mauryan empire under his successors . The resources of the conquered territories may have helped further expansion .
 One legacy of the Mauryan empire was an idea of the potential unity of India . One legacy was the idea of a possible unity of the country .
 Subcontinent was disunited and exposed to invasions from the north . In practice, the subcontinent had been disunited .
 IndoGreek kingdom ruled in the 2nd century bce by Menander Soter in the area of modern-day Pakistan and northern India . A variety of states flourished in the aftermath of the Mauryan empire .
 The most ambitious attempt to recreate the Mauryan empire was made by a dynasty that came to power in the 4th century ce . The first emperor adopted the name Chandragupta, from which the dynastic name ""Gupta"" was then derived .
 One boastful Gupta inscription refers to Samudragupta's victories over 21 kings . One inscription says he defeated 21 kings in total .
 Historians have cast doubt on Gupta claims to have ruled distant parts of India . Historians say they may have only owed them some vague allegiance . However, historians have cast doubts on the claims .
 In the 5th century the Guptas came under increasing pressure from the White Huns . Steppe nomads from Central Asia wore down the empire’s defenses and eventually destroyed it . The White Hun's eventually destroyed the cities and monasteries of the Ganges plain .
 The Indian warrior tradition was revived from the 8th century in the Rajput kingdoms of northern India . The Rajputs were the Rajasas of the Rajatas, a Raja-rindyaya, a Hindu warrior .
 There is no suggestion that he disbanded his army or abandoned the use of force . Any sensitivity to the sufferings of a defeated enemy and the human cost of war is so rare in the pre-modern world that Ashoka undoubtedly deserves his reputation .
 The Mauryan empire united more of the Indian subcontinent than any state until the Moguls in the 16th century ce, leaving out only one warrior with a rare kind of ax .
 A cross between a sword and ax, the weapon is native to northwestern India after his father's death . The weapon is a cross between the sword and an ax, and is native in northwestern India .
 Ashoka's first invasion of Kalingan territory was repulsed, leading him to assemble overwhelming forces for a second campaign . Ashoka assembled overwhelming forces to repel the first invasion .
 The Kalingans again resisted, but they were overcome after a savage battle by the Daya River . They were overcome by the savage battle .
 According to an inscription attributed to Ashoka himself, f 00,000 Kalingans were killed and 150,000 were deportei and many mor< died as a result of the devastation wrought by the war .
 The same inscription states that Ashok later experienced an extreme revulsioi against the brutality of conquest . Ashok is said to have experienced a 'extreme revulsion' against the brutal conquest .
 Sri Lanka is the southernmost area of the great peninsula and Sri Lanka . This led him to convert to Buddhism . He converted to Christianity .
 French account of the Crusades shows foot soldiers armored in the style of the 15th century fighting in front of a city under siege . The illustration was taken from a French account .
 Weak, quarrelsome states were prey to conquest by nomads such as the Mongols . The Mongols created the greatest empire the world had ever seen . The Mongolian empire was the most powerful state in history .
 Neither technology nor organization gave any great advantage to central authority or settled civilizations . Technology and organization gave no great advantage in settling civilizations .
 War was endemic in many regions, especially in Western Europe, and organized warfare often degenerated into plunder and piracy . Organized warfare was rife in Europe and throughout the world .
 Siege warfare and the building of strong fortifications became the cornerstone to military success . People sought refuge from insecurity inside castles and behind town walls .
 Viking shields were an important part of the seafaring Vikings' battlefield equipment . At the beginning of the period the rulers of the Byzantine empire made a determined effort to restore the Mediterranean empire of Rome to its full .
 They were usually made of wood that was covered with leather and painted . They were made of leather and leather that was often painted and covered with paint .
 Viking weapons were spears, swords, and axes, but failed in the West where Christianized Germanic kingdoms were established . Viking weapons failed to find glory in Christianized West .
 Both Byzantium and Sasanid Persia were confronted with the armed expansion of Islam . Both were confronted by armed forces in the Muslim world .
 Arab armies inspired by the new Muslim faith conquered vast territories from Spain to India . Arab armies defeated Spain and India in the early 1900s .
 Western Europe experienced a military resurgence from the 11th century . Western Europe was vulnerable to invaders and raiders, including Vikings and Magyars .
 Almost constant warfare between West European Christian states stimulated the development of new military tactics . The Crusades founded short-lived Christian states in the eastern Mediterranean and drove back Islam in Spain . In China the Tang dynasty was able to restore imperial rule in the early medieval period .
 The Song, which ruled in the south, often had to pay off nomadic tribes as insurance against attack from the north . Subsequent dynasties, such as the Song, had to . pay them as insurance .
 The nomadic horsemen of the steppes were formidable warriors, armed with composite bows, skilled in maneuver, and ruthless to the defeated . Whether Turks, Mongols, Jurchens, or Tartars, they were ruthless warriors .
 Under charismatic leaders such as Genghis Khan and Timur, their warlike qualities made them conquerors of China, Persia, the Middle East, Russia and eventually the Byzantine empire .
 In order to make their conquests permanent, they adopted many of the skills and customs of the settled civilizations . They adopted them to make them more successful .
 Iron mace would have been used by a Mongol warrior on horseback . High status was generally identified with fighting on a horseback in medieval warfare .
 This was especially true of armored cavalry, from the cataphracts of the Byzantine empire and the Persian Sasanids to the knights of Western Europe . The knights of Europe were armored cavalry in the past .
 The spread of the stirrup, improved metalworking for armor and swords, and the breeding of bigger horses all contributed to the evolution of the medieval knight . The stirrup was the first stirrup to be used in medieval armor and weapons .
 Highstatus warriors, whether European knights or Japanese samurai, adopted chivalric codes of honor . Warfare was first and foremost a means of demonstrating personal prowess . High status warriors viewed warfare as a matter of personal prowess.
 Infantry were consigned to an auxiliary battlefield role rather than the central place they had held in Ancient Greece or Rome . Infantry were mostly of low status and consigned . Infantry was mostly of . low status .
 In European warfare properly organized foot soldiers, especially when armed with longbows or crossbows, became increasingly influential from the 14th century onward .
 Longbow, for example, was a rather primitive weapon in itself but surprisingly effective when deployed en masse by the English in the Hundred Years War . The longbow was one of the most primitive weapons in the history .
 Gunpowder weapons developed first in China, where they were in extensive use by the 14th century, yet marginal in their overall impact . Gunpowder was used in China but was marginal in its overall impact in Europe .
 Around 1450 cannon started to change the face of war, ending the reign of stone castles by battering down their walls . It was in Europe around 1450 that cannon began to be used in war .
 Throughout this time a wholly separate tradition of warfare was maintained in the Americas, in the absence of both the wheel and the horse . The wheel and horse were not used in warfare in the past .
 Metalworking was rare and weapons were generally edged or tipped with stone . Weapons were generally tipped or edged with stone and edged with metal .
 Incas in Peru and Aztecs in Mexico extended military domination over substantial areas . This did not prevent the creation of large empires, with both the Incas and the Aztec extending military domination .
 His general Belisarius defeats the Vandals in North Africa and the Ostrogoths in Italy . He defeats them in Italy and North Africa . The general defeated the Othrogoths and Vandals . He died at the end of his reign .
 Knights from Western Europe march across Anatolia and capture Antioch and Jerusalem . Knights of Western Europe marched across Anatolia and capture the cities .
 The Minamoto clan defeats the Taira and establishes the shogunate of Japan . Minamoto's defeat of the taira forces the Minamoto family to take over the throne .
 English king Richard the Lionheart signs a treaty with Saladin . Christian pilgrims are allowed to visit Jerusalem . The treaty was part of a treaty between Richard and Saladin to protect Christian pilgrims .
 Charles of Anjou and the kingdom of Aragon fight for control of Sicily . Charles and Aragon fought for the throne of Sicily in Sicily .
 German emperor Maximilian I pays for the creation of mostly pike-armed mercenary bands . The landsknechts were created by the German emperor in C. C.1486 .
 Justinian I was a Byzantine emperor in a truly ""Roman"" mold . Empire rebuilder Justinian was a truly "Roman" emperor . Justinian's reign was the first of its kind .
 His armies recaptured much of the territory that had been lost to the Barbarians . Nicknamed ""the emperor who never sleeps"", he was known as the Emperor of the Roman Empire . His armies captured much of that territory .
 Byzantium was an important trading center, pivotally placed between Greece and the Mediterranean on one side and the rich cities of western Asia on the other . Byzantine capital was the center of the Byzantine Empire .
 The first Christian emperor, Constantine I, built his city here, naming it ‘Constantinople"" after himself . Constantine I built the city after himself, and named it Constantine I . The city was named after Constantine I and named after him .
 Emperor Theodosius II bolstered the capital's defenses, building what became known as the Theododosian Wall . His successor, Emperor Theodorius II, expanded the wall in the early Roman times .
 Byzantines always saw themselves as Romans . Their city may have been founded by the Greeks, it may have looked eastward into Asia . But the Byzantine city always saw itself as Romans.
 Their empire perpetuated that of Rome, even if its western states were routed by barbarians . Their western states—and their nominal capital—and the nominal capital, had been routed . The Romans' western states, such as Rome, were the only western states to survive .
 For a while, in the 6th century, it seemed possible the lost territories might be recovered . The lost territories may have been recovered, but they were never recovered .
 That this could be more than an empty dream owed much to the daring and skill of Justinian's military commander, Belisarius . The Roman general's military was the most daring commander in Roman history .
 Belisarius triumphed at Dara in 530, but after a stalemate at Callinicum the following year, the Byzantines and Persians agreed an around 505, he is believed to have been of Greek or Thracian ancestry . He is thought to be of
 Byzantine troops in 588 were attacked by Persia's Sasanid rulers over a percentage cut imposed on Byzantine troops . Byzantine troops mutiny invited an attack by Persia and hence an expensive peace .
 Justinian sent Belisarius out to conquer the Vandal kingdom in what had been the Roman province of Africa . Justinian still felt strong enough to embark upon a new campaign in a different theater .
 The Vandals were of Germanic origin . Though now established in eastern Algeria and Tunisia, the Vandals are of German origin . They were originally from eastern Algeria .
 Persia's Sasanid rulers were immensely proud of their warlike traditions . In 429, with Rome's THE RISE OF BYZANTIUM, they were proud to show off their military prowess . Persia's rulers were extremely proud to display their proud traditions .
 A sword like this one was not just a weapon but a status symbol . They had swept southward through Spain before crossing the Straits of Gibraltar . Often elaborately decorated with silver, they had swept through Spain .
 Sacking Roman Carthage, the Vandals soon set up their own capital there . The Vandals set up a new capital in Carthage . The city was founded by the Romans .
 The new Vandal kingdom was insignificant in terms of territory . Confined to the coastal plain, it was only a tiny kingdom . The new kingdom was ruled by the Vandal king .
 In 535, Justinian sent Belisarius to reclaim the Italian ""homeland,"" at this time under the occupation of the Ostrogoths . Justinian was exhilarated by this success, sent him to reclaim Italy .
 Goths were not beaten and by the early 550s were resurgent in Italy . The Goths remained in Italy until the mid-550s .
 It would continue intermittently for 50 years, shaping the Byzantine war machine . The Byzantine War machine would be used to shape the future of Europe .
 The Sasanids could deploy thousands of cataphracts, armored horsemen who charged with lances raised, smashing into the enemy with a force that even the toughest, most disciplined infantrymen could not withstand .
 After the shock of the first impact came the terrifying confusion as the units of cataphracts drew their bows and showered arrows all around .
 The Byzantines saw no alternative but to match the Persian threat directly . The Byzantine Empire saw no choice but to fight back .
 They assembled cataphract units of their own, reinforcing them with light and heavy infantry . The British army was defeated in the Battle of St. Louis in 1877 .
 Most of their soldiers were foederati, recruited from the barbarian peoples who were bound by treaty to the Byzantine cause . Others were mercenaries .
 Cataphracts used the movement of their horses to their advantage, gleaning extra power from the animal . A rider's lance was usually chained to the horse's neck and hind leg, using momentum to strengthen a lunge .
 The exhausted imperial armies had succeeded only in clearing the way for invasion by the Arabs . The exhausted Imperial armies had only cleared the way to the Arab invasion .
 A sort of medieval flamethrower played havoc with the enemy in an age of wooden ships . Believed to have been a blend of burning oil and tar propelled by a pump .
 Decades of war in western Asia had left both Byzantium and Persia drained . Byzantine and Persian empires were left drained .
 Neither was able to hold up the expansion of the Arabs through the 7th century . Neither were able to keep up the Arab expansion through the centuries .
 The decline of the Byzantine empire from this time on was inexorable, and it was permanently on the defensive . Beleaguered by the Roman Empire .
 Long after the bulk of its land-territories had gone, it remained an important naval power . But long after the . bulk of the . land . territories, it was still important naval . power .
 Wars with these groups in the 9th, 10th, and Uth centuries saw Constantinople under threat . The states in Italy and Sicily were taken by the Normans in the 11th century .
 After the hijrah —the move to Medina in 622 — they had to fight for their survival . The hijrah moved to Medina, Medina, in the early 622 . After that hijrah, the hijra moved into Medina . After hijra, they were forced to fight
 Inspired by their sense of mission, they triumphed at the battle of Badr in 624 . Inspired by them, they won the battle at the end of the war .
 Jihad could mean a literal war for Islam or an inner battle for personal renewal . Jihad could be a literal battle for Islam, or a personal battle for renewal .
 By the time the prophet died in 632, followers had grown accustomed to the idea that believers had to fight to make the truth prevail .
 The 7th century saw the birth of Islam, and with it an extraordinary campaign of conquest . The first caliph, Abu Bakr, brought all the Arab tribes under Islamic rule .
 In the space of a few generations, much of the known world was brought under Muslim rule . The Muslim world has been brought under Islamic rule .
 Until then, the Arabs had found a shared ideal, an identity in which they could unite . Till then, a collection of warring tribes, had found an ideal, a shared identity .
 Within a century, the prophet's message had been carried over an area reaching from northern Spain to Central Asia . Within 100 years, it had been spread over northern Spain, Central Asia and Spain .
 Their main weapons, though, were speed and surprise, as well as a passionate commitment to their beliefs . The team's main weapons were speed, surprise and passion for the sport .
 Nomadic pastoralists, they had grown up tough, with superlative riding skills . Nomadic nomads had come up tough and had superlatives riding skills.
 Husain ibn Ali was killed at the battle of Karbala in 680 . His martyrdom was the martyrdom of Husain  Husain in 680 .
 He is mourned each year in Muharram, the first month of the Islamic calendar . The dromedary was used as a beast of burden rather than a mount, but was quicker and more versatile than any wheeled cart .
 Out of the desert Abu Bakr's challenge as first caliph was bringing together all the Arab tribes . Abu Bakr was brought together by Abu Bakr, the son of the first king of the Islamic state . Abu Besar Bakr was born in the desert and became a leader of the
 Umar's armies poured out of the Arabian Peninsula to attack the southern borders of the Byzantine empire . It did so with explosive violence—Umar, the son of Umar, attacking the Byzantine Empire .
 The Arabs had conquered Syria, Palestine, and Egypt by 641 . They had also defeated the Sasanids .
 As yet, they were too few in number to take farreaching areas of the Persian empire, but they quickly made new converts and consolidated their position . They were too little in number but quickly made converts and consolidating their position.
 In the following decades, the empire-building effort was hampered by internal divisions . In the 1980s and '90s, the U.S. struggled to find a way to rebuild its empire . The U.N. has been in decline for decades .
 At Karbala in Iraq in 680, the army of Umayyad Caliph Yazid I overcame that of Husain ibn Ali, the prophet's grandson . Husain was the grandson of the Prophet Ali .
 The massacre that ensued left a legacy of The Islamic world . In just a few generations, the Arabs extended their empire across much of the known world .
 Iran was secured and Afghanistan taken by the Taliban in the early years of the Taliban . Even though, Iran was secure and Afghanistan was taken, it was still not secure enough to take control of Afghanistan .
 Muawiyyah I's Umayyad dynasty, with its capital at Damascus, imposed a degree of unity and order on the Arab 10 million .
 Husain ibn Ali, his half-brother, Abbas, and their supporters fought heroically to the death at the Battle of Karbala .
 Arab attempt to conquer Europe was thwarted at the battle of Poitiers in 732 . Arab attempt was thwarted by the battle at Poitier in the French capital .
 The Islamic hold on the Middle East remains strong to this day . However, the Islamic hold in the region remains strong .
 The Islamic kingdom of al-Andalus was to flourish for several centuries . Even so, the Islamic kingdom would flourish .
 The long-term consequences of some of these events can be traced in the modern era . The consequences of the events can still be traced back to the modern day .
 The encounter was sparked by Husain's refusal to swear allegiance to Yazid . Yazid wanted the blessing of the family of the Holy Prophet to legitimize his rule . Husain refused to swear his allegiance to the king .
 Husain was protected by a handful of relatives, many of them women and children, and was killed during the confrontation . Husain's relatives protected him from the attack .
 Muslim Arabs and Berbers had been raiding Aquitaine and Provence from Spain since 721 . Muslim Arabs, Berbers and Arabs raided Aquitain and Pro-Provence since then .
 Joab died in 768 and his kingdom was divided between his two sons, Charles and Charles . His kingdom was split between his sons Charles and Riding to war .
 This contemporary illumination gives a colorful impression of how the Frankish cavalry would have looked . Created for the Psalterium Aureum manuscript around 845 .
 Charles besieged Pavia, the capital of Lombardy, until Desiderius surrendered in June 774 . Charles besieged the Lombardy capital of Pavia . Charles was the first king to invade Lombardy in 774.
 Charles persuaded Lombard dukes to name him as their new king . With papal support, Charles persuaded them to do so . Charles was king of Lombard kingdom .
 Under King Clovis I, the Franks made themselves the masters of what had been Roman Gaul . Meanwhile, the Saxons took advantage of his absence .
 Under Frankish law, land had to be shared out equally among a man's sons . Land, like other possessions, must be shared equally among the sons of men .
 Equitable, perhaps, but where kingship was concerned, it was a recipe for war . Equitable perhaps, though, but when kingship is concerned, there was no such thing as war .
 A cycle of civil conflict developed in which individual rulers reunited the Frankish realms by force of arms, only to divide them up again among their sons . The Frankish realm was divided between sons and daughters .
 The authority of the Merovingian kings was undermined by aristocratic factionalism . The authority became undermined by a rise in aristocratic factions . Frankish kings wore a crown to show their loyalty to the king .
 The position ""Mayor of the Palace" was the official charged with ensuring the smooth running of the royal household . The position grew in importance as it became more important .
 From the 8th century, the Franks extended their dominion over much of Western and Central Europe . The Franks were one of the most powerful monarchs in Europe . They ruled much of the continent until the 9th century .
 Frankish empire brought a degree of stability to Europe that had not been seen since Roman times . It became a bulwark against Muslim expansion from the south .
 The authority of the Merovingians was greatly reduced in the 8th century . The authority was reduced to less than 50% of the kingdom's authority .
 Power had passed to the aristocracy and to the ""Mayors of the Palace,"" but even here dissension was rife . Even here, dissension is rife .
 Pepin's widow, Plectrude, tried to secure the Mayor's office for an eight-year-old grandson, Theudoald, but Neustrian nobles elevated their own candidate, Ragenfred, to Mayor .
 The Neustrians invaded Austrasia and, as Plectrude was agreeing terms with them, Charles escaped . Pepin's illegitimate son, Charles, had been keeping in captivity . Charles escaped and joined the army .
 Neustrian army at Ambleve, near Liege, as it withdrew, forced Plectrude to surrender power . Neustrians army at . Ambleves, then forced . Plectuude surrender .
 Charles defeated the Neustrians at Vincy, near Cambrai, in 717 . Charles was now ruling Austrasia, now ruling the country .
 Charles defeated their armies at Soissons in 718 . Chilperic and Ragenfred allied themselves to Duke Eudo of Aquitaine, but Charles defeated them .
 Up to now, these campaigns had been punitive expeditions to keep the enemy at bay . But now, they have been on a mission to keep them at bay in the Middle East .
 At the royal assembly held in Quierzy, Picardy, in January 775, Charlemagne announced his plans for an invasion . The Saxons were subjugated once and for all . The invasion took place in 775 .
 A wooden column or tree trunk on which Saxon religious worship was centered was centered . Although an advance force was defeated at the Weser River by I I IRMINSUL, I . I .
 Within a few weeks, Charlemagne reappeared and crushed the Lombard revolt, robbing the Saxons of their spirit . The Saxon revolt was the result of a revolt by Charlemagnagnus .
 His realms included much of modern-day France and the southern and western parts of Germany, as well as north and central Italy . His realm included France, Germany, Italy and southern Italy .
 Charlemagne consolidated and enlarged his empire through a number of campaigns against his enemies . His enemies ranged from the Byzantines to the Danes, and from the Slavs to the Saxons .
 V iV Charlemagne was not always able to make his authority felt so easily, however, however . He was able to do so easily .
 He later established a secure foothold to the south of the mountain range with the capture of Barcelona in 801 . Even so, he later established  _____ a secure . foothold in the area .
 This buckle for a sword belt was found in Oslo, southern Norway . The Danube Valley was ruled by the Danube Empire, but its empire was disintegrating . The buckle was found on a belt found in the city of Oslo .
 Saxons exploited his absences to rise up against his rule . Yet again, however, the Saxons rose up against him in his absence .
 A renewed revolt surfaced in the year 778, and though Charlemagne suppressed it, it was clear that the Saxons were never simply going to acquiesce to Frankish rule . A renewed rebellion surfaced in 778 .
 An effort to stamp out pagan practices among the Saxons was made to ease their absorption into the Frankish state . An effort was made in order to stop the spread of pagan practices in Saxons .
 Not until 804, after the deportation of a number of Saxons into Francia, were they finally pacified . The Saxons were eventually pacified in 804 .
 Charlemagne's conquest of the Saxons brought his empire up against the frontier of the Danes in southern Jutland . The Danes were the first to come to terms with the Saxon in Jutlands .
 Charlemagne at first had no answer to this problem, but after Godfred was succeeded by his nephew . Godfred succeeded by Godfred, who died in childbirth .
 Hemming, in 810, was able to push him into a peace treaty through a combination of diplomatic persuasion and military force . Hemming was the emperor of the 810th century, and the emperor pushed him to a treaty with him .
 Louis the Pious reigned from 814 to 814 . He had just one surviving son, Louis the Prince of France . He died in 814. He was the last monarch to hold the throne .
 Difficult as it had been to bring it about, the conquest of the Saxons was enduring . The conquest was enduring, and the Saxon were enduring .
 Under Charlemagne's successors they were successfully absorbed into the Frankish state as tributaries . They were successful absorbed by the Frankian state . They are now part of the Roman Empire .
 The Dukes of Saxony eventually became kings and, from the time of Otto I — crowned in 962—emperors in their own right . Otto I, Otto I and Otto II, were crowned kings of the Saxony in 963 . Otto II was Otto III, Otto
 This strongly Germanic eastern section of the empire would, in time, part company with the western region, which had once been Roman Gaul . Roman Gaul was once part of the Roman empire, but it was never Roman Gaul again .
 The division, agreed among Louis the Pious's sons at the Treaty of Verdun in 843, eventually became permanent . The division was agreed among the sons of the French monarch .
 In the meantime, troubles continued along the Frankish empire's frontiers, with unrest among the Slavs and Danes on the one hand and the Basques and Bretons on the other .
 Viking raiders looted coastal peoples of Europe and North Africa for almost IOO years . Viking Raids and the Norman Conquest took place between the 8th and 9th century .
 Over time the Vikings settled down to a life of trade, but though their raiding days were behind them, they were just as formidable in war as they were in war . The Vikings were known for raiding raids across the world .
 Scandinavia's lack of tillable land in Scandinavia has led to a population decline . Before, Scandinavia was scarce in the region, the population had to rely heavily on farming .
 No land meant no livelihood—and more prosperous societies were there for the taking . No land means no livelihood, and more prosperous society was there to the taking, says author .
 The peoples of Scandinavia lived as farmers, keeping cattle, sheep, and pigs, and growing crops, but land was at a premium . Land was at an important part of the culture of the region .
 Much of the interior was mountainous, so people clustered around the coasts . The pressure on arable areas was intense, so the pressure on the coasts was intense .
 Landless men without prospects at home set out to prey on other, more successful, civilizations . Landless people without prospects in home preyed on other successful civilizations. Landless .
 Great monastery on Lindisfarne was sacked and pillaged in the first known Viking raid in 793 . The monastery was located on an island off England's Northumbrian coast .
 Viking raids were to recur only too frequently as Viking raids became a fact of life . Unfortunately, such terrible, nightmarish scenes were to continue only too often .
 Monastic houses were a favorite target, but ordinary towns and villages also fell prey to the brutal invaders . Villages had rich treasures, isolated settings, and helpless inhabitants .
 Danish Vikings sailed back and forth across the North Sea to eastern England . Vikings sailed between Denmark and England in the 16th century .
 Vikings from Norway stopped off at the islands of Orkney and Shetland en route for Ireland with its ancient monasteries . Vikings took a more westerly course, though, stopping off at Orkneys .
 Viking vessel Streamlined for speed, was fast enough for its crew to rely upon the advantage of surprise . Vikings established bases around the world .
 Typically, it would lurk beyond the horizon, dashing for the coast once darkness fell . It would then head for the shoreline, heading for the ocean .
 Some were ""dragon ships,"" with dragon-shaped prows . Some were 'dragon ships' with 'dragon-shaped' prows. Others were "dragon ships"
 The Vikings reached much of medieval Europe and Asia and even ventured across the Atlantic at Dublin and along the Seine and Loire rivers in France where they could wait out the winter, ready to resume raiding in spring .
 While some headed westward across the Atlantic, others set up colonies in Iceland, Greenland, and ultimately North America . Others explored the warmer waters of the south .
 9th century saw raids along the coasts of Spain, Morocco, and even the Canary Islands . Raids were made in the 9th and 10th century .
 They came to the Byzantine metropolis in peace in order to find a market for slaves they had captured . However, they primarily came in peace to find markets for their slaves .
 Many Vikings hired themselves out to the Byzantines as mercenaries, forming an elite unit, the Varangian Guard . Many Vikings joined the Byzantine army as mercenaries .
 Sometimes a Viking, crazed by the excitement of battle, would tear off his ""sark" or tunic, and fight barechested . Increasingly, war-parties banded BESERK together for more ambitious raids .
 Normans came back as conquerors, wresting these vulnerable territories from Byzantine rule . Having arrived as mercenaries, the Normans arrived as mercenary forces . Normans were able to take over the Balkans from the Byzantine empire .
 Guiscard carved out a kingdom for himself in Sicily and southern Italy . He won what turned into an unseemly struggle of Norman warlords, and carved out his kingdom .
 Viking ax was a badge of wealth and status . Viking battle-ax was often ornate and a symbol of status and wealth .
 It landed an army of up to 3,000 men, including both Norwegian and Danish Vikings . The Vikings landed the land in Norway, Denmark and Norway .
 They defeated an Anglo-Saxon militia force led by Ealdorman Byrhtnoth . Marching up to Maldon in Essex, they finally defeated the militia .
 The invaders soon withdrew on payment of a large ransom . But not before the AngloSaxon leader was killed .
 The Vikings were not just raiders, they were also formidable in larger-scale, static warfare . Vikings seldom bothered with armor, but Normans did . Norman body armor was more individualistic in Inlaid blade Norman body armour .
 As the Bayeux Tapestry shows, the Normans wore chainmail hauberks that came down to the knees, with a split in the chain to facilitate riding . The Normans used to wear chainmail to protect their fighting style .
 Battle-axes, swords, and circular, hide-covered wooden shields were items of immense prestige . Their owners had intimidatory war names (Erik Bloodaxe; Bjorn Ironside; Ragnar Hairy-Breeks)
 The Vikings were beginning to behave more like conventional conquerors . The Vikings had begun to behave like a conventional conqueror . They had been in the midst of a crushing defeat .
 In the late 9th century Olav Tryggvason made a kingdom out of Norway . King Cnut the Great joined Norway and Denmark with England to form a Nordic empire .
 Norwegian Vikings or Norsemen had started to put down permanent roots in France, adopting the language, culture, and Christian religion . The name ""Normans"" comes from Norsemen .
 Normans kept their longships but took up the French way of fighting . Normans used armor and heavy cavalry in 1066 . The events of 1066 would show.
 King Harold's English army had been forced to march from Yorkshire, where just days before it had fought off Harald Hardrada, the Norwegian king .
 On October 14, Harold ranged his troops at the top of Senlac Hill, near Hastings . Harold's troops ranged their troops at top of the hill .
 William ordered his forces to feign retreat before Harold's Anglo-Saxon army . William's forces feigned retreat to avoid Harold's forces . Harold's army was defeated by William's army .
 The ploy enticed the English down from their advantageous position to the boggy ground below, where they were at the mercy of William's cavalry . It enticed them down to the ground below to face the risk of being attacked by William's troops .
 Harold's struggle continued for hours, and might easily have ended differently had Harold not fatally fallen . Even so, the struggle continued, and may have ended with Harold's death . Harold and Harold are still alive today .
 By nightfall, victory for William was complete, and the English throne was his . William's victory was complete and he was crowned king .
 As the generations passed, Scandinavia's peoples began to move away from the policy of plunder . In the 1030s Norman armies had gone to assist the AFTER ‘_ d f”
 The dreaded ""dragon ship"" made way for the shorter, rounder knarr . The dreaded 'dragon ship' made way to the shorter and more rounded knarrs .
 The merchant navy followed the same routes as their raiding ancestors . Now, though, they came peacefully as traders, transporting goods such as timber, weapons, ivory and furs .
 The strong state the Normans had built in England fell apart in the ""Anarchy"" of the 12th century . Normans built a strong state in England, but it fell apart during the Anarchy .
 Norman, Byzantine, and Arabic influences came together in a complex fusion . During that time, successors of Robert Guiscard had created a buoyant and prosperous multicultural kingdom in Sicily .
 Normans built many ""instant castles"" on campaign by what was known as the motte-and-bailey method . Normans used the method to build many castles on campaign . SIMEON OF DURHAM on the HAVOC THE NORMANS WROUG
 First, a motte, or ""mound of earth,"" was constructed (or an existing rise or outcrop used) with a wooden stronghold or ""keep"", erected on top . The motte or "keep" was built on top of a hill or hill .
 A ""curtain wall"" was then placed around the motte, enclosing an open area, or ""bailey,"" in which arms could be stored and horses grazed . The motte was then enclosed in an area where arms were stored, and horses could be grazed
 These forts could be assembled almost overnight and later rebuilt in stone . The forts were assembled in stone and could be easily assembled overnight .
 The many different Turkic peoples formed small and scattered nomadic groups . Turkic nomads formed small groups of nomadic tribes .
 Their lifestyle was prone to instability, as competition for water and pasture could be intense .
 Abbasid dynasty held nominal sovereignty over Islam's dominions . But local warlords were starting to assert themselves .
 The end of the first millennium brought a new wave of migration, propelling Islamicized Turks into the region . Many of them were enslaved by the region's rulers, many of them enslaved .
 These ghulams (slavesoldiers) served with unquestioning loyalty . Skilled fighters with nothing invested in the rivalries and conflicts of the Middle East .
 The Turks who appeared in the Middle East during the 9th century were outsiders and slaves . They were to exercise a powerful influence upon the region's history and upon that of Europe .
 Various Turkish empires repeatedly to alarm Byzantium until, finally, they triggered the crusades . The crusades were triggered by various Turkish empires, including the Ottomans, and the Turks .
 Arab invasions of the 7th and 8th centuries left an enduring legacy . The Arab invasion of Europe in the 8th and 9th century left a lasting legacy .
 Through much of the area they conquered, the Arabic influence—and Islam—still prevail today . The Arabic influence is still strong in the region .
 The Arab nobility was growing weaker and its authority increasingly ignored . Whether now exhausted by centuries of conflict, or spread too thinly over such vast dominions, the Arab nobility grew weaker .
 In Iran, especially, regional identities had been reasserting themselves . Local families were once again coming to the fore . The Samanids were the first Samanid to come to prominence .
 The Samanid dynasty had arisen among the Tajik peoples, establishing an empire that extended into Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and present-day Pakistan . In the east, in the early 9th century, the Samanids had established a dynasty that extended to Afghanistan and Uzbekistan .
 Turks were superlative horsemen and seasoned fighters, expert with composite bow and sword . Like the other nomadic peoples of the Central Asian steppe, the Turks were horsemen .
 By the 10th century, the Simjurids had gone their own way, governing from Daylarn, a mountainous region to the south of the Caspian Sea . Khurasan (an area including the east of Iran, the Bukhara region of Uzbekistan,
 The Buyids deposed the caliph and ruled in their own right, but they started to be undermined by warlords in the regions . They were deposed by the Buyids and ruled the country for more than a century .
 Regular raiding east into India assured a steady flow of booty that underwrote a golden age of architecture, art, and culture .
 The Seljuk Turks were to be overthrown by yet another influx of Turkic nomads from the Central Asian steppe . The Ghaznavids were overthrown in their turn by yet more influx of . Turkic . nomads . arrived from the . steppe from the
 The Seljuk Turks gained their name because they had originally come together under the leadership of a charismatic warlord . They originally came together under leadership of warlord Selkuk, a charismatic leader of the Selkur .
 The Seljuk mace head has raised fins to focus the impact of any blow . Beautifully decorated with flowing foliage and fine calligraphy .
 The mace is stereotypically seen as a Western weapon in contrast to the Eastern scimitar . The idea may well have reached Europe through the crusades all but independently of their masters .
 The Ghulam dynasty was taken over by the Ghaznavids, their name deriving from the city of Ghazni, where their founder, Alpi Tigin, had made his headquarters in 962 . In turn, this breakaway state was taken by the rival Gh
 Abbasid caliphs of Baghdad had also recruited Turkic ghulams and were coming under mounting pressure from their supposed slaves . Meanwhile, to the west of the empire, the Abbasid Caliphs were also recruiting Turkic gulams .
 In the event, the caliphs managed to prevent a coup by the ghulams . But only by seeking the help of the Buyids, a dynasty of Iranian warlords the 10th century Seljuk had set himself up at the head of the Oghuz Confederation .
 This brought together a large number of nomadic communities who until then had been living in the Syr basin . The area is an area of open grassland to the north and east of the Aral Sea . It is now home to the largest population in the world .
 It was a loose and opportunistic alliance, formed for the purposes of conquest and plunder . It was formed for purposes of plunder and conquest, says the historian .
 Seljuk Turks might have remained one more of many raggle-taggle warbands roaming the western steppe . Even so, they might have been inspired by the 72 teachings of Muslim missionaries .
 All of his followers embraced Islam, and when his grandsons, Tugril Beg and Chagri, began their first raids on the northern frontier of the Ghaznavid empire, they did so . They did so with the justification that they were fighting in the prophet's
 Mahmud of Ghazni's son, Mas'ud I, saw himself as the champion of Islam . However, Mahmud's son Mahmud was the son of the king of Islam, who was killed in the battle .
 He marched out to meet the interlopers with a mighty army, some 50,000 strong . The king's army was some of the largest in the world at the time of the invasion .
 Seljuks jabbed and harried, cutting off enemy supplies and preventing access to strategic wells . As this formidable force marched northward, the Seljakis jabbed, harried .
 The two armies clashed at Dandankan (now in eastern Turkmenistan) on May 23,1040. The two sides clashed at the site of the clash, now known as Dandankaan . The two nations fought each other at the time .
 Mahmud's men were defeated before the order came to engage . Dehydrated, hungry, and demoralized, Mahmud was defeated by his men .
 The Dandankan victory opened up a way to the west, heading over the Ghaznavid empire and beyond into Iraq . The battle was the first of its kind in the Middle Ages, and the second in centuries .
 The Seljuk Sultans (as they now referred to themselves) expected to rule jointly with the caliphs . The Selkuk sultans were now known as the Selkans .
 The Seljuk empire was dedicated to the strictest principles of Sunni Islam and to the punishment of infidels of every kind . It was also dedicated to punishing infidelists and punishing them for their crimes .
 To Arp Aslan, Tugril Beg's nephew and (on his uncle's death in 1063) his successor, that included both Christian Byzantium and the Shiite Fatimid dynasty then ruling Egypt . The Fatimids ruled Egypt from 1063 onwards .
 Arp Aslan then took Syria, invaded Palestine, Egypt, and even Arabia itself in a bid to ""liberate"" the two holy sanctuaries of Mecca and Medina from Shiite rule . Aslan invaded Palestine and Egypt, then invaded Arabia itself to take control .
 Seljuk Turks came to Europe through SULTAN A Turkish king or emperor . The Selkuk Turks were the first to come to Europe . They came to the continent through Sultan A Turkish emperor .
 Wooden cushions between the tiers of brick afforded some protection from earthquakes . The more anxious Christendom became. their campaign of conquest, the more anxious they became .
 When Arp Aslan destroyed the Byzantine army at the battle of Manzikert in 1071, the West was in the grip of something close to panic . The West was gripped by something close-to-panic at the time .
 Byzantine emperor Romanus IV had an army of up to 60,000 warriors at his disposal . The Byzantine emperor, Romanus III, had a total of 60,500 warriors .
 Such vast numbers ought to have made short work of the Turkish cavalry force, which, at most, numbered only 20,000 men, in theory, would have been able to make short work . The Turkish force, however, was only about 30,000 strong .
 Byzantine army was a motley assortment of Frankish, Norman, Bulgarian, and German mercenaries . They were bound to one another by ties of comradeship and loyalty that were simply lacking in the Byzantine army .
 The extent of disunity among the Byzantine troops became clear when, as evening approached after an initial and inconclusive round of fighting, the Byzantine leader gave the order to withdraw .
 Seljuk infantrymen prepare to enter battle in carved Turkish relief from the 13th century . Fearing that their commander had sensed defeat and was trying to fight back, they feared for their own safety .
 Arp Aslan's son, Malik Shah, succeeded him in 1072, advancing the work his father had begun at Manzikert . He took most of Anatolia from the Byzantines .
 The majority of the soldiers turned and fled the battlefield in abject rout . He furthered the cause of Sunni Islam during his reign .
 In the years that followed, Muslim Turks overran Anatolia, fundamentally transforming what had been a Christian land with a Hellenistic culture . The Muslim Turks fundamentally transformed Anatolia into a Muslim state .
 The Middle East was Islamic, and the stage was set for one of the great showdown struggles of the medieval age . Now the Middle East is Islamic, it was the first time the region had seen Islamic rule .
 The rise of the Seljuk Turks caused great consternation in the Christian West . The rise in the Muslim world was a major concern for the Christian west .
 Seljuk capture of Jerusalem from the Fatimids in 1073 was of symbolic rather than strategic importance for the West . But for fearful Christendom it seemed the final straw for the Christian Crusades .
 In 1092, following Malik Shah's death, one son, Kalij Arslan I, founded the ""Sultanate of Rum,"" so-called because its Anatolian territories had been taken from the Byzantines or Romans . The SELJUK EMPIRE
 Islam had already made significant inroads into continental Europe . From Latin word crux meaning ""cross," a military campaign on behalf of the Christian faith under siege .
 Constantinople was clinging on, but its wider empire had inexorably been whittled away by the conquests first of the Arabs and then of the Seljuk Turks . Constantinople's wider empire was whittling away, but it was still clinging on .
 The idea of a military expedition or crusade to recover the ""Holy Places"" for Christian pilgrims was the perfect rallying point for a wider attack on Islamic power . However, when the Byzantines appealed to Pope Urban II for assistance, he found the idea of military expedition . The idea was
 Pope Urban II called on all Christians to join the fight for their holy faith . The Council of Clermont in 1095 described the plight of Christian Byzantium, its dominions overrun by a ""godless rabble"
 His speech roused ardor with its promise of eternal salvation for those who enlisted . But it also fired a greed for territories and plunder .
 Cheers erupted and in the weeks that followed this enthusiasm spread across Europe, among rich and poor . Cheers erupt and in weeks after this, this enthusiasm spreads across Europe .
 Though highly enthusiastic, the army gathered in Constantinople for the assault on the Holy Land was disorganized, untrained, and very poorly provisioned . The army that gathered in . Constantinople gathered in the . invasion of the Holy . Land was very poor provisioned and disorganized .
 The French nobility expected to fight as heavy cavalry themselves but had brought very large companies of infantrymen armed with swords, shields, and bows . The French noblemen expected to be heavy cavalry .
 The excited mood was quickly sobered by the searing sun and rugged terrain of Anatolia's mountains—Seljuk Turk territory . The sun and mountains are the most rugged terrain in the region .
 Of the 100,000 soldiers who set out from Constantinople, only 40,000 reached Antioch in Syria . Only 40,00 soldiers reached Antioch, Syria, in total .
 Those who did, in October 1097, found a city built—and fortified—on an intimidating scale . The city was built in 1097 .
 The crusaders settled down for a siege, although, marooned in hostile territory, they were actually under a sort of siege themselves . The crusader settled down in the midst of a siege themselves.
 Many died of starvation and disease by the time Antioch fell on June 2, 1098 . Many had died by the fall of Antioch .
 It was a severely weakened army—only 12,000 in number now—that marched on to Jerusalem, and the prospect of another extended siege . The crusader kingdoms were once united in the Middle Ages . The Crusades were once one of the world's most successful armies .
 In the event, it took the men only a few months to find their way through Jerusalem's defenses . The men were able to get through the defenses of the city .
 Any crusade represented an enormous logistical challenge for the medieval army . Or O Cordoba Ways of the cross .
 The Fatimid defenders had successfully resisted the crusaders' siege of Jerusalem for several weeks . The crusaders had looked capable of holding out indefinitely . The siege took place in 1099 .
 Christians took their ships apart and used the ropes and wood to construct two enormous siege towers . The Christians took the ships apart to build the siege towers, but the Christians used their ships to construct the towers .
 The Muslims were unfamiliar with such equipment and were unsure how to proceed . The first group of attackers managed to swarm across onto the city walls on July 15 .
 Quickly overpowering the guards, they opened the gates and let their remaining comrades in to commence their orgy of bloodshed .
 More than 30,000 Jews and Muslims are believed to have been slaughtered in the following three days . The slaughter took place in the wake of the Holocaust .
 They set up a series of states across Syria and Palestine, including the County of Edessa in Armenia, the Principality of Antioch in Syria, and the Kingdom of Jerusalem in Palestine .
 A County of Tripoli (in what is now Lebanon) was added in 1104, with a ""military order"" of soldier-priests set up in 1120 to help protect the Holy Places . A county of Tripoli was added to Tripoli in the Middle Ages . A military order was
 The priests were named the Knights Templar after the Temple of Jerusalem . The Knights Templar were named after the temple in Jerusalem .
 Though the Temple of Jerusalem and other monuments were now in Christian hands, the territory outside Jerusalem was less firmly held . The area outside Jerusalem remained largely Christian, but was held by the Christian side .
 The knights became armed escorts to pilgrims in the 1130s . They protected them from the hostile environment of pilgrims .
 The Order of the Knights Hospitallers would build the city's defenses . They too were militarized as well as the Order . The Order built the defenses of the city in the city .
 The seal of the Knights Templar depicts two knights on one horse . Legend has it that this is a sign of the order's early poverty . As the fighting continued, the limitations became apparent .
 A knight's heavy armor was an uncomfortable hindrance in the heat, and the wearer was easily outmaneuvered by the swifter, more lightly armed Muslims .
 Arab cavalry wore no armor, relying on speed and agility, while the ghulam (armored slave-soldiers) brought the battle to the enemy on their own terms .
 Seljuks retaken the County of Edessa in 1144 came as a shock to the Muslim community . Muslim Muslims fought back against the Seljikes' retaking of the county .
 Pope Eugenius Ill's call for a Second Crusade was largely ignored, until it was taken up by the popular French abbot, Bernard of Clairvaux . King Louis VII and Conrad III of Germany followed, followed by King Conrad of Germany .
 Conrad Ill's contingent set off from Constantinople but suffered a shattering defeat at Dorylaeum, in southern Turkey, in 1147 . Conrad Ill’s contingent set . off from . Constantinople but | suffered a crushing defeat at the Turkish city of Dory .
 What was left of his army met up with the French who, coming by sea, had now landed safely . The French landed safely in France .
 The Muslims now had the initiative, they were also fired by the spirit of jihad, reignited by their outrage at this second invasion by the West . Muslims now have the initiative; they were . also fired .
 The army of llghazi of Mardin trounced the crusaders at the battle of Ager Sanguinis in 1119 . The battle took place at the end of the year 1119.
 The heavily armed Christians labored in the heat and dust of the Middle East . The heavily-armed Christians were killed in the fighting .
 The First Crusade was a success for the Christians but the Muslims were on the ascent . The Crusades were a success in the Middle Ages, but the Muslim faith was on the rise in Europe .
 A breakdown of relations with Byzantium left the crusaders reliant on seaborne supplies . The securing of coastal bridgeheads was vital for the Crusaders .
 Further expeditions were needed if the Christian presence in the Middle East was to be maintained . Christian presence was needed to maintain .
 Despite best efforts of the Christians, the Muslims were in the ascendant . Despite the best efforts, the Christians were in an ascendant. The Muslims are now in the ascendence.
 After initial success, the crusading movement had succeeded only in building rancor between Christians and Muslims . The crusades movement had failed to build rancor .
 A series of humiliating failures left the West feeling defeated and demoralized . Further crusades were mounted in the years that followed, but the West was defeated . The West was left demoralized by a series of defeats .
 Salah al-Din was famous as a warrior yet a thinker and thinker too . He carried this volume wherever he went, and it was important to him .
 Born in Tikrit, Iraq, he had risen in the service of Egypt's Fatimid caliphs . By 1131 he had set himself up as sultan, founding his own dynasty, the Ayyubids .
 The following years saw him extend that power as he cut a swathe through the crusader states . He finally took Jerusalem in 1187, but he always saw himself as fighting in the service of the truth .
 Most Christian believers felt that their mission had been accomplished, but their leaders knew that without control of the hinterland, the Holy City was vulnerable . The Holy City is vulnerable .
 Fighting continued and, as time went on, it grew harder to see how the Christian presence in the Middle East was to be maintained . Christian Christians were not allowed to leave the region .
 To make matters worse, a new generation of energetic Muslim leaders, like the Emir of Syria, Nur ad-Din, and Saladin, were coming to the fore . To make it worse, the new generation was coming forward .
 Henry II imposed a ""Saladin Tithe"" in England to fund a crusade that, in the event, never took place . After Saladin's capture of Jerusalem in 1187, the Tithe was imposed by Henry II .
 Nur ad-Din had worked hard to unite Islam after the collapse of the Second Crusade . He inspired his followers with a cold-blooded determination to drive out the infidels .
 In 1157 he had confined the Knights Hospitallers to their fortress and destroyed the army that marched out from Jerusalem to relieve them . He had confined them to the fortress in 1157 .
 Saladin was also a politician of rare talent and a general of genius wiped out . Saladin's death was the result of his assassination in the fall of the year .
 Leopold made it through, but with only a few thousand troops he could do little to help the crusader king, Guy of Jerusalem, who was bogged down in a stalemate with Saladin outside Acre .
 The port city was important to the Christians, who could not anticipate holding on to Jerusalem (in the event of their retaking it) without some safe way of bringing in supplies . The Christians could not expect to keep control of Jerusalem without a way of getting supplies .
 Richard I was 16 when he was entrusted with the command of his own army . The young king was sent to crush a rebellion against his rule in France . Richard I's father Henry II entrusted the young king with his army .
 He met his match in Saladin, however, and, for all his determination and dazzling generalship, his Third Crusade was at best only partially successful .
 The Third Crusade was declared within a few weeks of Saladin's recapture of Jerusalem . It was led by kings Richard the Lionheart of England, Philip II of France, and Frederick I of Germany .
 Frederick I drowned while crossing a river in Anatolia en route to the Holy Land . Frederick I set off in 1188, months before his fellow monarchs, and drowned in the process .
 The capture of Jerusalem in 1099 had been an undoubted triumph for the West . His successor, Leopold V of Austria, was unable to take charge effectively in the ensuing panic and a huge German army was practically v .
 The Holy Land was a long journey from Europe to the Holy Land . Islamic opposition was growing in Europe and growing in the Middle East . But Islamic opposition to the Islamic state was growing .
 A suit of chain mail in the style of a Saracen warrior of the crusader period . But there was Saracens armor .
 Medieval armor was flexible and could be relatively light to wear . Armor provided good protection both from thrusts and slashing strokes . Armor was flexible .
 Padding underneath the chain mail helped deflect arrows, while a kaftan on top allowed the wearer to be recognized . Also prevented the metallic armor from overheating in the sun .
 Leopold and Philip II had to leave the field following reports of unrest back in France . Richard and Philip were unable to agree on how to proceed next .
 On September 7, at Arsuf, north of Jaffa, the pressure from Saladin's forces became so unrelentingly intense that the Christian Knights Hospitallers could tolerate no more and broke first . The Christian Knights of Knights broke first in the battle .
 The last great flowering of the crusading ideal came with the Seventh Crusade, escorted by King Louis IX of France . The Crusades were led by the King of France, Louis IX .
 Louis took with him with him an army of 15,000, including his mounted knights, his regular infantry, and crossbowmen . Louis was accompanied by a large force of men and women .
 This left Richard alone at the head of the Third Crusade, he was undaunted, planning his mission in great detail . The road to Arsuf is the 12th Century of the Crusades .
 He marched his army south to where they could find food and water . On August 22, 1191, he left Acre, marching his army to find food for his troops .
 To their right, the cavalry were able to make progress relatively safely, while up ahead the baggage train lurched along, shielded by both the infantry and horses . The baggage train was shielded from the enemy's fire, while the cavalry made progress .
 Their ships tracked the coast to fend off any potential threat from the seaward side . Meanwhile, their ships tracked them down the coast in search of the rebels .
 Richard remained in control of the situation, his generalship turning certain defeat into triumph . Under Richard's leadership, his men now remain loyal to him .
 Saladin and his army of Saracens suffered a disastrous setback . Richard the Lionheart's reputation had been boosted, though it was difficult to see any tangible benefits from his victory . Saladin's reputation was boosted .
 He was recalled to England soon after, having failed to win back the holy city of Jerusalem from the Saracens .
 The Christians would have to keep fighting—and some were reaping huge . The number of knights / U f U J taken by King Andrew II of Hungary on the Fifth Crusade . King Andrew I of Hungary of Hungary took part in the crusade .
 Venice provided much of the waterborne transport during the Fourth Crusade in 1199 . Enrico Dandolo, the Venetian Doge, made sure that Venice earned a lot of money . Venice was a major source of revenue during the Crusades .
 The Fourth Crusade was to have a hideous conclusion when the fleet diverted to Constantinople and its Christian troops sacked the city . Many thousands were killed as the Christian troops burned and looted for three days .
 In 1228 the Sixth Crusade saw Germany's king Frederick II negotiate the return of Jerusalem . The concessions he made outraged his fellow Europeans . Frederick II made concessions in 1228 to return Jerusalem to Europe .
 The king and his entire company were taken prisoner and taken prisoner . An enormous ransom was demanded for the restoration of the monarch . The king's entire company was taken prisoner, and the king was captured .
 In 1270, unfazed, Louis embarked on the Eighth Crusade, but only made it to Tunis, where he died . Louis was unfazed and continued his crusade, but died in 1270 .
 A Ninth Crusade led by England's Edward I began the following year, but Edward fared rather less well against the Mameluks .
 The Fourth Crusade began with an amphibious landing and ended with the sack of the Catholic city of Zara . The siege of the city was the culmination of the Fourth Crusade .
 A series of ignominious failures had left Europe exhausted, demoralized, and disenchanted with the crusading dream; yet it managed to find a new focus . Europe managed to found new focus after a series of failures .
 Christendom's rulers launched ""crusades" against the pagan Slavs on their eastern borders, as well as Orthodox Christians in the Balkans . The rulers of the region launched the attacks on the Slavs in order to protect themselves .
 The Knights Templar was finally disbanded in 1305 . The ""military orders"" still prospered .
 Islam's influence grew, but still the Turks came in from the eastern steppe . Islam grew in Islam, but the Turks continued to come from the steppies .
 It once contained relics of the ""True Cross"" and fragments of the bones of Christian martyrs . The site is located in the middle of the Middle Ages .
 King Louis IX of France personified the crusading movement in all its idealistic ardor, its heroism, and its haplessness . Louis IX was the French king of the French Revolution .
 His piety could not be doubted, and his personal kindness was legendary, yet he burned with rage to see the Holy Places of Jerusalem in Islamic hands . His piety was not doubted, but he burned against seeing them taken over .
 The Seventh Crusade was ultimately a disaster and the Eighth ended prematurely with his death . But the Eighth Crusade was a disaster, and the Crusade ended prematurely .
 They sailed from the port of Aigues-Mortes in southern France, specially rebuilt for the purpose, via Cyprus, to Damietta in the Nile Delta .
 Louis St. Louis aimed to establish a bridgehead here before approaching Jerusalem and the Holy Land .
 Contemporary chronicles see no conflict between Louis' humility and his kingly pride, nor between his roles as a believer and as a battler for Christ .
 At the time Louis IX ascended the French throne of France, there had been no fewer than six crusades .
 It now took a visionary to continue to believe in the crusading ideal . Perhaps it now takes a visionary, perhaps it took a vision to continue .
 A boy of 12 when he was crowned in 1226, he reigned with the guidance of his mother for the first few years . He retained a certain childlike innocence all his life, and his innocence .
 In 1239 Louis spent a fortune buying what was believed to be a fragment of the ""True Cross" and the ""Crown of Thorns" that Christ's tormentors had forced him to wear . Louis spent the money on what he believed to have been Christ's "True Cross
 To house these holy relics in Paris, he built the stunning Saint Chapelle . To house the relics, the architect built the chapel in Paris .
 One of France's greatest Gothic churches, it was a riot of extravagant vaulting and stained glass . It was one of the world's most famous Gothic churches .
 The young king Louis' youth seemed an open invitation to France's power-hungry barons . Louis was king of France in 17th century . He died in 18th Century of France .
 Three-petalled fleurs de lys symbolize the French royal virtues of faith, wisdom, and chivalry, as well as the Holy Trinity . But his tough and determined way with a series of rebels made it clear that—pious or not, he was no weakling
 Hugh of Lusignan allied himself with Henry III of England . Louis defeated them at Taillebourg in western France in 1242 . Hugh and Hugh allied themselves with the English king .
 Louis learned that Jerusalem was back in Muslim hands . Two years later, as he recovered from a bout of malaria, Louis learned of Jerusalem's fate .
 Emperor Frederick II negotiated its return in 1228, but now Egypt's Ayyubid rulers had retaken it . Frederick II had negotiated the return of the land to Frederick II .
 St. Louis' barons must have felt he was still delirious when he proclaimed a Seventh Crusade . Louis' Barons must've felt he . felt he had to proclaim a Seventh . Crusade .
 The visionary and the soldier came together in Louis' career as a crusader . Louis' life as a soldier and visionary came together during his time in the Army .
 St. Louis hoped that he and his people might show themselves worthy of the New Jerusalem by recapturing the old one . Louis hoped to show himself worthy of New Jerusalem .
 The crusaders took Damietta in 1249, only to be caught out by the annual Nile flood . They were caught out in the annual flood of the Nile in the Nile .
 Their army was pinned down by the Sultan of Egypt's forces, and then almost annihilated at the battle of Fariskur . When they finally managed to make their move, in April 1250, they were almost completely annihilated .
 Louis's strategic planning left much to be desired . Despite leading with great distinction in the field, Louis left behind a poor record of strategic planning .
 He was captured, along with his two brothers, and an enormous ransom had to be paid for his return . An enormous ransom was paid for the return of him .
 On his release, he spent time in the Holy Land, helping to refortify cities against Muslim attack . He was released from prison in December .
 In 1267 he called another crusade directed against the powerful new rulers of Egypt, the Mamelukes . The crusade was directed against Egypt's new rulers .
 Louis fell sick after drinking contaminated water in Tunis . In 1270, he landed his army at Tunis and besieged the city . He died August 25, 1270 .
 Many of his soldiers suffered the same fate, and the crusade was abandoned . Many of the crusade's soldiers died, and many of them were killed .
 For all his failures, his idealism had been an inspiration to his contemporaries . Yet, for all their failures, he had been a inspiration to others .
 Louis VII was shown embarking from Cyprus on the Second Crusade in 1148 . His great-grandfather, Louis VII, was also on the crusade to Cyprus . Louis VII is shown in a new picture of his great grandfather's journey .
 Minamoto and Taira fight in a flurry of swirling banners and flashing tachi swords . J Samurai warfare is a classic battle between the two .
 Some ride into battle, lances leveled like Western knights, but most have dismounted and engage in single combat . Some ride in battle, but others dismount and engage single combat. Some of the world's most famous battles have been fought in the past .
 The tenno or emperor of Japan was in medieval times a marginal figure . Though his official status was divine, he was a minor figure in Japan .
 By the 9th century dominant dynasties were emerging, their ascendancy embodied in the strength of the armies of samurai warriors they had assembled .
 These factions grew up around important families, though most of those fighting for them were not blood relations . These factions are known as ""clans,"" since they grew up in important families .
 Fujiwara clan quickly established its presence, holding sway as sesshos, or ""regents,"" and wielding the emperor's authority on his behalf . It was the first family to hold sway over the emperor .
 By the 12th century, its influence was ebbing fast and other families were poised to take its place . The 12th-century family was one of the most influential families in Europe .
 Conflict raging for generations between the powerful Minamoto and Taira clans, finally flared up into a full-blown civil war . Conflict raged for generations before the war broke out in Japan .
 The Hogon Rebellion of 1156 saw the Fujiwara themselves reduced to figureheads . The Minamoto and Taira fought over who should have power behind the scenes .
 Three years later, after the Heiji Rebellion, the Taira established Japan's first samurai government . The Minamoto, however, felt they still had absolutely everything to fight for .
 Japan's Gempei Wars has the ring of heroic myth . With feuding families, its warring samurai, and its epic scale, the story is epic scale .
 The conflict convulsed Japan for five terrible years, leaving a lasting historical and cultural legacy . Yet the conflict convulsion left a lasting cultural and historical legacy . Japan is still recovering from the war .
 It transformed the country's military institutions and attitudes. Moreover, it transformed the nation's military .
 The wrath of the Minamoto boiled over in 1180 . S immering since the humiliation of the Heiji Rebellion three years before .
 Taira no Kiyomori, having first forced Emperor Takakura to abdicate, had installed his one-year-old grandson on the throne . The Emperor's grandson was one year old .
 Prince Mochihito, was the half-brother of Takakura and was angry at being cheated out of the succession . He was angry that he was not able to inherit the throne of Japan . Takakura was angry he was cheated of succession .
 Prince Mochihito was put to death, but Minamoto Yorimasa avoided capture . He avoided capture by avoiding capture by hiding himself .
 In 1181, at Sunomatagawa, the Minamoto did attempt a nocturnal ambush, but were detected in the darkness and defeated . The Minamoto were defeated in 1181 by the Japanese people .
 The Heike Monogatari is the great 13th-century epic account of the Gempei Wars . Curved blade Horsemanship was held in high regard, even though the samurai fought mainly on foot .
 The warrior's sword was his proudest possession, the symbol of his military prowess . The sword was the instrument of his ritual suicide if he were defeated .
 From that time, this ritual suicide had its special place in the samurai code . The samurai code enabled defeated warriors to die with honor, enabling them to do so with honor .
 Hearing rustling of birds' wings in the night, the Taira sentries up-close and intimate the fighting was . Hearing the rustling, the sentries were able to see the fighting up close and up close .
 Like the heroes of Homer's Trojan War, warriors make stirring speeches before battle and trade insults as they engage in single combat . The Trojan War was fought in ancient Greece and Greece in ancient times .
 I 1,300 The number of ships that are thought to have dashed at the battle of Dan-no-Ura in the Inland Sea . This is all part of a new series of pictures from the battle .
 The Taira clan were crushingly defeated in the literary convention, affording an opportunity for building suspense . The book is set to be released on Friday .
 samurai were schooled in their vocation as small boys horseback . There was no more noble calling than that of the soldier . samurai were taught to ride on horseback as boys .
 The cult of the katana, or ""samurai sword,"" was yet to be established, but the warrior still took pride in his skill with the long, curved tachi sword and with the dagger .
 The samurai who willingly gave up his life did so in the certain knowledge that he would be rewarded with both honor and everlasting fame . But the samurai who died in Japan did so knowing he would get the most honor and fame .
 An exchange of arrows by both sides was typically followed by a battle that unfolded as a series of highly formal single combats between warriors . The battle was typically a battle between two sides of the ages .
 This ritualized way of making war could not be sustained, says President Obama . Changing times, changing fortunes can be reversed, he says .
 In the Heike Monogatari, the Minamoto drew the Taira into an engagement of this kind at Kurikara in 1183 . But only as a decoy, the bulk of Minamoto Yoshinaka's army crept around to attack from the rear . The bulk
 Yoshinaka tied torches to the horns of frightened cattle, which were sent stampeding into the Taira . The Tairai was the Japanese city of the same name .
 The Minamoto were split by a number of bitter power struggles in the following months . Despite this, the Minamoto remained loyal and loyal to each other . In the following years, they were involved in a series of power struggles .
 Yoritomo, loyally backed by his cousin, Yoshitsune, emerged the victor . Yoshitsunes was Yoritsomo's cousin . Yoritsune was the Japanese leader of Japan .
 At Ichi-no-Tani in 1184, the Minamoto went on the offensive, forcing the Taira to fall back on their home territory around the Inland Sea . The Minamoto were forced to retreat from their territory .
 In 1185 Yoritomo set out to take the Taira's main fortress at Yashima, off Shikoku, off the coast of Japan .
 He had a party of men build fires in the hills inland to persuade the Taira that his army was approaching from that direction .
 The Taira took to their ships to make their escape, only to find the Minamoto sailing at them from the seaward side . The Minamoto sailed at them, and they were forced to flee .
 The battle of Yashima was more of a humiliation than a real defeat for the Taira . Most of them managed to make their way to safety, but most of them made their way out .
 Yoshitsune was born in 1159, the year of the Heiji Rebellion . The MINAMOTO YOSHITSUNE was born during the Heijin Rebellion .
 According to tradition, he was trained in the arts of war by Sojobo, mythical king of the tengu spirits of Mount Kurama . He is believed to have been trained by the legendary king of tengu spirit .
 In 1180 he joined his cousins, Minamoto Yoritomo and Minamoto Noriyori, in raising an army to fight the Taira clan .
 He went on to win vital victories over the Taira but fell out with Yoritomo, who had him murdered in 1189 .
 Gempei Wars cast a long shadow over the subsequent history of Japan . After the war, Japan's history has been defined as one of the greatest powers in the world .
 Their impact was as much in the political and cultural spheres as in the military . Their impact on the world was also in the cultural sphere as well as the military. Their impact could be as much as political, cultural spheres .
 Shogunates would, with only the briefest interruptions, remain in power until the second half of the 19th century . Shogunates remained in power with only a briefest interruptionions .
 Traditions and values established in medieval times were to resurface in the modern age . Traditions were to be re-emergualised in the medieval age .
 BATTLE OF THE GENII AND THE HEIKE CLANS climactic engagement of the Gempei Wars came a few weeks later at Dan-no-Ura . The battle of the Gen. II and the Heike Clan came to an end in a bloody battle . The
 This was technically a naval battle, though it was really more of a land battle at sea . This was the first naval battle of the Second World War . The Battle of the Battle of Gen. Edward VII was fought at sea in 1877 .
 Warriors fired off showers of arrows as they came into range of one another . Warriors then boarded each other's vessels to continue fighting in hand-to-hand combat .
 Yoritomo's Minamoto Minamoto decisively destroyed the power of the Taira once and for all . It was a rigorous test of samurai strength, and one that Minamoto won, decisively destroying the power .
 Tough nomads ranged the eastern steppe, warring over livestock and resources . Tough, fierce nomads fought over livestock, resources in eastern steppia .
 From time to time they banded together to attack communities in the world beyond . From time and time, they attacked communities beyond . They banded up to attack .
 Mongol nomads lived on the move until the 12th century when they coalesced around a charismatic leader . Genghis Khan was the man known to history as Genghi Khan . Khan was known as the Mongol leader of the Mongols .
 He brought peace to the warring nomads and established a political and military body . He established the political, military body.
 Since ancient times a tide of warlike nomadic peoples had drifted westward out of Central Asia to bring terror to the civilizations of the Middle East and Europe .
 The Mongols were viewed with outright horror by civilized nations . The Mongol invasion of Europe was the first Mongol invasion to invade Europe .
 They were happy to let their savage reputation go before them, but their strategic sophistication tells another story . They were willing to let it all go, but strategic sophistication is telling the tale .
 Mongols were fighters with flair and intelligence, who learned with every conquest . Mongols fought with flair, intelligence, and learned with each conquest . The Mongols are now in control of the world's most powerful state .
 The nomadic-pastoralist lifestyle was an unusual one and those who lived it developed an extraordinarily specialized set of skills . It is the most extinct in the modern world .
 Time after time, in both ancient and medieval history, these aptitudes had translated seamlessly from the open steppes of Central Asia to the field of war . The world's most famous warlord, Gen. Edward VII, was born in the region of the Middle East .
 For generations, they went to war only with one another, tribe against tribe . But when an enterprising warlord fostered a larger warband for an assault on a settled community nearby, it was inevitable .
 Genghis Khan and his sons created the biggest land empire ever seen . Khan's land empire spanned from the Pacific Ocean to Central Europe . Khan was born in small beginnings .
 This freewheeling warrior of the steppe had already shown himself a cunning and calculating politician . This is the first time he has shown himself to be a politician .
 President Obama revealed his infallible instincts as a politician and administrator . Now he has revealed that he has been wronged by his own mistakes .
 He broke up the old hierarchies in Mongol society, marginalizing the traditional elite . The Mongolian leader was a reformer who marginalized the old elite .
 He gave leadership positions to his most trusted friends, or to promising fighters plucked from the ranks . Instead of leadership positions, he gave positions to friends or trusted fighters .
 Having humbled the powerful, he won the gratitude of more vulnerable groups by outlawing the sale of wives and excusing the poorest people from paying taxes .
 Genghis Khan divided his warriors up into groups of ten , a hundred, a hundred , 1,000 and 10,000 —taking care to cut across tribal lines of loyalty . Khan's warriors were divided into groups with groups of 100,000 .
 "He introduced a degree of regimentation to the anarchic warfare of the steppe," he says . "That way he introduced a ... degree of ... regimentation"
 Genghis Khan's grandson, Hulegu, took the Abbasid capital in 1258 . The sack of Baghdad was the first of the Mongol invasion of Baghdad . Genghi's grandson took the capital in the 1258.
 Mongols destroyed the city's dykes, trapping the caliph's army behind a sea of water . The Mongols captured the city and destroyed the dykes .
 Mongols were not the most promising material for nationbuilding . Mongols are scattered, ever-mobile tribal communities . Order from chaos is not the best way to build a nation .
 Many of the tribal leaders resented Genghis Khan's rise to prominence . Certainly, many of the tribes resented his rise to fame .
 Genghis Khan slowly fashioned the Mongols into a coherent people . He coaxed some and forced others, by giving a promise here and administering a little pressure there, he says .
 Agility in the saddle kept the soldiers safe for the most part . Their diminutive horses possessed stamina and speed .
 S. Bowstrin S underestimated just how quickly the brutal invaders would arrive . So much so that settled peoples who received news of Mongol attacks some distance away frequently frequently frequently reported .
 Genghis Khan kept two quivers of arrows in his men's quiver . One was practiced daily to hone and one was kept in reserve to train .
 Maneuvers on horseback were an essential part of herding and hunting life, but there was always scope to iron out imperfections . Maneevers were essential to horseback and herding .
 Rigid regimentation might have been alien to his approach, but discipline was not . Rigid discipline might be alien to him but discipline is not .
 Mongol horsemen caught out enemy forces when they appeared to break formation and flee in disorder . Only to regroup at an instant's notice, they wheel around, and fall upon their helpless enemy .
 Genghis Khan's Mongol army swept through East Asia, invading Xi Xia, the kingdom in northwestern China, in 1207 . Many of his warriors were to fight as armored lancers; he himself developed particular mounted maneuvers .
 The Mongols sacked Zhandu in 1215, before heading south into the heartland of the ""Middle Kingdom."" Moving west, their armies attacked the cities of the Central Asian Silk Road, and by 1222 they were making a diversion into northern India .
 Mongols ruled from the Pacific Ocean in the east to the Caspian Sea in the west . Khan's successors were menacing the Arab countries of the Middle East . Khan died in 1227 .
 A Mongol's bow was made of wood, horn, and sinew, with strings of animal hide . The composite bow melded maximum tension with minimum length . The bow was the pace of the Mongols' progress .
 It survived long after his death, though it did break up into smaller khanates . Their military prowess depended on a great deal more than speed, but it also depended on speed .
 Genghis Khan had never stopped learning and never stopped improving his fighting force . Khan's greatest achievement was his ability to learn and improve his forces . Khan never stopped from improving his forces, but never stopped growing .
 The man was born Temujin inl 162, the son of a minor chieftain . He earned himself this accolade by becoming a king of the Rhinian kingdom .
 On his father's death, the young Temujin was ostracized and learned the hard way how to stand up for himself . He learned to fight for himself by fighting .
 Khan forged a united people out of an array of squabbling tribes . By 1206 he had won his title of Khan, forging a united nation . Khan was born in 1206 and died in 1207 .
 China, India, and others were to find out. naphtha to putrid animal carcasses over the highest battlements . They had engines that could shoot dozens of fire-arrows at a time .
 When Samarkand in Uzbekistan fell after a siege in 1220, the Mongol leader had the inhabitants rounded up and led to a plain outside the city walls . The Mongol leader rounded up the inhabitants and led them outside the walls .
 1240 Mongol troops sacked the city of Kiev after a bloody siege . The hapless people were then slaughtered and their 1240 Mongols were killed .
 Ogedei's armies continued westward, with separate warbands making exploratory forays into Poland and Hungary . The armies continued to advance westward .
 skulls arranged into a pyramid were a sign of victory and a warning to those who might have been tempted to resist . The 13th-Century-Centenary-Centennial commemoration was dedicated to the Mongolans .
 His forces invaded Russia in 1237, leaving a trail of devastation wherever they went . His forces were able to invade Russia and destroy everything they touched .
 All the Mongol chiefs were called back for a conclave to elect his successor . The Mongol chiefs are called back to elect their successor .
 The Mongols were preoccupied with other campaigns in the eastern regions of their realm . By the time his successor, Gyuyuk Khan, was in place, the Mongols had already been busy .
 Hulegu's Mongols literally outdoing themselves in wanton cruelty . Not, however, before Baghdad had been taken, the Mongols had taken Baghdad . The Mongols took Baghdad in 2003 .
 Anything up to half a million people may have been slaughtered in the bloodletting that followed the Iraqi city's fall . The world's most beautiful metropolis was razed to the ground .
 The Mongols were nomads by nature, and never really took to the settled life . They camped among their conquests, and for the most part they remained outsiders .
 Only in China, conquered by Genghis Khan's grandson, Kublai Khan, did the nomadic Mongols put down real roots . Only in the Chinese realm, the Mongols began to settle in China .
 This semiindependent arm of the empire lasted into the 16th century . For much of the time, the Golden Horde enjoyed a great deal of peace and prosperity . The Golden Horde was a semiindependent part of the Empire .
 Hulegu's army, the largest ever fielded by the Mongols, was bolstered by Chinese, Turkish, Armenian, Persian, and Christian soldiers . The Mongols' army was the largest of its kind ever fielded .
 Near-contemporary manuscript shows Chinese artillerymen breaking the city's defenses . The manuscript was found in China in the early 1900s .
 To a Mongol warlord, China was one of the world's great prizes . China was a land of wealth and untold splendor .
 Next had come the Khitan, the Tanguts, and, in the 12th century, the Jurchen's Jin empire occupied the north . The Jurchen had occupied the region since then . The Khitan and Tanguts had also occupied the area .
 The armies of this ""Southern Song"" managed to hold back the Jurchen raiders and so an uneasy equilibrium was maintained . The armies were held back by the Jurchens raiders .
 Genghis Khan's campaign had begun in China, but the northern region had borne the brunt . The northern region was the brunt of the Genghi's campaign .
 Not until the time of his grandson Kublai Khan did the Mongols establish a lasting presence further south . The Mongols established a permanent presence in the region of China .
 In Korea, the three kingdoms of Koguryo, Silla, and Paekche had been united as ""Koryo"" by King Wang Kon of the 10th century . The three kingdoms were united as "Koryos" in Korea in 10th Century .
 China posed a military and cultural challenge for the Mongols . Kublai Khan ruled China, Korea, Japan, Vietnam, Vietnam and Java .
 Kublai Khan was able to make himself a new kind of Mongol ruler here . He was the first Mongol ruler of the Mongol Empire .
 The mounted archers of the Mongol armies were out of their element in China's highly urbanized environment . They quickly adapted to the new conditions, but quickly adapted .
 K ublai Khan had come into contact with Chinese culture as a young man . He was governor of the Mongols' southern territories in China .
 Kublai was an ardent admirer of Chinese civilization, and covetous of Chinese wealth and technology . He was keen to add the ""Middle Kingdom"" to the Mongol empire .
 He had been fighting against the Southern Song in China when he got news of his brother Mongke's death in 1259 . He faced a bitter struggle for succession with his younger brother, Ariq Boke .
 Kublai Khan was able to return to his long-term plans in 1264 . It was not until 1264 that he could be reunited with his family . Khan died of his injuries in his first year of life .
 His courage and determination to carve out a new Chinese empire for himself may well have been bolstered by this period of feuding .
 Kublai Khan had lost a degree of support in the Mongol heartlands . An oppositional faction had grown up around his nephew, Kaidu, who fought for the Khan .
 By 1271 he had committed himself so far to his project that he declared himself Huangdi, or ""emperor" Huangdi was the founder of a new Chinese ""Yuan"" dynasty .
 This new title meant little, in that he did not yet control the majority of the areas to which he was laying claim, but it would have been full of significance for the Han Chinese . It would have meant little to him, but he would have had significance .
 Kublai Khan was sending out a powerful signal that he came, not merely as a conqueror, but as a new emperor . By appropriating it, he was sending a powerful message that he was not merely conqueror but emperor . The Khan took over the throne of Khan's
 Kublai Khan did not object to waging war on his adoptive country . He did not want to lose his adoptive nation .
 He began by besieging Xiangyang in 1268, a strategically vital city as it controlled access to the Han River and hence to the Yangtze, and to the fertile plains of central China . Xiangyang was a strategically important city in the region .
 Kublai Khan attacked with 100,000 mounted warriors . He was equipped with trebuchets, catapults that could fling rocks across the river .
 Song defenders widened the river at the vital point and padded their walls so that the missiles were Chinese fire-lance . The Song defenders had widened the River at the crucial point .
 It was used at close quarters, and flames shot out from the gunpowder-packed canister at the end . The gunpowder canister was used in close quarters .
 He became Khagan, or ""Supreme Khan,"" in 1260 after the death of his elder brother, Mongke . He was Khagan or "supreme Khan" of the Mongol kingdom .
 In 1271 he established the Yuan dynasty in China . A scholar of Chinese language and culture, renowned for his intelligence and enlightenment, in 1271, established the dynasty .
 Kublai Khan's new role as Chinese emperor meant his adopted country was all the stronger for his rule . With his grandfather's gift of government and administration, his rule was all but harmless .
 Kublai Khan responded by building a fleet of ships to blockade the river . Khan built ships to block the river in order to stop the flow of water . Khan also built ships on the banks of the Nile .
 Counterweighted trebuchets were designed specifically for Kublai Khan . The breakthrough came with the advent of counterweighted weapons .
 Though outnumbered, the Yuan ships succeeded in enclosing the Song fleet in a narrow bay . The Yuan ships were outnumbered by the Song ships .
 Kublai Khan said to have constructed 5,000 ships to prevent river-borne supplies reaching the Song at Xiangyang . The confined ships were tied to the Song, said to be the largest in the world .
 By 1276 most of China was in Mongol hands, together in a line, so when the Yuan attacked, they were afforded a floating walkway to the central Song flagship . The Yuan attacked the Song in 1276, and the walkway was a floating bridge .
 Japanese samurai swarm onto Mongol commander's vessel at Hakata Bay in 1281, seeing off the second of Kublai Khan's two failed invasion attempts . He contrived a miracle of organization and logistic organization .
 Subsequent invasions were rather less successful . Ill-prepared ventures . Subsequent invasion attempts were unsuccessful .
 In 1274 a seaborne assault of Japan at Hakata Bay on Kyushu was thwarted by a storm . A storm destroyed the Mongol fleet in 1274 .
 Tradition has it that the attackers' ships were dispersed by a typhoon . Modern experts have suggested that both fleets were too hastily built and inadequately prepared .
 Some question whether the ""divine winds"" were anything more than the usual bad weather . Some even question whether it was the 'divine wind' Some believe it was just bad weather.
 Kublai Khan showed open-mindedness in his military innovations . His reforms placed the empire on a stronger footing, encouraging economic innovation .
 Kublai Khan's grandson Temur was followed by his grandson, Temur . His succession was as troublesome as Khan's had been . Temur Khan died in 17th century .
 Later Yuan emperors failed to reign successfully over such a vast empire . Later Yuan rulers failed to re-establish themselves over vast territory .
 A series of droughts and floods in the 1340s brought the agrarian economy to its knees . Droughts, floods and floods brought a series of agricultural disasters to their knees .
 Han Chinese rebels brought down Yuan dynasty in 1368 . Led by Zhu Yuangzhang, they brought down the Yuan dynasty . Zhu Yuanzhang was one of the rebels .
 The Conquests of Timur is the story of the Mongol invasion of the steppe . Timur was the first Mongol conqueror to conquer Western and Southern Asia . The threat from the Central Asian steppe was gaining momentum again .
 The more they demonized him, the better Timur Lenk liked it . He reveled in his self-styled status as a ""second coming"" of Genghis Khan . Lenk reveled his status as the "second coming"
 Warlords still jostled for advantage by the 14th century, setting their sights on greater things . Before, the steppe was quiet on the Central Asian steppe .
 To the ambitious warlord, his story offered an alluring vision of what ruthlessness and courage might achieve . His story offered a vision of the power of ruthless and courage .
 Transoxania, in present-day Uzbekistan, now belonged to the Khanate of Chagatai . The region is now part of Uzbekistan .
 Named for one of Genghis Khan's sons, the territory was still ruled by his successors— the Barlas—a Turkic-Mongolian group who prided themselves on their illustrious line of descent . There is thought to be little merit to their claims .
 His flair for fighting was already evident, as were his rigor and courage . He was already showing signs of his passion for the sport . He is now a professional fighter .
 Timur played off the enmities and ambitions of men more powerful than himself . Timur had made himself the leader of the Barlas clan by 1360; eight years later he was leader of Chagatai Confederation . The real power of Timur was in the Chag
 He vowed to transform Samarkand into one of the world's greatest cities . The city is now the headquarters of the country's largest city .
 Only when Central Asia had been secured did he direct his energies south and west . Only after Central Asia was secured, he directed his energies to the west .
 He began in 1381 by invading Iran, a land of small states once united under the Mongol Ilkhanids . Iran is now a nation of small, independent states .
 Only afterward, when Timur had left, did the region rise in rebellion . The region rose in rebellion only after Timur left, when the region had left .
 Turning back to put down the revolt, he did so with a cruelty that was little short of frenzied . Turning . back to putting down the . revolt, the . president did so .
 At Sabzevar he had 2,000 living prisoners heaped with mud and masonry, literally building them into the fabric of a tower . Heaped with masonry and mud, heaped them into a fabric of the tower, he said .
 Wherever he went, he built pyramids of skulls—a warning to the world, and monument to his murderousness . The pyramids were built as a warning to world and a monument to the murderousness of Adolf Hitler, says CNN.com .
 The king of Azerbaijan forced the king to convert to Islam before heading south through Armenia and back into Iran . Pushing west through Azerbaijan into Christian Georgia, the king was forced to convert . The king converted to Islam .
 In 1387 he took Isfahan, but then rebels killed Timur's tax collectors . Timur was killed in 1387 by rebels in Isfahahah .
 Timur was always a nomad at heart, a raider rather than an empire-builder . Timur always wanted to be nomad rather than empire builder . He was always nomadic at heart .
 By 1393 he was back in Iran, crushing a rebellion with his customary cruelty . He crushed a rebellion in 1393 with his usual cruelty . The king returned to Iran by 1393 .
 Attacks on Baghdad and Kurdistan were followed by raids on the Golden Horde, sacking and burning as he went . The Golden Horde was defeated by the U.S. invasion of Iraq .
 The impression is of a leader eaten up by an insane blood lust, but Timur was more rational than that . Timur had a rational mind, says historian John MacIntosh .
 The sacking of southern Russia cut off one of the main commercial corridors between the East and West . Russia's southern Russia is a key economic corridor between the two countries .
 Timur inspired adulation and undying loyalty in his men . Whatever horror he induced in the civilian populations of the countries he conquered, Timur was admired .
 As his conquests continued, his army grew in size till it eventually numbered 200,000 . His army grew to be around the world's largest and most successful . His conquests took place in the Middle Ages .
 A master-tactician, he loved ruses and feints; his troops would pretend to flee then suddenly regroup and attack . He loved feints, pretending to flee and then attacking .
 Timur was a Muslim and frequently professed to be fighting for his faith . Many thousands of his victims were Muslims too . Timur often professed he was fighting for the faith, even if many thousands were Muslims .
 Timur Lenk led his army over the mountains of the Hindu Q mountains in 1398 . The number of pyramids, each A O one comprising 1,500 skulls, was counted by a chronicler of 1388 in a half-circuit of the walls of Isfahan
 It is said they killed as many as 100,000 civilians before they even reached the capital . It is also said to have killed up to 200,000 people .
 Bayezid's defeat gave Timur a dubious role as savior of Christian Byzantium . The Turks' conquest of Constantinople was put back 50 years . Timur's defeat put the Turks' conquests of Constantinople back to 50 years later .
 The Middle East was his; his sumptuous tomb stood pride of place in his capital, Samarkand . His tomb was built in his country's Samarkan capital .
 His successors' Timurid dynasty quickly destroyed itself through infighting . His successors’ Timurids were quickly destroyed by infighting. His successors also destroyed themselves .
 Babur was a refugee from the Timurid dynasty's succession-struggle . The Muslim conqueror Babur is one of the most powerful men in the world . Babur died in childbirth at the end of the 13th century .
 Mace was a heavy club that was common among the Mongols . The mace was used in dose combat, the heavy club .
 Timur's magnificent mausoleum, Gur-e Amir, still stands in Samarkand . A fitting memorial to Timur, the Mongolian ruler, remains in the country .
 His body, embalmed with rose water, musk, and camphor, lies in an ornate coffin . His body is embaled with rose rose water and musk in a coffin .
 The association between the two institutions was tested by the ""Investiture Contest"" of the 11th century . HENRY IV TROUBLED TIMES .
 Emperor Henry IV was at odds with the papacy over rights and was excommunicated in 1076 . Henry IV died at the hands of the Pope in 1081 .
 He was compelled to make penance at Canossa, begging papal forgiveness . He was forced to beg the papal for forgiveness .
 Concordat of Worms formally ended the power struggle between the emperors and the pope . Concordat was the end of a power struggle in which the pope ruled the Roman Catholic Church .
 Thereafter, while a semblance of unity was restored, relations remained uneasy . Relations remained uneasy and a tussle began over control of Italy . Italy was ruled by the League of Nations in 1945 .
 The northern states banded together in the Lombard League, and the focus switched to the south after the ""Sicilian Vespers"" uprising .
 The Guelphs and the Ghibellines, two fluctuating alliances, fought these wars, resolving some political and institutional issues . The creation of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation was a masterstroke. The Guelsphs were a master stroke. N eatly
 The new union invited power struggles, and tensions were quick to show . However, this new union invites power struggles .
 In Italy prominent cities like Piacenza, Milan, Padua, Venice, Venice and Bologna were trying to extract themselves from the intrusive local bishops . In Italy, prominent cities such as Milan and Padua are trying to extricate themselves .
 The bishops were appointed by the emperor, not by Rome . They found an ally in the pope, since the pope was chosen by Rome, not Rome .
 Frederick served notice of the callous way with which he intended to rule when he launched an invasion . He seized Crema in 1159 and Milan in 1162 .
 Frederick's men played football with severed heads at Crema, Crema . The people responded by slaying captured soldiers, killing them .
 War of the Sicilian Vespers dates from 1158-1266 to 1282-1302 . Charles I voyages to Rome for his investiture as king of Sicily in 1265 . War of Sicily, southern Italy, and Malta .
 Key battles in the War of the Sicilian Vespers would be fought at sea and spilling over onto the mainland of southern Italy . War would be full-blown war and spill over onto mainland of Italy .
 In the event, though, a full-scale French invasion was defeated, the people rising up in support of Peter and his lords . Peter's lords were defeated in the event .
 The French were stopped at sea as well, Peter III with an immense advantage . Roger di Lauria commanded his fleet . Peter III had an enormous advantage .
 Admiral di Lauria won a great victory over the Angevins at the battle of Malta on July 8, 1283 . The dashing Italian had already proved his worth, winning the battle .
 His victory at the battle of Les Formigues, off the coast of Catalonia in 1285, was observed as a decisive reverse for the crusade . Now his victory has been seen as an important victory for the Crusades .
 The admiral was disciplined and daring, and could trust the captains of his galleys to break formation, feign flight, and lead enemy vessels out of position in the knowledge they could be commanded back to order at a moment's notice .
 On Peter's death in 1285, Pope Urban IV tried to restore Sicily to the Angevins . The conflict flared up all over again when the Pope tried to re-order Sicily .
 Frederick III, the younger son of Peter III, was preparing to fight . James, the elder of Peter's surviving sons, was happy to agree to the terms . Frederick III was the son of James and Frederick III .
 Roger di Lauria defeated Frederick's fleet at the battle of Cape Orlando in 1299, and then again at Ponza, on June 14, 1300 . The treaty was made between James and Frederick in favour of James .
 Charles I defeats Frederick M's son, Manfred, in 1266, to secure Sicily and put an end to Italian Hohenstaufen rule . Battle of Benevento saw Charles I defeat Manfred's son Manfred . Charles I defeated Manfred M in the Battle of
 Pope gave his support to the cities when they formed a defensive alliance, the Lombard League . Thwarted, the pope gave the cities his support in a bid to defeat the cities .
 Frederick's forces swept over the Alps again besieging Alessandria in 1174 . In 1174 Frederick's troops were again in the same way again in Italy .
 Frederick's army had more than 4,000 armored knights; that of the Lombard League comprised mainly infantrymen . Frederick's armies were mainly made up of infantrymen and knights .
 They of a famous Hohenstaufen stronghold, and they were strong supporters of the emperor . They were strong backers of the Emperor, and were of a major stronghold .
 The papal party christened themselves the ""Guelphs" and took their name from the Hohenstaufen opposition, the Bavarian House of Welf . The party was christened as the Papal Party and christened themselves the ""
 Conflict between factions continued for the rest of the 12th century and well into the 13th . Conflict between the two factions continued between 12th Century and 13th Century .
 Emperor brought 8,000 Muslim archers from Apulia in the southern ""toe"" of Italy . Arab influence was still strong in the region where Arab influence still strong . Certain victory was snatched when the new emperor brought the archers .
 Frederick II Barbarossa's grandson, Frederick II, made further conquests into Italy in the 13th century . Barbarossas' grandson Frederick II also made conquests in Italy in 13th Century .
 The number of galleys captured by Roger di Lauria on July 4, 1299, at the battle of Cape Orlando . Crossbowmen and archers wore down the enemy .
 The Lombard cavalry now regrouped, before charging back in to defeat the emperor . The emperor was defeated by the Lombard, who died in the battle .
 Guelphs and Ghibellines signed the Peace of Venice, a treaty with the Lombard League that had been brokered by the pope, but tension between the two sides continued . Frederick had to endure the humiliation .
 In 1262 Pope Urban IV conferred the throne of Naples and Sicily on Charles of Anjou . This group came together as the ""Ghibellines" -- the name is supposed to have been a corruption of Waiblingen, the title The Sicilian Vespers .
 Manfred of Sicily was related by marriage to the Hohenstaufen family . This was highly provocative, given the opposing claim of Manfred, who was related to Manfred .
 Charles defeated Manfred's army at Benevento in 1266 . Even so, Charles enforced his case, defeating Manfred in 1264 .
 At Vespers (the evening service) in Palermo's Church of the Holy Spirit on Easter Monday 1282, this resentment erupted into rioting . The rioting erupted at the evening service of the church of the holy Spirit .
 In the weeks that followed, hundreds of people associated with the Angevins (the House of Anjou) were killed . Hundreds of people were killed in the weeks following the attack .
 Peter III of Aragon came into the conflict on the Sicilians' side . Charles cracked down, and Manfred's heir (by virtue of their relationship by marriage) Manfred was the son of Peter III .
 8,000 French people believed to have been slaughtered in the course of the ""Sicilian Vespers"" insurrection of 1282 .
 Catapults had been used on the battlefield and in siege situations since ancient times . Catapults have been used in battle battles and siege situations in the past .
 Roman ballistae worked like giant crossbows, shooting heavy bolts . Other engines were used for hurling rocks . Roman ballists were used to throw rocks .
 Such engines had relied on the torsion of twisted or ratcheted rope, and there were limits on how powerful they could be . Such engines used to be powered by rope torsorsion .
 From the 12th century, engineers were employing the force of leverage, compounded by the use of counterweights . Engineers used leverage to create the structure from the ground to create it .
 The struggle between popes and emperors had gone on for more than two centuries . These new ""trebuchets"" could propel huge rocks over greater distances and with an accuracy never seen before .
 The papacy was never to be a military power in its own right, says Pope Francis . Pope Francis was born in Rome, but the papacy never had a military advantage .
 The Church continued to be a powerful influence in political affairs . It was a thorn in the side of successive emperors . But the Church continued its influence .
 An ox wagon carrying both the army's standard and an altar at which mass was said before battle . The ox wagon was used to carry both the standard and the altar .
 V 91 ASPECTS OF WAR: Monument to a mercenary . A mercenary is loyal to whoever pays him . Monument to the mercenary is a monument to the war .
 Bartolomeo Colleoni was a condottiere who fought in the 15th-century wars between Milan and Venice . He served both sides at different times during the wars .
 Professional soldiers who fight for a living and pledge their loyalty to whoever pays them, mercenaries have been seen by many as no better than hired assassins . Mercenaries are seen as mercenaries who are seen by some as mercenary soldiers .
 Recruitment of mercenaries has been an essential part of warfare throughout history . The recruitment of mercenaries continues in several parts of the world today . Recruiting mercenaries is a key part of the practice in several countries .
 Men fought for their families, for their homes, and out of loyalty to their chieftain in return for land . I n earliest times men fought for . their families and for their . homes .
 Sargon I of Akkad is the first king known to have conscripted an army . In New Kingdom Egypt up to 10 percent of males were forced by the pharaoh into military service .
 In both cases a soldier's time was spent as much working on engineering projects as it was fighting in battle . Both soldiers were involved in engineering projects .
 Smaller states, however, were not equipped to raise and maintain large armies through conscription . Smaller state was not equipped with resources to raise large armies .
 Conscription was not always viable, even for large empires, as large portions of the population could not always be removed from vital jobs to join the army . Nor was conscription always viable for large armies, even large empires .
 Hiring mercenaries was therefore an obvious recourse for states of all sizes, as mercenaries are both already trained and available as needed . Hired mercenaries are already available and trained as needed, as well as available as necessary .
 The mercenaries themselves usually came from warrior elites who saw the waging of war as the only fit occupation for a man of honor . The mercenaries were often seen as a noble trade .
 Such groups came with weapons, skills, and a readymade esprit de corps that could be placed at the service of a king . Such groups would come with weapons and skills, but could also be placed in the service .
 From the 3rd century bce, Celtic warbands from Central Europe were in the service of Egypt's Ptolemaic rulers and the kings of Asia Minor .
 After the first Vikings found their way from Sweden down the Russian river system to the Black Sea in the 9th century, a number enlisted in the service of the rulers of Byzantineium .
 By the 10th century there was a permanent Varangian Guard of several thousand strong . Viking mercenaries were a permanent force of around 1,000 .
 Turkic warlords who drifted westward with their warriors placed themselves in the service of Islamic rulers . Sultans later found it more convenient to buy or capture boys as slaves, whose primary loyalty would be to them .
 Often mercenaries recruited because they could offer special skills . Often, mercenaries were recruited because of their special skills.
 Sasanid Persia supplied its own armored cataphracts, but hired other cavalry and elephant divisions from further afield . Persia supplied itself with its own cavalry and even elephant divisions .
 The Renaissance saw the rise of national armies, but also the emergence of free market economies and private enterprise in Europe . The Renaissance was also the birth of the private sector .
 Found in the port of Dover on the south coast of England, this Carthaginian coin was probably brought home by a Celtic mercenary . As a result, the creation of private armies became a lucrative business .
 German landsknecht mercenaries were German mercenaries of the 16th century . Landknechts were mercenaries of 16th-century Germany .
 Soldiers from certain countries came to specialize in mercenary war . Swiss pikemen and German landsknechts were among those who specialized in mercenary warfare .
 More and bigger conflicts came in the wake of the Reformation, and mercenaries offered skills and disciplines that no group of conscripts could match .
 One-fifth of all Scottish males born in the 17th century went soldiering for foreign masters at some point in their lives .
 Mercenaries have not always been the answer to their employers' problems . Sometimes they have presented challenges of their own . Mercenaries are not always the answer, but sometimes they present challenges .
 Irish and German mercenaries mounted a similar revolt in 1828 at the end of the Argentina-Brazil War . The revolt was a similar to that of the 1828 revolt in Argentina-Argentina War .
 Mercenaries often end up holding the upper hand over their employers . Mercenaries have often ended up holding on to their employers' advantage . The situation in Syria has been described as a 'humanitarian crisis'
 Condottieri such as Braccio da Montone and Muzio Sforza were prominent figures in early 15th-century Italian politics . Condottierieri such a prominent figure in Italian politics were prominent in 15th century .
 American mercenary leader William Walker made himself president within a year . He was brought in by the Nicaraguan government to help put down a rebellion in 1855 . Walker was the first president of Nicaragua .
 Mercenaries have no stake in the countries they fight in, so there is MERCENARIES endure . Mercenaries endure in the modern era of national armies .
 Mercenaries are useful for unofficial engagements, such as the arm's-length involvement of the United States in the Angolan Civil War in the late 20th century . Mercenaries were used in the U.S. in the Angola Civil War .
 They are useful where sending official troops to fight is likely to be unpopular . They are also useful in places where official troops are needed to fight .
 This has been the case, for example, with the use of private military contractors (mainly Blackwater, now called Xe) by the U.S. in Iraq . The use of Blackwater by the United States in Iraq has been controversial .
 By 2009 there may have been as many as 100,000 private contractors in Iraq, in spite of international pressure to ban their activities .
 In 1989 the United Nations passed the International Convention Against the Recruitment, Use and Training of Mercenaries . The resolution finally came into force in October 2001 .
 The resolution bans the use of military contractors, who have since redefined themselves as security services offering armed guards to their employers . The resolution was passed by the U.S. Senate last week .
 Several countries have yet to sign the convention, including the United States and the UI< . As always, it is still cheaper to buy short-term services than to pay for an extended standing army .
 Until war itself is banned, it seems the mercenary soldier will always be with us . The mercenary soldier is always with us.
 Portuguese mercenaries fought alongside soldiers of the National Liberation Front of Angola in the Angolan Civil War of 1975-2002 . Mercenaries in Angola were Portuguese mercenaries .
 They serve Gaelic chiefs and Norman lords of Ireland for the next three centuries . They serve the Gaelic chief and Norman lord of Ireland until the end of the century .
 Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I founds the first landsknecht units at about this time . The first land knecht unit was found in the Roman Empire .
 Western governments fund mercenaries to help UNITA and FNLA rebels, after Cuba sends troops to support the government . Western governments pay mercenaries to support UNITa and the FNLA .
 Most of these mercenaries are employed by a private company, Blackwater . Most of them are mercenaries employed by Blackwater, the company that employs them .
 Lack of accountability is part of the appeal of being and hiring a mercenary . 1519 Spanish adventurer Hernan Cortes launches his invasion of Mexico .
 The Spaniard will keep a share of any booty he brings back for the Spanish Crown . He will also keep a portion of the proceeds from his haul .
 The arrangement will later be formalized, with Gurkha regiments integrated into the British Army . The arrangement is expected to become formalized .
 The landsknechts became notorious for collecting money from civilians too . They collected protection money from citizens for their protection .
 The more fervently men and women believed in their religion and its ideals, the more susceptible they were to disillusionment . The most fervently believers in their faith and ideals were to be disillusioned, the author says .
 By the 12th century the wealth and power of the Church was giving rise to resentment . The Church was given a poor reputation in the Middle Ages by the time of the first century .
 People saw it as being too close to the kings and nobles who exploited and oppressed them . People were outraged that it was close to them, and saw it too close .
 Some people, like the Cathars of the Languedoc in southwest France, rejected Christianity altogether . The Cathars rejected Christianity entirely .
 Theirs was a dualistic universe in which God and Satan were at war and love and power were locked in eternal opposition . Theirs were created in a world of dualistic world of love, power and love .
 The soul was immortal and belonged in heaven, the realm of God, of light . The soul is immortal and belongs in heaven .
 Since Christ was ""the Word made flesh,"" he BEFORE L \ Christendom, now beleaguered both within and without, reverted back to the ideology and method of ""Holy War"" to quash dissent .
 An opinion or doctrine is at variance with established religious beliefs . Naturally, Europe's I HERESY is Europe's most popular religion .
 The Islamic threat had not vanished entirely, but Christian Europe faced new hazards at home . Christian Europe was faced with new hazards in the battle for freedom .
 Discontent with the Church was growing; an increasingly educated public was tiring of its tyrannical ways . The Church was in the midst of a growing backlash against the Church .
 Those in power, however, saw this new threat in the same way as they saw Islamic menace . and his teachings were seen as evil too too .
 Pope Innocent III was concerned about the teachings of the Cathars . Innocent III ruled that Innocent III could not ignore the teachings .
 The heretics were like the ""Saracens,"" he said, and in 1209 he duly proclaimed a crusade against this enemy within . In 1209, he declared that they were heretics like the Saracens .
 The most part of the ""enemy"" were defenseless peasants . Though local magnates like Count Raymond of Toulouse were involved .
 The Albigensian Crusade against the Cathars of Languedoc was fought in 1209 . The number of men I L/jVyvJvJ was the highest in the medieval Crusades .
 Sappers (military engineers) with siege-engines smashed through the walls of provincial cities . Sappers were used to break into provincial cities in the early years .
 On July 22 ,1209, crusaders sacked Beziers and killed 20,000 men, women, and children . The massacre took place on July 22,1209 .
 More than 1,000 people were burned alive after taking refuge in a church . More than a quarter of those burned alive survived the fire .
 Pope Innocent II tried to rein in the carnage from about 1213, but it had gained buoyant momentum . As many as a million people are thought to have died in the 1213 riots .
 Baltic Slavs were recalcitrant under the shaky rule of the Polish kings . The Teutonic Knights were the last remnants of Poland's rule in the region .
 After recurrent invasions they remained obdurately unpacified—and pagan—and unmasked .
 Simon de Montfort's crusaders take on the Albigensian army of Raymond of Toulouse, in 1213 . When a call to defend the faith went out, the Teutonic Battle of Muret took place .
 The Knights Hospitallers were a well-established military order founded in Acre at the time of the Third Crusade . These German priests had begun by tending the sick and wounded .
 By 1198 the knights' role as fighting clerics had been acknowledged by the Church . Knights' role was acknowledged as a fighting cleric in 1198 .
 The Crusades swept through Prussia and beyond into presentday Lithuania, Lativa, and Estonia . Their function in the ""Prussian Crusades in Europe 94 » CRUSADES IN EUROPE Crusade"" was not in doubt from1230 onwards .
 They fought as armored cavalry, followed into the field by light cavalry and infantry . They fought in the Battle of Gettysburg . They were armored cavalry and light cavalry .
 The pope had granted Prussia to the order as a ""monastic state" -- so, in theory, they were its rulers . Prussia was granted to the Order by the pope as a monastic state in theory .
 The knights struggled against guerrilla factions during their time in the Middle Ages . But, in practice, this was untamed terrain .
 The Teutonic Knights were able to carve out their own religious state in Prussia . During the battle of Durbe in 1260, the knights allowed themselves to be surrounded by Samogitians (pagan tribesmen) and suffered a defeat that triggered a bloody uprising .
 The Teutonic Knights concentrated on Prussia, where they consolidated their position throughout the 14th century . The Knights then concentrated their position in Prussia .
 During the battle of Grunwald (also named Tannenberg), more than 20,000 knights are believed to have faced up to 30,000 enemy cavalry . The battle is one of the biggest battles of medieval times .
 The knights also had artillery, and viewing that as an advantage, they kept much of their cavalry in reserve . The knights kept their artillery in reserve, and viewed that as a . advantage .
 But downpour doused their gunpowder, and when news came in that their general, Ulrich von Jungingen, had died, morale collapsed . morale collapsed and they fled in disarray . The Germans were forced to flee after the death of their general .
 Fighting with gunpowder had its disadvantages; nevertheless, this new technology offered a way forward . It became evident in the Hussite Wars, with the introduction of gunpowder technology .
 Czech reformer, Jan Hus, is seen as paving the way for Martin Luther and the Reformation . Today, the teachings of Jan Hus are seen as a key figure in the history of the Czech Republic .
 Hus was condemned as a heretic and burned to death on July 6 1415 . But in his day, he was condemned by the Roman Catholic Church . Hus was burnt to death in 1415, but was never burned .
 Hussite rebels used hand-held cannons to defeat the Ottomans . The Hussite were defeated in their campaigns, but their campaigns proved inconclusive .
 The gunner cradled this in one hand, trying to keep it pointing in the direction of the enemy . He bent over to light the gunpowder charge with a spill or match .
 Accuracy or penetrationpower mattered little, given that these weapons were deployed against an enemy who came charging en masse, and had no protection against shot through armor or through tactics . But accuracy or penetration power mattered little given given the enemy's ability to charge en masse .
 The Treaty of Thorn signed in 1412 brought peace between Poland, Lithuania, and the Teutonic Knights . The reparations it called for would ruin the Teutsonic state . The treaty of Thorn was signed by Poland and Lithuania in the 1412 .
 The wagenburg, or ""wagon fort,"" was created by arranging carts to form a square enclosure . It gave lightly armed infantry a way to resist charging knights .
 Hussite use of wagons to create a wall was not new, but its use by the Hussites marked a real innovation . Hussites used wagons in the creation of a wall in order to build walls .
 Set up discreetly and quickly, the wagenburg was placed within firing range of the enemy . The wagburg was consistently placed within fire range of enemy .
 The Hussites could keep up a steady barrage or sally forth among the horsemen with pikes or flails . The charging enemy found a solid wall of wagons, while the Hussites kept up a constant barrage .
 The crusading ideal was not yet dead as a philosophy, though it was constantly being reinterpreted in response to changing conditions and changing times . After the war of the Cold War, the world's most famous anti-war leader was assassinated in 1968 .
 In Spain the conflict between the Christians and the Muslims went on . In Spain, Christians and Muslims fought for centuries between them . The Muslims were Christians and Christians .
 It was to last until 1492, each side taking and then retaking territories . The two sides took territories in 1492 .
 The Teutonic Knights' war against Russian 8,000 Russians . The Teutsonic Knights were defeated by Russian troops in Grunwald .
 The religious conflicts of the following centuries provided the perfect testing ground for ever more powerful, more accurate, and more sophisticated firearms .
 The revolution in technology brought a revolution in tactics, says the author of the book, "The New York Times" It's the first time the technology revolution has been allowed to be allowed to take place in the world .
 Heavily armored knights with lances gave way to lighter cavalry armed with pistols as well as swords . Heavy cavalry with pistols and swords was replaced by lighter cavalry with lighter cavalry .
 Infantrymen learn new drills for coordinated loading, aiming, and firing of their matchlock and wheel-lock muskets . Infantrymen learned new drills to fire matchlocks and wheellocks .
 Artillery was also to play an increasingly important role, exerting a powerful influence on tactics in the field of war . Artillery's presence in turn exerts a powerful . influence .
 The Christians were fighting among themselves did not mean other threats had gone away . The fact that the Christians are fighting against each other does not mean that other threats have gone away.
 The period is known in Scotland as the Wars of Independence, yet the Scots were not fighting to gain their freedom, but rather to hold on to the independence they already had . The period was known as the 'Wars of Independence'
 There were two separate kingdoms, England and Scotland, and an autonomous principality, Wales . Wales was a principality of Wales, Wales, and a kingdom of England .
 England had size and wealth, but the integrity of Scotland and Wales went unquestioned . England's pre-ememence was a pre-eminence in England, but Scotland's integrity was questioned .
 Edward I invaded Wales in 1277 to punish the defiance of Prince Llewelyn . The invasion was the first of its kind in Wales since 1277 .
 Edward invaded Wales in 1282, smashing Welsh resistance and building a chain of castles to cement his rule . When the latter rebelled, Edward invaded again, smashing Wales resistance . Edward invaded the Welsh in 1281, and built a chain-of-castle castle in Wales .
 The power of the native-born princes was over, and ""Prince of Wales"" became a new title awarded to the English ruler's son and heir . The title of Prince of Wales was given to English rulers' sons and heirs .
 Alexander Ill's granddaughter in Scotland sparked a crisis in 1290 . Alexander's granddaughter's death in Scotland led to a crisis at the time of 1290. Alexander's daughter's death sparked a political crisis .
 Edward I judged the decision, demanding the right of overlordship, that of supreme lord or feudal superior . Edward I was angrily rejected by the Scots . The decision was made by Edward I in the 13th century .
 Robert had a son as determined as his father that Scotland should be the kingdom of the Bruces sitting ducks . Robert the Bruce was also determined to keep Scotland from becoming a kingdom of sitting ducks.
 The arrows opened up gaping holes in their formations through which the English knights could charge . The arrows were used to open holes in the formation of their formations . The English knights were able to charge with arrows .
 Wallace escaped to France and did not return until 1303 . Wallace escaped in 1303 and never returned to Scotland . Wallace was forced to flee to France to escape in 1302 .
 Robert the Bruce killed his rival, John Comyn, in a quarrel and ascended the Scottish throne . Robert I Comyn's family was not in a forgiving mood. The young Robert Bruce was killed the year after his death of his rival .
 Robert's forces surprised at Methven, west of Perth, in 1306, almost wiping out his force . Supported by Edward I, they surprised him with a surprise force . Edward I and Edward I were supported by Edward II .
 J ohn Balliol's coronation in 1292 was an uneasy compromise to the succession of King Alexander III of Scotland . In April 1307, his men rolled giant boulders down a steep hillside onto an unsuspecting English English man .
 Edward I of England insisted on his overlordship over Balliol's rule . Balliol was not respected by Balliol, but by Edward I, Edward I insisted he was king .
 His army sacked Berwickupon-Tweed before defeating the Scots at Dunbar, forcing John Balliol to abdicate . The Scots were defeated by the army in Dunbar and forced Balliol's resignation .
 Edward carried off the Stone of Scone, on which the kings of Scotland had traditionally been crowned, and placed it in London's Westminster Abbey . The Stone was placed in Westminster Abbey, London, in 17th century .
 The following year, William Wallace led a rebellion of minor nobles against the English . Wallace's uprising led to the death of the minor nobles .
 On September 11, 1297, the Scottish army met the Earl of Surrey's army at Stirling Bridge over the Forth River . The Earl's army was defeated by the Earl's forces .
 Three hundred Scottish knights were matched against ten times as many English cavalry . 10,000 Scots infantry faced up to more than 50,000 English troops .
 Wallace's victory was also a triumph of tactical cunning and discipline . Wallace won the battle in 17th century with a victory over the British Army . Wallace was the only person to defeat the British army in the First World War .
 Scots waited on higher ground above the river until the English vanguard had crossed the narrow bridge, after which they surged downhill en masse . The Scots waited for the English to cross the bridge until they had crossed .
 The Scots seized the bridge and set about the English army's advance-party . Surrey and his remaining troops looked on helplessly from the other side of the river .
 Edward then led a second invasion, with 10,000 infantry and 2,000 knights . Enraged, Edward led the second invasion with 2,500 knights .
 Spearmen held up in defensive schiltrons, exacting heavy casualties on Edward's army . The spearmen were forced to retreat from the battlefield .
 Pikes presented outwards to create impregnable wall of spikes to ward off enemy cavalry . Square or circular formation of infantry with pikes presenting outwards . Square formation is square formation of the infantry .
 Longbowmen were used in the Anglo-Scottish Wars between 1296-1328, 1332-57 . The inability of the English mounted knights to deal with the schiltron of the Scottish infantry prompted a move toward longbowmen .
 The king made common cause with the disgruntled ""disinherited"" faction (the Balliols and their supporters) against Robert the Bruce's young son . The king's son was Robert's son, Robert's youngest son .
 In 1332 John Balliol's son, Edward, defeated the Scottish army at Dupplin Moor near Perth, Scotland . Edward defeated the Scots army in 1332 . In 1333 the Scottish Army defeated the Balliols army .
 By July 1333 Berwick was under siege, and the English inflicted a shattering defeat at Halidon Hill . The English inflicted the English a crushing defeat at the same place .
 Bruce took his triumphs where he could find them . Although not much of a ""battle,"" Bruce won his first battle, he won't forget the other .
 Edward II was weak and indecisive, though he could still call upon a big and powerful army . Edward II's son and successor, Edward II, was indecisive and weak .
 Over 2,000 knights and some 14,000 infantrymen came north with him in 1314 . Some 14,500 infantrymen and knights came with him to the north .
 The Bannock Burn is a stream in open country near Stirling, Scotland . Robert's army met with Robert's troops south of Stirling . The battle was fought near the town of Stairlair .
 On June 23, during their preliminary maneuvers, an English knight spotted Robert the Bruce on his horse out in front of his own lines on open ground . The English knight said he spotted the English knight on June 23 .
 Robert calmly sidestepped and swung his ax, splitting the Englishman's helmet and skull wide open . Refusing to flinch in sight of his watching soldiers, Robert calmly stepped in and swung the ax .
 Dunstaffnage castle was a stronghold of the Balliol cause . It was besieged by Robert the Bruce in 1308 following the battle of the Pass of Brander .
 The full-scale conquest and occupation of the country appeared inevitable . An assured defeat was an assured defeat for the West .
 Scots offered small-scale resistance with hit-and-run attacks and skirmishes . But they knew they could not win a head-on confrontation with the English . The Scots knew they couldn't win a battle with England .
 Their strategy of harrying and hoping was to succeed beyond their wildest dreams . Their strategy was harrying, hoping and hoping for success .
 In 1357 David II signed the Treaty of Berwick with Edward III, agreeing that the English king should succeed him in Scotland on his death . The treaty was signed by David II in 1357 .
 The Scots as a nation never accepted this, however, appointing their own king, Robert II, when David died in 1371 . The Scots never accepted David's death and appointed Robert II when he died .
 Scotland remained its own kingdom, even after the devastating defeat at Flodden in 1513 . Scotland remained independent in Scotland, even though the defeat was devastating .
 A dynastic crisis forced the ""Union of the Crowns"" in 1603—James VI becoming James I of England when Elizabeth I died childless . James I became James VI of England .
 A series of Arab conquests had spread the word of Islam through much of the known world . The prophet Muhammad first proclaimed his message in the 7th century .
 Only in a tiny pocket, in the mountains of Asturias in the far north, did Christian rulers still hold sway . Christian rulers were still in charge of Spain in the late 1800s .
 Mudejars, conversely, were Muslims living under Christian rule . wealth and culture was important to Mudejaras . wealth, culture and culture were important to them .
 Toledo, the Visigothic capital of the country, became a major center under the Moors as well . Toledo was a Visigothsic center of the century . Toledo, Spain's capital, was also a Moors center during the reigns .
 After quarrels among the rulers of the al-Andalus, this region went its separate way, becoming an independent kingdom under the control of the caliphate . The region became independent under the rule of the Islamic State of Spain .
 The identity of Spain was forged in fighting; the Reconquista—the ""reconquest"" of those territories taken by the Moors—was the guiding project of the nation .
 These wars became the stuff of legend for subsequent generations, but the reality was often messy and confused . These wars were often messy, confused and confused, and the reality is often messy . The reality is that the history of these wars was often confused and messy .
 Spanish Reconquista started as a fight for survival and became a power struggle . Only gradually did it take on the character of a crusade . T 1 he Spanish Reconqueista started .
 By the middle of the 8th century, the Moors had occupied almost the entire Iberian Peninsula . The Moors were the first to occupy almost all of the Iberan Peninsula .
 In 722, the Muslims had been held by the local Muslims in the Spanish city of Avila . The Muslims were held in the mountains of Asturias to the north .
 Asturias is one of Spain's most populous regions . The region was founded in the 17th century . Asturia is now known as the Spanish capital of Spain . It is also known as one of the most important cities in Spain .
 A new kingdom, Galicia, was established in the west, with a new state centerd on Leon . Galicia became a new kingdom of Spain in the 1930s .
 1 lth-century stronghold commanded what was then the border between Navarra and Muslim Zaragoza . To the east, following Castillo de Loarre was also a stronghold of the medieval city of Aragon .
 Frankish incursions across the Pyrenees, the kingdoms of Navarra, Aragon, and Catalonia emerged . Aragon and Catalonia were conquered by the Frankans .
 All of northern Spain had now fallen into Christian hands . Although this was a patchwork of little states that warred as much with one another as with the Moors .
 Spanish knights of the 13th century show their commitment to a strongly militarized version of the Christian faith . Within these little kingdoms too, conflict was very much the norm, with local lords locked in endless battles .
 At the same time, there were truces in fighting with the Muslims— some of them of long duration . At the time, the fighting with Muslims was between the two sides .
 The Moors had their own divisions, with inequalities between the Arab elite and the Berber rank-and-file leading at times to tension and conflict . In some cases, there was open conflict between the two sides in some cases .
 The Reconquista was more messy and confusing than the later mythology would have us believe . It was a messier and confusing period of Spanish history .
 Rodrigo Dfaz de Vivar was a truly formidable figure . “True believers, fight against the infidels who are near you, and be hard on them ...”
 He found himself hghting on the Muslim side on more than one occasion . Amid the complicated realities of a rapidly changing situation, he found himself on the Islamic side .
 Religious oppositions sometimes paled into insignificance beside other enmities . Though real, religious oppositions often paled in insignificant with others, they were not all religious .
 It is not unusual for Muslim and Christian leaders to form alliances against rivals in their own camps . Muslims and Christians often formed alliances against each other .
 No longer content to tussle with his fellow kings, he saw himself as ruler of the peninsula as a whole . He saw himself—in aspiration, at least—as ruler of his own country .
 He captured Toledo, until then the center of a rich and prestigious Muslim state . Toledo was until then known as Toledo, a center of the Muslim state of Toledo . The city was once a wealthy and prosperous city .
 Almoravids were recently taken power in North Africa . Thrown into panic, the rulers of al-Andalus called on help from the AlMoravids . Almoraviaids had recently taken over the region .
 The Almoravids went on to beat Alfonso at the battle of Sagrajas in 1086 . Alfonso died at the end of his reign in 1087 . The battle took place in Sagraja .
 The Christian kingdoms extended their influence over southern Spain . Very gradually, however, the Christian kingdom extended its influence over Spain .
 The Almoravids set about transforming Spain into their own kind of Islamic state . A Berber movement dedicated to both moral and spiritual renewal within Islam, they set about turning Spain into a state of Islam .
 Almoravids started reversing the conquests of the Christians, but met their match in 1094 at Valencia . The Almoravidids were defeated by the Christians at the end of 1094 .
 In many I ways, El Cid was the last in XJU a line whose attitude to the struggle with the Muslims remained opportunistic . In many ways, the last line of XJJU was opportunistic.
 Even as the Almoravids were changing the tone of the conflict on the Muslim side, there was a clear shift on the side of the Christians too . The Christians were not only Christians, they were also Christians .
 The calling of the First Crusade in 1099 placed the conflict with the Moors in a new perspective, as a sacred struggle to reclaim Iberia for the creed of Christ . The First Crusade was the result of a holy war between the Crusades and Moors .
 El Batallador ("The Battler"") soon made deep inroads into the south . Christian Mozarabs were happy under Moorish rule .
 Metallurgical analysis has shown that the steel blade was forged in Cordoba in the 11th century . It was forged under the Almoravids, making it less comfortable under Almoravia .
 King Alfonso brought 10,000 of them back with him for resettlement along the Ebro in the far northwest . Alfonso was king of Spain . King Alfonzo brought them back to Spain for resettlement .
 Alfonso defeated the Almoravids at Ourique in what is now the south of Portugal in 1139 . In 1139 another Alfonso won a victory, defeating the AlMoravids in Ourique . Alfonso's victory was the first of its kind in Portugal .
 Alfonso Henriques, son of Henry of Burgundy, led his outnumbered Christian army to a victory . He also claimed the title of Count of Portugal . The battle took place in the early 12th century .
 The result was the result of failing communication and disagreements on the Moorish side . The result, although unexpected, seems to have been the consequence of failing communications and disagreements .
 Christians were overjoyed at this most unexpected triumph and attributed it to divine agency . Not unnaturally, the Christians were quick to attribute it to the divine agency.
 It was in fact this triumph that brought the modern country into being. It was a triumph that helped bring the modern nation into being .
 Alfonso declared—defying Castile and Leon, that he intended to reign over his conquered territory as Afonso I of Portugal . Alfonso I declared that he planned to rule over the conquered territory . He ruled over the whole of his conquered kingdom .
 Almoravids found themselves faced with another enemy in the 12th century . The Almoravidids were defeated by the Crusades in 12th Century .
 These were the Almohads, also Berbers, and also seeking Islamic renewal . These were also Berber Berbers and also sought Islamic renewal. The Almohadans were also seeking renewal.
 Having already The Reconquista substantially molded early-modern Spain—very much for the worse, it might be argued . Having already shaped early-Modern Spain, it may be argued that it might have been very bad .
 1469 saw the accession of the ""Catholic Monarchs,"" Ferdinand and Isabella . 1469 was the birth of the first Catholic monarch . Ferdinand died in 1469 .
 Their marriage brought the kingdoms of Navarra, Aragon, and Castile together into a single Spain . They were ""catholic"" in the sense of being universal . The marriage brought together the kingdoms .
 The expulsion of the Moors coincided with Columbus's discovery of America . The expulsion coincided with the discovery of the Americas .
 The opening up of a ""New Spain"" in the colonial Americas was to be justified as a continuation of the Christianizing struggle of the Reconquista . The opening of a "New Spain" in the Colonial Americas was justified as part of a Christianizing effort .
 Almohad Caliph, came from Morocco and took personal command of the kingdom's armies . He became the ruler of the Kingdom of Morocco . He took over the kingdom from Morocco .
 The ""Disaster of Alarcos"" was followed by other reversals for Alfonso . Alfonso was defeated by Alfonso III of Spain in the final victory .
 30,000 taken over territories of the Almoravids in North Africa, establishing their capital at Marrakesh . They invaded al-Andalus in 1147 and established their capital in the city of Marrakeesh .
 In doing so, they reversed what had been the gradual weakening in Moorish resistance to the Reconquista . In doing . They reversed what . had been . been gradual weakening of Moorish . resistance . In . doing .
 The northern kingdoms scented victory and pressed hard to repel them . Even so, the northern kingdoms pressed hard against them .
 The number of Christian combatants killed at the battle of Alarcos, 1195, according to the chroniclers of the day .
 Muslim losses were fewer than 500 Muslim losses . The Almohads. sprang a surprise attack upon the Almohadans. sprang to attack .
 The vast Muslim army—by all accounts up to 300,000 strong, although this amount is dubious— was all but exterminated in the brutal fighting . It is believed that the vast Muslim population of the Muslim nation was wiped out of existence .
 It was the longbowmen who determined the outcome—and changed military history for ever . Longbowmen changed history for the first time .
 They all but sauntered into Caen, ""liberating"" large quantities of wine before continuing on their way .
 Longbowmen slipped off into wayside woods, returning with deer and other game . Longbowsmen slip off into . wayside . woods, return with deer, other . game .
 The French, though at home and numerically much stronger, felt far less cheerful . A demoralized army . The French felt much less cheerful.
 Even in Picardy's green countryside there is not enough water for their thousands of horses . Picardy has not had enough water to feed their horses in the past .
 French army was top-heavy with knights and nobles . Three commanders: Philip VI himself, blind King John of Bohemia, and Charles, Count of Alen^on .
 Edward's men were lined up along a ridge, with his longbowmen (up to 10,000-strong) under the command of his son, the Black Prince, Edward, Prince of Wales .
 The French would have to attack uphill and brave the arrows as they advanced on the English center . The French had to brave uphill battle and brave arrows to advance . The English center was the focus of the battle .
 Rooks descended in huge, chattering flocks, unnerving the soldiers . The sky grew ominously dark as the soldiers were attacked by the birds .
 The skies cleared, the downpour stopped, and the sun came out again . Then, just as abruptly, the skies cleared and the rain stopped again .
 The English knight's armor glinted on the armor of the English knights, dazzling the French . Now, though, it glints on the English knight, dazzling them .
 First English and Welsh arrows hit home . Dispirited, they broke as battle commenced and the first battle commenced .
 The French cavalry charged, and the air again turned black—with showers of English and Welsh arrows . The air then turned black, with the French cavalry charging .
 Chaos becomes carnage, the hill a heaving mass of screaming men and horses . Chaos became carnage, and chaos became carnage . Chaos was chaos, and the hill was heaving chaos . It was chaos. Chaos became chaos .
 The French had been trounced, and the mounted, armored knight humbled by the low-born longbowman . The French were defeated, but the French had not been defeated by the longbowmen .
 Military tactics and the advent of firearms technology gradually changed the face of medieval warfare . Over that period, developments in military tactics and . advent of . firearms technology . changed the . face of warfare .
 In the 1300s England and France were fluid concepts; kings and lords meant more than nation-states . King and lords were more than monarchs and lords .
 Plantagenet kings were rooted in English society and tied to France . They were the English rulers of the 13th century . The Plantagenets were the first to hold the title .
 Suspicion between England and France had existed since the Norman Conquest of 1066 . Suspicions between the two nations had existed between 1066 and 1070 .
 William and his successors had been kings in England, with lands in Normandy and Aquitaine, but only vassals of the kings of France . William was king of England, but not of France, but vassal of the king of Normandy . William's successors were kings in
 He aided mutinous English nobles in their attempt to topple King John in the first ""Barons' EDWARD III War"" of 1215-17 . He had aided mutiny English nobles  in their attempts to topple king John .
 Edward was defeated and found his position on both sides of the Channel weakened . Edward's position was weakened by the defeat .
 Edward of Windsor, the future Edward III, was left in no doubt of his father's humiliation . His French queen, Isabella, was sent to negotiate on his behalf, and Edward was left humiliated .
 France's throne had been left vacant when the Capetian line became extinct with the death of Charles IV in 1328 . Charles IV was the last monarch to hold the throne .
 England's Edward III was the late king's nephew— his mother, Isabella, had been Charles's sister . Charles was Charles's nephew, Edward III's mother Isabella had been his sister Isabella .
 His claims were not without merit, even though they came through a female line . His claims came through his female line, but they are still merit .
 The battle of Sluys was not so much a naval encounter as a land battle at sea . The battle was fought at sea in the early 1900s in the Netherlands .
 The French had chained their ships together to form a wall, but while this presented a solid front, it made their decks into a continuous battlefield . The French were forced to abandon their ships in the battle .
 Longbowmen aboard the English vessels rained arrows on to the advancing French fleet, softening up any resistance . boarding parties were dispatched to defeat the French .
 The French held out for eight bloody hours, but were eventually forced to capitulate . Up to 18,000 soldiers and sailors were killed . The French were forced to surrender .
 Despite the loss of their fleet, the French were by no means beaten . Yet, despite the loss, they were not defeated .
 Small-scale skirmishes and truces alternated until, in 1346, Edward III invaded France . Edward III's invasion of France was an unequal struggle .
 He landed at Calais but, for the moment, ignored the port city . Calais is a major port city in southern France .
 Instead of advancing inland, his soldiers advanced inland, burning and looting along the way . Instead of retreating inland, the soldiers burned and looted .
 Philip's 40,000 troops were largely untrained at the battle of Crecy . Philip's forces were mostly untrained and many of them were untrained .
 His 5,000 spearmen were in the center, his mounted knights on either side, and divided between the flanks, some 7,000 longbowmen . The battle took place in the middle of the road, with some of the world's most famous battles .
 English cannon were the first known appearance on the battlefield in Western history . The English had a few cannon, but they did not shape the battle . The battle was the first of its kind in Europe .
 Edward brought in settlers to make this crucial port an outpost of England . Edward brought settlers in to make it an outpost .
 The year 1347 saw the destructive power of humanity eclipsed by that of the Black Death . The Black Death was the worst year of the 1347 .
 A third of the population of Northern Europe may have been killed by the bubonic plague . Serious hostilities had to be suspended for some years .
 Edward III sent a letter to Philip VI of France to send his longbow to France . The longbow was used in France's 1337 invasion of France .
 The carnage was horrific, compounded by the heavy cannon fire that followed . It was the first time the British soldiers had been killed in the battle .
 The French never actually engaged their English enemy . What was most discouraging for the French was the fact that they never actually engage their enemy .
 Trained for close-quarters fighting, they were deplete their resources . They were depleting their resources. They were trained for close quarters fighting .
 In 1356 the French, under Jean II, tried to make a stand at Poitiers . As at Crecy, their army massively outnumbered England's .
 During the naval battle of Sluys in 1340, the French fleet were tied together in a defensive wall . Unable to move, they were at the mercy of the English . Again, the longbow won the day .
 The triumph gave England control of the Channel for the rest of the war . The French soldiers could not fully exploit their advantage, so the advantage was not exploited .
 French were intent on neutralizing the threat of archers at the outset . But, forced back by the hail of arrows, they became snarled up in their own lines . The entire French force was in a state of confusion as the English advance began .
 It was Crecy and Poitiers again; another victory for the English longbow . The longbow is a longbow; it is the weapon of choice in France .
 Gunpowder was playing a more important part in the conflict that was settling down into a series of sieges . Gunpowder played a bigger role in the fight against the British Empire .
 Improved alloys allowed the manufacture of more powerful, stable cannons . In 1453, they would deliver a deadly counterblast against the English archers at Castillon .
 Later that same same year, Bordeaux was taken and the English army was finally expelled .
 So protracted a conflict could not help but have a lasting impact on both countries . The United States and Afghanistan have been at odds for decades . The conflict is likely to have a long-lasting effect on both nations .
 When Pope Julius II quarrelled with France in the 16th century, King Henry VIII of England took the pontiff's side . Henry VIII also took the pope's side in the battle between France and France .
 Henry hoped to use the religious conflict to extend his French possessions . Henry hoped the conflict would help him extend his possessions .
 France and Britain were able to build an enduring friendship until the second half of the 19th century . It was not until then that the two countries could build a friendship .
 Joan of Arc's counter-attacks lifted the Siege of Orleans in just nine days . After six months of stalemate from 1428-29, the Siege lifted in nine days unscathed . Joan's counter attacks lifted the siege of Orleans from a stalemate .
 A truce of sorts was agreed in the 1360s before subsiding from the 1380s onward . A truce was agreed, but fighting flared up again in the 1460s and 1370s . The two sides were at odds again in 1360 and 1380 .
 When Henry V ascended the English throne in 1413, he looked across the Channel to a France divided by discord . Henry V was the king of England and France . He was the first English monarch to take over the French throne .
 Survivors set off for Calais but soon found themselves facing a huge French army at Agincourt . The survivors set off to Calais but were soon faced by a French army . Surviving survivors were forced to flee to the French capital at Agencourt .
 Joan of Arc was just 16 when, in 1428, she appeared out of nowhere, citing an order from God to drive the English out of France . But while the battle was fought on open ground, woods hemmed the men in on the open ground .
 She promised to lead her countrymen to victory over the invaders . Charles VII had her fitted with armor after she promised to protect her country .
 Still only 19, she was burned at the stake as a ""witch,"" though she was later revered as a patriotic martyr and, eventually, canonized in 1920 . She was still only 19 when she died, but she was eventually canonized as a martyr .
 Even though it has become obsolete on the battlefield, the sword is still regarded by many to be the eternal accoutrement of the warrior . The sword is the most powerful weapon in the world .
 The weapon was designed for slashing and was often more effective than a spear . It was designed to be more effective with slashing than a sword .
 In use from the first millennium, iron was stronger than bronze and could be pattern-welded . Pattern welded could combine bits of iron to form a stronger, longer whole .
 Italian sword from the 15th century had its blade quenched in water for extra toughness . Crossguard helped protect the user's hand .
 Highland ""hand-and-a-half"" sword was developed in Scotland in the 16th century .
 It was light, yet powerful, and could be wielded with either one or two hands, hence its name . The light-yet-powerful weapon was light and powerful, hence the name . It could be used with either hand or with two hands .
 The khanda was the sword of choice for India's Sikhs of the 19th century . It was the weapon of choice of the Sikhs who fought for their religion .
 This Turkish saber from the Ottoman empire is inscribed with texts from the Koran . The saber was inscribed with the Koran and inscribed with messages from Islam .
 Turkish-style kilij, or scimitar, evolved from the sabers of steppe warriors . The yelman, or flaring toward the tip, enhanced its cutting power .
 Model 1850 infantry sword was worn, but not much used, by Union officers . It was worn by many Union officers, but was not used much of the time .
 Originally the eastern part of the Roman empire, Byzantium went on to develop its own identity . Byzantine Empire was one of the last vestiges of Roman empire .
 The Byzantines made great efforts to defend Constantinople against the Turks . Ottoman expansion dates 1300-1453 Location Turkey and the Balkans . The Byzantine Empire was founded in 17th century .
 "Greek Fire" is thought to be a blend of burning oil and tar . The Greek Fire was thought to have been a mixture of oil, tar and oil . The Greeks did at least possess the useful secret of 'Greek Fire'
 At sea it was pumped from dispensers which could be aimed at enemy vessels . At sea, it could be pumped from a dispenser which could also be fired at enemies .
 The soldiers flung them from catapults or dropped them on the enemy from fortifications . Soldiers flung the bombs from catarults or threw them at the enemy . The bombs were dropped by the enemy or dropped by cataroms .
 The Byzantines also used them to flush out Mehmed's miners from the tunnels they had been instructed to dig beneath the city walls . The Byzantine Empire used the tunnels to flush them out of the city .
 Ottomans were named for Osman, a 14th-century Turkic warlord whose divinely ordained imperial destiny was said to have been revealed to him in a dream .
 He moved into Anatolia with his kinsfolk and clansmen, offering their services as soldiers to the Byzantine empire . He then built his own power base in what remained of the Seljuk state .
 He achieved this against the reluctance of the Byzantines; indeed, the mercenary bullied his masters into acquiescence . The mercenary was able to achieve this by bullying the Byzantine .
 Under Osman's son, Orkhan, the Ottomans extended their dominions across the Bosphorus and into Thrace . The Ottoman empire extended its dominions into Europe under the reigns of Osman and his son .
 Christian princes came together to face Murad I at the Amselfeld in Kosovo in 1389 . A coalition of Christian princes and Christian princes faced Murad in Kosovo . Murad's son Murad was killed by Murad during the siege .
 A Serbian suicide-squad succeeded in assassinating Murad as the battle commenced . Bayezid I took charge of the battle and won the day .
 The Christian knights had broken through the main mass of Ottoman infantry, foundering only at the last . Christian knights broke through the Ottoman infantry only to the last gasp .
 The Ottomans deliberately placed their softer, more expendable corps of conscripts in the front of the front . It took a succession of these ""narrow"" defeats for them to realize that they had to realize they were losing .
 The janissaries were slave soldiers . Fanatically loyal to each other, to the Ottoman empire, and to Islam, they were loyal to the empire .
 Many of the empire's Christian territories had originated from Christian territories . Many of them, ironically, had originated in Christian territories.
 Ottoman helmet was crafted in steel in around 1500 . Ottoman helmet functioned as a mark of rank of rank. other life.
 Ottomans were quicker and more ready to innovate than the Christians, who were still attached to the chivalric tradition . Above all, they were quicker than the Christian, more likely to innovate .
 The news from Kosovo awoke the West to the danger represented by the Turks . The West woke up to the threat of the Turks in Kosovo, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The defenders, only 5,000 strong, still held out for almost two months . The defenders still held on for almost 2 months .
 The Knights Hospitaller and Teutonic Knights also participated . France, Germany, Hungary, Wallachia, and Poland also participated in the event .
 All these groups had their own leaders, and their divisions proved fatal to the cause . Yet all these groups were leaders and leaders, with their divisions .
 Bayezid met his own nemesis as he prepared to close in on Constantinople, but met his nemesis . A major setback for the Byzantine Empire, he was forced to retreat .
 Bayezid marched his army across the country in the searing heat of summer . Taken by surprise, the army was taken by surprise by the king .
 Timur poisoned the wells and diverted the waters of the (uluk Creek so that the Ottomans and their horses had no access to drinking water . They reached Ankara, where Timur was waiting, in a state of near-exhaustion, only to find that the war
 They put up fierce resistance once battle was joined the next day, but they ultimately suffered a shattering defeat . Even so, they put up a fierce resistance . Even though, they fought back, they were ultimately defeated .
 Bayezid was taken prisoner by Timur and died a year later, still captive . Bayazid died in a year after Timur captured him .
 Christian Europe fought back in the 1440s, but was still dogged by disunity, leaving them weak . Christian Europe was plagued with disunity in the 14th century .
 Under Mehmed II, the siege of Constantinople began in April 1453 . The siege of the city began in 1453 under Mehmed III .
 Mehmed II built his own fortress, Rumeli Hisar, which controlled access to the Black Sea . He built the fortress in his first year of power .
 In a single night, more than 70 warships were shifted overland on rollers into Constantinople's inner harbor . A sustained assault could be mounted from the water . More than 70 ships were shifted to the inner harbor so that a sustained assault was mounted .
 Mehmed instructed miners to tunnel beneath the walls of the city . Mehmed told them to tunnel below the walls . The tunnel was dug by miners in the city of Istanbul .
 The fall of Constantinople brought the Byzantine empire to an end after 1,000 years, but the city was to continue to play a historic role . The city was later renamed Istanbul .
 The Ottoman empire went from strength to strength during the Ottoman rule of the Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman Empire was the heart of the city .
 The great church of Hagia Sophia was transformed into a stunning mosque . The sultans assumed the authority of the old caliphs as leaders of the Islamic world .
 From the end of the 17th century, the Ottoman empire stagnated . The empire passed almost imperceptibly into a long decline . The Ottoman empire passed into a period of stagnation .
 Europeans mounted on horses and armed with gunpowder weapons were able to conquer great swathes of the Americas . With the help of treachery and cunning, small numbers of Europeans mounted . mounted on horse and armed armed, armed with . gunpowder . weapons .
 Age of Discoveries opened up the world for conquest . 1500-1750 was the period of Europe's most powerful period .
 China, Mogul India, and the Ottoman Turks were more powerful than any European state . The Americas were easily conquered, but Asia's empires were the most powerful .
 During the era from 1500 to 1750 European land and naval forces transformed themselves into potential agents of world domination . European land, naval forces became agents of the world domination.
 Sailing ships armed with cannon extended other great Muslim empires . This was apparent at sea early on, as sailing ships became increasingly dominant .
 Persia fielded impressive fighting forces, carbines, to the light cavalry, who acted of substantial parts of the Americas . and the Moroccan army beat both African as scouts and skirmishers .
 The Spanish conquistadors overthrew and European opponents . Spanish conquists overthrew European opponents. Spanish conquiscerates overthrew them .
 The conquest was introduced but, above all, guns the great American land empires of the of Ming China by the Manchu in the revolutionized the design of fortifications .
 Aztecs and Incas in the 1520s and 1530s mid-17th century involved military involved military . There were no more castles with high with what seemed remarkable ease .
 Stone Age societies were without contemporary European wars . Stone walls were larger in scale than any stone walls, but lower-lying star forts . Stone-Age societies were not without European wars.
 Their populations armies outside Europe at all at all technologically defensive weapon . Nor were allowed cannon to be used as a . effective horses or the wheel .
 The Japanese, the Ottomans, typically relied on mercenary bands led World diseases . The Japanese used mercenary bands to fight off diseases .
 European armies at first enjoyed no clear use of muskets; the Chinese deployed trained levies . Elsewhere in the world, and the Moroccans all made sophisticated by military entrepreneurs or on hastily European armies .
 In the 16th and 17th centuries metal-armored ships were disruptive, given to mutiny and plunder . Recurrent problems with technological or organizational superiority cannon on large scale .
 Christian Europe was torn apart by religious and dynastic wars in the second half of the 17th century . Christian Europe tore apart by the second and third century wars .
 Uniformed regular engaged in a desperate struggle to hold European armies . Muslim Ottoman struggled to adapt their tactics to levels of discipline, discipline and more dependable pay empire .
 Matchlock arquebuses and muskets were neither accurate nor quick-bring, they displaced bows from the battleheld . Mercenaries were still important, although matchlock arzebuses were not accurate nor swift-bring .
 Various combinations of musketeers and pikemen were employed, with an increasing proportion of muskets as time went on . Various combinations were used .
 Commanders recognized the need for infantry to be disciplined and formal drill was introduced with musket and pike . Commanders realized the need to be more disciplined .
 Cavalry retained prestige and social status, but the armored knight with lance gradually died out . Cavalry continued to be seen as a social institution in Europe .
 Swords and brearms became the principal weapons of horsemen on the battleheld . Swords and Brearms were used in the battle to protect the horses .
 This gold mask was made by the Chimu people of Peru . These ranged from heavily armored dragoons, who dismounted to bght with The riches of South America .
 Chimu established the largest empire in South America before they were conquered by the Incas between 1465 and 1470 . The Chimu purchased from other states rather than from private entrepreneurs .
 The more efficient hintlock musket replaced the matchlock, and the bayonet took the place of the pike, so that all infantry could be musket-armed . The bayonet was replaced by the more efficient .
 At sea, European warships had evolved into huge three-masters armed with formidable arrays of cannon . European warships now have formidable arsenals of cannon and weapons .
 The Dutch and English fought the brst wars to be almost exclusively conducted at sea . The Dutch, English and Dutch fought the wars to almost exclusively fought at sea.
 Through the brst half of the 18th century European states continued to develop disciplined armies, with ever more effective held artillery .
 They were at the service of monarchs who enjoyed an impressive degree of centralized control over their realms . They were in charge of the crowns who had a large degree of central control .
 These rulers fought wars for limited dynastic objectives, characterized by lengthy sieges and generally indecisive battles . But their armies and navies would prove potent instruments for the more aggressive, expansionist age that followed .
 The Spanish demonstrate the effectiveness of their arquebuses in battle with the enemy .
 Spanish adventurer Francisco Pizarro, with a handful of followers, seizes control of the Inca empire in Peru . Spanish conquistador captured Inca in 1532-33 in Japan .
 Spain's tercios go on to dominate European warfare for the next century . Spain's Tercios were the first to dominate Europe's warfare .
 At the battle of the Solent, the English warship Mary Rose sinks off Portsmouth . The battle was a naval encounter between France and England . I I I 1 1545
 Ottoman admiral Kheir-ed-Din defeats a large Christian fleet under Genoese admiral Andrea Doha at Preveza . Janissaries, the elite corps of the Ottoman army 1538 .
 The Thirty Years War begins with a revolt by Protestant nobles in Bohemia against the rule of their Catholic Habsburg king, Ferdinand . Bartholomew's Day Massacre in Paris is one of the most famous events in the history of the world's history .
 Thousands of Huguenots are murdered following a plot to kill many of their leaders in Paris . Thousands were murdered following the plot to murder many of them in Paris. Thousands were killed in the plot .
 King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden defeats an imperial army at Breitenfeld . Gustav Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden defeated the imperial army in the battle . The battle took place in the middle of the Thirty Years War .
 A coalition of the Holy Roman empire, the Dutch Republic, Spain, Spain and Savoy opposes Louis XIV's France . The coalition was formed in 17th century France .
 Dutch end by humiliating the English with a raid on the Medway . Inspired by Admiral Michiel de Ruyter, the Dutch end the war with the English .
 French forces defeated by the armies of Marlborough and Prince Eugene of Savoy at Malplaquet, France in 1709 . The battle took place in the French town of Mal Plaquet .
 The Peace of Utrecht brings the War of the Spanish Succession to an end . A Vauban fortification was built in 17th century .
 The War of the Spanish Succession pits England, the Dutch United Provinces, the Holy Roman empire, and other states against France and Spain .
 Louis XIV's chief military engineer Sebastien Vauban is made a field marshal . Louis XIV made him a chief of the French army in 17th century .
 In the 1490s Italy became the base in which Western Europe's emerging powers fought for pre-eminence . France, Spain, the Swiss, and the Italian city-states were at the center of the conflict .
 Italy and France were ultimately the losers, swept aside by the rise of the Spanish superpower . Spain is now one of the most powerful countries in Latin America .
 A degree of peace had returned to the Italian peninsula after the turmoil of the 12th and 13th centuries . But with no central authority it appeared to be there for the taking .
 The Swiss pikemen had won respect with their dispatch of Charles the Bold's Burgundians in 1476 .
 Charles VIII of France was only too happy to recruit them into his army . Many now needed work, and Charles VIII was happy to hire them . Many needed work and were recruited by Charles VIII .
 Pope Innocent VIII backed Charles, and Spain's King Ferdinand I agreed not to oppose him in return for a free rein in the Pyrenean provinces of Roussillon and Cerdagne . Charles was the son of Charles II, who was born in France .
 King Ferrante I of Naples died in 1494, and Charles was waiting for him to do so . Charles had been waiting for the moment since 1494 when he was king of Naples .
 Some 10,000 of his soldiers are believed to have been killed in the battle . 1,500 on the Imperial side were killed, as were 1,000 on the other side . 10,500 of his troops are thought to have died, as against 1, 500 on Imperial side
 King Ferrante I of Naples died in January 1494, his son Alfonso II inherited the crown . Alfonso I inherited the throne of Naples .
 Charles VIII saw this as an opportunity to advance his own Angevin claim on Naples by force . Charles VIII also saw it as a means of advancing his own claim to Naples . Charles VII saw this opportunity as a way of advancing on Naples .
 Duke Ludovico Sforza of Milan was encouraged to hold his own duchy . He was encouraged by the new king Alfonso, who had disputed his right to hold it .
 Italian Wars was to be the ever-shifting tangle of enmities and alliances that CONDOTTIERE literally ""contractor"" in Italian . One of the characteristics of the Italian Wars .
 Some condottieri grew exceptionally powerful during the Italian Wars . helped shape the unfolding action on the ground . The Italian Wars was one of the longest and most intense periods of the war .
 Charles's soldiers encountered armies commanded by condottieri, mercenaries contracted to individual cities . Charles's army was now sweeping southward, Charles's troops encountered armies .
 Charles made short work of them, besieging cities and blasting at the walls and defenses with huge cannon . Some attempted to fight back but Charles made it easy for them to do so .
 Ludovico now realized that Charles had his own designs on the Duchy of Milan . Charles wanted to take over the city of Milan from Ludovica, who had been expelled from the city .
 Pope Alexander VI added his authority to Ludovico's calls for an alliance against French aggression . Ludovica was the first pope to join the anti-French alliance . Alexander VI was the pope's first pope in Rome .
 The ""League of Venice"" was formed to force the French into leaving Italy . The League of Venice was formed in order to force France to leave Italy .
 Francesco II Gonzaga, a eondottiere and also the Marquess of Mantua, was assigned to take command . Francesco Gonzaga was also assigned to lead the army .
 The standard bearer was crucial to the pike-square's sense of honor and identity . Dressed far more elaborately than the typical Swiss pikeman, the standard bearer .
 In July 1495, his Italians fought the French to a standstill at Fornovo . The French were defeated by the Italians in the Italian city of Fornova .
 Charles's army was forced to retreat back to the safety of France . Charles's forces were forced to return to safety . The French army survived .
 Charles's successor, Louis XII, invaded Lombardy in 1499 and took Milan . Louis XII invaded Milan and took the city of Milan .
 He deposed Duke Ludovico and continued south, agreeing with Ferdinand I of Spain to share the Kingdom of Naples . The King of Naples was created in 1783 .
 Spanish commander, Gonzalo Fernandez de Cordoba, found his army outnumbered four-to-one . Spanish commander found his troops outnumbered four to one in battle .
 Gonzalo Fernandez de Cordoba had the use of arquebuses and heavy guns in his war . Named El Gran Capitan by his associates, he fought a pikeman's war in the Spanish city .
 Tercios were Spain's answer to the Swiss pike-square . They combined pikes, arquebuses, and edged weapons equally .
 As cohesive and effective for defense in depth and aggressive attack as the Swiss square, the tercio could also make use of its arquebus firepower to provide additional impact .
 Gaston de Foix's French force met the Spanish at the battle of Ravenna in 1512 . The battle took place in Ravenna, Italy, in the Italian capital .
 The Swiss would soon invade Italy, taking Milan . The French never saw the benefit, however, however .
 The French returned the year after but were beaten at Novara, Italy . The Swiss pikemen were beaten by the French in the same year .
 French king Francis I was driven by dynastic ambition . He was born in 1494 and was crowned in 1515 .
 Francis began his reign with the great military triumph at Marignano . He was well educated and a cultivated patron of the Italian monarch .
 His dynastic rivalry with the emperor, Charles V, led him into a series of futile attempts to rule Italy . But his rivalry with Charles V led him to try and rule Italy in vain .
 Defeated and captured at Pavia in 1525, he was forced to win his freedom by making huge concessions to Charles V . Repudiating his promises once back on French soil, he spent the rest of his reign carrying out further wasteful attempts to destabilize Charles's position .
 The Swiss killed hundreds of the captured German landsknechts . He died on March 31, 1547, in 1547 .
 At Marignano in 1515, Louis's successor, Francis I, found the answer to the pike formations in artillery and 10,000 artillery . The population of Rome after the sacking of the city in 1527 was 10,500 .
 Thousands of people had been killed, though many had fled to the countryside . Heavy cavalry. heavy cavalry . Thousands had fled . heavy cavalry. Thousands had died .
 Francis had new roads especially built across less frequented—and arduous—back routes . The best known passes were closely guarded .
 He was forced to agree to humiliating terms in the Treaty of Madrid in 1526 . The treaty was signed by the King of Spain in 1524 .
 30,000 men marched on Rome after funds ran out . Funds to pay their wages ran out and, enraged, they marched on the city .
 Charles was noted for his Catholic piety, but the pro-French pope, Clement VII, was wary of Imperial power . Charles was known for his Catholicism but Clement VII was wary .
 Some of Charles V's 14,000 landsknechts had Lutheran sympathies . This added a note of religious enmity to the sack of Rome . Charles V was the king of the Roman Empire .
 Pope was forced to shelter, a virtual prisoner, in Castel Sant'Angelo . In May 1527 his German and Spanish troops inflicted an orgy of destruction in which the pope was forced .
 The struggle for power between France and Spain continued in the decades that followed . After the war, the conflict for power continued to grow in France .
 In 1519 Francis was furious when Charles I of Spain became Emperor Charles V, as Francis had coveted that position for himself . Francis was a prisoner of Pavia in 1519 .
 Francis's pikemen and cavalry were once again mauled by the tercios at Bicocca in 1522 and Sesia in 1524 . He decided again on an invasion of Italy .
 Francis's cannon tore great gaps in the Imperial lines but had to cease fire as the French cavalry surged forward . Francis had to stop fire in order to get his cannon to hit the ground .
 Spanish arquebusiers could fire at will . Both sides' landsknechts engaged .
 The War of the League of Cambrai had broken out in 1508 . Battle of Marignano was the first of its kind .
 Francis I suffered a series of reverses, but he transformed his fortunes with this victory at Marignano in 1515 . He was able to win back all the territories he had lost .
 Spain was enriched by the profits of its American empire . Spain started to grow ever more powerful in the 1930s .
 By the 17th century, Europe's two great Catholic powers began resisting upsurge of Protestant power in Northern Europe .
 Italy itself enjoyed a welcome period of peace and cultural flourishing under a largely unchallenged Spanish hegemony . Italy itself now enjoyed a . welcome period .
 The technology gap between the Old and New World cultures was crucial to these conquests, yet their sheer audacity still defies belief . The technology gaps between these cultures were crucial to their success .
 I t was prophesied that the plumed serpent god, Quetzalcoatl, would one day appear from the eastern ocean in human form . The serpent god is believed to have one day appeared from eastern ocean .
 When Hernan Cortes arrived from Spain in 1519, he was believed to be that serpent god . Cortes is believed to have been the serpent god when he arrived in Spain .
 Cortes encouraged by Cortes in order to intimidate the people he was conquering . Yet the myth was of Spanish, rather than Mexican, origin .
 Cortes and his little band of men were able to subdue such an incredibly powerful empire was extraordinary . Cortes was able to overcome such a powerful empire, the historian says .
 Christopher Columbus opened up a New World, but soon became exploited by the Old one . His courage, charisma, and ruthlessness are before his discovery .
 Spain's colonization of Middle and South America's pagan cultures was ostensibly a Christianizing mission . Spain's conquest of the Americas was ostensibly an attempt to Christianize .
 conquistadors were tough, ruthless opportunists in search of booty . But those adventurers who undertook the dirty work of conquest were ruthless opportunistists .
 After all the savages were ignorant of the Gospel; and they did moreover possess fabulous chimu mask quantities of gold . After all, these savages had .
 The Aztecs' crushing of other Mesoamerican peoples led to the creation of their empire . Prior to the Europeans' incursions, the Aztec empire was the strongest in the world .
 They had widened their dominions through Mexico in a series of conquests from the 15th century . The Spanish conquests were part of their conquests of Mexico .
 Over the same period, the Incas had founded an even larger empire, over 2,170 miles across . The Incas also conquered civilizations like the Chimu and Chimu, but also conquered other civilizations .
 On the eve of the Spanish conquest both empires were consolidating their power . This is the first time the two empires have been in contact .
 D Q: Conquest of the Aztec empire dates from 1519-21 to 1531-33 . D H: Incas were not in doubt. H: The Incas may have been the Incas' Incas .
 He exploited the existing enmities among the native peoples of Mesoamerica . Nor is the cunning with which he exploited those enmites .
 Cortes took Malinche, a Nahua woman whose people were hostile to the Aztecs, as his mistress and interpreter . Cortes' wife was the Nahua, a woman who lived in a hostile state of Mexico .
 At Cholula, west of Puebla, Cortes and his men killed the male population, without doubt at the urging of the Tlaxcaltecas, who wanted to punish the Cholulans for submitting to Aztec rule . The Aztec warriors killed the
 The scale of the slaughter the Spanish had been able to commit with their steel weapons and their firearms was scarcely imaginable to them . The scale . of slaughter the . Spanish had committed with their . steel weapons .
 Cortes and his company were given nervous adulation upon arrival at the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan . Moctezuma II seems to have taken Cortes's claims to be an ""ambassador"" at face value .
 In 1521, the defeated Aztec ruler was caught by Cortes and his men as he tried to slip away across Lake Tenochtitlan . Cortes took fright at talk of a revolt and massacred the Aztec nobility .
 Cortes and his men had to fight their way out of the rebellion that ensued . Cortes was forced to abandon his troops in the wake of the revolt .
 Cortes besieged Tenochtitlan, now stricken with smallpox the conquistadors had unwittingly brought with them . Cortes was forced to flee with the smallpox he brought with him .
 Under Cuauhtemoc, the nephew of Moctezuma, the Aztecs resisted bravely . The Aztec were defeated by the Aztec Empire of Mexico .
 Cortes and his men held a number of advantages, as Cortes knew . Cortes' men were aware of their advantage, as well as the advantage .
 The city is on a series of islands in a shallow lake connected to the mainland and to each other by narrow causeways . The city's situation allowed defenders to focus their efforts more effectively .
 In the 1530s Francisco Pizarro took Peru against still more astounding odds . Inca complacency led the Inca to victory over the Incans .
 South America had weapons never before seen in Gold trim South America . Arquebuses (muzzleloaded firearms) and cannon, as well as steel-bladed swords .
 Inca complacency allowed Pizarro's party to probe deep into the empire completely unscathed . But in the end it was Inca . Complacency that allowed the Inca to go deep into .
 Atawallpa saw no reason to take a handful of "bandits and thieves" seriously .
 The two sides met, eventually, at the city of Cajamarca, in northern Peru . It was the first time the two sides had met in the World Cup .
 conquistadors kept to their ""Christian"" commitment by bringing a priest out to preach to the Inca king . The conquistador kept to his ""Christian "" commitment"
 The cruelty of the colonists was dwarfed in destructiveness by the ravages of the infections they introduced they introduced .
 In every region of the Americas, epidemiologists estimate that 90 percent of the population had been killed by disease within just 50 years of the arrival of the Europeans . The Americas' population has been wiped out within 50 years .
 In just a few years, Spain had won a vast American empire . Spain had only a tiny commitment of manpower, it was Spain .
 Vasco Nunez de Balboa in Panama, Francisco de Orellana in the Amazon, Pedro de Valdivia in Chile, and Pedro de Ollana in Chile grew fabulously wealthy . The Spanish conquistador was one of the most powerful men in the world .
 Aztec headdress is made from tail feathers of the quetzal, consecrated to the plumed serpent Quetzalcoatl, a Mesoamerican deity of death .
 The cold steel of the conquistadors cut down the Inca troops, shocked into passivity . Although their noise and smoke had far greater impact than their penetrative power, their cold steel cut down .
 In a few hours of one-sided fighting, Pizarro's men killed 7,000 Incas . Then they seized Atawallpa, the Incas, which is now known as Atawwallpa .
 This proved so astonishing an outrage that the watching soldiers could barely believe it was happening . It proved so shocking it was so shocking that the soldiers were barely believing it .
 Atawallpa was held captive in Cajamarca . The conquistadors demanded an enormous ransom, and then garroted the king anyway, setting another puppet, Manqo Qapac, in his place .
 He led a belated fightback, but the Incas were finally defeated in 1536 . He led the fightback and led a fightback .
 Like so many of the conquistadors, Pizarro originated from Extremadura, then the poorest part of Spain . The conquistador is one of Spain's most famous conquists .
 He made his first foray into South America in 1524, faring better on his second, two years later, into Colombia and Ecuador, where he first heard of the wealth of the Incas .
 The success of his third expedition owed much to his qualities as leader . He was the leader of the expedition in the early 1900s .
 Pizarro always retained composure, unfazed by the scale of his endeavor . No strategist, but a formidable improviser, he always retained his composure . He is a strong force of improvisation, but no strategist .
 Aided by a coalition of native people determined to overthrow the Aztecs, the Spanish, with horses, armor, modern weapons, and gunpowder, were the cutting edge of military power . The Spanish were the first to be armed with horses and armor .
 The Aztecs, fighting on foot with clubs, bows, and spears, were overwhelmed within two years . The Aztec warriors were overwhelmed by two years later .
 The Muslim Mogul dynasty took pride in its Turko-Mongol origins and was celebrated for its civilization and culture . Descendants of the great Mongol conqueror, Timur Lenk, were the descendants of the Mongol .
 Moguls lived up to their antecedents in the field of war, carving out an empire that ultimately extended across India . The Moguls ruled India for centuries and ruled the country for decades .
 Babur took Kabul in 1504, making it his base for forays into the central Asian region of Transoxania . Babur led his warband into Afghanistan, leading his warbands into Afghanistan . Kabul was Babur's base in Afghanistan .
 He made a series of invasions into Punjab and was soon asked by local nobles to assist them in overthrowing Ibrahim Lodhi's fearsome Afghan regime . He was soon joined by local noblemen to help them overthrow the Lodhi regime .
 Babur took the time to furnish his army with the new gunpowder weapons and to train them in their use, while preserving the more traditional skills of steppe warfare . Babur also trained his army to use the new weapons .
 Not until end of 1525 did he mount a full-scale invasion of Hindustan . Not until the end of that year, he finally invaded the country .
 Babur's army numbered only 10,000, but it brushed aside the Afghan force sent to intercept it . Babur defeated the Afghan forces in Panipat Babur victory in his first invasion of Afghanistan in 1883 .
 India has always been vulnerable to invasions and raids from the northwest, from the direction of Central Asia . To the north, the subcontinent of India is protected by the formidable barrier of the Himalayas .
 Babur was a descendant of both Timur Lenk and Genghis Khan . Babur founded a yadhadhyayayaq in the 13th century . Babar was a descendent of both the Lenk- and Khan .
 Caught up in Timurid dynasty's succession struggles, he found himself forced out of Samarkand in the late 15th century .
 Babur built a power base first in Afghanistan, then in India, establishing his own dynasty in Delhi . Babur was the founder of the first dynasty of the Delhi dynasty .
 Sultan Ibrahim, with 100,000 men and 1,000 elephants, confronted the invaders at Panipat, north of Delhi . Sultan Ibrahim's men and elephants faced the invaders in the Battle of Pani .
 The era of the Moguls saw a gradual transformation of warfare in the subcontinent . He also dug trenches and felled trees to create barriers to left and Mogul firepower .
 Babur was killed and left lord of Hindustan, soon occupying the cities of Delhi and Agra . Guns, like this 18th-century matchlock, would have a growing role in the region .
 Armored elephant could trample infantry, stampede horses, and demolish fortifications . Elephants could also stamp out horses and destroy fortifications in the desert .
 The Muslim Moguls are famed for their religious tolerance and their openness to India's aesthetic values . They are known for their tolerance and openness .
 Babur's grandson, Akbar the Great, ascended the throne in 1556, allying himself with northwest India's Hindu princes, the Rajputs . Babur the Great ruled India from 1556 until his death in 1583 .
 During the 1560s and 70s he asserted his power over his Rajput ""allies" Rajputs . Most accepted, most accepted, since Akbar gave them privileged offices of state . He asserted power over Rajput allies .
 Those who resisted had to be cut down by force, as at the siege of Chitor in 1568 . Akbar invaded the country's eastern states, including Orissa and Bengal, extending the empire across the right, leaving gaps .
 Ibrahim attacked Babur's well-placed fortifications on April 21, but his soldiers were brought up short by Babur . Babur was killed by Ibrahim in the Battle of Babur in the 14th century .
 Babur's men fired at point-blank range into this close-packed mass . The bombardment began from behind the barrier .
 Afghan army was pulverized by the Taliban . Almost 16,000 soldiers were killed in the battle .
 During this period Kabul was taken by Babur's old nemesis, the Uzbeks, under their formidable leader, Abd Allah Khan . Babur was killed by the U.S. during his reign in Afghanistan .
 Akbar established a new frontier on the banks of India's Godavari River . Khan's death in 1598 brought the northwest security, and Akbar soon established the new frontier . Khan died in 1597 .
 Under subsequent Mogul emperors like Jahangir and Shah Jahan , these conquests were made . The siege of Chitor Akbar’s men in 1568 was captured .
 Rajputs fought to the death; this fate seemed preferable to a dishonorable capture by the Mogul enemy . The Rajputi Raja was captured in the death of the Raja Raja .
 The Mogul empire steadily expanded to take over the whole subcontinent, apart from the southern tip of the country and Sri Lanka . The empire was based in the north, the historic center of Islamic influence in India .
 The Mogul empire reached its greatest extent under his authority, but it was less happy and more restive . A puritanical and single-minded Muslim, the Mogul was a leader of the Islamic state of Islam .
 Aurangzeb's death in 1707 saw his successors facing increasing difficulties and local unrest . His successors faced increasing difficulties in the aftermath of his death .
 In the end, the dynasty fell into decline, gradually losing territories to others .
 India was incorporated into the ever-expanding British empire in 1857 . In the aftermath of the bloody Indian Mutiny, British rule continued in India .
 The Moguls had modernized Indian warfare, but had no answer to a changing political environment in which the power of Britain was playing an ever increasing role .
 As the 18th century went on, the Moguls were increasingly powerless to prevent the expansion of the Maratha empire from the south .
 Suleiman I had a much bigger military force than that of the Hungarians led by Louis II, the Jagiellonian king . Sueleiman I was a much larger force than the Hungarian king .
 Louis's soldiers started plundering the dead, allowing the janissaries to reach level ground and form up with their cannon . Janissaries reached level ground allowing the Janissary to form up their cannon with the cannon . Louis's troops then looted the dead .
 Ottomans' rise was one of the most striking aspects of their rise was their readiness to adapt . One of the key factors of their success was their willingness to adapt to the times .
 The high seas could hardly have seemed further from the Central Asian steppe, but they took to seafaring as though it were in their blood .
 peasants in the Balkans knew that if their sons were taken they would be ""made"" for life . The janissaries may have been slaves, but peasants knew their sons would be 'made'
 Some would try to pass their sons off as Christian so that they could be recruited into the sultan's special guard . Others would also try to get their sons into the special guard of the Sultan .
 From the Ottoman point of view, it made sense to have aliens who, far from their families, would bond the stronger with their comrades and ""belong"" completely to the corps . The aliens would bond better with each other and would bond stronger with comrades .
 Conditions were restrictive and discipline ferocious, but the janissaries gained immense status and privilege . The janissary became the most powerful janitorial corps in the world .
 The first siege of Vienna was led by Suleiman the Magnificent . The siege lasted more than 100 days .
 Town by town, soldiers were mobilized to correspond with quotas . Engineers and laborers were also mobilized to construct bridges and dig trenches .
 The janissaries were the nucleus of the sultan's army . They were not just a reliable elite but literally at the physical center of his military operations . Janissaries are now a vital part of the Arab world's military .
 Conscripts provided a ""cushion" at the fore, while at the rear came the tougher, more seasoned troops with their commander . Conscriptions provided the "cushions" of the troops at the front .
 Eventually, this idea was taken to such lengths that trenches were excavated and barriers erected at the heart of the army in the field .
 Big guns were placed there too, and were to feature increasingly in Turkish tactics . Big guns are placed there also, and are often used in Turkish operations .
 Mounted archers, or sipahis, acted as personal bodyguards to the sultan . Mounted archers were used to act as bodyguards for the Sultan .
 The akindshi, a small group of cavalry, went before the principal army as scouts and raiders, pillaging, burning, and spreading panic . Half that number of men with about 80 guns. half a number of guns .
 This advantage was testimony to the organizational powers and logistical capacities of the Ottoman Turks, writes John Sutter . Sutter: This advantage is testimony to their organization and logistical capabilities .
 Caught descending a steep escarpment above the Danube River, the army had to break into smaller groups as they came down . The army was forced to break up into small groups as it came down, breaking into groups of soldiers .
 Hungary, ""the Shield of Christianity,"" had been the final buffer between the Ottoman empire and Central Europe . The Hungarians Battle of Mohacs Hungary was the final battle between the Ottomans and the Hungarians .
 Ottomans attacked Vienna in 1526, but were easily easily repelled . Its defeat at the battle of Mohacs opened the way to Vienna for the Ottoman Empire .
 For centuries Constantinople had been regarded as the greatest city in the world . The city was known as the "greatest city" for centuries . In the 16th century, the city was considered the world's greatest city .
 Ottomans had fallen to the Ottoman Empire in 16th century . That it fell to them, it sent shockwaves through Christendom . The loss of the city to the Ottoman kingdom was a major blow to the world .
 Ottomans had seized territory in the eastern Balkans as early as the 14th century . Sultan Murad I's ottoman sultan forces had defeated MURAD I the Serbs at the battle of Kosovo in 1389 .
 From their base in Constantinople , the Ottoman Turks pushed westward, extending their influence by both land and sea . The Ottoman Turks extended their influence on land and the sea .
 Christian powers won significant victories, but Islamic forces were relentless . Christian forces won significant battles against the Islamic forces .
 T he fall of Constantinople in 1453 brought the suspense of centuries to an end . The fall of the Ottoman Empire was a major event in history .
 The Ottomans had shown their strength in the most ominous way; suddenly, they were a real and pressing threat . But the West was now in the front line; the West had shown its strength in an ominous way .
 A bodyguard's halberd bound at the head with golden foil, its blade beautifully adorned with Koranic verses, was carried by one of Sultan's Mohammad Ill's bodyguards . Recruitment fell to district officials ensuring access to the whole population of an Islamic empire .
 In the 17th century the Ottomans extended their territories across North Africa . In the 16th century they extended their territory across the continent . In 17th and 18th century, they were able to take over the region of North Africa from Ottoman rule .
 Barbary corsairs were an essential arm of Ottoman naval policy . They harassed Christian shipping and raiding in the Mediterranean and beyond . The Barbary pirates became an important arm of the Ottoman navy .
 It reached its greatest extent toward the end of the 17th century, whereafter came a gradual decline . It was the greatest extent of its influence in Europe .
 The number of Ottomans killed in the field at the battle of Zenta in 1697 . The number who died in the Tisa River trying to escape the battle . Aden f N i o' r defeat at Lepanto .
 The Ottoman invasion of Crete in 1669 occupied Crete . But they quickly regrouped and returned to the offensive, occupying the island .
 By 1683 they were again advancing on Vienna, which they subjected to a 59-day siege . Vienna was subjected to 59 days of siege by the Ottomans .
 Lithuania formed a ""Holy League,"" raising a massive army that was more than 80,000 strong . Together with the pope, Austria, Bavaria, Saxony, and Poland formed a "Holy League" Lithuania was one of Europe's most powerful nations .
 John III Sobieski, king of Poland-Lithuania, led the decisive cavalry-charge down the hillside . The charge is said to have been the biggest in history, with 20,000 horses .
 Holy League followed through with a series of victories in Hungary . The Holy League won their first two games in Budapest .
 In 1697, it inflicted an ultimately decisive defeat of the Ottomans at Zenta . It inflicted a decisive defeat on the Ottoman Empire in 1697 .
 All that was left for the Ottoman empire after its failure at the battle of Zenta was decline . But it was to be slow, and for a long time imperceptible . The Ottoman empire's decline was slow, but it was not to be as slow as it was .
 Ottoman empire remained the greatest power in the eastern Mediterranean . Its wider sphere of influence extended from Morocco to the Middle East . The Ottoman empire was the most powerful in the region .
 Already, the Portuguese had gained control of the trading centers of the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf .
 In Egypt and Algeria, local governors, or beys, are asserting ever more autonomy without quite breaking the link with Istanbul .
 Scores of ships were sunk and thousands of lives were lost in this climactic confrontation of the Cross and the Crescent . Scores of battles were fought and scores of ships sunk . Thousands of people were killed in the clash of the Red and Crescent .
 The true strategic significance of the victory of the forces of Christendom has been disputed, but its symbolic impact could hardly have been greater . The true significance of this is disputed but it has a symbolic significance .
 I n 1570 Ottoman forces had taken the island of Cyprus from the Venetian Republic, making the Ottomans masters of the eastern Mediterranean . The island was taken by the Ottoman in 1570 .
 With Christendom under threat, Pope Pius V summoned the Holy League, an alliance of Catholic powers against Islam . The Holy League was a Catholic alliance against Islam in the Middle Ages .
 Spain was the most powerful of the Western states, Venice, Malta, Genoa, and Savoy . Its commander was Don John of Austria, the half-brother of King Philip II of Spain .
 Ottomans were equipped with composite bows and the Christians with muskets and arquebuses . The fighting forces on both sides were large . Both sides fought large .
 Ottoman commander, Ali Pasha, was confident that his fleet would win the encounter . But the battle would be decided by close-quarters fighting with edged weapons .
 As his main fleet engaged the enemy center, his wings would close in, crescent-like, and attack the Christians' flanks . His main fleet would engage the enemy's center, while his wings closed in on the flanks of the Christians .
 Don John commanded the Christian center, meeting the main body of Ali Pasha's fleet head on . The Christian center was met by the main army, meeting with the main fleet .
 At the outset the Ottomans tried to spring their trap, closing in from the wings . The battle unfolds at the beginning of the battle .
 Six Venetian galleases placed ahead of the main Christian galleys . Their size and firepower broke up the tightly-formed Ottoman line of battle . But the initial impact of this maneuver was disrupted by the six maneuver .
 Scirocco's ships on the right wing made some initial headway before being forced back and finding themselves hampered by coastal shoals . Despite this disruption, the ships were able to make some headway .
 Ulug Ali's left wing was on the point of breaking through a gap that opened up on the Christian right when Don Juan de Cardona's reserve came up and blocked the Ottomans . Don Juan De Cardona came up to block the break-up .
 In the center the battle raged, combatants leaping to board one another's vessels through the fog of smoke and the hail of lead and arrows, with whole ships erupting into flames .
 For a time Ali Pasha's fleet held firm against the onslaught but, pounded relentlessly through four hours of fierce fighting, eventually the flower of the Ottoman navy was all but destroyed . The battle lasted for four hours before the Ottoman fleet was destroyed .
 Ottoman ships and galleys of the Holy League engage at dose quarters . Ottoman ships were engaged in a confused and bloody conflict . Ottoman forces engaged in the conflict . The Holy League was defeated by Ottoman forces .
 Many lords and their samurai followers felt overlooked . Nonetheless, bitter enmities were evident, as many lords and samurai followers .
 Onin War had brought another round of conflict as the daimyo fought for supremacy . The Onin war was the first of its kind in the region .
 Portuguese merchants with firearms and gunpowder added a dangerous new ingredient to an already volatile mix . The arrival of Portuguese merchants in the 1500s added a new dangerous ingredient to the mix .
 The Europeans arrived in 1543, when a ship en route to China was caught in a storm and forced to put in on the island of Tanegashima . The island is now Japan's most popular tourist destination .
 Guns almost certainly found their way into Japan before this, brought by Asian traders . In spite of this, guns almost certainly made its way into the country before this .
 T he daimyo Oda Nobunaga came to the fore in the 1550s in Owari, in the present-day Aichi Prefecture of southeastern Honshu .
 He was ready to extend his power by 1560, but the Yoshimoto and Matsudaira clans had other ideas . The Yoshimoto clan was in control of the Japanese kingdom .
 Nobunaga headed toward Kyoto with 1,800 men, he heard that an army of over 20,000 was marching out to meet him . Nobuaga was heading toward Kyoto, Japan, when he heard of the army's arrival . He was forced to retreat to Kyoto .
 Unperturbed, he devised a dummy army, setting up a row of soldiers' hats and banners along a lengthy skyline to give the impression of a waiting force .
 His army made its way around to approach his enemies in the rear at Okehazama . Meanwhile, his army discreetly made their way around .
 His surprise attack sowed complete and utter panic and brought him an improbable victory . He said: 'I'm not going to be surprised. I'm going to win'
 Nobunaga still faced enormous challenges, including his rival, Takeda Shingen . Nobuaga's new recruits were reinforced by these new recruits .
 Shingen had hopes of uniting Honshu under his rule . A formidable warlord from the nearby province of Kai, Kai, had hoped to unite Honsu under him .
 Shingen died soon after the encounter, but his son and successor, Kutsuyori, was no less ambitious, and just as determined to dominate Japan . Kutsuiori was just as ambitious as his son .
 When his much larger force met with Nobunaga's at Nagashino Castle, also in Mikawa Province, a repeat of the rout at Mikatagahara seemed likely . The battle was fought at Nagasino Castle in Nagawa Province .
 Nobunaga's men were cut down in their thousands by his arquebusiers, men armed with muzzle-loaded firearms . Instead, the impact of Kutsuyori's cavalry charge was checked by the disciplined stand of his men . The impact of the cavalry charge is checked by
 Matsudaira Takechiyo was the son of a small-time daimyo, leyasu . He was born in 1543 in Matsura, Japan . He is a self-made man .
 Hideyoshi saw off the threat, defeating his enemies at Shizugatake, in the present-day Shiga Prefecture, in 1583 .Hideyoshi defeated his enemies by defeating them in Shizugsatake in Shigatake .
 A number of Takeda Kutsuyori's 1 / I generals were his most trusted comrades . By 1585 he had secured his position as one of his trusted generals .
 He harbored ambitions of conquering China—and organized two invasions of Korea . Neither of these was ultimately to go as planned .
 Hideyoshi's back-channel diplomacy in the days preceding, which resulted in several key daimyo switching sides . Even so, by the time he died in 1598, he had brought order to Japan and the Tokugawa chief's diplomacy .
 Ieyasu's victory was epoch-making, though unrest continued to simmer for several years . Ieyasu's victory in the early years of his reign was epochal .
 Only when the Toyotomi were finally cornered and destroyed at the siege of Osaka in 1615, could the wars of the Sengoku era be said to have reached their end . Only when they were cornered, they could say the end of the wars .
 Toyotomi dan headquarters under attack by forces of Shogun Tokugawa leyasu, in 1615 . Siege of Osaka castle was the result of the attack .
 Siege lasted for six months before the Toyotomi fell . Siege was bloody and violent .
 Nobunaga's victory was a victory, not just for Nobuaga, but also for modern ways of making war . In hindsight, it was a triumph, not only for Nobuna, but for modern warmaking .
 A unified Japan Nobunaga died in 1582, forced to commit sepukku by one of his own generals, Akechi Mitsuhide, having allegedly insulted his mother . He was forced to kill his mother after she insulted him .
 Toyotomi Hideyoshi was succeeded by his sandal-bearer, Toyotom Hideyushi . Hideyoshim had risen in his master's trust to become his most valued general . He was succeeded in his death by his most trusted general .
 Hideyoshi abandoned the campaign he had been waging in the east and to harass his men from the rear, unsettling them . Nobunaga abandoned his campaign in the eastern part of Japan and instead pursued the rear .
 Plated with gold and covered with chain, this samurai helmet also has a detachable fan . Tokugawa leyasu had eventually made his peace with Hideyoshi, but he drew the line at respecting the succession .
 Hundreds of daimyo felt they had a stake in the outcome of the election . Opposition coalesced around the figures of leyasu and Ishida Mitsunari .
 The former drew supporters from the east; the latter had his power base in the west . The former president and vice president had supporters in the east .
 Fighting took place over a wide area, with small warrior-groups engaging in a series of running skirmishes . The fighting took place in a large area of northern Syria .
 Japan benefited from stability conferred by the Tokugawa shogunate, though it could be rough and ready in its maintenance of order . More crucial had been divisions in the Toyotomi camp .
 Thousands lost their lives during the Shimabara Rebellion of 1637-38, when Ieyasu's grandson, lemitsu, clamped down on Christian converts .
 To shore up their authority at home, meanwhile, they bore down on the samurai, defining their privileges and restricting their the use of firearms .
 The Tokugawa shoguns maintained Japan's isolation for nearly three centuries .
 Commodore Perry and his American flotilla turned up in 1853, demanding commercial access . But the country was poorly equipped when Commodore Perry turned up and demanded commercial access.
 All the old structures—the shogunate, the power of the samuraiH/vere soon swept away . The samurai power was swept away by the samurai, but not the samurai .
 The Japanese celebrated the capture of Busan in 1592 with an orgy of bloodletting . The massacre was celebrated with blood-shedding .
 Japan invaded Korea in 1592-93 and 1597-98 . It was to be the first overseas conquest for Toyotomi Hideyoshi's Japan . Korea Resists invasion of Korea .
 Hideyoshi's imperial ambitions were crushed by the Koreans . The Koreans repulsed the invaders not once, but twice, in the Battle of the Moon . They were brave, resourceful and resilient .
 Ming China was diplomatically close to neighboring Ming China, and shared many of its values . It was a close ally of China and was close to Ming China .
 King Wang Kon of Koguryo united Korea's ""Three Kingdoms"" in the 10th century . Wang Kon united Korea in Korea's Three Kingdoms .
 The French state attacked the privileges of the country's aristocratic families . It built up its own authority at the expense of aristocrats .
 By the middle of the 16th century, its stranglehold on society was slowly weakening as rival factions started to emerge . By the mid-16th century it had been slowly weakening .
 He dreamed of building an empire overseas . Having turned his long-divided country into a single nation-state, he wanted to build an empire abroad .
 Just a short hop from Kyushu—Japan's southernmost island—Korea was not just a prize in itself but a stepping-stone to a possible conquest of Ming China . Korea was a key ally of Japan's Ming China alliance against China .
 It was not long, however, before he realized that Korea itself was virtually defenseless . He realized that he had to take responsibility for his country .
 So it seemed to a ruler with half a million men under arms—samurai with years of experience in the arts of war . So it would seem to be a ruler of a war-ravaged nation .
 30,000 of Busan's inhabitants were killed in cold blood in May 1592, 1592 . The city was a strategic fortress-city on the Korean coast .
 Ill-armed and inadequately equipped, the Koreans' regular troops and their ""Righteous Army"" of volunteers had no Hansando on August 13 . Ill-army and inadequate equipped, they were unable to defend themselves . The Korean government was unable to defeat the North Korean army .
 "All of the sudden, their supply line seemed very long and desperately exposed. All of the time, they seemed to be desperately exposed."
 In October they successfully defended the fortress of Jinju and, in February 1593, they also held Haengju fortress . With just 2,000 soldiers to Hideyoshi's 30,000, they were able to hold Jinju fortress in 1593 .
 Turtle ships were so-called because they had completely enclosed decks beneath a curved cover that resembled the shell of a turtle . The ships were called 'turtle ships' because they were completely enclosed .
 The cover was shaped so that cannonand small-arms fire glanced off, and iron spikes protruded from the surface to discourage enemy boarders .
 Oars and as many as five different types of cannon protruded from protected ports along the sides of the ship . There were additional cannon at the bow and stern . Oars, as well as five cannons, were protected ports .
 The dragon provided a spout for the thick, sulfurous smoke that was emitted by the crew to help conceal a vessel's movements at sea . The dragon had another significant role, however, in providing the spout to provide the thick smoke to hide a vessel .
 Hideyoshi gave up and agreed to a truce, although he did not renounce his imperial ambitions in Korea . A second attempt to take over the Korean peninsula was made in 18th century .
 In January 1597, he launched another invasion, sending hundreds of ships and over iOO.OOO troops . The invasion was the first of its kind .
 This time, however, they lacked the advantage of surprise; their enemy had been making preparations . The enemy was making preparations, and they were not surprised .
 Ming China sent 75,000 men as well as ships to Korea . The Koreans had also armed themselves with backing from Ming China . Ming China also sent troops and ships .
 The Japanese took the city of Namwon and the strategic fortress of Hwangseoksan, but these victories did not prove to be substantial breakthroughs .
 Yi Sun-sin had been forced to relinquish his command after a dispute with his superiors . His replacement managed to lose almost his entire fleet in a single battle .
 Hideyoshi's dream of a Japanese empire had turned out to be a fantasy . Hideyoshoshim had hoped to create an empire in Japan but it had proved to be nothing more than a dream . Hideioshi's dreams of an empire had been a fantasy.
 His successors would henceforth concentrate on maintaining stability at home . The country's future would be maintained by his successors, he said .
 Tokugawa leyasu, Hideyoshi's sometime ally and long-term rival, was absent from Korea . Hideyoshim Hideyashi's long-time rival was Hideyasu's ally and rival . Japan's first war in Korea was a victory for Hidey
 The Tokugawa shoguns pulled down the shutters on Japan, excluding foreign merchants and missionaries . Hideyoshi's imperial project was halted by the shogun shogun's shogun .
 Korea had been through terrible traumas, but it had gained much in military capability and confidence . Korea's new-found confidence is a key to its success in the Middle East .
 Korean hwacha used gunpowder charges to fire a hundred arrows or more at once . Korean weaponry was crucial to the victory at Haengju fortress .
 He looked to the unification of Japan . While his contemporaries sparred and scrapped over provinces, he looked to unification .
 His first acts as regent, in 1586, were to start shipbuilding and build a base on the northern coast of Kyushu from which he planned to launch an invasion force .
 Without an external enemy, they might direct their aggression at each other or turn on him . Without an outside enemy, the U.S. might direct its aggression towards each other .
 Hideyoshi began negotiations with Korea's Choson regime about the skill and prowess of his soldiers . So he began negotiations to find an answer to the skill of the skill-and-suicide of Hideyoshu .
 They relied mainly on bows and arrows, which could not compete with the Japanese arquebuses for range or penetrating power . Though they had some heavy cannon, they relied on heavy cannon .
 Korea's capital, Hanseong, was taken in mid-June and, by the end of August, the country was all but conquered . The country was taken by the South Korean army in August .
 Japan's samurai tradition combined a code of honor and self-sacrifice with an aesthetic of war . Craftsmen who furnished the warriors with weapons and armor shared this aesthetic . The Japanese navy suffered heavy blows in a series of engagements with Yi Sun-sin's Korean fleet .
 16th-century Myochin Nobuiye created the helmet in Japan . The helmet is one of the greatest armorers of all time .
 The kabuto was created by Myoshin Nobuiye in about 1535 and is signed on the inside of the front plate .
 Toyotomi clan made their last stand against the forces of the Tokugawa shogunate in the fortress at Osaka in 1615 . The Toyotom clan made the last stand in a fortress in Osaka, Japan .
 Myochin Nobuiye made the tsuba, the guard that protects the hand on samurai swords, the ultimate expression of the armorer's art . The tsubas are the guard guards that protect the hand from samurai swords .
 Tokugawa Ieyasu heard the sound of shots being fired and sensed the thump on his chest as bullets hit him . He sensed a thump in his chest when he was hit by bullets .
 Charged up with a warrior's frenzy and swept along in the confusion, he fought on . Eventually leading his warriors to victory, he led them to victory .
 Only afterward when, back in camp, he unfastened his armor and two small leaden balls fell out, did he appreciate quite how close he had come to death .
 Ieyasu's armor would have been made of narrow metal plates bound together in a way that was both flexible and strong . Like that of generations of samurai before and after, the armor was bound together with flexible metal plates, bound together .
 His helmet was also made of metal strips, riveted together for rigidity, then lacquered over . The helmet was made from metal strips made of riveted metal strips .
 Arching forward in a wingor horn-like shape, the fukigayeshi covered the ears . Arching forwards in a horn-shaped shape, it was a form of form of shape that covered the ear . It is believed to have been used in Japan as a
 The honor of a samurai warrior was a quality that transcended his effectiveness in the field of battle . Just as the worth of armor far exceeded its functionality, so the value of armor exceeded its function . The Myochin mystique of the armor is a Japanese legend .
 It embodied the values of the samurai bushido code and announced the heroic valor of its wearer . Beautiful and exquisitely wrought, it was the most expensive piece of art .
 Not surprisingly, the armorer's trade was revered—indeed, it was not so much a trade as a vocation . The armorer was revered for his work, not his trade, but his life was his vocation, he says . He says, "Not so much
 Its secrets were carefully guarded and its skills were handed down from father to son over generations . The Myochin family kept its secrets carefully guarded .
 This dynasty of court armorers was at the center of Japanese military life from the medieval era right up until the 20th century .
 A certain Myochin Munesuke is said to have created the helmet that saw the great Minamoto warlord Yoshitsune safely through so many campaigns before his betrayal and suicide in 1189 . The helmet was said to be the helmet of the Minamoto Minamoto .
 Myochin Nobuiye was a samurai armorer in the early part of the 16th century . He left behind the realms of artisanship for those of art . His descendants later moved on to the art of art to make their own art .
 Artistic genius Nobuiye's skills were legendary, winning him the sort of renown that was outshone only by that of a great warrior . He was one of the world's most accomplished artists .
 We know that he lived and worked in the town of Shirai, in the Kozuke district of central Honshu . His armor and swords were admired by the great warlord Takeda Shingen .
 Few of his pieces have been reliably authenticated and many craftsmen have set out to make deliberate forgeries .
 The tsuba became the part of the sword on which Japanese swordsmiths lavished their most dazzling skills . From this time on, indeed, the tsubas became the most dazzling sword on the world .
 The fukigayeshi— forward projections of the shikoro, or neckguard— are richly decorated with embossed and gilded clouds and dragons . The neckguard is a forward projection of the body, and the neckguard has been worn in Japan .
 The Manchu sauntered into Beijing, seizing power as the Ming administration imploded . Manchu took control of Beijing in 16th century .
 Manchu warriors send Chinese force into retreat . Force of the Manchu forces Chinese forces retreat .
 Some soldiers ride on armored wheelbarrows propelled by their comrades . Wheelbarrows also functioning as shields . Some soldiers also ride on wheelsbarrows as shields.
 M anchu history is said to have started with Nurhaci, a Jurchen warlord, at the end of the 16th century .
 Nurhaci encouraged the creation of a written script of the Manchu language . He also brought together the warring nomad groups of the eastern steppe . The Manchu was the first to write a script of its own language .
 Four centuries before, the Mongol ruler had trampled the Jurchen's last bid for ascendancy . The Jurchen were defeated by the Mongols four centuries before .
 Genghis Khan had reduced the Jin dynasty to dust and smoke . Their Jin dynasty had extended its . dominion across swathes of northern China, but it was reduced to dust .
 Jurchen people pledged their duty to China's Ming emperors . Forced since then into vassal status, the Jurchen have been forced to live as vassals of China's rulers .
 Nurhaci's unifying efforts gave them the strength to assert EAST ASIA Manchu conquest of China w Dates 1618-83 Location Manchuria, China, Korea, and Taiwan have met .
 As it was, they faced many other difficulties—floods and famines, economic chaos, and political corruption—and rebellion in the empire was rife . rebellion in Britain was rife, and rebellion was rife.
 Ming emperors had come to power in 1368 at the expense of the Mongols . The Ming dynasty came to power at the end of 1368 . The Mongols had been defeated by the Ming dynasty .
 Kublai Khan's successors had shown little of his wisdom or—increasingly—his strength . Khan's successor showed little of the Khan's wisdom or strength .
 The Ming had hardly established themselves when, in the early 15th century, a new surge of Mongol attacks were launched under the leadership of Esen Tayisi . The Ming were the first to resist a Mongol invasion of China .
 Ming emperors plowed resources into renewing the Great Wall of China . The menace was eventually lifted, but the walls were never removed .
 The 16th century brought the Portuguese to China, along with their modern cannon . The Portuguese were the first Europeans to arrive in China .
 Jurchen continued their raids and expansion into both China and the Choson dynasty's Korea . From here, the Jurchen were able to expand into China and Korea .
 Nurhaci was among those killed at Ningyuan in 1626 . He was one of those killed during the siege of Ningyu in 1625 .
 Yuan's study of modern Western artillery weapons and techniques was crucial . Nurhaci was wounded by a cannonball from which he never recovered from .
 The shock of their leader's death distressed the Manchu, but the late Khan's sons . Khan Khan died in 1912, but his sons survived .
 By 1638 they had captured Korea, an important conquest in its own right but crucial too as an ally of the Ming . The Korean invasion was the first of its kind in 1638 .
 In another era, the rise of the Manchu might have represented a crisis for the Ming rulers, but one that they could far too long . Ming rulers could have faced a crisis if they didn't deal with it long enough .
 A mutiny led by Zhang Xiangzhong broke out in the 1640s in Sichuan, China . Hundreds of thousands of people were killed in this self-proclaimed emperor's reign of terror .
 Li Zicheng's troops entered Beijing on May 26, 1644 . By 1644, the situation was growing increasingly hopeless . Li's forces entered Beijing in 1644.
 Zhu Youjian, the Chongzhen emperor and the Ming dynasty's last, committed suicide in China . He committed suicide at the end of his reign . Zhu was one of China's last monarchs .
 General Wu Sangui, fought on but was soon cornered by Li Zicheng's advancing forces . General Wu fought on and was cornered . General Li was killed in the Battle of Shangai .
 Kangxi emperor extended his empire and strengthened his hold at home by undertaking military campaigns beyond his frontiers . Kangxi was one of China's most successful monarchs .
 To the west, against Tibetans, against the Dzunghars; and, in the far east of Siberia, Russian colonists . To the north and east, the Russian colonists were fighting against the Tibetans .
 From 1736, when his grandson, the Qianlong emperor, ascended the throne, the Chinese empire realized its greatest extent . The Qianlong Emperor's grandson, who was emperor from 1736 to 1788, ascended to the throne .
 Qing had fostered a splendid isolation. Like the ruling powers of Japan, the Qing fostered an isolation.
 The colonial period brought its own battles, such as the Opium Wars of 1839-42 and 1856-60 . The British colonial period also saw the opium wars of the same period .
 Qing regime finally removed from power during the Nationalist Revolution of 1911 . Qing regime was finally removed by the Qing regime in 1911 .
 Zheng Chenggong led his army out against the Manchu . The QIANLONG EMPEROR's military dress was worn by the Chinese emperor .
 General expelled the Dutch from Taiwan, ending 38 years of foreign rule on the island . General remained loyal to the Ming and went on to expel them from Taiwan .
 With their assistance, the general won a crushing victory over the rebels at Shanhaiguan . The general won the general's crushing victory .
 Their forces fanned out through China, extending their dominions far to the south under the pretense of mopping up the rebels and re-establishing order . The Chinese government was trying to mop up rebels and restore order .
 A new dynasty Wu Sangui's hopes that the Chongzhen emperor's son would succeed to the throne were soon dashed . Wu had hoped that his son would inherit the throne from his father Chongzhen Emperor .
 Dorgon proclaimed his young nephew, Shunzhi, emperor, with himself as regent . He proclaimed himself as emperor . Shunzhhi was ruled by his nephew Shun Zhunzhai .
 Ming supporters and rebels melded into one. Ming supporters, rebels and rebels merged into one . The country's new rulers took control with no compassion. The new ruler took control of the country .
 The Manchu felt little sympathy for the Han Chinese population . Their agricultural traditions and settled ways they despised were despised by the Chinese .
 The Han made subjects shave their hair at the front and wear a long pigtail behind in the Jurchen style . The Han were humiliated by the Han, who were forced to wear a pigtail in front .
 The number of ""banners" or divisions, that the Manchu people were divided into, family by family, for military duty and organization, also later used for political purposes . Such atrocities appear only to have encouraged opposition, and fighting continued .
 General Zheng Chenggong established his own state of Fujian in south-eastern Fujian . He established his state as a center of resistance in the south-east coastal region .
 Koxinga's armies thrust deep into Manchu territory, forming alliances with other nearby powers, including the Portuguese in Macau and the Spanish in the Philippines . Starting from Amoy, the Manchu armies thrusted deep into Amoy .
 The gold, ivory, and coral design on this 17th-century Manchu saddle signify the rider's status and rank . Despite Intricate ensign, the Manchu rider's saddle is not a replica .
 Chinese generals had been charmed by the invaders with the promise of power and wealth . They had been given provinces in southern China, and had been promised wealth .
 The idea had been to extend the reach of an invasion force that was in danger of spreading itself thin and to afford the Manchu an important source of information . The idea of the invasion force was to extend its reach and to give it an important intelligence source .
 Feudatories had risen up against the Qing dynasty in 1674 . However, they became wayward and became disunity . The rebels defeated themselves with their disunity. They were defeated by the rebels .
 He invaded Taiwan, then a Dutch colony, and made it his offshore base for the campaign against the Qing . From there, he invaded Taiwan and became a base for his anti-Chinese campaign .
 The general's death from malaria later that year ended any hope of a Ming restoration . The Manchu rulers still faced opposition from other quarters .
 Reformation overturned many old certainties, while dynastic power struggles caused widespread destruction . The Reformation was a major event in the history of the Reformation .
 The two branches of the family held the thrones of Spain and the Austrian Lands . Even after he abdicated, they were a natural choice for election as Holy Roman Emperors .
 In the mid-16th century the great French dynasties began to struggle with each other for power . The French Wars of Religion dates back to 1562-98 .
 The conflict embroiled the whole nation and became all-consuming; their fervor fueled by sectarian hatred and the age-old, implacable fear of change . The conflict was embroiled in the whole .
 As regent to her young son, Charles IX, in the 1560s she sought peace among the nobility . She sought an accommodation between Catholics and Calvinists . The Queen sought peace with the nobility in her son's reign .
 This intransigence was encouraged by the House of Guise, self-appointed guardians of Catholicism . The House of French Guise is a self-proclaimed guardian of Catholicism, and encouraged by its actions . This is not the first time the French government has allowed a French president to
 In March 1562, Due Francis de Guise led an Turning wheel , Iron pyrites hammer attack for two hours . The attack lasted two hours, with two hours of burning .
 Conde's cavalry could not penetrate the wall of Swiss pikemen facing them, but his own landsknechts were not so stalwart . Conde’s cavalry was not able to penetrate the walls of the wall, but the Swiss pikesmen were .
 When the trigger was pulled, the sprung wheel spun, releasing the hammer, which struck sparks . The Wheellock pistol was presented to Charles IX of England in 1564 .
 plate armor afforded a degree of protection against the shot from early firearms . Plate armor was on the brink of obsolescence during these wars .
 Civil war erupted between the Catholic Crown and Protestant Huguenots, led by Louis I de Bourbon, Prince de Conde .
 The battle of Dreux was fought in December 1562, and marked by hapless generalship on both sides . The battle was fought on the French side of the River Dreux in France .
 Having not sent any scouts ahead, Conde was caught unawares when his force met the Catholic army face to face . Conde had not sent scouts ahead of his troops .
 The Crown's marshal, Anne, due de Montmorency, failed to return to Orleans . Stunned himself, the Crown marshal failed to arrive in the city .
 Protestant England, sympathetic to the Huguenots, enjoyed its enemy's difficulties . Protestant England was sympathetic to its enemy, enjoying its difficulties .
 Spain's Philip II had no love for the House of Valois, but his Catholic piety was real . Philip II's Catholic piety is real .
 He feared Protestantism's capacity to create political unrest, which had already manifested in the Netherlands . And he feared that Protestantism could create unrest, and he feared it would create unrest .
 In August 1572, France's Huguenot elite gathered in Paris for the wedding of their co-religionist, Henri of Navarre, to Charles IX's sister, Marguerite of Valois . Charles IX was Charles VIII's brother, Henri, and Marguer
 The match was intended to promote religious harmony, though many Catholics opposed it . Many Catholics opposed the match, including, the bride .
 Due de Guise was assassinated by Admiral de Coligny, thought to have ordered Guise's father's assassination years before . The prominent Catholic was enraged, the more so because of the Huguenot Admiral .
 When an agent of Guise tried to shoot Coligny, the admiral survived . The Huguenots were outraged when he survived but were outraged by the attempt .
 Catholic mobs burst into Huguenot houses murdering men, women, and children in orgy of slaughter that went on for three days . Over 12,000 people were killed in the slaughter .
 The Peace of Longjumeau made concessions, which enraged diehard Catholics . Armored helmet with a hinged visor enclosing the entire head and face . Huguenots defeated once again .
 A popular maneuver, known as the caracole, involved riders advancing in formation, each one with a pistol at the ready in both the right and the left hands . The maneuver was a popular maneuver known as "caracole"
 On approaching his enemy, each man turned his mount slightly to one side, firing I k-' from that hand, before half-turning the other way to fire again .
 Royalists had numbers on their side, with troops from Spain and states of Italy . The Royalists were outnumbered by the Royalists .
 Protestants prevailed nearby, at La Roche-TAbeille, and again at Moncontour in 1570, bringing an end to this round of fighting . Catholics defeated the Protestants again in the French capital in the same year .
 Most were restored under the Edict of Beaulieu, which concluded the ""Fifth War"" of 1574-76 . Most of the 15th War was fought in France and France .
 Charles IX died in 1574, succeeded by his brother, Henri III . Henri III was a conciliator, like his mother . Charles IX was succeeded by Henri III, who succeeded him in 1575 .
 In 1576 Due Henri de Guise established a ""Catholic League" to secure the throne for himself . Francis's heir, Due Henri, established the League in 1576 .
 Henri III had Henri of Navarre on his side . Henri was a Bourbon and a Protestant, already fighting for the Huguenot cause . Henri III was a Protestant .
 Henri of Navarre also descended from King Louis IX . Henri III was childless, this made him the legitimate heir to the French throne . As Henri III died in 17th century, Henri III ruled the French monarchy .
 Battle of Dreux Fought in March 1562 this battle marked the beginning of the French Wars of Religion . The battle was fought in 1562 in France .
 Family members were killed on the opposing sides as poor planning made for the most brutal of encounters .
 At Coutras, in 1587, Catholic forces marched quietly through the night to surprise Henri of Navarre at dawn . The Catholic forces surprised Henri of the Navarre with a surprise attack .
 His men held their formations, making every shot tell . But his men, well-trained veterans, held their positions .
 De Guise's Catholic cavalry, made up of armored knights with lances, made a stirring sight as they charged toward their enemy, but were cut down easily by Henri of Navarre's arquebusiers . The Catholic cavalry made a stir with its armored knights charging toward the enemy
 Henri III died following the assassination of Henri III by a Catholic extremist . Two years later he did, following the death of Henri IV in France .
 Henri of Navarre converted to Catholicism before he was crowned, but did not entirely abandon the Protestant cause . Henri of Navarre converted to Catholicism .
 In 1598 the Edict of Nantes confirmed the Huguenots' religious freedoms and gave them security in the form of rights to maintain their own garrisons and troops . The Edict also gave them the right to maintain a military presence in the city .
 Although the coronation of Henri IV appeared to have taken most of the acrimony out of France's religious divisions, not much had been settled . The coronation was the first of Henri's reign in France .
 Peace in France was brought to an abrupt end in 1610, when Henri IV was assassinated by a Catholic fanatic . The Catholic fanatic assassinated Henri IV of France .
 The France that emerged from this nightmare was an autocratic, highly-centralized state with no room for dissent of any kind . The French state emerged from the nightmare of the French Revolution, writes Philippe Coste .
 The Dutch finally won their independence, not just by their bravery but by their resourcefulness and readiness to adapt . The Dutch were not just brave, but they were resourceful and adaptable enough to survive .
 With the ""nation state"" just beginning to emerge in Europe, dynastic problems soon arose . Emden Leer i *i Jemmingen 1568 I RIESLAND '% DRENTHE j Zuider Lu q m Zee Q >■ ££ BEFORE F .
 Charles 1 of Spain was also Charles V, Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation . Charles V was Charles V of Spain, who was also Emperor of Spain . Charles 1 was also King of Spain from Spain .
 He came by the Burgundian possession of the Netherlands as heir to the House of Valois . He was heir to a family of the Valois family .
 He was successor to the Austrian House of Habsburg and the thrones of Catalonia and Aragon . But he was also successor to Austria and Spain, as well as the throne of Spain .
 The Catholic Church could see that the Protestants had tapped into a profoundly spiritual hunger . It sought to renew itself with a ""CounterReformation"" with Charles as its temporal leader .
 He viewed the rise of Protestantism in the Netherlands with alarm . He was defeated thanks to French support for the German princes .
 When he abdicated in 1556 to devote his life to prayer, his son, Philip II, continued his work . Philip II continued to continue his work until his abdication .
 Philip II felt threatened by dissent by dissent of any sort . Under his rule the activities of the Inquisition intensified . Philip II's rule was the result of his fear of dissent .
 In 1568, descendants of Muslims forcibly converted to Christianity during the Reconquista staged a revolt, which Philip put down with brutal force . In Granada, the descendants of those who converted to Catholicism were put down by Philip .
 Until 1635 supplies and materiel for the Dutch war effort had traveled up along the ""Spanish Road" through France . The battle was the first major battle of the day .
 France's Catholic king, alarmed at the growth of Flabsburg power, entered the war on the side of the Protestant powers . This crucial conduit was cut when France's . Catholic king entered the . war on behalf of the Protestants .
 Spain fought off England's coast between Dover and Deal between 1639 and 1639 . The battle was fought off the coast of England's southern coast .
 It was a breakthrough victory for a rising Dutch naval power . Dutch Protestants, sacred images of every kind were false idols . It was the first time the Dutch Protestants were able to defeat the Dutch .
 Catholic churches are full of stone and wooden figures, stained glass, and carvings . Catholic churches were full of stained glass and stone and woodwork .
 Philip II suspected that Protestantism was associated with the rejection of authority . Philip II had always suspected that Protestants were associated with rejecting authority . The Duke of Saxelderburg thought Protestantism had been associated with authority .
 The doctrines of Calvin and Luther had taken root in northern Europe, among an increasingly affluent merchant class . The doctrines were taken root among increasingly affluent merchants .
 The ports and industrial cities were home to selfconfident communities whose people expected a measure of intellectual independence . People expected to be expected to live in self-confident cities with independence .
 When the Duke of Alba led an army into Brussels in 1567 to crack down on the rebels and reinstate Catholicism, the population rose up in a patriotic rage . The population rose in patriotic rage when the Spanish general led a Spanish army into the city .
 Resistance coalesced around the figure of William the Silent, Prince of Orange . The suppression of the dissenters was quick. William the silent, but the suppression was quick .
 A rebel army marched out at Rheindalen in April 1568, but its volunteers were no match for the soldiers of the Spanish Crown . The rebels were defeated by the Spanish army in 1568 .
 Terrible massacres took place at Zutphen and Naarden, and then in Haarlem in 1573 . Terrible murdered occasions occurred at Zuthen, Naarden and then at Naarden in 1574 .
 Far from encouraging other cities to surrender, such conduct strengthened their defiance, says the mayor . "Such conduct strengthens their defiance," he says .
 Alba defeated them at Mookerheyde and in September 1574 resumed his siege . Alba's siege continued until 1574, when he defeated them .
 Spain's early victories were soon forgotten as the Dutch turned a quick policing operation into a long-running war . The Dutch failed to oust the Spanish, and were The Dutch Revolt 1568-1609 .
 Angry soldiers went on a rampage in Antwerp killing 8,000 in three days . The episode was known as the 'Spanish Fury' and is the name of the episode known as Spanish Fury .
 The geuzen were Calvinist privateers who had originally sought religious asylum in English ports . They were Calvinists who originally sought to escape from English ports to escape persecution .
 Expelled by Elizabeth I in 1568, they returned to fight for the rebels in the Netherlands . They fought for the Dutch rebels against Elizabeth I and were expelled from England .
 England gave covert support then, from the i580s, increasingly open support to the Dutch Revolt . Despite this early rebuff, England rebuff was rebuffed by the Dutch .
 Luis de Requesens found it hard to maintain a moderate course in a conflict that was not just exasperating but financially draining . His replacement, Luis deRequesens, found it difficult to maintain the moderate course .
 Spanish troops were going alliance of the various regions of the Habsburg Netherlands . By 1576 Spanish troops had gone to the Netherlands . Spanish troops went to the cities of Amsterdam and Amsterdam .
 Spain reclaimed the initiative when significant funds began to arrive from the American silver mines . Spain reclaims the initiative after significant funds arrived from the U.S.
 His ""divide and rule"" approach played on the tensions he saw between the southern cities and the more militant, aggressively Calvinist northern centers .
 Parma persuaded the southern states to form the Union of Arras, loyal to Spain . Parma convinced the south to join the union of the Arras . The union was formed by Parma and the Southern States .
 The Duke made the southern cities his base for a new campaign of conquest . The Duke of Sax Saxelderburg made the city his base .
 The survivors were to witness many changes as their country reveled in its new-found independence . The survivors witnessed many changes in their homeland .
 Those who survived the Dutch Revolt, especially in the northern cities, discovered a new sense of national identity . The Revolt was the start of the Dutch Revolution in the 1960s .
 As soon as hostilities ceased and the Treaty of Westphalia was signed in 1648, the Netherlands flourished . The Netherlands flourished as soon as the treaty was signed .
 As intrepid seafarers, the Dutch were soon opening up new areas for colonial exploitation in the East Indies .
 The halberd proved one Dutch answer to the fearsome Spanish pike . A versatile weapon, it proved one of the world's most versatile weapons .
 The tilted ax blade could cut deep. war on England, was defeated. The point pushed off attackers. War on England was defeated .
 His stated aim was to train his troops more Romano ("in the Roman way""), and he culled many of his ideas from the ancients . While his recognition of the need to make his army into a fighting machine seems modern, it seems modern .
 His men performed endless repetitive drills with pikes and muskets, every one broken down into individual movements . Each one was broken down in individual movements, each one numbered .
 He rationalized the army's structures, training all new officers to command smaller companies . The army's structure was rationalized, he rationalized .
 In 20 years (while laying siege to cities and attacking fortresses), he contrived to fight just two pitched battles . In 20 . years he fought just two . pitched battles.
 In 1600, he defeated Spain at Nieuwpoort, near Dunkirk . In 1600 his superior tactics were shown when he defeated the Spanish .
 Ambrogio Spinola, a brilliant Italian general and financier, entered the service of the Crown . Less fortunately for Maurice, the brilliant general became a major figure in the British Empire .
 From 1609, hostilities were suspended during the Twelve Years Truce . But from 1609 to 1609 they were all-peaceful .
 The Thirty Years War began in 1618, and fighting resumed in the Netherlands in 1621 .
 Maurice of Nassau's health was failing and he could not prevent Spinola from taking the crucial city of Breda in 1625 .
 Spain's ships were bringing silver back from the mines of the New World . Their loss was a deep humiliation and a major blow for Spain . Spain's loss of silver was a major humiliation .
 Maritime warfare had been changing fast . Ships with side-mounted cannon were becoming the norm, and the Dutch had been quick in acquiring mastery .
 They had shown this as early as 1607 in their audacious attack on the Spanish off Gibraltar . The attack on Gibraltar in 1607 was the first of its kind .
 Maarten Tromp and his fellow seafarers savaged a Spanish fleet in 1639 at the battle of the Downs . The battle was just off the coast of England and was the first of its kind .
 It had not been defeated; but neither was there any realistic prospect of its winning . Money was running out and lives were being lost . The U.S. government was not winning, but it was losing .
 When the Thirty Years War came to its conclusion in 1648, Spain's power was weakened . Spain was weakened by the end of the war .
 Diego Velazquez's famous painting underlines the importance of this conflict to the Spanish Crown . The Surrender of Breda is the most famous painting of the Spanish Civil War .
 The Crown benefited financially by issuing ""letters of marque" to seamen like Francis Drake, Martin Frobisher, and John Hawkins . The Crown was able to inspect, capture and destroy foreign vessels .
 Elizabeth's interference in the Spanish-controlled Netherlands was something more . Inconveniencing Spain—Europe's richest Catholic power—was one thing, but Elizabeth was one thing .
 Philip II's 1585 expedition in support of the Dutch rebels was futile, but for Spain's Philip II it was the final indignity . The Earl of Leicester's expedition was futile but for Philip II he was the last indignity of the Spanish king .
 In January 1586, with Frobisher, he led a party ashore to sack Santo Domingo . Several weeks later, he looted Cartagena de las Indias .
 Rumors growing of a sizable Spanish armada, or fleet, that would take the war to England . Drake did to Spain what he had done to its colonies . Drake was killed in the Battle of the Word .
 The Duke of Parma would be waiting with an army 30,000 in Cadiz, 1587 . The number of ships sunk by Sir Francis Drake in the raid on Cadiz is the number of sunk .
 Spanish helmet was the helmet of choice for Spain's 16th-century soldiers . The classic ""comb morion"" was the Spanish helmet of the day .
 F rancis Drake sighted the Nuestra Senora de la Concepcion ("Our Lady of the Conception"") off the coast of Ecuador on March 1, 1579 . Drake set it off in 1579 and it is believed to have been the first sighting of the
 The Golden Hind finally closed in as darkness fell . Having trailed it discreetly throughout the day, his ship, the Golden Hind, was finally closing in .
 Drake's crew opened up with cannon and musket fire, shattering its mast . Drake opened fire on the ship, shattering the mast of the ship . Drake was killed by the explosion of cannon fire .
 The Spanish crew surrendered, the English taking the Spanish cargo of gold and silver . The shocked crew surrendered . The English took the Spanish gold and gold .
 The defeat of the Armada in 1588 did still successfully frustrate Spanish invasion plans . English vessels that stopped Spanish ships on the high seas .
 The encounter was to loom large in the English myth-making of later times . And the encounter was a major part of the story .
 When Queen Mary I ascended the throne she restored Catholicism to England . She restored the Catholic faith to the country .
 Despite protests at her betrothal to a Spanish prince, she was able to face down her opponents . Despite protests, she faced down her political opponents .
 Queen Mary I's marriage to Prince Philip of Spain in 1554 promised to ensure lasting good relations between the two countries . The wedding prompted violent protests in England . The Spanish Armada and the Counter Armada were the first to attack the Azores in 1591 .
 PHILIP II OF SPAIN A NEW PERIL Protestant dangers were all too evident. Protestant dangers are all too obvious.
 Mary's death in 1558 was not just a personal loss for Philip but a diplomatic challenge . Her Protestant half-sister, Elizabeth I, took the throne . Elizabeth I became the queen of England .
 Religious conviction and power-politics proved a combustible mix in the escalating conflict between the Spanish and the English . The Anglo-Spanish War was fought in Spain and England .
 The events of the Anglo-Spanish War were to become fundamental to England's sense of itself as divinely appointed defender of Protestant liberty . The events were fundamental to the English sense of being a defender of liberty .
 10 ft long-barreled culverin could fire a light shot over long distances to invade England . Often mounted on the upper deck of warships from this period .
 Spain's Armada traveled up the Channel without much trouble . Commanded by the Duke of Medina Sidonia, Spain's armada made it to the Channel .
 Armada, waiting at Calais, proved vulnerable when the English dispatched fireships to float into its lines . On August 7, the Armada was attacked by the English .
 Panicked Spanish crews cut anchor cables and the Armada broke free . Panicked crews cut their anchor cables . The Armada quickly lost its defensive formation quickly lost .
 Parma's invasion was foiled, and the Armada was forced to push on into the North Sea . The Armada's invasion of Parma was the first of its kind .
 The voyage home proved costly, stormy waters claiming some 60 ships and thousands of lives . Stormy waters claimed some 60,000 lives during the voyage .
 Jubilant England sent out its own armada in 1589, but this endured heavy losses . The armada suffered heavy losses and was destroyed by the end of 1589 .
 Spain reasserted its naval superiority at the battle of the Azores in 1591 . An attempt to capture its treasure fleet was thwarted by the Spanish forces .
 Lord Howard led a joint attack on Cadiz in 1596 with the Earl of Essex . He led the attack on the Spanish city of Cadiz .
 In 1595 Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone, and ""Red"" Hugh O’Donnell had fitful Spanish backing when they led an Irish rebellion against the Spanish .
 In 1601 Spain landed soldiers on the coast of Cork in support, but the groups did not rendezvous successfully . Spain landed troops in support in 1601, but failed to reach a rendezvous .
 The Spanish were pinned down by the English at the siege of Kinsale . The siege was the first time the Spanish had been pinned down .
 Elizabeth's famous address to the troops at Tilbury showed there was no doubting her resolution or strength . Her famous address showed there were no doubts in her resolve or her strength .
 Her Protestant convictions helped shape her country's foreign policy for years to come . Or indeed the Protestant convictions that brought her into conflict with Spain .
 By the time she died in 1603, Queen Elizabeth I had made England the most important European counter to the dominance of the world's great Catholic monarchies .
 LORD HOWARD OF EFFINGHAM'S DISPATCH OF AUGUST 9, 1588 . The defeat of the Spanish Armada had sent England soaring .
 Ireland's Irish neighbor would prove a problem, as would the Dutch Republic . The Dutch Republic would also be a problem if the country were to be ruled .
 The conflict with Spain had given the English a fright . The plantation of Ulster was a success for the English .
 It appeared a susceptible ""back door"" for invasion, its people Catholic in religion and prone to rebellion . It appeared to be a susceptible "back door" for invasion .
 The settling of loyal Protestant Lowland Scots in the northern Irish lands of the O'Donnells and O'Neills transformed the political culture of the north of Ireland .
 France repeatedly tried to exploit Irish insurgencies toward the end of the 18th century . However, the strategy did not stop France from trying to exploit them .
 England's status as Europe's leading Protestant power was to be challenged by the Dutch Republic in the 17th century . The Dutch Republic was a major factor in England's Protestantism .
 In 16th-century Europe, it was also at the heart of social and cultural existence . The 16th century Europe was also known for its culture and history .
 Religion was increasingly the center of political life, especially once the Protestant Reformation opened up the possibility of difference of belief . Religion was becoming increasingly important in politics .
 Germany was actually a patchwork of principalities, duchies, and other small states . The Holy Roman Empire was soon divided along religious lines . Germany was divided on religious grounds .
 Peace of Augsburg in 1555 prevented serious conflict between Germany and Germany . The principle of cuius regio, cuius religio was agreed and regional independence cemented . Regional independence was cemented in the Peace of 1555 .
 If the ruler was Catholic, then that was the state's religion; if he was Protestant, then so were his people . If he's Protestant, his people were Protestant, they were also Protestant, and so were their people .
 As time goes on, impatience grew over what appeared to be an unresolved issue . As time went on, impatientity grew over the issue .
 Emperor Rudolf II seemed to be storing up trouble with his tolerant attitude . The Emperor's tolerant attitude seems to be a sign of trouble to come .
 The Thirty Years War Habsburg plans to turn back the dock, reimposing Roman Catholicism as the established religion, turned Central Europe into a cauldron of conflict and suffering . The Thirty-years-old conflict was the result of the Thirty-year-old's efforts to turn Catholicism
 This war for the continent's Christian soul was outstanding in its heartless cynicism and in its staggering extent of its civilian casualties . This war is outstanding in the heartless cynics and in the staggering amount of civilian casualties. This war was outstanding .
 Protestant nobles in Bohemia hurled two imperial governors, accused of violating Protestants' rights, from a high window into a heap of horse manure . O ne of Europe's most tragic episodes began in farce, when Protestant nobles hurled them from a window .
 The officials in the Town Hall had been acting on behalf of the empire and the Church, and this ""Defenestration of Prague"" symbolized the Protestants' defiance .
 Rocked by the Reformation, the empire had drawn strength from the CounterReformation . There were fears that Catholicism would again be enforced by the Empire .
 Matthias remained ruler of Upper and Lower Austria and Holy Roman Emperor until his death in 1619 . His nephew, Ferdinand, had been elected king of Bohemia by the Bohemian Diet in 1617 .
 Ferdinand's aggressive Catholic devotion was well known . Bohemian elites assumed that he would respect their religious privileges . Ferdinand was known for his aggressive Catholicism .
 Ferdinand instantly sought to change things in Bohemia in favor of the Catholics . The result was the Defenestration and open rebellion against Habsburg authority . The conflict spreads
 Elector Frederick V Frederick was leader of the Protestant Union, a military alliance of the radical Protestant States in Germany set up by his father in 1608 . Calvinist ruler of the Palatinate, Elector Frederic V Frederick, was leader . The Protestant rebels looked to their religious
 Ferdinand inherited Matthias' remaining titles and was German burgonet helmet . Matthias died in 1619; Ferdinand inherited his remaining titles . The burgonet was light despite being reinforced internally .
 The war spread beyond Sicily and Scotland, with trouble flaring up from Sicily to Scotland . But it also spread beyond the borders of Italy and Scotland .
 Despite this development, the Bohemian rebels declared Ferdinand deposed and elected Frederick V to his place as ruler of Bohemia . Frederick V was declared deposed by the Bohemians, but was not deposed .
 Ferdinand responded by preparing his military forces and looking to the support of his Habsburg cousin in Spain, Philip III, and the Catholic League, composed of German states under the leadership of Bavaria . 4 million:;;:;* died during the Thirty Years War, whether killed in
 Some estimates give a figure almost twice as high to counter the Protestant Union . Some estimates say the figure is almost double that .
 In late 1620, at the battle of White Mountain just outside Prague, a united Catholic army crushed Frederick's forces, deposed him, and put down the revolt . Frederick was deposed by the Catholic army .
 Frederick fled into exile, his own territories in Germany held by the victorious Catholic forces, and Habsburg authority and Key Mentioned in this article .
 Religious principles and political issues were at stake both in the Holy Roman Empire and across a wider European stage . But this was just the start, not the end, of hostilities .
 Christian IV of Denmark took up the Protestant banner in 1626 . He was worsted in successive engagements with the army of the Catholic League led by Count Tilly and by the emperor's army .
 Wallenstein aroused fear and outrage among the rulers of the Holy Roman Empire . Wallenstein was a German poet of 17th century . His work was published in 17th Century Germany .
 Although without a princely title, his virtually private army had carried the emperor's power across Germany and to the Baltic coasts . It had been funded by a wave of transfers and confiscations of territory into his hands .
 Beginning with a series of annexations along the Baltic seaboard, he then fought Poland . He then fought against the Polish Republic .
 Maurice of Nassau's military theories were developed for use on the field . Subscribing to Maurice's theories, he developed them for use in the military .
 Wallenstein's defeat of Denmark took that country out of the war, while Sweden's Gustavus Adolphus stepped up to lead the Protestants .
 Gustavus Adolphus won a resounding victory at the first battle of Breitenfeld on September 17, 1631 . Gustavus Adolphus Gustus adolphus was victorious in the battle .
 Wallenstein's men were mauled at Liitzen by the Swedes, but Gustavus Adolphus was killed . The following year, Wallenstein’s men were killed by the Swedish forces .
 He imposed a truce, followed by a general German peace at Prague, in 1635 . The truce was followed by the peace of 1635 at Prague .
 The German princes, Protestant and Catholic, were war-weary and alienated by Sweden's military policies . The princes were alienated from Sweden by its military policy .
 They accepted a settlement that moderated the emperor's tough religious demands . The settlement moderated his tough demands on religious matters .
 The Protestant city of Magdeburg was the scene of one of the greatest atrocities of European history . Cardinal Richelieu, King Louis XIII's chief minister, had the sack of the Protestant city .
 In 1631 some 25,000 people were slain and the city destroyed . The city had grown uneasy at the thought of the Habsburgs being established in Germany and Spain .
 France declared war on both Spain and the empire, soon invading the Spanish Netherlands and Imperial territories along the Rhine, but they were repelled . The French invasion of the Netherlands was repelled by the Spanish forces .
 Spanish and German armies cut through Picardy, Burgundy, and Champagne . French and French armies fought in Picardy and Burgundy .
 The Habsburgs were weakened by Dutch victories at sea and rebellion in Portugal . They were also weakened by the Dutch victories and rebellion .
 Sweden regrouped before winning decisively at the second battle of Breitenfeld in 1642 . Concentrating its forces in North Germany, Sweden won the battle .
 Spain's tercios were massacred at Rocroi in France the year after by France's Due d'Enghien . Spain's Tercios massacred in France in the same year .
 In 1648 the Treaty of Westphalia was signed . Gradually, the fighting eased, and in 1648, the Treaty was signed.
 Thirty Years War had been both a crucible for lasting hatreds and a useful laboratory for the testing and development of new technology and tactics .
 In France the easing of external threats allowed domestic discontents to boil over in the popular rebellion known as the Fronde . In France, domestic discontent led to the uprising of the French Revolution . The Fronde was a popular uprising in France and Spain .
 FRONDE literally a ""sling"—improvised weapons like this were used in Paris by rioters in order to break the windows of establishment supporters in what became a civil war, raging from 1G48 to 1653 . Spain—still at war with France—t
 This injected new acrimony into the Franco-Spanish War, which went unresolved until 1659 . The war was unresolved until the end of the war, which ended in 1659.
 Swedish infantry units won the day for Custavus's forces in the battle . The battle was won by the Swedish troops in the Battle of the Second World War II .
 Thirty Years War settled down into a struggle for strategic advantage and political power . First Battle of Breitenfeld was the first battle of the Thirty years War . Battle was first battle in 17th century .
 In time it became a blood-soaked, life-and-death laboratory in which a new science of warfare slowly took shape . In time, it became the blood-sucking laboratory of warfare .
 In 1631, Swedish forces gave the world a terrifying taste of things to come . Nowhere was this more apparent than at Breitenfeld, where in 1631 Swedish forces took over .
 B y 1630 the advantage in the war that had been going on for just over a decade seemed to have swung toward the Catholic powers . The advantage in 1630 seemed to be leaning toward the Catholics .
 Gustavus Adolphus's entry into the conflict on the Protestant side occasioned little concern . The Duke of Friedland proved all but indomitable in his service to Ferdinand II, the Holy Roman Emperor . Gustavus Adolphus adolphus was Swedish king Gustavus
 Friedland was replaced by another great commander in 1630 . However, the emperor became so alarmed by Friedland's growing power that he replaced him .
 Gustavus landed in Pomerania in 1630 with an army that had learned much from previous combat experience . Gustavus had learned a new way of war from his previous campaigns .
 His infantry were now organized into brigades of 1,200-1,500 men, which combined excellent cohesion and battlefield staying power with tactical flexibility .
 The infantry were powerful in defense, could quickly deploy in lines six deep to maximize the impact of musketry . They could combine with artillery and cavalry to deploy a variety of offensive tactics . The infantry could combine artillery with cavalry and artillery and combine with infantry .
 Gustavus Gustavus defeated Tilly in the Battle of Tilly . Gustavus' victory was far from assured on the outset of the battle . Gustavs' tactical flexibility gave Gustavus victory against Tilly.
 Gustavus had linked up with the Elector of Saxony's army . Gustavus and Tilly advanced into Saxony, where Gustavus allied with Tilly . Tilly was killed in Saxony .
 The initial assault of Tilly's troops swept away the Saxon army corps on the left flank, and threatened to roll up the Swedes from the flank .
 The rapidity, skill, and determination with which the second line was swung round to drive back the Catholic forces turned apparently inevitable disaster into crushing victory .
 Tilly's army resisted bravely, but Adolphus's juggernaut could not be stopped . Tilly fought bravely for her country, but her army was overwhelmed .
 Despite this, deep conviction drove him to support the Cromwellian cause, he supported the British monarchy .
 The 17th century saw the British Isles torn by religious and ideological struggles, which were to exact an appalling human cost . The British Isles was torn between religious and political struggles, with the deaths of many .
 C harles I's attempt to arrest leading Parliamentarians—in parliament itself—precipitated the outbreak of civil war . C. harles tried to arrest Parliamentarians in parliament itself .
 Earl of Essex had been assembling a Parliamentarian force, derisively named ""Roundheads" by their opponents on account of the radical Protestant fashion for close-cropped hair . Their opponents called them 'Roundheads' because of their hair .
 While the war was fought in the defense of sincerely-held principles, a number of soldiers signed up as mercenaries . Leading officers who were veterans of the Thirty Years War were veterans .
 Led by the king's nephew, Prince Rupert, the Essex was waiting west of the city at Turnham Green . Prince Rupert's nephew Prince Rupert was the first to arrive in London .
 He had been busy creating volunteer town and village militias, so he also had an ample force . The king was too big for the king to think of tackling .
 Over the following year, the armies criss-crossed southern England, closing occasionally for brief . casualties on both sides, the Royalists could not break the steady resolve of the Parliamentarian pikemen .
 Light as it was, the falconet could be hitched up to a team of horses and moved quickly . It was an important advantage in the fast-moving action of the British Civil Wars .
 Charles I of England believed in the king's ""divine right" to rule unchallenged . Charles I believed in a king's "divine right to rule unchrenged" Charles I .
 This absolutism brought him into a long and bitter conflict with his parliament . He was in a long-running conflict with the British parliament .
 There were suspicions in what was now a proudly Protestant England that the Stuart dynasty had Catholic sympathies . There were also suspicions at his despotism .
 Charles certainly had no time for the freedom of individual conscience that Protestants prized . Charles was not impressed with the freedom he had been given .
 In 1638 Presbyterians in Scotland signed a National Covenant, noting their defiance . The document was signed by the Scottish Presbyterian Church in 1638 .
 Charles undertook two ""Bishops' Wars" for his right to impose his own hierarchy on the Scottish Kirk . Charles took over the Scottish Church from the 16th century onwards .
 The failure of this enterprise not only damaged his authority at home, but saddled England with an enormous debt for reparations to the Scots .
 In order to raise taxes, Charles had to recall his parliament, to the alarm of Ireland's ""old English"" Catholic nobility . The Protestants of Scotland and England's Parliamentarians were in the ascendant . Charles was losing control of his parliament .
 Such trust as still existed between the king and his critics now broke down . The king and critics no longer trusted each other anymore .
 The falconet could fire single-round shot, and tiny ""grapeshot" -- both devastating against enemy infantry . It was an outsized musket on wheels .
 Essex seemed no more able to press his advantage than Charles had been before . Essex seemed to have been able to hold on to his advantage .
 Both armies struggled to sustain support among their troops, and both were short of supplies and funding . Both armies were short-staffed and short-needed .
 Men deserted and preyed on the country people, who grew disillusioned with the conflict . Men deserted . Men preyed upon the country . Men were deserted .
 Both sides sought help from outside, Charles from the Catholic Irish lords; his enemies from the Presbyterian Scots . Charles and his enemies seek help from the outside, both from the Catholics .
 Most of the engagements were won by the Royalists, most of which were against them .
 Royalist cavalry charged to apparently devastating effect against Essex's horsemen . But much of this good work was undone in one afternoon at Newbury in September 1643 .
 Parliamentarian horses scattered before them . Despite a succession of attempts, however, and dreadful cavaliers charged with scorching pace and force, scattering the Parliamentarians .
 Some infantrymen fled, but the core of the Royalists were disciplined . Charles's Royalists seemed to think the battle already won . Some of the troops fled, and the core was disciplined .
 The Parliamentarian infantry pushed forth, their cavalry regrouped, regrouping . The Royalists threw away their advantage, chasing plunder while the Parliamentarians pushed forth .
 His political resistance to the king had commanded respect in the years leading up to the war . But as a military novice, he had since been sidelined .
 He had set 1 900,000 rri, of casualties in the British Civil Wars in 1639—51. Nevertheless, he had set a total of 1,900,000 casualties in that war .
 About a third of the population of Ireland is thought to have been killed or exiled . about raising his own mounted militia in Cambridgeshire . The Irishman is believed to have raised his own militia in the area .
 By July 1644 he was a Lieutenant-General of the Horse, and served at the head of 3,000 cavalry under Sir Thomas Fairfax at the battle of Marston Moor, near York .
 Shot shot could be made in the field by pouring molten lead into a hinged mold .
 Troops used pointed ""nippers"—or their teeth—to trim the rough edges . Troops were hurt, though only slightly, in the battle .
 The Scots stood firm, and Cromwell called his cavalry back into formation . Cromwell's cavalry returned into formation, but the Scots stood their ground .
 He led an audacious charge across the breadth of the battlefield to attack the Royalist horse, putting them to flight before turning on the infantry . Seizing the initiative, he led an attack across the width of the field to attack .
 Marston Moor might have given the Parliamentarians mastery in the north, but Essex was being overwhelmed in the south . The New Model Army might have . given the . Parliamentarians control the north of the border, but the . south of England, it was being . overwhelmed by the .
 Fairfax created a ""New Model Army,"" numbering 20,000 . The body of professional full-timers could be deployed at speed wherever needed . The New Model Army was created by Fairfax in 1964 .
 With 11 regiments of cavalry, 12 of infantry, and a single regiment of dragoons, they were trained and drilled in the best modern continental style .
 Ornate muzzle himself led the infantry—8,000 in all, backed by 14,000 Scots . Orton led the army with 8,000 troops, backed up to 14,500 Scots .
 Cromwell led the Parliamentarian attack, striking unexpectedly in the evening . Cromwell was the first person to attack Cromwell's Parliamentarian forces .
 Fairfax's infantry were slowed by marshy ground . The attack started well but faltered when Fairfax's troops were slowed down .
 As the Royalists counterattacked, Cromwell it was centralized and imbued from top to bottom with the Protestant virtue— and military value— of discipline . Cromwell was central to the defense of the British monarchy .
 Prince Rupert's cavalry squandered another victory at Naseby in Northamptonshire the following June . The army held its shape in the manner in which the army held itself .
 In 1648 Scots nobles came to Charles's rescue with 20,000 men, but they were halted by Cromwell . Cromwell was an astonishing man in both energy and resource . He was the only man in the world to stop the invasion of Scotland .
 A self-taught soldier, he helped build an army from scratch, and was indefatigable in the execution of his plans . He helped build his own army and strategy from scratch .
 He showed a shockingly implacable side during his campaigns in Ireland at Preston . The manager showed a shocking implacability side during the campaigns at Preston.
 Both sides in England's First Civil War had learned from the example of the Thirty Years War in technology and tactics . In 1649 they tried and executed Charles I .
 Cromwell's determination to quash the Irish rebellion in 1649 was shocking in its ferocity . Cromwell was shocked by the ferocity of his determination to crush the rebellion .
 At the siege of Drogheda on September 11, the entire garrison of 2,800 and some civilians were purposely killed when the city was stormed by Cromwell's troops . Some civilians were also killed in the siege .
 The role of Scotland in the conflict had been changing . Scotland's role in the war was changing. Scotland's turn was changing .
 Scottish Presbyterian religious and political establishment had at first supported the Parliamentarian cause in England . But rifts over political aims and the more doctrinally-radical Protestantism espoused by much of the New Model Army, including Cromwell himself, had led to rifts, and finally to Scottish
 In 1648 the Scots had mounted an invasion of England, and in 1650 they prepared for another invasion . In 1650 the Scots prepared for a second invasion of the English state .
 Cromwell returned from Ireland and marched an army north, besieging Edinburgh . Cromwell's army marched north and besieged Edinburgh . He returned to Ireland and returned to Britain .
 On September 3, he trounced the much larger Scottish army that came after him, drawing it down from its superior position on higher ground . He then deftly outflanked it .
 Cromwell smashed Charles II's Royalist army once and for all in Worcester . Cromwell defeated the Royalists at Dunbar a year after his triumph in Dunbar .
 Royalists were heavily outnumbered at the battle of Naseby in 1645 . Parliamentarian forces won the day with superior discipline of their cavalry . Parliamentarians were outnumbered by Royalists, but their cavalry made a crucial contribution .
 Cromwell repressed rebellions in Ireland and Scotland . Cromwell was a leader in the early days of the First World War .
 In Ireland ""Penal Laws" were passed preventing Catholics from holding public office and restricting their property rights . In Ireland Catholics were forbidden from holding office and property rights in Ireland .
 While Cromwell was away, his parliament in England bickered and government ground to a halt . Cromwell's government eventually ground to an end .
 Cromwell suspended parliament in 1653 and took power as ""Lord Protector" Cromwell took power in what amounted to a military coup . Cromwell was known as the 'Lord Protector' of the British Parliament .
 Cromwell died in 1658, to be succeeded by his son, Richard . Richard was as ineffectual as his father had been strong . Cromwell was succeeded by Richard Cromwell, who was as ineffective as he was .
 A reconvenvened parliament invited Charles II to return from exile and take his crown . Charles II returned from exile to take over the throne .
 Commonwealth period was retrospectively defined as nothing more than an ""Interregnum"— a break between two reigns . Commonwealth period defined as an 'interregnum' and a break .
 The longest-ever naval engagement in history was fought in 1666 at the height of the Second Anglo-Dutch War . L Four Days Battle is the longest naval engagement ever fought .
 The English faced a struggle to rebuild their fleet in the years after the attack .
 Two ambitious, up-and-coming maritime powers came into conflict with each other over the possession of the seas in the 17th century .
 The Netherlands had won their freedom after 80 years of struggle, emerging as a major mercantile economy and colonial power . The Netherlands won its freedom in 1881 .
 1 7TH century Commonwealth was looking to a future shaped overseas, in a growing empire . But now that peace had returned to pikeman's breastplate, England was looking for a future in Europe .
 War with the Netherlands seemed inevitable, though it was soon to regret . It was a policy that England soon regretted, though .
 England and the Dutch Republic had much in common during the Anglo-Dutch Wars . The two nations fought each other in the early 1900s .
 Two Protestant nations in the north of Europe, they had recently triumphed over an overbearing Spain . They had both won over Spain .
 From the 1650s they fought a series of wars over which state was to have supremacy . The two states fought over which was to be the most powerful in Europe .
 Under the Navigation Act of 1651, imports to England had to be shipped directly from their source nation . Vessels from a third nation could not be involved in the act .
 Both sides were caught out when the fighting started, however . Both sides had a portentous start to the game, however.
 On May 29, 1652, Lieutenant-Admiral Maarten Tromp's fleet and that of England's Robert Blake's fleet chanced upon each other .
 The encounter led to the battle of Goodwin Sands, which lasted five hours and left both fleets badly damaged . Both fleets were badly damaged during the battle .
 George Ayscue's English fleet attacked a convoy of Dutch merchantmen that August, taking a battering from Michiel de Ruyter's warships for its efforts . The English fleet was attacked by Michiel's warships .
 Blake defeated the Dutch at the battle of Kentish Knock in October . Blake took revenge in October, defeating the Dutch in October at the same battle .
 Vice-Admiral Witte de With wanted to take the battle to the English, while Vice-Commodore Michiel de Ruyter favored a more cautious, defensive approach . Vice-admiral de With and vice-commander Michiel De Ruyer wanted to
 With their bigger ships and superior cannon, the English won decisively, while the Dutch fled in disarray . The Dutch fled "scattered like sheep before wolves"
 Dutch were to benefit from this bruising, however, in the slightly longer term, however . The Dutch will benefit from the bruising, but not necessarily as much as they would have been .
 Anglo-Dutch Wars took place in 1652-54, 1665-67, 1672-74 . The English Channel and North Sea were used to build bigger, more powerfully armed ships .
 Admiral Blake could not contain his disgust at what he described as a certain ""baseness of spirit" in some sections of his fleet .
 The new tactics paid off in March 1653 at the battle of Portland, in an engagement known as the Three Days Battle .
 Blake's fleet finally made its superiority in arms and tactics tell against a Dutch fleet of similar size . The enemy was forced out of the English Channel .
 The English Admiralty issued ""Instructions"" schematizing a new approach to war at sea . A new directive was issued by the Admiralty .
 Until now, ships had closed with enemy vessels as quickly as possible, hoping to get men aboard in a general free-for-all . Until now ships had tried to close with enemy ships as fast as possible .
 Ships not only risked being destroyed by enemy gunfire but also endangered comradevessels with their own . Ships were also at risk of being shot at by enemy fire .
 As such, the broadsides inflicted the greatest possible losses, while avoiding damage by ""friendly fire" As such as "friendly fire", they avoided damage by avoiding damage from friendly fire .
 The hostilities ended in mutual exhaustion, though the underlying issues remained unresolved . The hostilities were mutual exhaustion .
 The real cause of the conflict, however, was continuing competition for trade, the BBC says .
 The Dutch had built up their fleet since the first conflict and felt confident of a victory . The battle of Lowestoft proved a rude awakening to the Dutch .
 The English casualties were negligible, yet they did not build on this victory . The English suffered negligible casualties, and yet they didn't build on it .
 The Dutch were able to recover and went on to triumph at the Four Days Battle . The battle was fought off the east coast of Kent from June 1-4, 1666 . The Dutch defeated the British on June 1,1666 .
 JOHN EVELYN was on the flagship of the Royal Charles at the time of the Battle of 1666 . He was the first Englishman to be captured in the English-speaking fleet .
 This was the final straw for an enemy reeling from the impact of both the Great Plague of 1665-66 and the Great Fire of London of 1666 .
 King Charles committed his support to Louis XIV of France, so when the latter attacked the Dutch in 1672, he was compelled to help . England no longer had the stamina for further fighting, but King Charles had committed support to France .
 St. Louis's invasion was halted when the Dutch opened up their dykes to flood the countryside . The English fleet was summoned to assist .
 Dutch admiral who was to win admiration for his dash and daring was a surprisingly modest man . The Dutchman was a modest man, with a modest personality .
 Almost 60 years old when he masterminded the Raid on the Medway in 1667, he had been at sea since boyhood .
 His most famous victories were that of a consummate seafarer, thoroughly familiar with his men and ships, their limitations and capabilities . Scrupulously professional and cautious by nature, the audacity of his audacity was that of his most famous victory .
 Dutch and French remained at war after Charles II retired from the conflict in 1674 . The Dutch and the French were still at war when Charles II died .
 Michiel de Ruyter died in 1674 at the battle of Augusta . His fleet was victorious in the battle .
 By 1678 the Dutch had forced King Louis XIV to give up his idea of conquering their country . Louis XIV was forced to stop the Dutch from conquering France .
 It would not be too long before England had a Dutchman as its ruler . The Dutchman would rule England for a long time .
 William of Orange was called to take the place of the Catholic Stuart king, James II, in 1688 . William took over from James II to become the new king of England .
 Fourth Anglo-Dutch War flared up in 1780, but it did bring almost a century of peace with the Netherlands . The war brought almost a 100 years of peace between the two nations .
 No longer could naval combat be seen as a continuation of land warfare by other means . A new era for naval combat is no longer seen as continuation of the land warfare .
 Later editions of the Admiralty Instructions developed new theories of naval warfare . The Dutch navy easily staved off their fleet's attack .
 A sudden change in the wind averted a shattering defeat by the Dutch at the battle of Solebay, off the coast of Suffolk, in 1672 .
 French and English navies led to crushing defeats at Schooneveld and Texel in 1673 . Charles II was forced to sue for peace after the defeat .
 Dutch warships under the command of Michiel de Ruyter respond to an attack by English warships under . the Duke of Albemarle off Dunkirk . 1666.
 The action precipitated the most brutal battle of the Anglo-Dutch Wars . The battle was one of the longest naval battles in history .
 Albemarle fought off the Flemish and English coasts for four days . Ten ships were lost, and over 2,000 seamen were killed .
 Louis XIV was just five when he succeeded to the French throne in 1643 . He reigned under the guidance of his chief minister . Louis XIV's reign was the first of its kind .
 For France, the war ended in an eruption of civil violence, the Fronde . The Fronde was the first French war of its kind, ending in a civil war .
 Cardinal Mazarin grew up to be Europe's model for the absolute monarch . This helped shape the attitudes of his charge, the ""Sun King," who became a monarch .
 This conflict appeared to have very little to do with France, still very much an agrarian economy, with limited involvement in overseas trade . France is still a very much agratic economy with limited overseas trade, with little involvement overseas trade.
 Louis XIV's vision for himself and for France was too grand and heroic to be contained within the frontiers he had inherited from his forebears . The Early Wars of Louis XIV were the first of his reigns and the second of his first .
 Determined to win recognition as the continent's pre-eminent ruler, the ""Sun King"" plunged Europe into a dark period of permanent conflict .
 Louis XIV assumed full control of his country in 1661, but France was almost bankrupt . He was forced to take control of the country .
 Jean-Baptiste Colbert, the finance minister, inaugurated a program of economic rearmament, encouraging industry and stimulating trade . Colbert: Rearmament will encourage industry, stimulate trade and stimulate trade .
 The War of Devolution began in 1667, with the Vicomte de Turenne leading the French army into the southern Netherlands . The war of devolution was the first French invasion of the Netherlands .
 The Spanish garrisons were undermanned and the defensive infrastructure neglected . The Spanish military was undermanning and under-performing in Spain .
 St. Louis backed down, but discreetly set to work undermining the Alliance . Louis has been working quietly to undermine the Alliance since the war .
 He bribed Charles II of England to sign the secret Treaty of Dover in 1670 . Charles II signed the secret treaty of Dover, signed in secret .
 Military engineering entered the modem era at Maastricht . Two years later, the siege of the city was completed .
 Vauban deployed heavy cannon above the ground and carefully directed miners below . He dug zigzag trenches running parallel to the walls to protect his infantry . France and England declared war on the Dutch Republic .
 Sweden sided with the aggressors, but Spain, the elector of Brandenburg, and Leopold I, ruler of the Austrian Lands and Holy Roman Emperor, allied with the Dutch, who opened the dykes to flood their countryside .
 Louis turned his attention back to the Spanish Netherlands . Louis was unable to defeat them in the first leg .
 Louis's armies were successful on the battlefield and gained him more territory at the expense of the Spanish monarchy . Drawn into a further six years of war against an able coalition of enemies, Louis was victorious .
 The conflict saw advances in siegecraft and fortification after the capture of Maastricht by Sebastien Le Prestre de Vauban .
 Vauban, a military engineer, convinced Louis that he could build a Fortress France . Vaubans convinced Louis to build a fortress .
 The king erected a chain of ramparts and fortresses along his northeastern frontier . Vauban's ""systems of fortifications" were used to protect his country .
 He substantially modified 83 towns; eight new strategic centers were built from scratch . Eight new strategic centres were built to build from scratch.
 Pioneers opened up the Mississippi basin in the American colonies, and Canada . Missionaries and merchants set up contacts in southern Asia and the Far East .
 The year after, his enemies—not just the Dutch Republic, Sweden, and the Protestant principalities in Germany, but Catholic . “ I never saw a Louis XIV, king of France L'Etat, c'estMoi , Louis XIV reputedly said.
 William of Orange became the despotic ruler of a wealthy and powerful France in 1677 . His concerns proved well-founded when the Dutchman was crowned King William III of England .
 France's navy triumphed in 1690 at Beachy Head but was unable to prevent William's landing in Ireland to contend with James's fightback . William's forces landed in Ireland in 1688, but were unable to stop the invasion .
 Louis XIV, meanwhile, was finding things extremely frustrating . Louis XIV was frustrated by the outcome of the conflict .
 A man who ruled by diktat, he was horrified by the indecisiveness of war, he said . He was horrified at the indecisioniveness of the war, and was appalled by it .
 The 17th century came to an end, but Louis XIV still had business that needed attending to . After the Battle of SINSHEIM, 1674, he was at the center of the world's most important battles .
 The French army reached a size—350,000 men by the mid-1690s—not seen In Europe since the fall of the Roman empire . France's army reached size not seen in Europe since Roman empire's fall .
 The proportion of France's overall budget going toward military expenditure goes to military spending .
 The proportion of military spending going toward Vauban's fortifications is 100 per cent . The majority of the money goes toward the fortifications .
 Although the army and navy imposed a huge financial burden on the population of France, it had the enthusiastic support of the nobility, who served en masse as the officer corps .
 Louis had to face financial and military might of the Anglo-Dutch alliance . In 1683, the Austrians repulsed the Ottomans at Vienna . The Austrians were victorious in 1683 .
 The coalition was founded by Emperor Leopold I in 1686 to challenge the French king's expansionist plans .
 In 1688, Louis sent an army to lay waste the Palatinate of the Rhine . The war was the first of its kind in Germany since 1688 .
 Louis had been dismayed when James's daughter, Princess Mary, studied their maps and planned tactical maneuvers and feints, but these invariably foundered on the muddy ground of Europe . Louis was dismayed at the lack of maps and plans made by Princess Mary .
 At Fleurus in 1690, Louis's army, led by the Due de Luxembourg, won what appeared to be a victory over Prince Waldeck's allied army . William III had entrusted his forces to the prince while he was away . The battle had no strategic gain .
 The War of the Grand Alliance ended with the Treaty of Rijswijk in 1697 . No resolution was reached, but no resolution of the conflict was reached .
 Louis XIV was militarily the war's victor (he had modernized warfare in many ways) but had gained very little else . Louis XIV died in France in 1777 .
 They feared the rise of a Franco-Spanish superpower . They were prepared to fight to make sure this did not come about . The British government feared this would lead to the collapse of Spain .
 The reign of the ""Sun King"" was at its zenith by the start of the 18th century, but Louis XIV had not managed to impose his authority on the continent at large .
 In 1700 King Charles II of Spain died, and Louis's great-grandson, Philip, Due d'Anjou, succeeded the throne . In 1700, Philip became King of Spain .
 The Habsburg emperor, Leopold I, objected, as did England, Portugal, Prussia, and the Netherlands . The emperor of Austria, the emperor of Spain, objected .
 T he Habsburgs did not like the idea of the Due d'Anjou inheriting the Spanish crown . Neither did other European nations, including the Habsbergs .
 The fighting began in Italy, where Austria's Prince Eugene of Savoy invaded the Spanish-held duchy of Milan . The fighting was the first to take place in Italy and the second in France .
 Eugene captured Cremona the following February 1701 . He was said to possess a bloodthirsty ire during battle .
 England's Duke of Marlborough could not have been more different in his style . Like Eugene he led his soldiers from the front, he led them to the front .
 At the head of English, Dutch, and allied forces in the Low Countries, the ""Grand Alliance"" had been renewed . He seized a series of fortresses along the Meuse River .
 Prince Louis William of Baden-Baden faced a French force at Friedlingen, Bavaria in October 1702 .
 He stopped the French from joining their Bavarian allies and, having inflicted heavy casualties, extricated his army almost intact . He lost the battle, but he kept his army intact .
 In September Marshal Villars defeated an Imperial army at Hochstadt in Bavaria, opening the road to Vienna . In September he defeated the Imperial army in the Bavarian capital . Villars died in 1883 .
 Prince Eugene had, in the meantime, brought his army up from Italy and together, at Blenheim in Bavaria, engaged with FrancoBavarian forces .
 Marlborough began by encircling Blenheim village, with much of the enemy inside . The enemy was inside the village .
 He tricked the remaining troops with dummy attacks, prompting them to commit their reserves too soon . The remaining troops were forced to commit too soon, forcing them to abandon their reserves .
 Marlborough had his artillery moved at speed across the battlefield to where it could be most advantageously deployed . The artillery was moved to the best of the battlefield in order to be most effective .
 Cavalry charges delivered precise thrusts at a weakened enemy before a final and devastating advance of the infantry . The battle was fought in the Battle of Gettysburg in June 1944 .
 The Duke of Marlborough's conduct of the battle of Blenheim on August 13, 1704 was masterly . The battle was the first of its kind since the Battle of the Great War in 1704 .
 On a battlefield spanning almost 4 miles, Marlborough threw his enemy off-guard with a series of feints, before smashing his way through their center . The battle lasted almost four miles and lasted almost 4 hours .
 "The brilliance of his thinking and the ease with which his forces executed his instructions on the ground were something quite new in military history," says President Obama .
 Marlborough's victories saw great daring underpinned by supreme efficiency . The campaign had seen great daring and supreme efficiency. Great daring underpinning great efficiency was evident in victory .
 The modern idea of the army as a ""military machine" had been gaining ground for some time . Increased regimentation and standardization of uniforms and weapons was gaining ground .
 The flintlock was replacing the unreliable matchlock musket, while lightweight and easily movable cannon could be deployed more imaginatively on the battlefield . The lightweight cannon was replaced by lightweight and movable matchlock cannon .
 Marlborough used the same tactics at the battle of Ramillies, in present-day Belgium, in May 1706, in 1706 . The battle took place in the same place as the Battle of the same name .
 French and Bavarians were defeated with 22,000 casualties to the Alliance's 2,500 . With a feint to one side, followed by a shattering frontal attack, they were defeated .
 France lost half the Spanish Netherlands as a result of this crushing defeat . France attempted to recover the territory of the Dutch territory .
 Marlborough, once more linked up with Eugene, ordered, in 1708, an overnight march to ambush the invading French . Double cock Frizzen spring Trigger attacked across the Scheldt River to win a third great victory at the battle of Oudenarde .
 All this time, a subsidiary struggle had been unfolding across the Atlantic . Queen Anne's War .
 The French, Spanish, and Native American allies had been fighting Britain and its American colonists, allied with the tribes . Double-barrelled flintlock pistol was routinely used in combat .
 During this period flintlocks were gradually replacing matchlocks, which tended to be less reliable . Flintlocks replaced matchlocks as the most reliable type of weapon .
 Eugene urged the Alliance to fight at Malplaquet in 1709 . Eugene was killed in the Battle of Malploquet . Eugene urged him to fight .
 Almost 40,000 were killed and wounded in the battle that critics claimed need not have been fought . Critics claimed the Iroquois Confederacy should not have fought .
 Spanish attacks on South Carolina by Spanish forces from Florida were easily rebuffed . The French became a real threat when they struck south from Canada into New England .
 It would be an exaggeration to claim that the Grand Alliance had won this most mutually draining of wars; but it would be clear that Louis XIV had lost . Louis XIV lost.
 The outcome of the War of the Spanish Succession was less conclusive than it first appeared . After the death of King Henry VIII, King Henry VII VII VII was defeated .
 Though ousted in the ""Glorious Revolution"" of 1688, James II still considered himself king of England . James II was ousted in 1688 but considered himself a king .
 He lived until his death, in 1701, as a guest of Louis XIV who continued to treat him as rightful king . He lived in France until 1701 . He was treated as king by Louis XIV .
 In 1701 Louis recognized James's son as James III of England, one of the factors that determined the British on war . Louis recognized his son as the king of England .
 James the ""Old Pretender"" was expelled from France under the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht . He made a fresh attempt to win back the British throne following Queen Anne's death and succession of George I .
 Jacobites mounted an uprising in 1715, but James's Catholicism was a stumbling block for most of the conservative groups in English society . The Jacobites (as supporters of James—in Latin, Jacobus —were called) mounted an insurrection in 1716 .
 In a long but ineffectual reign, Louis XV was to preside over the gradual erosion of France's foreign-policy prestige . Louis XV's great-grandson, Louis XVI, presided over the erosion of French foreign policy prestige .
 The intimacy of the warrior's relationship with this weapon helps explain why it is so often ornamented . The intimacy between the warrior and the weapon is a key to the art of war .
 Quillons, or crossguards, were designed in Medieval Europe to stop the from blade sinking in too far, and to protect the hand . Crossguards were designed to stop blade sinking into the hand, and protect it from the blade .
 The Highland dirk was often used in conjunction with the broadsword . The dirk and broadsword were often used as a weapon in each hand . It is thought to have been the most effective weapon in Scotland .
 A Rajput warrior's katar was held horizontally, and used with a ""punching"" action . Rajput warriors used to use the katar as a weapon . The katar is held horizontally and used horizontally by a warrior .
 The 18th-century Sri Lankan warrior's dagger was exquisitely ornamented to reflect the owner's elite status . The dagger was designed to reflect an elite status in Sri Lanka .
 This is an 18th-century Italian gunner's stiletto, with a numbered scale on the blade for quickly measuring the bores of guns . It was designed for the gunner to quickly measure gun bores .
 The late 19th-century East African finger-knife belonged to a Turkana herder from Uganda .
 The North African koummya dagger was curved like the slashing tusk of the wild boar . It also shielded against the evil eye from evil eye .
 This knuckle-duster knife could be used for punching as well as stabbing . This one is from World War I .
 The Baltic, long a backwater, was by the 17th century one of Europe's most prosperous regions . I0P"" 1 56 DAGGERS |0 ITALIAN SWORD-BREAKER SCOTTISH DIRK .
 The year 1655 saw the start of the Stormakstiden, or ""Age of Great Power,"" in Sweden . 1655 was the year of Sweden's first major expansion of the country .
 Sweden attacked Russia, Denmark, Brandenburg, the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, and the Netherlands . In what outsiders call the Northern Wars, Sweden attacked the Netherlands, Denmark and Brandenburg .
 The French and Dutch were drawn in when Norway-Denmark invaded the island of Scania in 1675 . France and the Dutch were involved in the 1675 invasion .
 The war that resulted ended indecisively, but Sweden's influence was growing . The war ended in indecisive but Sweden was growing in power .
 Peter the Great of Russia, tsar since 1682, was resolved to build a modern and militarily powerful state . Peter the tsar of Russia built a modern state of Russia in 1682 .
 He constructed his own highly centralized administration and reformed the army at the expense of the old officer elite, the Streltsy . He constructed himself in a highly centralized .
 He had already expanded his empire in the south, taking the Ottoman naval base of Azov in 1696 .
 The steady growth of Sweden's Baltic empire sparked all-out war in 1700 . The Great Northern War was fought over Sweden's growing Baltic empire .
 After more than 20 years of conflict, Swedish supremacy was finally brought to an end . Swedish supremacy in Sweden has been brought to a standstill .
 Russia emerged as an aggressor in the region in 1697, when Charles XI died . In subsequent years, it emerged as the aggressor .
 Charles XII, not yet 15, was the son of Charles XII . Charles XII was Charles XII's son, Charles XII. Charles XII died at the age of 15 .
 Peter I of Russia was making reforms that he hoped would bring his country major power . Peter I's reforms were intended to bring Russia to power .
 Augustus n, was both the king of Poland-Lithuania and elector of Saxony . Augustus n. was both king and elector . Augustus was also king of the Saxony and the Polish kingdom of Poland and Lithuania .
 In 1696 the death of his half-brother left Peter I as sole ruler of Russia . Peter I planned to give greater priority to a series of military and naval reforms .
 The Baltic Sea became a highway and battlefield for the powers competing for authority around its shores in the 17th century . The rivals had underestimated their opponent, however, whose upbringing and education had prepared him for Baltic supremacy .
 Coin showing the Narva battle was made in 1716 Stockholm Gothenburg . Coin was made of Christiana Culf of Bothnia and the Aland Islands . Coin shows the battle .
 Sweden's army had 30,000 infantry and 11,000 cavalry at home and 25,000 mercenaries around the empire . Sweden also had a large army of mercenaries around empire . The Swedish empire had 25,500 mercenaries .
 A system of conscription, which allotted men both to military and to agricultural work, ensured supplies . Superbly organized and trained, it was constantly replenished by a system of . conscription .
 They launched a crushing combined attack in early 1700, only to be brought up short almost instantly . The combined attack was launched in 17th century, but was quickly brought down .
 Denmark was defeated in a matter of days, Charles personally leading the expedition that took Copenhagen . A member of one of several warlike, formerly nomadic communities of the southern steppe .
 Augustus II was severely weakened when, with Riga surrounded, an expected uprising of local nobles failed to materialize . Augustus II suffered a severe defeat when he was surrounded .
 Peter's new navy suffered defeats at Osel Island in 1719 and Grengam in 1720 . Peter the Great lost the war at sea .
 Russia now ruled the Baltic waves and a large area of dry land as well as the dry land . Russia now rules the Baltic waters and the Baltic Sea as well .
 The Treaty of Nystad gave the tsar authority over much of the Baltic coast . The year after, the treaty was signed, gave him authority over the region .
 Peter Peter declared his kingdom an ""empire"" in 1721 . Peter Peter had desired to secure a ""window on Europe,"" declared his country an "empire" Peter declared the kingdom an empire .
 Peter died in 1725 and his immediate successors struggled to stay in charge of what was still an unruly nation . Peter's successor struggled to cope with the unruly state of the country .
 The percentage of Russia's population who were serfs on the accession of the Empress Catherine the Great in 1762 . In 1762, the majority of the population was bound to their landlords' fields .
 Not until 1762 would Russia have a ruler who could match Peter for resolve or ruthlessness . Peter was the only ruler to match Peter's resolve and ruthlessness in Russia . Peter became a ruler of Russia in 1762 .
 Catherine II was another modernizer, eager to shake up an obdurately conservative nation . Catherine II became a modernizing monarch in 1877 .
 The Russians' scorched-earth tactics left the Swedes starving . Striking south into grain-rich Ukraine as Peter's forces retreated might have seemed sensible, but it left them starving .
 The army that surrounded the fortress of Poltava in spring 1709 was reduced to 14,000 men . Disease was rife, and disease was rife . The army was reduced by disease .
 Charles was optimistic, and his plan to ""punch through"" in an audacious frontal attack might well have worked against the Russian troops of old . Charles planned to attack Russia in a frontal attack .
 Peter's soldiers hit back with devastating force . Peter's army was rocked by the shock of his assault, but hit back .
 Peter's sense that Poltava had been a turning-point was borne out in the years that followed . Peter: "Poltava was a turning point in the history of the Ukraine"
 Sweden's enemies were closing in and Charles continued the struggle on his return . Charles continued to build up his navy, building up his forces .
 Charles invaded Norway, but died at the siege of Frederiksten in 1718 . Charles, ever-proactive, invaded Norway but died in the siege .
 Peter the Great founded the Preobrazhensky Lifeguard Regiment as part of his military reforms . It fought with distinction in the Great Northern War . Sweden was also Russian military uniform .
 Swedish king's turn to underestimate an enemy. But now it was the Swedish king . A campaign too far .
 Peter had ordered a root-and-branch reform of his forces after Narva . Peter was deeply affected by the shock of Narva.
 The country Charles invaded in the fall of 1708 was not the same as before . Charles invaded the country in 1708, but it was never the same thing .
 Charles Xll's all-conquering army was savaged by the Russians . Winter was on Battle of Poltava - a ghastly winter in the field .
 Charles fled south, seeking sanctuary with the Ottomans . Augustus had a string of victories against Augustus's increasingly desperate forces in Poland and Lithuania .
 Charles Charles delivered the decisive blow to Estonia in present-day Estonia . Charles fought off overwhelming odds to win the battle . Charles was killed in Estonia in 1777 .
 Peter's army defeated the Russians, capturing just about all the weaponry Peter's had . The Russians captured about all of Peter's weaponry . Peter's son Peter was killed in the battle .
 All that remained was for Charles to name his conditions for his enemies' surrender; no one was in a position to object . Charles named conditions for the surrender of his enemies, no one objected .
 Much of the most important action takes place behind the scenes during the war . Charles fought on, and won Supplies Supplies .
 Ensuring those fighting have the food, tools, weapons, ammunition, and other supplies they need is vital to the success of any military campaign . Ensuring that those fighting in Iraq and Syria are well-prepared for the battle is vital .
 A ncient armies lived off the land, so summer was the best season for a campaign . The ncient army lived in a similar way, living off the ground in the summer .
 Even where food was readily available, organizing its collection and managing its distribution k to a large body of men were constant headaches . Organizing the collection and distribution k was a constant headache .
 Each horse or mule needed 11 gallons or more each day each day . Horses and mules were used to carry horses, mules, horses and pack animals in the Civil War .
 Assyrians had dedicated officials who could procure and train 3,000 horses a month . Assyrian officials were able to train and train thousands of horses each month .
 Horses or mules needed some 75 acres of good grazing a day . Huge quantities of fodder had to be carried where fresh grass was scarce .
 A Roman army of 40,000 men needed 1,600 smiths and other craftsmen to maintain its armor and weapons . According to Livy, writing in the reign of the first emperor, Augustus , a Roman army needed 1.6 smiths .
 Roman legionaries carried weapons, food and water rations, but also basic cooking utensils, spades or pickaxes for digging, baskets for moving earth or gathering fresh produce, stakes for palisades, and much more .
 Roman armies increasingly required pack animals and ox-drawn wagons for especially heavy or bulky equipment . Even so, Roman armies needed pack animals to transport heavy equipment .
 The organization of Peter the Great Peter's military reforms at the beginning of the 18th century made the Russian army a force to be feared . Peter's reforms made the army a powerful force to fear .
 His attention to detail in matters of supply played a major part in his victory over Sweden in the Great Northern War .
 A campaigning legionary's essential gear included a pickax, food bag, water flask, blanket, woollen cloak, and leather satchel . Roman legionaries' basic gear included pickax and food bag .
 This slowed it down, however, and was a weak point that an enemy could exploit . This slowed the aircraft down, but was a slow point that could be exploited .
 Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix's attempt to detach Caesar's legions from their baggage train outside Gergovia in 53 bce failed only because of the discipline of the Roman soldiers . The Roman soldiers were disciplined enough to stop the Gallic attempt .
 As the complexity and size of siege engines, guns, and other hardware increased in the 16th century, a paradoxical problem arose . Siege engines and guns became more complex and more complex .
 The better equipped an army, the bigger and slower its baggage train became . The better armed army became, the better equipped army would be, the worse equipped .
 This change markedly enhanced the performance of France's armed forces in the field . This change has been described as a 'miracle' for the French armed forces .
 Peter the Great's civil service reforms contributed to Russia's epoch-making victory over Sweden at the battle of Poltava . The reforms were among the many factors contributing to the victory .
 Russia's army had been in a position to fight at all thanks to the tsar's centralization of military administration . The tsar had centralized military administration in order to keep Russia in fighting .
 Field commanders such as England's John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough, did so too . Field commanders like John Churchill did so in the 1930s .
 During the War of the Spanish Succession, Marlborough saw how the tedious business of organizing and supplying an army could open up possibilities for flamboyant exploits .
 His march from the Netherlands to the Danube with 40 men in the weeks before the battle of Blenheim in 1704 would not have been possible without the efficient flow of food, weapons, and ammunition .
 Marlborough also sent advance parties to set up camps and make sure hot food was waiting at the end of each day's march . The march is the first of its kind in the UK and is being held in London .
 When his army arrived in Frankfurt, each man was issued with a new pair of boots . Each man was given a pair of new boots .
 The 18th and 19th centuries brought an industrial revolution in warfare . Everything from guns and ammunition to uniforms and rations were affected .
 These could now be mass produced, and as technology improved, so did the art of organizing it all . An entire quartermaster corps were set up for the task of moving supplies .
 Tough and reliable, mules have kept armies supplied for centuries . They can still prove their worth in terrain inaccessible to vehicles . Mules can be found in the toughest terrain in the world .
 Another revolution came with the modernization of transportation systems such as railroads . The modernization of railroads was also a revolution in the world of transportation .
 For military purposes, railroads came of age in the American Civil War . Railroads were vital to both the Union and Confederate armies in the war .
 In Europe they were essential for the movement of men and materiel during the Franco-Prussian War . Almost one million Prussian and German troops were moved to the front, then supplied and equipped .
 Train timetabling so many trains and ensuring rolling-stock was in place when they were needed was no easy task . However, timetabling the trains was not always easy .
 Britain and France took just three weeks to ship their own materiel much further by sea . It took only three weeks for the two countries to send their materiel by ship .
 Lack of infrastructure in Russia later worked in the Soviet Union's favor, when the Germans invaded Russia in 1941 . Ironically, the lack of infrastructure worked in Russia's favor for the Germans .
 Hitler's whole blitzkrieg philosophy depended on the use of motor vehicles and planes . The United States Army Quartermaster Corps was set up in 1775 .
 The United States Army's other logistics branches are the Ordnance and Transportation corps . The U.S. Army's logistics branch is the Transportation and Ordnance Corps .
 The Germans struggled to supply their army across inadequate Russian roads . The Germans were forced to rely on Russian roads to get their supplies .
 Simply obtaining fuel can be difficult, and moving a volatile substance as gasoline is extremely dangerous . Not only can an attack on the fuel supply cause loss of life, transportation dependent on fuel will be rendered useless .
 A major problem for a superpower like the United States lies in maintaining a supply-line that may stretch halfway around the world . The U.S. needs to keep an eye out of the world's supply-lines, experts say .
 Troops must be moved over huge distances and their high-tech equipment must be serviced in a range of inhospitable environments . Troops have to be moved around huge distances to get their equipment to work .
 Supplies stockpiled in Prussia cannot be brought quickly enough to his troops, he says . Supplies will be brought in quickly enough .
 There had not been peace, but skirmishes were a regular occurrence . There had been peace .
 Earlier European conflicts had stemmed from dynastic disputes . European conflicts began in the Middle Ages .
 In 1739 Britain and Spain had fought in the Caribbean in the ""War of Jenkins' Ear,"" 4 80 15% of Britain's capital spent on the Royal Navy in the 18th century .
 The proportion of the British governments' military expenditure in the 18th century rose to 100 per cent in 18th Century .
 Spanish coastguard allegedly cut off the ear of Robert Jenkins, an English merchant sea captain he accused of piracy . He accused Jenkins of piracy and accused of cutting off his ear .
 Prussia's Frederick William I had been modernizing his forces, ready to stake his own claim to military ascendancy . In the interim, Prussia was modernizing its forces, and it was ready to claim its own claim .
 Dynastic disputes loomed large in an age when Europe's great royal families held absolute dominion over vast and wealthy empires . The War of the Austrian Succession was the result of a dispute between Austria and Austria's great families .
 The disagreement over who should succeed to the Austrian throne in 1740 ignited a protracted and far-reaching series of interlocking conflicts . In 1740, the disagreement over the future throne in Austria ignited a series of conflicts .
 In the absence of a male heir, a daughter might succeed to the Habsburg monarchy . T he ""Pragmatic Sanction,"" pushed through by Emperor Charles VI in 1713, stated that, in the . absence of male heirs, a girl might succeed .
 When he died in 1739, the Habsburgs' his soldiers relentlessly for years, inculcating iron discipline to produce a powerful military machine that was ready for action at any time .
 Until now, Prussia was to gain respect and fear, not just as a military power, but as a militaristic one . Marginal till now, until now, the Prussian was to be feared and feared .
 Austria and Bohemia accepted Maria Theresa as ruler of Austria, Bohemia, and Hungary without demur . But their enemies found a deep and principled objection to the idea that royal power might be imparted down the female line .
 Frederick II dispatched his Prussian forces into Habsburg Silesia, in present-day southwestern Poland . Frederick II promptly dispatched his forces . Frederick's forces were in Habsberg Silesian, present-modern Poland .
 His father, Frederick William I, had drilled the number of combatant countries in the War of the Austrian Succession . His father had drilled his father's troops in the war .
 Crossing the Oder in December 1740, Prussian armies took the area almost unopposed . The area was taken by the Prussian army unoppopposed by the enemy .
 Europe looked on, amazed at the speed and efficiency of the Prussian conquest . The Prussian invasion of Europe was a success story for Europe .
 The ""smallsword"" was light and thin, its blade fairly short—sometimes only 24 in in length . Hand-protected hilt Slender steel blade was a Prussian infantry sword .
 The smallsword was still used for fencing and thrusting . Though soon overtaken by the socket bayonet, it was used for thrusting and fencing . Smallsword was first used in the early days of the smallsword era .
 In April 1741, the battle of Mollwitz, in present-day Poland, was a close Prussian victory . The battle was fought by Prussian troops in present day Poland .
 Frederick II allied with France, agreeing to support the Bavarian elector, Charles Albert, as the next emperor . That December, still undefeated, but feeling the pressure, Frederick II agreed to support Charles Albert as emperor .
 Frederick's forces pushed southward, while the French marched into Prague from the west . The fighting moved to Bohemia, with Frederick's troops pushing southward . The French moved into Prague, while Frederick pushed northward .
 Charles Albert was placed on the Bohemian throne by his allies . The city fell in November 1741, and Charles Albert took over .
 Duke of Cumbedand's English soldiers prepare to attack the French at Fontenoy in 1745 . He had 15,000 troops lined up in a deep column of troops in the French capital .
 Bohemia was overwhelmed by Maria Theresa's men, and the new emperor fled . Fighting was fierce, and English regiments lost half their infantry .
 Battle rejoined in New England and Canada between France and Britain and their Native American allies . There was war in India too, where Britain and France had colonies .
 Britain was also at war with Spain in the Caribbean and in the Mediterranean . In the Mediterranean, the widening war was taking in the little states and duchies of Italy .
 The ""Wild Geese" led the vital cavalry charge when the French triumphed at Fontenoy, in present-day Belgium, in May 1745 . Maria Theresa had ceded most of Silesia to Prussia in 1742 as part of the Peace of Bres
 Supporters of Charles Edward Stuart, or "Bonnie Prince Charlie," tried to place him on the throne . That same year, supporters of the Stuart tried to put him on a throne . Supporters of his supporters say he should have been a king .
 In July he landed in the Outer Hebrides in Scotland, and marched south with an army from the Highlands . He landed in July and marched down the coast of the Hebride .
 The troops made it as far as Derby before turning back, disillusioned at the lack of English support . The troops turned back after being disillusioned with the support of the British government .
 Prince Charlie fled to France after the defeat at Culloden, Scotland, in April 1746 . Prince Charlie was killed in 1746 by the British army .
 The remains of a Prussian military ensign from the War of the Austrian Succession when Prussia became a military power . The remains are a fragment of the flag fragment from the German-Austrian War of 1881 .
 King George II led the British attack at the battle of Dettingen, Germany, in June 1743 .
 The allies were victorious despite having their line of retreat cut off during the ""Mousetrap" The trap was laid by the Due de Noailles, who laid a trap on their retreat .
 Frederick II reopened hostilities in Silesia after Austria tried to reclaim the region . Frederick II re-opened hostilities after Austria had tried to take back the area .
 From France's perspective, 1745 had been successful in distracting Britain from the ""real"" war . French occupation from 1745 to 1745 was successful .
 Marshal Saxe's French forces won at the battle of Rocoux, outside Liege, in October 1746, and again at Lauffeld in July 1747 . The French won at Rocoux again in 1747, winning the battle twice in succession .
 France now occupies the whole of the Austrian Netherlands, threatening the United Provinces to the north . France now occupied the entire Austrian Netherlands . The French occupation of the Netherlands is now a major threat to Austria .
 The Dutch town of Maastricht was besieged by French troops for the second time in less than a century . Negotiations began, leading to the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle . The treaty was signed by the French government in 1883 .
 Young male Catholics from Ireland dispossessed by the Penal Laws . They took flight to seek advancement as soldiers of fortune in armies of France, Spain, Sweden, Austria and Russia .
 In June 1745, he won a tactical victory at the battle of Hohenfriedberg, in present-day Poland . He approached the enemy in ""oblique order" and presented a solid front . In 1745 he attacked in an attack on one flank while simultaneously presenting a solid
 Another triumph followed at Soor in Soor, in the present-day Czech Republic, in September .
 Britain's growing difficulties seen as opportunities by longstanding foes . With events swinging against the Pragmatic cause, Britain's problems were seen as an opportunity . The UK's problems have been a problem for decades .
 The incompetence of Bonnie Prince Charlie and the heroism of his Highland army were both exhibited on April 16, 1746, at Culloden .
 The night before, the army had marched cross-country to Nairn so it could attack the Duke of Cumberland's government forces as they slept . The army had been preparing to attack the government forces in advance .
 Cumberland’s army happened upon the tired troops . Arriving too late, with dawn rapidly approaching, the army was compelled to retrace its steps to Culloden Moor . Cumberland's army was forced to return to the battlefield .
 Prince Charlie left FTER while pondering his next move . For all the years of bloodshed, not a great deal had changed . Prince Charlie's next move was to leave FTER .
 Frederick the Great felt that his father's past efforts in rebuilding Prussia had been amply vindicated . Frederick felt his father had vindicated his efforts to rebuild Prussia as a soldier state .
 Prussia ruled as though it were an arm of the military, becoming a byword for regimentation and discipline . Prussia was ruled as a by word for discipline and regimentation .
 The surrender of Silesia apart, Austria had emerged unscathed, and Maria Theresa held on to her throne . Maria Theresa was able to hold on to the throne .
 In the months after Culloden, the Duke of Cumberland exacted cruel retribution in the Highlands, using terror tactics to quell the population . The Duke used terror tactics against the population in the months following the battle .
 Weapons had to be handed in and the trappings of the clan system were outlawed . Wearing tartan plaids or kilts became a crime in Scotland .
 Having escaped from Scotland in disguise, Charles Edward Stuart spent the rest of his life in embittered exile . He spent the next few years in exile .
 When he died in 1788, the Jacobite dream died with him . His infantry lined up, steadfastly holding their positions, within range of Cumberland’s cannon .
 His men obeyed, their pistols and broadswords useless as they ran across the boggy ground, cut down by heavy fire . His men were cut down in heavy fire.
 Government artillery was no longer firing cannonballs but tiny ""grapeshot" that scattered as they flew . Government artillery no longer fired cannonballs, but tiny "grapesot" scattered as the flew .
 Those who reached the redcoat lines found themselves facing the Duke's resolute troops with bayonets fixed . The Duke's men were faced with bayonet fixed .
 Napoleon marched his troops across the Rhine to win spectacular victories over Austria and Russia . Instead of marching across the river, he won spectacular victories against Russia and Austria .
 The French Revolution of 1789 failed to create a radical new political system . The revolution was the first French revolution since the revolution began in France in 1789 . It was the second French Revolution to take place in France .
 More successful revolutions took place in the Americas, where colonists won their independence from Britain and Spain .
 The principal battlefield weapons were the flintlock musket, bayonet, sword, and muzzle-loaded smoothbore cannon, as they had been since around 1700 .
 The semaphore telegraph and the Congreve rocket had only a marginal impact on warfare . There were improvements in weapon design, but genuine innovations such as the . Semaphore . telegraphs and Congreve rockets were among the innovations in warfare .
 The growing power of European states was evident in sheer numbers . The French army of over 600,000 men that invaded Russia in 1812 was of a size unprecedented in European warfare .
 French general Jean Rapp presents the defeated Russian prince Repnin and enemy prisoners to Napoleon after the battle of Austerlitz in 1805 .
 States were able not only to mobilize such large forces, but also to equip them . States are able to mobilize large forces and equip them with equipment .
 Nelson had more than 2,000 cannon at Trafalgar in 1805, and there were some 1,200 artillery pieces deployed at Borodino in 1812 . Nelson had 1,400 cannon pieces at the Battle of the Meddina in 1815 .
 The most fervent attempt to mobilize a whole society for war was made by the French revolutionaries of 1793 . The French revolutionaries decreed a levee en masse (mass conscription) for the defense of France .
 France's commitment to war grew just as decisively in Britain and Russia . But other states could equal the French commitment to the war .
 The key innovative commanders of the revolutionary era—Napoleon on land and Nelson at sea—expressed the progressive spirit of the age . Nelson's victory over Napoleon in the Battle of the British Isles was a triumph of the revolution .
 Their predecessors had appreciated the merits of a well-conducted land campaign, with meticulously organized supplies and immaculately drilled troops, or at sea the conduct of a battle at sea . The British Army has never seen a British commander since the Second World War .
 Nelson preferred to break up the line in search of decisive victory in an unpredictable melee . Nelson preferred the break-up of the line to secure victory in the unpredictable melee.
 Napoleon abandoned dependence on a formal supply system in favor of living off the land . Napoleon's large army corps was able to advance at speed with ease of ease .
 Skirmishers and sharpshooters armed with rifles became an essential element of the armed forces . They supplemented the ultra-disciplined musket-andbayonet infantry .
 Napoleon, a former artillery officer, turned artillery into an offensive force on the battlefield . Napoleon concentrated in batteries to maximize firepower and used to soften up the enemy .
 Napoleonic infantry often attacked in column, rather then deploying into a line on the battlefield . The full force of the cavalry charge was restored by the French armored cuirassier .
 European states went to war across the world, fighting in India, the Caribbean, and North America . European states fought in India and the Caribbean . The war was the first of its kind in Europe and the second in Asia .
 The process of nonEuropean countries adopting Western-style military organization and technology began to gather pace . They demonstrated a clear supremacy over opponents from outside Europe .
 Howitzers evolved to provide a high-angle counterpart to standard low-trajectory cannon . I 4 British 5. inch howitzer, 1782, was the first British howitzer .
 Royal Artillery howitzer was a companion to the 9-pounder field gun . Howitzer was companion to 9-lb field gun, which was used in World War II .
 In northern India an Afghan army led by Ahmad Shah Durrani fights the Frenchtrained Indian Marathas at Panipat . V 18th-century British blunderbuss pistol .
 After initial clashes at Lexington and Concord, the British are besieged in Boston . The British were defeated by the British in the city of Boston .
 The British under General Edward Braddock were defeated by a French and Indian force at Monongahela, Pennsylvania .
 The Ottoman navy is destroyed by the Russians at Chesma in 1770 . This conflict leads to the Russo-Turkish War . The war is the result of the defeat of the Ottoman navy .
 General William Howe defeats the ( Americans at Brandywine I and occupies Philadelphia . Howe was the first general to occupy Philadelphia since the Battle of the Delaware River .
 The British take Charleston and win a victory at the battle of Camden . Spain declares war on Britain . The Spanish government declares war against Britain .
 Napoleon defeats an attempted coup by turning cannon on insurgents in Paris . Napoleon defeated an attempt to take control of the French capital . Napoleon was assassinated in 1803 .
 In western France, Republican forces crush royalist uprising in Vendee region . Republican forces kill royalist rebels in western France's Vendee province .
 Nelson bombards Copenhagen, in response to the Northern League of Armed Neutrality . Nelson bombarded Copenhagen with a barrage of bullets .
 Napoleon returns to France and takes power in a coup d'etat . Napoleon defeated the Ottomans at Aboukir in the French Revolution .
 Napoleon defeats the Austrians at Ulm and the Russians at Austerlitz . The Russians and Austrians defeated each other at the end of the war .
 Ottoman sultan Mahmud suppresses the janissaries who are blocking military reforms . Sultan Mahmud was the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire . He was the first sultan to impose military reforms on his own people .
 The Ottomans forced to accept a peace agreement granting autonomy to Greece, Serbia, Moldavia, and Wallachia . The agreement was part of a peace deal between the Ottoman Empire and the Greeks .
 The claim was a direct challenge to the territorial ambitions of the British colonies on the eastern seaboard of North America, which had no defined western borders . It was the first claim to the territory of the American colonies .
 Whenever Britain and France went to war, fighting flared in North America . North America was a major source of conflict between the two countries .
 The British colonists, with the Iroquois Indians, attacked New France in King William's War of 1689 to 1697 . The war was fought between the British colonists and the Native Americans .
 Colonial militia and the Royal Navy captured the French fortress of Louisbourg in 1745 . This was returned to France by the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748, which restored pre-war borders .
 The French and Indian War was fought for high stakes . Involving relatively small forces, the war was fought in a relatively small war . The war was won by the British Empire .
 The outcome of battles for isolated forts and settlements would determine the future shape of North America . North America's future shape will determine the shape of the continent .
 Had the war gone differently, Canada and the U.S. would not exist as we know them today . The war would have left the country and the United States without Canada .
 The French and Indian War in fact started before the related European conflict . G enerally seen as a North American offshoot of the Seven Years War of 1756 to 1763 .
 Britain and France were still at peace when the first significant clashes occurred in 1754 . The first major clashes were between 1754 and 1754 in France .
 For France, this was an essential link between its colony in Canada and the lands it claimed along the Mississippi . For France it was an important link between Canada and its colonies in the U.S.
 The Ohio Company was founded by its Virginian colonists . The British government awarded land grants in the region to the Ohio Company .
 Marquis Duquesne was made governor of New France in 1752 with instructions to assert control of the Ohio territory . He was given specific instructions to establish control of Ohio .
 I OU Virginian Lieutenant-Colonel George Washington on his expedition to Fort Duquesne in spring 1754 . He set about establishing a I T Q .
 The forces engaged in the French and Indian War were often surprisingly small . They won the support of many of the traditionally pro-British Algonquin Indians .
 Virginia governor and leading participant in the Ohio Company, Robert Dinwiddie, was determined to resist the French advance . Dinwidie was a leading member of the company who fought the French .
 In spring 1754, George Washington sent a body of Virginia militia, under George Washington, to face the French at Fort Duquesne, on the site of present-day Pittsburgh . Virginia militia fought the French in 1754 .
 A skirmish between Washington's force and a French patrol on May 28 left a French officer dead . A French officer was also killed in the skirmish .
 Washington's men were too weak to resist a French and Indian force sent to punish them . Washington was defeated by the French and Indians in 1817 .
 He was released only after signing a document admitting to the ""murder"" of the French officer . He was only released after signing an admission to the murder .
 The Virginians appealed to the British government for support, and received it in the form of two regiments of troops under Major General Edward Braddock .
 With Washington as his aide-de-camp, Braddock marched 2,000 men to attack Fort Duquesne . Washington was Washington's aide de-camp .
 On July 9, 1755, they were ambushed by a predominantly Indian force under French leadership at the Monongahela River . The French were killed by a majority of the Indians .
 The British had successes, taking Nova Scotia and holding the Hudson Valley . The British held Nova Scotia .
 The French were in a position to take the offensive in North America in 1756 . But when the situation in Europe brought Britain and France to a declaration of war in May 1756, it was the French .
 Roger's Rangers were a company of colonial militia that specialized in special operations deep inside hostile territory and intelligence gathering . The company was formed in 1755 during the French and Indian War . Roger captured and destroyed Fort Oswego, a key British outpost on the southern shore of Lake Ontario,
 Major Robert Rogers trained his men to move undetected through the wilderness, track down the enemy, and carry out ambushes . Their leader, Major Rogers, trained his team to move in the wilderness undetected .
 The British suffered 2,000 casualties and were obliged to withdraw . George W. Washington was at the center of the 1755 battle .
 The French fortress of Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island, commanding the Gulf of St. St. Louis, was destroyed in 1758 .
 Lawrence, Canada, was taken by British troops under General Jeffery Amherst, brought from Halifax, Nova Scotia, by sea . Lawrence was taken from Halifax by the British troops . Lawrence, a war hero of the day, was captured by British forces .
 The following year, the Louisbourg fortress provided the base for the British thrust into the heart of Canada . The British take Canada .
 British and colonial forces captured Forts Ticonderoga and Niagara from the French . A British fleet carried 8,000 troops under the command of General James Wolfe up the St. Louis River .
 An initial 15,000 were killed in seven years' fighting during the French and Indian War . This is estimated number of deaths during the seven-year conflict .
 Some 11,000 soldiers were killed in one day at the battle of Kunersdorf, in 1759, during the Seven Years War in Europe .
 General Braddock was mortally wounded at Monongahela in 1755 . His aide-de-camp, George Washington, rode around the battlefield rallying the troops .
 The fall of Fort William Henry became notorious because of the behavior of Montcalm's Indian allies, who tortured and massacred hundreds of British men following their surrender . Hundreds of British soldiers were tortured and murdered by the Indians .
 Britain began to devote more substantial military resources to the North American conflict . Now engaged in a general war with France, Britain began spending more substantial resources .
 The British Royal Navy's command of the Atlantic Ocean made it difficult for France to reinforce its troops in Canada . The British enjoyed a growing numerical advantage over France .
 As they began to score victories, the Indians tended to switch sides, further shifting the balance against the French . The Indians often switched sides as they began scoring victories .
 While the struggle for the Ohio territory continued, the war increasingly became a British campaign of conquest directed at Canada .
 An outstanding general, Montcalm ensured that his opponents enjoyed no easy successes . The Scotsman was an outstanding general in Scotland .
 With less than 4,000 men under him, Montcalm prepared field fortifications . Abercrombie disastrously attempted to take by frontal assault . Mont Calm prepared fortifications with less than four,000 troops .
 Tomahawks were general-purpose axes used in warfare by both the Indians and the colonists . Tomahawk blades were general purpose axes used by both Indians and colonists .
 British landing was repulsed and a bombardment of the city from the opposite riverbank had little effect . British landing repulseed and bombardment of city from opposite riverbanks had no effect .
 Wolfe used a risky plan that required a night landing upriver from Quebec, and scaling of the cliffs of the Heights of Abraham . Wolfe was unable to maintain a lengthy siege, Wolfe adopted the risky plan . Wolfe scaled the heights of Abraham in a daring attempt to capture the French capital .
 This was achieved on September 12, forcing Montcalm to give battle on the Plains of Abraham, a plateau outside the city walls, the following day . This was the first battle to be fought in the area outside the walls of the walls .
 The British were victorious in a brief but savage encounter in which both commanders lost their lives . Both commanders were killed in the battle .
 French made one last effort to retake Quebec in spring 1760, but their attacks were held off . The French made a last attempt to retake the city in 1760 .
 Vastly outnumbered, the French surrendered Canada to the British at Montreal in September 1760 . The French surrender Canada to Canada in 1760.
 The European war between Britain and France continued until 1763, but the contest in North America was over at last . France and Britain fought in 1763 .
 Peace agreement of 1763 confirmed British possession of Canada . Peace agreement confirmed British in possession of the country .
 The Spanish ceded Florida to the British and, in return, took Louisiana from the French, leaving France with no substantial territory in North America . The French ceded Louisiana to the Spanish in return for Florida .
 The aftermath of the war was far more painful for the Indians than for the French Canadians . It set Britain on the path to conflict with its North American colonies . After the war, the British government began to negotiate with the Indians .
 By the Quebec Act of 1774, Britain allowed its new Canadian subjects the free practice of the Catholic faith and the use of French civil law . Many of the Canadian subjects were Catholics, but many of them were Catholics .
 I PONTIAC was an Ottawan leader who played a significant role in the Indian uprising of 1763 . The Indian tribes found that treaties agreed by the I PonTIAC were agreed by an Ottawa leader .
 His name was later appropriated for a city in Michigan and a brand of automobile . His name later was later used for a Michigan city and an automobile .
 British during the war to win their support were not respected after the war ended . The British were used to win the support of the British in order to win support from the British .
 An Indian uprising known as Pontiac's Rebellion flared in 1763, but this petered out after a few years of massacre and counter-massacre . The uprising was the result of a series of massacres in the aftermath of the massacre .
 The British government tried to prevent trouble by banning westward expansion of its colonies into Indian territory . The policy was unpopular with Indians .
 This limitation, like the tolerance of Canadian Catholics, was deeply unpopular in the British colonies . The tolerance of Catholics in Canada was also deeply unpopular .
 Between 1756 and 1763 Europe was immersed in a general conflict between the major powers . Germany, especially Silesia and Saxony, was involved in the conflict .
 Prussia, having precipitated the war, fought for survival against a coalition of Austria, Russia, and France . Prussia was defeated in the Battle of the Medellines .
 The French and British fought an almost separate war, chiefly at sea, linked to colonial conflicts . The French, British and colonial powers fought in almost separate wars .
 Both a land war between Europe's major powers and a worldwide colonial conflict between Britain and France . The Seven Years War had two separate points of origin . France and Britain fought over the world's colonial colonies .
 The first shots of the conflict were fired in North America . The first shot of the war was fired in the U.S.
 George Washington ambushed a party of French Canadian scouts at Fort Duquesne in 1754 . George Washington of the Virginia militia ambushed the party .
 Frederick II of Prussia saw the alliance between Habsburg Austria and Bourbon France in 1756 as a preparation for war . Frederick II saw the diplomatic revolution as a precursor to war .
 Frederick seized the initiative and launched his own preemptive assault against Saxony . Saxony was a state closely aligned with Austria and was the obvious starting point for an invasion of Prussia .
 Saxony was overrun by Prussia's efficient army, but in response to Prussian aggression both France and Russia agreed to enter the war in support of Austria .
 Frederick faced a coalition—soon to be joined by Sweden—vastly superior in aggregate manpower and resources . Frederick faced facing a coalition of forces, soon-to-be-joined Sweden .
 Britain was already at war with France at sea and in the colonies, and only committed to a limited intervention in the European land war to defend the German state .
 In that war Prussia had proved itself a major military power and, by annexing the wealthy province of Silesia, had greatly enhanced its resources . The annexation of the Silesian province greatly enhanced the country's resources .
 In May 1756, Austrian Empress Maria Theresa formed a defensive alliance with the Habsburg's enemy, France . The alliance was formed to protect Austria from its enemies .
 For Britain, a big concern was to defend Hanover, the German state from which the British ruling dynasty had come, against the French . For Britain it was to protect Hanover from the French, a state of Hanover .
 The British government made an agreement to back Prussia in a war over Silesia, in return for their promise to defend Hanover against France . The Prussians proved incapable of fulfilling the promise .
 Through the summer of 1757, the war went badly for the British and Prussians . The Prussian army was defeated by the British in July 1757 .
 Britain's attempted defense of Hanover failed with the defeat of the Duke of Cumberland by the French at the battle of Hastenbeck in July .
 Frederick was meanwhile in a desperate situation as the Russians overwhelmed East Prussia and French and Austrian armies approached from the west and south . Frederick was also in the midst of a crisis of his own .
 In November and December the Prussian king achieved victories over the French at Rossbach and the Austrians at Leuthen . Both skirmishes fought against odds of almost two to one . The French and Austrians were defeated by Prussian forces .
 Frederick's military talent was displayed by Prussia's disciplined infantry cavalry and artillery . Frederick's troops were able to carry out swift marches and complicated battlefield maneuvers .
 Battle of Quiberon Bay ended plans for an invasion of Britain in 1759 . Admiral Edward Hawke's victory shattered French naval power and ended plans .
 Hanoverian Army of Observation on Prussia's western front was sufficient to hold off the discouraged French . Prussia was defeated by the French at the end of the Second World War .
 Prussia and the Russians fought at Kunersdorf, August 12,1759 . Austria and Russia continued to attack 34,000 men in the battle .
 Both the Russians and the Prussians suffered more than 30 percent casualties . A desperate drawn battle was fought at Zorndorf, Germany . Both the Russian and Prussian forces suffered 30% casualties .
 For Britain and France, the conflict reached crisis point in 1759 . France and Britain were involved in the conflict between 1759 and 1760 .
 After initial setback in Minorca at the outset of the war, the Royal Navy had reasserted its superiority blockading French ports .
 This required their Mediterranean squadron to sail from Toulon to Brittany where it would join the Atlantic fleet and escort troop transports to Britain . This required them to sail to the Atlantic where they would escort troops .
 The Mediterranean squadron was intercepted and destroyed by Admiral Edward Boscawen off Lagos, southern Portugal, in August .
 Admiral Edward Hawke shattered France's Atlantic fleet in Quiberon Bay in November . France continued its invasion preparations, but in November its Atlantic fleet was trailed and shattered by Hawke .
 Spain was later induced to join France's naval war against Britain . But there was never another serious challenge to the Royal Navy's command of the sea .
 Quiberon Bay made 1759 a triumphant year for the British . Coupled with victories in Canada and India, it made it a year of triumph .
 Frederick of Prussia fought the Austrians and Russians unaided . British and Hanoverian forces also defeated the French on land, at Minden . Frederick's Prussian forces defeated the Austrian and Russian forces .
 At Kunersdorf, in August 1759, and went on to defeat the Austrians at Liegnitz and at Torgau, the following November 1760 . In August 1760 and August 1761, they defeated the Austrian at Liegenitz in Liegnitzer
 Pitt, the force behind Britain's war effort, resigned in 1761 . In 1761 British support for Prussia faltered; Pitt resigned . Pitt was force behind the British war effort .
 As losses mounted, Prussia's administration struggled to find fresh men and money to keep the war going . Prussia was forced to withdraw from the First World War .
 The Empress Elizabeth of Russia died and the pro-Prussian Peter III was crowned . The pro-Russian Peter III died and was replaced by pro-prussian Peter .
 Peter was assassinated after six months, but he had time to make peace with Prussia . Frederick was able to retake Silesia front Austria . Frederick made peace with the Prussian, but was assassinated six months later .
 Peace was signed in February 1763 between Prussia and Austria and between Britain and France . Peace was also signed by Prussia, Austria, and Britain .
 The Seven Years War left the map of Europe broadly unchanged, but it had important consequences that were not confined to the European colonies .
 France's power was diminished, while Britain was the great beneficiary of it . France was weakened by the loss of power, and Britain was a great beneficiary .
 Frederick II of Prussia was admired both as a military commander and an enlightened despot . Frederick the Great was admired for his role in Prussia . He was a military and enlightened leader of the Prussian kingdom .
 Leuthen was the second of King Frederick II of Prussia's two great victories of 1757 . The battle was one of the two great battles of the year .
 A month after crushing the French at Rossbach, on December 5 he encountered a Austrian army twice the size of his own . He defeated it through bold maneuver and the aggressive use of combined arms—infantry, field artillery and cavalry .
 The victory confirms his reputation as Europe's finest military commander . The victory confirmed his reputation for Europe's best military leader .
 80,000-strong Austrian army had invaded the valuable province of Silesia . Prince Charles of Lorraine was killed in the battle .
 Charles ordered his army to take up a defensive position on a four-mile line between two reaches of marshland, centerd on the village of Leuthen . Charles was determined to keep the position .
 Frederick's army numbered only 36,000 men but he chose to attack against the odds rather than leave Charles in possession of Silesia . Frederick attacked against odds but chose to take the chance to take over the region . Frederick's forces were outnumbered by the odds .
 Frederick's plan of attack depended on the ability of the rigorously disciplined Prussian infantry to stay disciplined and transfer parade-ground drill to the field of battle . The Prussian army was able to successfully transfer parade ground drill from the field to the battlefield .
 First he used his cavalry to drive back Austrian pickets who were observing his forces, knowing that his army's subsequent maneuvers would largely be masked from the enemy by low hills .
 Frederick marched his infantry in perfect order to the left of the Austrian line, while his cavalry rode about showily opposite the right of the Austrians . Frederick then marched his cavalry to the right and left the line . Frederick's cavalry rode around opposite the Austrian lines .
 The Austrians were utterly confused by what little they could see of the Prussian infantry's movements . The Prussian army was defeated by the Austrians in the Battle of Mannheim .
 Charles reinforced the right of his line after the redeployment of troops . Interpreprepreviously interpreted their redeployments as a withdrawal .
 When the Prussian infantry columns emerged unexpectedly on the Austrian left, they reformed with precision into their conventional two-line attacking formation, at right angles to the end of the enemy line .
 With 12-pounder guns positioned on a knoll, Prussian infantry attacked . Prussian guns were positioned on knoll to support them, the Prussian army attacked .
 The Austrian left was rolled up as Charles struggled to bring across reinforcements from the distant right wing of his position . The Austrians in disarray by cannon from the knoll and by volleys of musket fire from the advancing infantry .
 The Prussians took the fortified village of Leuthen after a furious fight lasting 40 minutes . The chaos of pitched battle took over from organized maneuver, the Prussianians taking the fortified town .
 Austrian forces managed to form a new defensive line that stalled the Prussian advance . Beyond Leuthen, the Austrian cavalry assembled for a charge to sweep the infantry from the field . The Austrian cavalry then charged the enemy with a charge .
 Frederick ordered his own cavalry into action to counter the Austrian horse . Frederick ordered the horsemen to fight back against the Austrian horses .
 The rival bodies of men on horseback clashed head-on in a swirling melee . The bodies of two men were killed in the clash in the early 1900s .
 Charles's cavalry was driven back, and Austrian resistance crumbled . Eventually Charles's forces were driven back by Austrian forces .
 Frederick had won back control of Silesia for Prussia and the disgraced Charles was forced to resign in the wake of his defeat . Frederick had taken control of the region .
 The disunity of India made the country ripe for exploitation in the 18th century .
 Mysore engaged in a series of hard-fought wars against the British, urged on by the French, who provided arms and training . Britain, represented by the East India Company, extended its rule over ever larger areas of the subcontinent with Indian states .
 Mysore fielded armies that fought with discipline, incorporating much of the best of contemporary European tactics, including cannon cannon . Mysores fielded armies with discipline .
 The decline of the Mogul empire gave European powers the chance to expand their influence in India by intervening in the affairs of rival Indian princedoms . It also deployed rocket brigades, units of several hundred soldiers armed with explosive rockets .
 TIPU SULTAN, Ruler of Mysore and enemy of British troops, died in battle with 2,000 sepoys . He was killed by British troops in the battle .
 British leaders undermined the Nawab's position by intrigue . However, British leaders had undermined his position by . intrigue .
 They promised the throne to a rival claimant, Mir Jafar, and bribed most of Siraj's commanders . Siraj was killed by the rebels in 2009 after they promised him the throne . The rebels had bribed Siraj to give him control of the kingdom .
 On June 23, barely one-tenth of the Nawab's forces actually fought . In the battle at Plassey, barely a tenth of the Nizab's troops actually fought in the battle .
 The British won what appeared, by numbers alone, an impossible victory and took control of Bengal, with Jafar as a puppet Nawab . The British were able to win what appeared to be the impossible victory in Bengal .
 The British victory at Plassey was a setback for French policy in India, and worse followed . The French victory in India was the result of a French defeat in India .
 The major French settlement was at Pondicherry, which rivaled British Madras on the Carnatic coast . It was a French colony on the coast of India .
 Britain shipped a newly raised infantry regiment, the 84th Regiment of Foot, to India in 1759 . It defeated the French under Count de Lally at Wandiwash in January of the following invading Muslim Afghan army led by Ahmad Shah Durrani and Hindu Marathas .
 There may have been over 100,000 troops involved in this costly but ultimately inconclusive encounter . The U.S. troops were involved in the conflict in Afghanistan .
 One result of the battle of Panipat was to facilitate the rise of Hyder Ali, ruler of Mysore, who took advantage of the temporary weakness of the Maratha Confederacy to extend his power .
 After the death of Emperor Aurangzeb in 1707, Mogul rule was soon restricted to the area around Delhi . Between 1767 and 1767, the Mogul ruled the city of Delhi .
 The new dominant power was the Maratha Confederacy, but smaller states such as Hyderabad, Mysore and Bengal also flourished .
 The British East India Company established its first trading post (or ""factory") on the Indian coast at Surat in 1612 . Surat was Surat's first trading centre .
 By the 18th century its factories included Bombay , Calcutta in Bengal, and Madras in Madras .
 From 1742, under governor-general Joseph Francois Dupleix, the French attempted to drive out the British and extend their influence over India . The French tried to drive the British out of India and extend its influence .
 The French ended the Seven Years War with only a nominal presence in India . The French had a very small presence in the country .
 Napoleon's later ambitions to rule India remained in the realm of fantasy . They failed to restore their position when war broke out with Britain again in 1778, during the American Revolution .
 The East India Company's army consisted of Indian sepoys under Indian NCOs and British officers, often aided by elements of the British Army paid for by the Company . The Company was undoubtedly effective .
 The Company confirmed its control of Bengal with a victory over numerically superior forces at Buxar in 1764 . The Mogul emperor's army was defeated by the Company's forces . Company confirmed control of the Bengal with victory in 1763 .
 It would be a mistake to exaggerate the impact of the European presence at this time or its military superiority . But it's not a mistake for exaggerating the impact or military superiority of Europe's presence .
 The largest battle fought in India in the mid18th century was at Panipat in 1761 . The British takeover of India began in Bengal at the start of the Seven Years War .
 At war with France from May 1756, the British bolstered their defenses in Calcutta in case of a French attack . The British were at war with the French from 1756 .
 The British sent a small force by sea from Madras, commanded by Colonel Robert Clive, which retook Calcutta at the start of 1757 . The British retook the city at the beginning of the year .
 In 1799 British forces led by General David Baird stormed the city of Seringapatam, capital of Mysore . Supported by French artillery men with heavy cannon, the Nawab led an army more than 50,000 strong to confront Clive, who had less than a thousand
 Mysore's ruler, Tipu Sultan, was killed by the British while defending his palace . Tipu was killed during the British invasion of the city .
 Indian armies combined traditional dashing cavalry with cannon with cannon and musets . The result of the two armies was combined with cannon, musets and cavalry .
 Tipu Sultan scored impressive victories, notably at Pollilur in 1780 and Tanjore in 1782 . The Sultan of Hyderabad was the ruler of the Hyderabad .
 Napoleon's invasion of Egypt awoke British fears of a revival of French influence in India . Tipu Sultan was defeated in 1799, when Napoleon's Egyptian invasion awoke Britain's fears .
 The British invaded Mysore with a force that included Maratha sepoys from Bombay, British infantry under Arthur Wellesley, and the army of the Nizam of Hyderabad . The British invasion included a force of Maratha soldiers from Bombay and British infantry .
 The British turned their attention to the Maratha Confederacy, a potential enemy weakened by divisions in its constituent semi-independent states . The British focused their attention on the Marathis, which was weakened by division .
 Marathas traditionally fought as skirmishing light cavalry, but under French influence they also had musket infantry and field artillery . Under French influence, they also fought as muskets infantry and artillery .
 In 1803 the British defeated Maratha armies in the north, while Wellesley campaigned in central India . The British defeated the Maratha in 1803 .
 In September Wellesley blundered into a Maratha force at Assaye that was stronger than his own in cavalry and manufactured in Lahore for the Sikh army . Wellesley's defeat of the Maratha forces was a major embarrassment for the British Empire .
 It was captured by the British Army during the wars with the Sikhs in the 1840s, as well as in overall numbers of artillery .
 He chose to attack across a river and carried the day despite heavy losses . Despite heavy losses, he chose to carry out the attack across the river .
 Peace in 1805 left the Marathas still independent . British victories brought the British large territorial gains .
 It took more fighting, in 1817-18, to break up the Confederacy, leaving Britain in control of the Indian subcontinent .
 Company rule extended to northern India after two fiercely fought wars against the Sikhs in the 1840s . Company rule of northern India extended into northern India in the 18th century .
 Sikh state had been rapidly expanding in the early decades of the 19th century . The khalsa was a highly motivated force that had European-trained artillery and uniformed infantry .
 The key British at Sobraon in 1846 cost more than 2,000 British and sepoy casualties . The key battle in the area was the death of 2,500 British and Indian troops . The battle was fought in the early years of the 1846 .
 The Indian Mutiny of 1857 marked the end of an era for the British . Yet again the British were not militarily superior, but they had an edge that was enough .
 The last Mogul was exiled, the East India Company was abolished and India became a possession of the British Crown . India was the last place in India to be ruled by the Mogul and the last was exiled .
 Bengali sepoys mutinied, attempting to reinstate the Mogul emperor as ruler of India . British rule of India was ruled by British rule .
 Sufficient sepoys remained loyal for the British to crush the rebellion, which included notable military actions at the siege of Delhi and the relief of Lucknow .
 Massacres of some British civilians were used as justification for the extreme brutality used when suppressing the revolt . The use of massacres was used to justify the brutality used by the British government .
 Afghanistan remained outside the borders of Britain's Indian Raj . Afghanistan was ruled out of the British-controlled territory .
 In 1839 British forces invaded the country and installed a pro-British ruler, but they were driven out by an uprising in 1842 .
 A second British invasion in 1878 was militarily more successful, but could not subdue the Afghans, who remained independent . The Afghans remained independent until 1878 .
 Between 1775 and 1783 rebels in 13 American colonies, supported by France, fought a conflict for independence from British rule . HUDSON'S BAY COMPANY NOVA SCOTIA.
 General Thomas Gage had orders to suppress the rebellion in 1775 . General Gage agreed to surrender his troops to defeat the rebels .
 They clashed with local militia first at the village of Lexington and then at Concord's North Bridge . They clashed first at Lexington, then at the North Bridge, and again at Concord, Concord .
 The rebel militia, strengthened by soldiers recruited by the American Congress, besieged the British in Boston . The British were defeated by the militia in 17th century .
 Britain sailed 4,500 troops across the Atlantic to reinforce the garrison . The British sortied to attack fortified militia positions on Breed's Hill and Bunker Hill on June 16 .
 The disciplined British infantry took the rebel positions, but at heavy cost . The British army eventually abandoned the garrison at Boston in March 1776 .
 The 13 colonies that rebelled against British rule stretched down the eastern seaboard of North America between Canada and Florida . King George Ill's government hoped that American loyalists would play the leading role in restoring royal authority .
 There were indeed many Americans who fought for the British, including slaves who saw Britain as offering hope of freedom . The rebels controlled the militias in most of the colonies, but the rebels controlled most of them .
 Despite recruiting 30,000 ""Hessian"" German mercenaries, the British faced an insoluble manpower problem . The British faced a manpower problem in the early years of the Second World War .
 Most resented the army presence and none wanted to pay taxes imposed by the British nor the customs duties to support it . But most resented British presence and resented army presence .
 British troops killed five people in suppressing a riot in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1770 . Trouble flared up in Boston after British troops were killed in suppressing riot .
 In 1774 Massachusetts was placed under the military rule of General Thomas Gage . General Gage ruled the state of Massachusetts in 1774 . Massachusetts was put under military rule by Gage in 1775 .
 The Massachusetts legislature refused to recognize his authority . The other colonies (initially excepting Georgia) rallied to its support in the Continental Congress .
 Radical ""patriots" began attacks on pro-British Americans, and local militias prepared to resist the British soldiers .
 The British 4th Regime of the British Empire was at the center of the war . It was the first government to attempt to take over control of the country .
 Keeping large numbers of soldiers supplied across the Atlantic was a formidable task . It was a huge undertaking for the British Army in the early 1900s .
 Britain needed to reconcile the colonies to its rule, yet the conflict caused a bitterness that made this almost impossible . Britain needed reconciliation with the colonies, but the conflict made this impossible . The conflict caused bitterness that led to the bitterness of the colonies .
 The American political leaders in the Congress were more conservative than revolutionaries . Lawyers and landowners predominated . Their views on the prosecution of war were conventional .
 In June 1775, they voted to form the Continental Army, recruited from all the colonies, to fight the war under George Washington . The Continental Army was recruited from the colonies to fight under Washington . George Washington was elected to lead the army in 1775 .
 This was to be a traditional European-style army, with a disciplined and drilled into an efficient fighting machine . The army was to have a 'disciplined and drilled' into a 'efficient fighting machine' This was the first time the British army had been in existence .
 Washington was assisted from 1778 by his Prussian inspector-general, Baron Friedrich von Steuben . Washington had a hard task creating and maintaining such a force .
 It was short of money and supplies and desertion was a constant problem . Desertion was also a problem for the soldiers, who were short of food and supplies .
 Congress declared independence in July 1776; it was the British who went on the offensive . Congress took the decisive measure of declaring independence in 1776 .
 General John Burgoyne led a British army south from the Canadian border to the Hudson river . After the repulse of an initial American attack on Canada, the British army moved south .
 By October 1777, Burgoyne's force had been surrounded at Saratoga and had to surrender . The 1777 battle was the first of its kind in the nation .
 The Continental Army underwent great hardship encamped at Valley Forge in the winter of 1777-78 .
 Washington rode past the Marquis de Lafayette, a French lord who served with the army as a volunteer . Washington rode through the battlefield with his troops as a rider .
 The French allied themselves with the Americans in February 1778 and went to war with the British the following June . The French were allied with the U.S. and the British in 1778, and went on to war in 1777 .
 For the British, the conflict in North America was less important than the wider war with European enemies, who threatened other valuable British interests, including the colonies in the West Indies .
 British strength in North America declined in 1780 . French army under the Comte de Rochambeau arrived in July 1780 to support Washington .
 For a long time, it was unclear how the Americans could win control of the new country they had founded . Still, for a time, the Americans were unsure how they would win control .
 The Continental Army barely survived a grueling winter camped at Valley Forge in 1777-78 . The winter camp camp camped in Valley Forge was a brutal winter camp at the beginning of 1777 .
 The British used their naval power to spread the fighting to the south . Then the British used it to spread their power to the region .
 General Sir Henry Clinton seized Charleston in South Carolina and Savannah in Georgia . He seized Charleston, South Carolina, and Savannah, Georgia in South America .
 This triggered a vicious war in the back country of the Carolinas—a virtual civil war between rebel and loyalist militias . The war was triggered by a vicious conflict between loyalist and rebel militias .
 American rebels such as South Carolina's militia leader, Francis Marion, and Continental Army general, Nathanael Greene, turned to guerrilla warfare . Loyalists also practiced irregular warfare ruthlessly and to good effect .
 General Charles Cornwallis was the commander of British forces in the southern theater . He was the British commander of the British forces during the Second World War .
 George Washington fought as an officer in the Virginia militia during the French and Indian War . He scored a striking U.S. General George Washington was a wealthy plantation owner .
 As commander of the Continental Army throughout the Revolutionary War, he patiently husbanded his limited resources . He knew that keeping the army in being was more important than winning battles .
 After the war he retired into private life, emerging to become the first president of the USA in 1789 . He retired from private life after the war and went on to become a president .
 David Bushnell's Turtle The Turtle, propelled by hand, was the first submarine to be used in war . The Turtle was propelled to war by hand .
 After the humiliation of the surrender at Yorktown, Britain gave up trying to win the war in North America . Peace was not signed for another two years after the defeat .
 A naval victory over the French in the West Indies in 1782 limited Britain's losses in the war . Florida, held by Britain since 1763, was returned to Spanish rule .
 In the United States the role of armed citizens in the initial resistance to Britain ensured that a right to bear arms would be written into the Constitution .
 There was a fierce dispute in the post-independence period over whether the U.S. required a standing army . But a small permanent force was maintained in the United States .
 Cornwallis decided to end his campaign and marched north through North Carolina into Virginia . Cornwallis ended his campaign in North Carolina .
 In summer 1781, Cornwallis dug in to a position on Chesapeake Bay, where he could be supplied from the sea . Cornwallis was able to supply him with food and ammunition from sea .
 British command of the sea could no longer be relied upon in the face of a French Navy . French Navy reinvigorated since the Seven Years War . British command was no longer relied upon .
 Admiral de Grasse defeated a British fleet off Chesapeake Bay . Washington and Rochambeau brought their armies south to besiege Cornwallis's force on land .
 General Cornwallis surrendered his army at Yorktown on October 19, 1781 . Cornwallis was heavily outnumbered and without hope of relief .
 French and American troops guard the defeated British army at Yorktown, Virginia, on October 21,1781 .
 The surrender of over 8,000 British troops marked the end of the American Revolutionary War . The surrender was the end to the fighting in the American Revolution .
 The two commanders, Charles Cornwallis and George Washington, conducted the surrender via their deputies . The British and American armies surrendered in 1777 .
 Peter the Great, who reigned from 1682 to 1725, transformed Russia from a backward state into a dynamic power . He reigned in Russia from 1672 to 1625, with a modernized army and navy . Russia was one of the world's most powerful states .
 Territorial expansionism led to conflict with the Ottoman empire when Peter seized the fortress of Azov in 1696 . Peter seized Azov fortress Azov from the Ottoman Empire .
 He was assassinated after six months by a group of nobles who placed his wife, Catherine, on the throne . Catherine's death was followed by the death of her husband, Catherine .
 Wars fought during this period substantially extended the territory of the Russian empire, mostly at the expense of the Turkish Ottoman empire and Poland . Wars fought in this period included the Crimean War and the Second Crimean War .
 The trigger for the first round of warfare was the revolt of the Bar Confederation in Poland in 1768 . The revolt in Poland was a revolt against the bar confederation in the 1768.
 This group of Polish nobles rejected Russia's domination of their country, embodied in the occupant of the Polish throne . They rejected the Russian domination of the country .
 King Stanislaw August Poniatowski was former lover of Catherine the Great . He was the Polish king's first wife to Catherine . He died in the early 1900s .
 The Polish uprising encouraged the Ottoman sultan, Mustafa III, to declare war on Russia . Catherine’s favorite Prince Potyomkin failed to reduce the Turkish fortress of Ochakov by bombardment and blockade .
 T he strategic position of Russia at this time was uniquely favorable to an expansionist policy . Russia's strategic position was unique to be able to expand its own territory, he says .
 Ottoman Turkey, standing in Russia's path to the south, was once a once-great state in military and political decline . Ottoman Turkey was standing in the path to Russia's south, but was in decline .
 Its sultans had failed to modernize their armed forces and were also vulnerable to pressure from Christian subject nations within their borders . The country was vulnerable to Christian pressure from within its borders .
 Russia coveted control of the Black Sea as an outlet into the Mediterranean . It could envisage even wider ambitions to liberate the Christians of the Balkans from Muslim rule .
 The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, dominant in Central Europe as recently as the 17th century, had entered an even steeper decline than the Ottomans . The Commonwealth was dominant in central Europe as well as the Ottoman Empire .
 All that stood in the way of a Russian takeover of Poland was the hostility of Prussia and Austria to a westward thrust of Russian territory and power . Prussia, Austria and Prussia were opposed by the Russians .
 Catherine's Russia had to keep a watchful eye on the balance of power in the Baltic region . The dominance the Russians had gained through the Great Northern War was still open to challenge from Sweden .
 The engagement of Russian forces in one area presents an opportunity for the country's enemies in another area to initiate combat . These areas of ambition and concern interacted, with the engagement of Russia presenting an opportunity to start combat .
 The Russian army was initially preoccupied with operations in Poland, but the Ottomans proved unable to take any advantage of this . The Russians were able to take advantage of the situation in Poland .
 Despite support from the French, the Confederation failed to oust the Polish king . Russian forces were worn down through campaigns in which Russian General Alexander Suvorov fought . Striking steel Ivory stock Catherine's pistol .
 St. Petersburg gunmaker John Adolph Grecke for Empress Catherine the Great in 1786 . The Empress was given a gun by the St. Catherine's Great for her protection .
 Count Alexei Orlov, brother of another of Catherine's lovers, Grigory Orlov . Count Orlov sent two squadrons of warships to the Mediterranean under the overall command .
 Count Orlov's mission was to stimulate the Greeks to revolt against Turkish rule . Orlov was inspired by a desire to rebel against the Turks . He was killed in a Greek revolt in 1918 .
 The expedition destroyed an entire Ottoman fleet at Chesma Bay off the island of Chios in July 1770 .
 Count Pyotr Rumyantsev defeated Ottoman forces and their Crimean Tartar allies twice; first at the Larga River and then at Kagul . In the same month, Russian general . Count . Rumyantssev . defeated . Ottoman forces . and Crimean Tart
 Rumyantsev's boldness at Larga and Kagul appeared to have exhausted his energy . The war with the Ottomans stagnated in both encounters . In both encounters, Rumyantssev appeared to be exhausted .
 The transfer of Suvorov from Poland to the Turkish front in 1774 brought a renewal of the offensive spirit, however . In 1774, the transfer of the Crimean War hero to Turkey brought a renewed offensive spirit in Poland .
 A bold thrust into Bulgaria persuaded the Ottomans to make peace at Kuchuk Kainarji . Russia gave Russia ports on the Black Sea and the right of passage into the Mediterranean . Russia recognized Russia's legitimate interest in the fate of the Ottoman sultan's Christian subjects .
 Catherine and her favorite, Prince Potyomkin, hatched bold plans for the demise of the Ottoman empire . A decade of peace followed, during which Catherine hatched plans to take over the Ottomans .
 In 1783 Russia annexed the Crimean Khanate, until 1774 an Ottoman Barrel Fore sight . The 38,000-strong Russian army was outnumbered, but triumphed through aggression and speed of movement .
 Emelyan Pugachev declared himself tsar in 1773 with the support of Cossacks and rebellious peasants in the Volga region . Pugachev proclaimed the liberation of the serfs and proclaimed the revolution of serfs in 1772 .
 Pugachev was defeated at the battle of Kazan, taken prisoner, and executed . Pugachev set up a protectorate over Georgia in the Caucasus . After scoring a number of successes against the government forces he was eventually defeated .
 Catherine allied with the Austrian emperor, Joseph II, envisaging a joint attack on and partitioning of Ottoman territory . Catherine then allied with Joseph II to attack and partition of the Ottoman empire .
 The Ottoman sultan Abdulhanrid I declared war on Russia in 1787 . The sultan responded to the provocations by declaring war on the Russian Empire .
 The next year the war widened when Sweden's King Gustav III seized the opportunity offered by the RussoTurkish War to attack Russia in the Baltic . Gustav III's attack was the result of the war on two fronts . Sweden and Russia fought on both fronts .
 This war on two fronts placed Catherine's forces under considerable strain . Catherine's troops were placed under considerable pressure .
 If Sweden had succeeded in achieving naval superiority in the Baltic, it could have attacked the Russian capital, St. St. Petersburg . Sweden's naval superiority could have prevented Russia from attacking St. Peter the Apostle Islands .
 A series of hard-fought naval engagements, contested by oared galleys in shallow coastal waters and sailing ships out to sea, frustrated Swedish efforts to land troops . A costly I Russian defeat at Svenskund ended with a costly I Russia defeat . The Battle of Svensk
 The Russo-Turkish War also had an important naval aspect, with a series of battles fought on the Black Sea . The Russian-Turkish war also had a naval aspect .
 Admiral Fyodor Ushakov led Russia's navy from 1788 to 1790 . His victories from Fidonisi to Tendra in 1790 gave Russians command of the sea .
 Russia's most admired military commander, General Alexander Suvorov, joined the army at the age of 12 . He is considered one of the country's most powerful military leaders .
 His campaigns against the Poles and Ottomans exhibited the principle of maximum application of force, in pursuit of a decisive victory .
 He was exceptional among Russian officers in his rapport with the rank and file . He was an exceptional among officers in Russia's military ranks, he said .
 In 1799 he led an army on a sweeping campaign against the French in Italy and Switzerland, but he died in St. Charles in 1799 .
 On land, campaigning on both sides was predominantly pedestrian, with Suvorov providing the striking exception .
 Russia besieged the Turkish fortress at Ochakov in 1788, their commander said . The fortress was destroyed by the Russians in the fall of 1788 .
 Only after a six-month siege, during which the Russians lost many troops to disease, was Suvorov allowed to storm the fortress . Only after six months of siege, after many troops died, were allowed to enter it .
 He then defeated the Ottomans at Focsani in 1789 and, in 1790, attacked the supposedly secure fortress of Izmail, which controlled the mouth of the Danube River . In 1790 he attacked Izmail in which he attacked the fortress, which was controlled
 This victory ended the fighting of the Russo-Turkish War, but peace was not agreed until 1792 . Peace was agreed until the end of the war in 1792.
 The final campaigns in the reign of Catherine the Great were fought against the Poles . Catherine's final campaigns were fought in the final years of her reign .
 The fiercely independent Cossack settlers of the frontier areas of the Russian empire provided the Russian Army with excellent skirmishing light cavalry . In 1792 and again in 1794, the Russian army used Cossacks as light cavalry in both instances .
 Russian armies crushed Polish resistance to impose two further— and final —partitions of the country . Russian armies defeated Polish resistance and imposed two further-final-partitions .
 By 1795 Poland had ceased to exist as an independent entity, its territories having been absorbed into Russia, Austria, and Prussia . Poland's territories had been absorbed by Russia and Austria .
 Catherine the Great died in 1796, having achieved a dominant position for Russia on the Black Sea with a western border that had advanced to what is now Belarus . Catherine's western border was extended to Belarus .
 Russian forces were defeated by Napoleon from Austerlitz in 1805 to Friedland in 1807, but redeemed themselves in later campaigns that started with the repulse of a massive French invasion in 1812 and ended with Russian forces in occupation of Paris in 1814 .
 The two empires last fought during World War I, when the Russian empire had the annexation of Constantinople as one of its secret war aims . The annexation was one of Russia's secret aims to take Constantinople from Constantinople .
 His tunic, preserved with its torn sleeve, is a silent witness to an era when European monarchs fought one another for limited objectives in wars that cost lives and limbs, often to little discernible purpose .
 W achtmeister was an aristocrat whose career depended on his skills as much upon his skills of a courtier as upon military prowess . His career depended upon skills of courtiers as well as his military prowess.
 He was born in 1757 and, as was common for sons of Swedish noble families, embarked on military life at a young age . He received a commission as an ensign in 1772 and became an officer in 1777 .
 Sweden declined into a second-rate power during the 18th century . Sweden was a country with a formidable military tradition, but it had declined .
 Its army was a hybrid force, with a kernel of professional soldiers supported by a larger number of provincial reserves . The country's army is a hybrid army, supported by professional soldiers and reserves .
 Gustav III was determined to reassert royal authority over parliament and suppress aristocratic privileges . Wachtmeister served Gustav III of Gustav III, Gustav III .
 His policies were resented by many of the Swedish aristocracy as an offense to their liberties . The Swedish aristocracy resented him for his policies .
 Swedish King Gustav III liked to be represented as a benign ruler and friend to the common man . Wachtmeister kept positive propaganda clear of conspiracies that multiplied among his fellow officers .
 In 1778 he went abroad to gain experience on campaign, joining the Prussian army fighting Austria in the War of the Bavarian Succession in 1778-79 . The Prussian general joined the army in the 18th century .
 Gustav declared war on Russia in 1788 hoping to silence domestic opposition with a victorious campaign in Finland while the Russians were preoccupied with a war against the Turks . Gustav hoped to silence the domestic opposition by winning a victory in Finland .
 The encounter at Valkeala was hardly a major battle with around 3,000 troops on each side . The Swedes had the better of it and Wachtmeister was made the hero of the hour .
 The war ended in 1790 with no gain for Sweden or Russia, but promotion to major-general for Wachtmeister . Sweden and Russia did not win the war, but the war ended with promotion .
 In 1792 Gustav III was assassinated by a conspiracy of army officers at a masked ball at the Royal Opera House . Gustav III died in 1792 at the hands of his army officers .
 Wachtmeister suffered no interruption to his career . His successor, Gustav IV Adolf, was as hostile to ideas of liberty as his father . Adolf's successor was Gustav III Adolf, who died in 1918 .
 With the French Revolution and the rise of Napoleon, times were changing . Subsequent service led to the death of many of the Frenchmen .
 Sweden's participation in a coalition against Napoleon in 1805 revealed how outdated the Swedish army had become . Wachtmeister fought in Pomerania during his time in the French army .
 The wounded aide-de-camp King Gustav rides up to inquire after Wachtmeister . He was deposed in a revolt against the king . The king deposed him .
 The aide-de-camp calmly leans his wounded arm on a rock as he explains to the king how he came to be shot . A Russian army was advancing into Sweden in 1809 as a Russian army advanced into the country .
 Wachtmeister ordered to land his troops behind Russian lines . The new king, Karl XIII, ordered his troops to land behind Russia's lines .
 Wachtmeister withdrew to the coast, where his forces were sheltered by naval guns . Meeting the Russians at Savar, his troops performed well, mounting a counterattack .
 Wachtmeister was considered not to have acted with sufficient boldness and soon retired to his estates . He was considered a man whose time was past .
 Russian flintlock was the standard weapon of 18th-century warfare in Europe . It was probably responsible for wounding Wachtmeister at the battle of Valkeala .
 The tunic sleeve was presumably cut by a surgeon preparing to remove the musket ball from Wachtmeister's arm after he was shot . The sleeve was cut by the surgeon when he removed the ball from his arm .
 Count Gustav Wachtmeister wore the tunic at the battle of Valkeala in Finland in 1789 . The tunic was worn by the Count of Gustav Wachmeister in Finland .
 Although wounded in the arm, Wachtmeister suffered no permanent disability . He continued to serve in the Swedish army for another two decades .
 A mix of aggressive nationalism and revolutionary enthusiasm propelled the French into a series of wars against most of the rest of Europe . The French became one of Europe's most powerful statesmen .
 Reformers such as Cuibert and Gribeauval met resistance from the French nobility, however, who defended their monopoly of the higher officer ranks .
 New military academies were created for the sons of the poorer nobility . Even they could mostly progress only in the artillery or engineers .
 After the revolution of 1789, large numbers of aristocratic officers emigrated . About 5,500 out of 9,500 by 1792 had emigrated to France .
 The officer corps was opened to all classes in 1790 . NCOs and junior officers were soon promoted to high rank .
 Guibert's theories on aggressive tactics and strategy were adopted in 1791 . New infantry regulations adopted by 1791 embraced his theories of aggressive tactics, strategy .
 In the period leading up to the French Revolution, France made determined efforts to reform its armed forces . France made efforts to regain military ascendancy in Europe .
 Army officer Jean-Baptiste de Gribeauval was responsible for a new artillery system . The new system had standardized guns for aggressive deployment on the battlefield .
 French declaration of war on Austria in April 1792 was motivated by little more than a desire to maintain popular enthusiasm for the revolution . France declared war against Austria in 1792 .
 It took little account of the state of the French army, which since 1789 had lost the majority of its officers as well as many regular soldiers . The French army had lost many officers and regular soldiers in 1789 .
 An appeal for volunteers partly made up the numbers of infantry but there was almost no cavalry . The supply system was in chaos and the numbers were made up by volunteers .
 An initial French advance into the Austrian Netherlands was a fiasco, with most of the volunteers fleeing the moment they came under fire . Most of the French advance was a disaster .
 The revolutionary government declared war on Prussia that summer . Undaunted by this, the revolutionary government declares war on Germany .
 The Austrians and Prussians were preoccupied with Poland, which they were preparing to partition with Russia . France was defeated in the Battle of Poland .
 Despite a bold declaration of support for Louis XVI in 1791, they had little interest in restoring his monarchical powers . Louis XVI was declared king of France in 1792 .
 Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick crossed the French frontier in August 1792 . After lengthy preparations, an army led by Duke Ferdinand crossed the border in August .
 It advanced as far as Valmy, where on September 20, the artillery of the old French royal army put up stiff enough resistance to persuade Brunswick to withdraw . Brunswick was forced to withdraw from the battle .
 The French army now returned to the offensive, again invading the Austrian Netherlands and defeating a smaller Austrian force at Jemappes . The French invasion of the Netherlands was the first of its kind .
 Despite these victories, France plunged deeper into political and military crisis . French President Nicolas Sarkozy's government has been in crisis mode for years .
 It declared war on the Dutch, British, and Spanish in 1793 . It increased its number of enemies by declaring war against the Dutch and Spanish .
 The introduction of conscription in February sparked uprisings in parts of the country that were already alienated by revolutionary policies, notably the Vendee . Some areas of the nation are already alienated from revolutionary policies .
 Royalists handed the naval port of Toulon to the British . French army was driven out of the Austrian Netherlands by the Austrians . Austrians drove the French army out of Austria Netherlands .
 Lazare Carnot, a military engineer, became Minister of War in August 1793 . Carnot was the first French minister of war to be French President .
 He oversaw the levee en masse, not only an extension of conscription to all men aged 18 to 25, but a general mobilization of the masses in aid of the war effort . The levee was not only conscription but also a general mobilization of the mass in aid to
 Carnot ensured that all new conscripts were integrated with the regular army . Arms supplies were expanded to equip them . Carnot also ensured that new recruits were integrated into the army .
 The rag-tag army of royalist rebels in the Vendee region of France flees government troops at Cholet in October 1793 .
 The pacification of the Vendee was utterly ruthless, with mass killing of women and children . Women and children were killed in the pacification .
 The cavalry was the part of the army worst hit by the revolution, which left it short of horses and experienced riders . Young soldiers won rapid promotion; for instance, Louis Hoche, a corporal in 1789, was a general by fall 1793 .
 Life for senior officers was precarious; the revolutionary government ruled by terror, and a general could easily lose his head to the guillotine for political or military failings . Life was precarious for senior French officers .
 A combination of ambitious commanders and armies swollen with fresh conscripts turned the tide of the war . But a combination of bold, ambitious commanders turned the tides of the conflict .
 In the second half of 1793, Toulon was retaken by Napoleon Bonaparte . The Vendee was also retaken, but the ruthless ""pacification"" of rebel areas would take another three years . The French Revolution was defeated in 1793 .
 The French Army of the North defeated the British and Austrians at Tourcoing in May 1794 . General Jean-Baptiste Jourdan's army of the Sambre-Meuse defeated the Austrians in June at the battle of Fleurus .
 French generals were executed in 1793-94 when the reign of terror in France was at its peak . A French general was executed in the French Revolution .
 Deputies were sent by the revolutionary government to keep watch on all officers on campaign . Deputies kept watch of all officers during the campaign .
 By 1795 the French had annexed the Austrian Netherlands, occupied the Rhineland, turned the Dutch Netherlands into the satellite Batavian Republic, and made peace with Prussia and Spain . The French annexed Austria and occupied the Netherlands .
 The -revolution had passed its virulent phase, with the end of the terror and the installation of the more moderate government of the Directory . There was no longer any military threat to France and the revolution had passed .
 The French lost none of their lust for war, however, which had turned into a self-sustaining system . The glory of war was the glory of the French .
 Guibert's theories of mobile warfare led to armies living off the land . The French armies were forced to live off their land in response to supply problems .
 As long as they campaigned on foreign territory, they cost little to maintain . They brought in great wealth through plundering conquered lands . As long they campaigned, they brought in little expense .
 Successful warfare brought glory to the regime, satisfied ambitious officers, and kept soldiers paid and fed . As well as exporting revolutionary principles, successful warfare brought .
 In 1796 the French embarked on fresh campaigns against Austria, giving Napoleon Bonaparte the chance to show his military genius . The French began the transition from the Revolutionary to the Napoleonic Wars .
 Napoleon's campaigns in Italy in 1796-97 brought the first phase of the Revolutionary Wars to a close, but left France still at war with Great Britain . Napoleon's campaign in Italy ended in 1797-97 .
 The following year Austria was forced to make peace on French terms, leaving France temporarily at peace on the European continent . Austria was made peace with France on the following year, leaving the French at peace .
 Britain remained at war with France, defeating the Spanish in a naval battle at Cape St. Charles .
 France had failed to land an army under General Hoche in Ireland in December 1796, but supported the United Irishmen uprising in 1798 . France supported the uprising in the spring of 1798 after failing to land troops in Ireland .
 The French were only able to land a small force in County Mayo, however, and could not prevent the British from crushing the Irish rebellion . The French failed to defeat the British in the 17th century .
 Between 1796 and 1800 Napoleon Bonaparte led two invasions of Italy and a spectacular expedition to Egypt . The rise of Napoleon was the birth of the French Revolution in France .
 Napoleon Bonaparte was born in Corsica in 1769 . He was sent to military college and then entered the artillery, where promotion was less dependent on high birth . Napoleon was a hero to the French army and people during the French Revolutionary Wars .
 Napoleon was promoted to full general in 1795 . Napoleon led loyalist forces in Paris and was rewarded by promotion to general . Napoleon was a French general in the French Revolution in the 17th century .
 In 1796 France launched an assault against Austria on the Rhine River and in northern Italy, where the Austrians fought in alliance with the Piedmontese Kingdom of Sardinia .
 Napoleon Bonaparte took command of the French Army of Italy in spring 1796 . The soldiers were short of pay, food, boots, and muskets .
 Napoleon's solution was to supply the needs of his army by defeating the enemy and living off occupied territory . Napoleon lived in occupied territory for the duration of the war . Napoleon's army was defeated by the enemy .
 He faced Austrian and Sardinian armies that together outnumbered his forces . The Kingdom of Sardinia included Piedmont in Italy's north .
 By attacking Sardinia separately, he drove Sardinia out of the war and forced the Austrians to retreat, allowing the French to occupy Milan . By attacking them separately, however, he swiftly drove the French out of Sardinia .
 Napoleon fought a series of campaigns against Austrian counter-offensives that showed his skill at concentrating his forces at the point of combat . Throughout the rest of the year, Napoleon fought against counter-offsives that show his skill .
 A decisive victory at the battle of Rivoli, in January 1797, further highlighted his tactical skill . It paved the way for the Army of Italy to threaten an attack over the Alps into south of Austria .
 Austria had won 'A* various battles in the south of Germany in 1796 . But now, rapidly losing their nerve, the Austrians sought an armistice . The Austrians lost their nerve and sought an end to the conflict .
 The action in Italy brought rich plunder for the Republic and glory for Napoleon . Napoleon was presented in popular prints as a romantic figure leading his soldiers from the front .
 The peace with Austria meant Napoleon was briefly unoccupied . Cairo taken from Napoleon's Cairo palace .
 An invasion across the English Channel was rejected as unfeasible, given the strength of the Royal Navy . Though France was still at war with Britain, an invasion was rejected by the British government .
 Egypt was officially a province of the Ottoman empire, though in effect ruled by the Mamelukes, descendants of Turkish slave soldiers . Egypt was ruled by descendants of slaves from Turkish slave-soldiers in the Ottoman Empire .
 If Egypt fell into French hands, it might give France Austrian musket . In 1798 Austria introduced a new flintlock musket to match the latest French model .
 The basic flintlock design did not change from the 17th to the 19th century . Improvements were made in reliability and rate of fire . The basic design of the flintlocks was not changed from 17th century to 19th .
 Egyptian campaign dates 1796-1800 and 1798-1801 . Egypt and central Italy threaten control of the eastern Mediterranean . Palestine also threaten British interests in India .
 The project pleased the leaders of the Directory because it would take a dangerously popular general and political rival away from Paris . The project was approved by the French Directory in 1881 .
 French Army of the Orient evaded Admiral Horatio Nelson's British Mediterranean fleet in 1798 . Sailing from Toulon in May 1798, the French army landed in Egypt in July .
 At the battle of the Pyramids the charges of the troops and British naval gunners were seen . The battle took place in Egypt in the early 1900s .
 Acre resisted a series of attacks by Napoleon, until he retreated to Egypt with his army struck down by plague . Acre fought back against Napoleon, but he was killed by plague in Egypt .
 The French advanced from Cairo and, though inferior in number, drove the Turks back with aggressive tactics . The Turks were defeated by the French, but the French were superior in number .
 By August 1799, however, France's successes in Egypt were overshadowed by defeats in Europe . France's success in Egypt was overshadowed by European defeats .
 French soldiers were killed at the battle of the Pyramids in 1798, under attack from 6,000 Mameluke cavalry . France faced a new coalition of hostile states, which France faced .
 Austrians and French met in northern Italy on June 14, 1800 . Battle of Marengo was dose-fought between the two sides . The meeting was the first meeting of the two nations .
 Mameluke cavalry proved powerless against French infantry squares and Napoleon was able to occupy Cairo . This painting by Louis Lejeune, who fought in the battle, depicts the surrender of Austrian soldiers .
 Admiral Nelson destroyed the French fleet in Aboukir Bay at the battle of the Nile . However, this success was immediately negated by Admiral Nelson's destruction of the French forces .
 Napoleon's long-term prospects were poor after his communications were cut and the Ottoman sultan declared war . The French were routed .
 He took the offensive nevertheless, heading north over Palestine to Acre in spring 1799 . He headed north over the border, heading for Acre .
 Ottoman invasion of 17th century included Russia as well as Austria and Britain . Ottoman invasion included Russia, Austria, and Britain.
 Russian general, Alexander Suvorov, routed French armies in series of victories in Italy ending at Novi in August . Archduke Charles of Austria drove the French back over the Rhine .
 Napoleon returned to France to play his part in the political and military crisis . Napoleon returned home to play a part in France's political crisis .
 Tsar Paul I pulled his country out of the war after the failure of an Anglo-Russian invasion of France's ally, the Batavian Republic . After a shattering loss in Switzerland for Russian forces, Russian forces retreated across the Alps .
 Napoleon took a force through the Alps from Switzerland and descended into Italy in May 1800 . Austrian General Michael von Melas was besieging Genoa when Napoleon entered Italy .
 The Austrians turned and attacked Napoleon at the battle of Marengo in northern Italy, on June 14 . The battle took place at the end of June 14, when Napoleon died .
 Napoleon had unwisely divided his army and was almost overwhelmed by superior numbers . General Louis Desaix, marching to the sound of the guns, brought back a division to support him . Napoleon was defeated by a division of French troops .
 Desaix was killed, but a cavalry charge commanded by Francois Kellermann won the battle for France . The battle was won by the French cavalry, which led the battle .
 Jean-Victor Moreau's Army of the Rhine won at Hohenlinden on December 3, 1800 . The battle took place in southern Germany in 1800 .
 Austria, now threatened from the west as well as from Italy in the south, made peace in February 1801 . Austria made peace with Italy in 1801, with Italy threatening Austria from west .
 A war-weary Britain eventually followed suit, signing the Treaty of Amiens in March 1802 . The treaty was signed by France and Britain in France .
 The French army left in Egypt by Napoleon was defeated by Britain in 1801 . After Napoleon's defeat the French army was defeated in Egypt .
 Muhammad Ali set himself up as Egypt's governor in 1805 . Muhammad Ali was an officer in the Ottoman forces . He was a member of the Egyptian royal family .
 Muhammad Ali crushed the Mamelukes and embarked on a modernization drive that made Egypt the most progressive economic and military power in the Muslim world . Muhammad Ali's success in Egypt has led the country to become the most powerful in the world .
 The work of the scholars and scientists whom Napoleon had brought with him on his expedition gave THE R0SETTA stone a boost to Egyptology .
 The Rosetta Stone is the key to reading ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics . It was discovered in 1799 by a French army engineer, Captain Pierre-Franqois Bouchard .
 The western half of northern and central Italy was absorbed by France . In the eastern half an Italian Republic was formed in 1802, with Napoleon as its president .
 Napoleon was crowned Emperor of the French in 1804 and proclaimed King of Italy . Italian troops served in many of his armies during his reign .
 By 1793 it had lost most of its experienced officers and had fallen into a state of indiscipline and demoralization . It had also fallen into an indiscipline state and was demoralized .
 The French suffered substantial losses of warships during the occupation of the Mediterranean naval base, Toulon, in August 1793 .
 Admiral Vilaret de Joyeuse succeeded in defending a crucial grain convoy, but went on to lose seven ships of the line . He succeeded in protecting the convoy but lost seven ships .
 The British naval budget had stood at £2.2 million in 1793, so this represents a tenfold increase in funds . The British navy budget was £2 million when it was set up in 1792 .
 For Britain, the Royal Navy was the key to national defense and to prosperity as a commercial and colonial power . The Royal Navy is now a major source of British prosperity .
 The French generally had ships that were better designed than the British . However, the Royal Navy remained superior in gunnery . The Royal Navy was superior to the French .
 By 1796, the Spanish and the Dutch had allied with France . The Royal Navy was coming under severe pressure .
 French general General Hoche sailed troops over to Ireland that December, although they failed to land . It was not able to prevent French general Hoche sailing troops over .
 11,000 British merchant ships were lost to enemy action between 1793 and 1815 . French privateers and frigates had begun to take their toll on merchant shipping .
 Mutinies staged at Spithead and the Nore in the spring of 1797 . Seamen pressed into the Royal Navy rebelled against their harsh conditions of service .
 Crisis Fleet actions in the 18th century were fought by two or three-deck ships of the line, exchanging broadsides and closed to board .
 Innovations in the late-18th century included the British carronades— powerful and lightweight shortrange, upper-deck guns— and copper sheathing hulls .
 The main French naval bases at Brest, Rochefort, and Toulon were kept under constant blockade by the Royal Navy . The British naval blockade kept the main French ports under constant pressure .
 Copenhagen was strategically vital to the British as it controlled trade with the Baltic, which was a source of essential naval supplies . Copenhagen was a strategically vital location for the British in the world .
 Battles were fought between single ships . The exchange of broadsides was often followed by boarding and hand-to-hand fighting . Many battles were fought by single ships, with many battles fought between ships .
 The British frigate Ambush and the French corvette La Bayonnaise engage in 1798 . Ambush was overcome by the British and French forces .
 St. Vincent and the Dutch defeated each other at Camperdown in 1797 . The Dutch defeated the French in Camperdowns in 1798 .
 Vincent was the major influence in the restoration of discipline and improved standards among naval commanders . Vincent, the son of Vincent, was a major influence on the British Navy .
 Horatio Nelson emerged as a British national hero with his stunning victory at the battle of the Nile in 1798 . Nelson's victory in the Nile was a major success for the British Empire .
 Nelson led his 14 ships of the line into Aboukir Bay, where the French fleet was at anchor . Nelson had failed to prevent Napoleon landing an army in Egypt .
 A British fleet was sent to pressure Denmark into quitting a league of Armed Neutrality, led by Russia, which threatened to deny Britain access to vital naval supplies .
 Sailors used them to support musket-armed marines in boarding encounters . Sailors also used them in support of musketeers in boarding battles .
 Gibraltar to Britain Trafalgar A Black Sea Constantinople 1805 ** Algeciras Bay 1801 M e d} Tunis Malta . Malta Jun 1798: occupied by Napoleon . Malta June 1798 : occupied by Napoleon. Malta .
 British command of the sea brought far-flung territorial gains in the peace settlement at the end of the war . Malta in the Mediterranean, Cape Town at the southern tip of Africa, to Tobago in the West Indies, and Mauritius in the Indian Ocean .
 France remained the world's second largest naval power, but had neither the will nor the resources to tackle Britain at sea . The French navy was the second largest in the world, but was unable to take on the UK .
 Steam-driven ironclads supplanted wooden sailing ships and explosive shells began to replace solid shot . Explosive shells replaced solid shot in the early 1900s .
 The British naval dominance was not seriously contested until the rise of American, Japanese, and German naval power in the late 19th and early 20th centuries .
 Nelson sailed into Copenhagen harbor and, ignoring an order to withdraw, battered the Danish fleet and bombarded the city . Nelson bombed out of Copenhagen harbor in 1877 .
 Nelson's final triumph over a combined French and Spanish fleet at Trafalgar in October 1805 was decisive . The British mainland was under threat . Nelson's last triumph over the combined French, Spanish and French fleet was decisive in the battle .
 Napoleon planned to invade Britain, but needed temporary naval superiority in the Channel in order to ferry his army safely across from Boulogne to southern England . Napoleon's army needed to be able to reach southern England safely .
 Admiral Villeneuve, commander of the French Mediterranean squadron, needed to join up with their Atlantic squadron not avert the French invasion of Britain . Napoleon had already abandoned the project, as he needed to fight the Austrians and Russians .
 Trafalgar did ensure that there would be no further attempt to organize a cross-Channel invasion . But it also ensured that there were no further attempts to invade Britain .
 Napoleon never lost hope of overcoming British naval superiority, pumping vast resources into shipbuilding right up to ports placed a heavy burden on men and resources . Britain retains naval superiority in battle of the Great War .
 The Royal Navy's insatiable manpower requirements led to abuse of the press-gang system . The press gang system was a form of selective conscription . It enlisted too many landsmen from jails and courthouses .
 The policy increased the gap in teamwork and skills between the two navies . On the other hand, by giving constant exercise at sea to British crews and denying the same to French crews bottled up in port, the policy increased .
 The overall impact of sea power on the course of the war was significant but limited . The impact on sea power was limited, but it was significant, says historian .
 HORATIO NELSON, DISPATCH BEFORE TRAFALGAR, OCTOBER 9, 1805 then under British blockade in Brest . Nelson was sent to Brest in 1805 .
 The French would then have the concentration of naval strength required . Together with their Spanish allies, the French would have the strength needed .
 Villeneuve succeeded in luring Nelson into a pursuit to the West Indies, then dashed back across the Atlantic . Nelson was killed in a gun battle in the early 1900s, but was never found .
 Instead of freeing the Brest fleet from blockade, he joined the Spanish in Cadiz . The Spanish were able to block the blockade of Brest from Spain .
 The long war continued to demand an exceptional effort from the Royal Navy . It was the first time the British Navy had been involved in the war .
 In 1807, the British had to take prompt action against Denmark, attacking Copenhagen for a second time, in order to stop the substantial Danish fleet fighting as an ally of France . The British attacked Copenhagen for the second time in 1807 . The Danish fleet fought for France against the British
 The policy of keeping a permanent, close blockade of French secured its trade routes . The policy was to keep the French out of reach for trade .
 Britain was able to sustain an army in Portugal and Spain during the Peninsular War of 1808-14 . It also allowed Britain to sustain a British army in Spain and Portugal during the war .
 The amphibious landings at Walcheren in the Netherlands in 1809 were not a success . However, the amphibious operations on mainland Europe, most notably the landings, were unsuccessful .
 Nelson's high-risk tactics could easily have gone awry . Despite the scale of the eventual British victory over a combined French and Spanish fleet, this was a desperately hard-fought battle .
 The combined Franco-Spanish fleet ended up under blockade in Cadiz, in southwest Spain, after a failed attempt to organize naval cover for a French invasion of England .
 Admiral PierreCharles Villeneuve led 33 ships of the line out of port on October 19, 1805, and sailed toward Gibraltar . The ships were led to Gibraltar by Admiral Villeneve .
 Nelson's blockade force was on paper inferior— he had 27 ships of the line when battle was joined . Nelson saw this as an opportunity to deliver a mortal blow to the seapower of Britain's enemies .
 The British attacked on the morning of October 21, when the two fleets were off Cape Trafalgar, south of Cadiz . The British attack took place in the early hours of that morning .
 Nelson arranged his ships in two columns sailing at right angles to the Franco-Spanish line, which was conventionally organized into vanguard or van , center, and rear squadrons . Nelson's ships were organized into two columns .
 Nelson planned for his columns to break through the enemy line in the center and rear, creating a ""pell-mell" fight in which his superior gunnery would prevail . Nelson planned to use his superior firepower to win the battle .
 Nelson feigned to head toward the van, but checked back to attack the center . The enemy van would find itself left out of the battle until later . Nelson feigns to head to the van but checks back and attacks the van .
 The drawback of Nelson's scheme was that his fleet had to make their approach with the forward part of their ships exposed to enemy broadsides . The simultaneous bring of all guns on one side of a ship was the result of the scheme .
 Nelson's beet would come under Bre without being able to defend itself . As his ships could not return Bre across the bow or stern of the enemy, this meant that Nelson's beef could not defend itself from Bre .
 With only a light wind, the approach was agonizingly slow . With only light wind the approach to the finish was agonisingly slow. There was no rush to break the line .
 Nelson led one column on board FIMS Victory, Admiral Collingwood the other on FfMS Royal Sovereign . Nelson led the column on the FMS Victory and the FimS Royal Sovereign respectively . Nelson was on board the Royal Sovereign at the time of the event .
 Both succeeded in sailing through the Franco-Spanish line, raking through the length of the enemy's ships with broadsides .
 The battle resolved into a series of close-quarters engagements in which British broadsides prevailed over an enemy who fought with the utmost courage and determination .
 The exception was the Franco-Spanish van, which was slow to beat back against the wind toward the fighting . It then unaccountably failed to fully engage the British fleet .
 Nelson was shot by a marksman in the rigging of the French ship Redoutable . Early in the afternoon Nelson was killed by a shot fired by the marksman . Nelson was the first to be shot in the British ship .
 By the evening 17 Franco-Spanish ships had been captured; one had exploded and sunk . One of the ships was captured; another was sunk by the explosion .
 He deployed artillery, heavy cavalry, and infantry columns aggressively on the field in search of victory .
 Between 1801 and 1805 France faced no enemy on land, giving Napoleon Bonaparte an opportunity to organize his forces for the titanic struggles that lay ahead . The French were able to organize their forces and prepare for the battles they faced .
 Land warfare in Europe ended with the Treaty of Luneville, signed by France and Austria in 1801 . Land warfare ended in Europe in the wake of the Second World War .
 Peace between France and Britain only lasted from March 1802 to May 1803 . Peace between the two only lasted between 1802 and 1803, ending in 1803.
 Napoleon had his Grande Armee camped at Boulogne ready for a cross-Channel invasion . Napoleon had crowned himself emperor in December 1804 .
 It was a formidable force, its numbers swelled by annual conscription . Conscripts were highly trained, with experienced commanders bearing the newly created rank of marshal .
 Austria joined Russia and the lesser powers of Sweden and Naples in an anti-French coalition financed by Britain . The coalition was formed in August 1805, 1805 .
 Napoleon abandoned his plans for a British invasion, instead marching his Grande Armee from Boulogne across Germany to strike at Austria . Napoleon thus abandoned plans to invade Austria .
 His aim was to defeat the Austrians before they could combine with the Russian army under General Kutuzov, which was advancing west to join its ally . The Austrians were defeated by the Russians .
 Napoleon's Grande Armee numbered almost 200,000 troops, organized into seven all-arms corps . Each corps was capable of independent maneuver under the orders of one of Napoleon's marshals . Napoleon was the first French president to take command of the French army .
 The rapid movement this vast army achieved was peerless, a result of forced marches, self-sufficiency without the encumbrance of a supply train, and skillful organization by the general staff .
 Austrian General Mack surrendered a 25,000-strong force without a major battle . General Mack had crossed Bavaria to Ulm, but was encircled by the French .
 As the emperor pursued the enemy eastward, the Grande Armee's position became increasingly precarious . But as the enemy pursued the emperor, the position became more precarious .
 The assault, lasting for 14 hours, did not see a decisive result . The assault lasted for an exhausting 14 hours . It was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in the assault .
 Napoleon gambled on bringing his enemies to battle quickly and deciding the war with a single crushing victory . Napoleon gambles on bringing enemies to war quickly and ending the war in crushing victory, he says .
 Emperor Francis of Austria and Tsar Alexander of Russia fought in Austerlitz on December 2 . The battle was fought in Austria, Austria and Russia .
 Napoleon defeated them in a desperately contested battle . Napoleon's generals taking the offensive, holding their initial attack and then delivering counterblows . Napoleon defeated the Frenchmen in the battle .
 After this loss the Austrians sued for peace, while the Russians withdrew into Poland . The Austrians and the Russians were victorious in the war . After the war, the Russians retreated to Poland .
 Throughout this campaign Prussia remained on the sidelines, unsure where its advantage lay . Prussia had remained the sidelines of the campaign .
 Prussia's army, once the envy of Europe, was no longer a match for the French . The Prussian army was once considered the most powerful in Europe .
 The Grande Armee's capacity to fight independently was shown at the simultaneous battles of Jena and Auerstadt . The Grand Army was shown to be able to fight independent at the times .
 Napoleon sent most of his army—almost 100,000 FRANCE men—to fight a small Prussian force at Jena, while Marshal Davout's corps of 26,000 confronted the 64,000-strong principal Prussian army at Auerstadt .
 Despite his numerical inferiority, Davout e d 1 drove the Prussian army from the field . Davout d 1 led the French army out of the field with a victory .
 They dissolved in a general rout, and Napoleon occupied Berlin . Pursued by French cavalry, they dissolved .
 The Russians and winter weather were Napoleon's enemies . Napoleon's winter weather was Napoleon's greatest enemy . Napoleon was killed in the Battle of the Russian Revolution .
 Key made peace at Tilsit at the end of the 18th century . Key made a peace pact with the Roman Empire of Romania .
 In 1809 the Austrians tried to throw off this domination by declaring war on the French again . The Austrians declared war against the French in 1809 .
 With Prussia failing to assist and Russia hostile, Austria had little hope . Austria was forced to rely on Prussia and Russia for help .
 French cavalry charge, 10,000 strong, crushed the Russian infantry and overran their cannon . In a savage clash in a snowstorm, the day was won by a French cavalry force .
 The French suffered some 25,000 casualties, Eylau was no decisive victory . With the French suffering some . casualties, the French suffered no decisive victories .
 The number muskets and other small arms manufactured in France during the period of Napoleon's empire, 1804-14 . However, after their defeat at Friedland in the summer, the Russians were forced to retreat .
 Archduke Charles caught Napoleon's army halfway through a river crossing and forced him to abandon the bridgehead . Aspern-Essling in May forced Napoleon to abandon his army in a river .
 Napoleon’s favorite field artillery weapon was the 12-pounder, first introduced before the French Revolution by Gribeauval . Napoleon's campaign of 1805-07 French victory was the French victory .
 Napoleon never succeeded in stabilizing his command of Europe, partly because Britain remained at war, but also because his policies bred opposition and resistance . Napoleon's policies bred resistance and opposition to his policies .
 Napoleonic France had absorbed the southern Netherlands, the west bank of the Rhine, and a large part of Italy into its territory . The French Empire ruled over the Netherlands, Italy and the Netherlands .
 He placed family members on thrones and made a marriage alliance by wedding Marie Louise of Austria of Austria . The king also made an alliance with Austria by marrying Marie Louise .
 Marshal of France, Jean-Baptiste Jules Bernadotte, became crown prince of Sweden in 1810 . He was born in France and became the crown prince in Sweden .
 From 1806 the emperor installed the Continental System to destroy British commerce, banning all trade between Europe and Britain . The Continental System was installed by the emperor in 1806 .
 From 1807 France's army underwent changes that lessened its fighting efficiency . The changes were made to reduce the effectiveness of the French army .
 Conscripts no longer had proper training, and a decreasing percentage of its troops were ethnic French . Conscriptions were no longer having proper training .
 During the Peninsular War, Cadiz was the seat of Spanish power, and had been besieged by the French for over a year . Cadiz had been the Spanish seat of power during the war .
 Though the French lost the battle, the British and Spanish failed to exploit their victory . The French army, under Marshal Victor, reoccupied their siege lines .
 The Peninsular War of 1808-14 contributed substantially to Napoleon's downfall . Although a sideshow in the overall context of the Napoleonic Wars, the war was a major factor in Napoleon's fall .
 For the British, it was a chance to mount a sustained campaign on mainland Europe . The British, for example, were able to take on the continent's mainland mainland .
 Irish-born Arthur Wellesley first distinguished himself fighting the Kingdom of Mysore and the Marathas in India . The Duke of Wellington was the first British general to become a British general .
 His success in the Peninsular War made him a British national hero . His role in the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815 was enhanced by his role in defeat at Waterloo .
 Usually a cautious general, he was also capable of bold attacking strokes, as at Salamanca in 1812 . Usually cautious general he was often cautious .
 He was never careless of his men's lives and took only necessary risks, he said . He said: "He never took any unnecessary risks. He never took unnecessary risks"
 The Peninsular War was a result of Napoleon's interference in Iberia . Napoleon's initial French invasion of Portugal followed by an attempt to grab the Spanish throne .
 In 1804 the Spanish Bourbon monarchy allied itself with France against the British . The Spanish Bourbon monarch allied itself to France against Britain .
 Napoleon placed an embargo on all trade between Europe and Britain . Two years later Napoleon initiated his Continental System, placing a trade embargo on Europe .
 French army, helped by Spanish, occupied Portugal in 1807, obliging the Portuguese royal family to flee to Brazil . To enforce this blockade, the French army helped by the Spanish, invaded Portugal .
 The presence of French forces in the Iberian peninsula left Spain at France's mercy .
 By May 1808, French soldiers had seized control of key Spanish fortresses and occupied Madrid . The French occupied Madrid, Spain, in 1808 .
 Napoleon bullied the Bourbons into abdicating, but his attempt to place his brother, Joseph, on the Spanish throne provoked an uprising . Napoleon's attempt to put his brother Joseph on the throne provoked a revolt .
 May 2, 1808, the population of Madrid rebelled against the French garrison occupying their city . Madrid was occupied by the French at the beginning of the 1808 revolt .
 The uprising in the Spanish capital was swiftly and brutally suppressed, but the insurrection spread across Spain . Provincial councils organized military resistance to the Spanish government .
 In mid-July a 20,000-strong French army corps surrendered after being encircled by forces of the Spanish regular army at the battle of Bailen . The Spanish army encirched the French corps at the end of July .
 Britain landed an army under Arthur Wellesley in Portugal in Portugal and defeated Marshal Junot's French forces at Vimeiro . Meanwhile, Britain landed a army under Wellesley under Marshal Wellesley .
 Junot was isolated by the uprising in Spain, and felt his situation was untenable . Junot felt that his situation had become untenable after the uprising . He felt that he was isolated in Spain and felt that it was his only option .
 He sought an accord with more senior British generals who had replaced Wellesley for the time being . Wellesley was replaced by Wellesley, who died in 1881 .
 Junot's army was generously but foolishly repatriated to France, with its arms and booty, on board British ships .
 British Army in Portugal numbered 30,000 men . British column under Sir John Moore forced to flee toward northern Spanish coast . Surviving survivors were evacuated by Royal Navy from La Coruna in January 1809 .
 Napoleon left the Iberian peninsula for Germany, where Austria was presenting a fresh challenge to his dominance of the continent . Napoleon left Spain for Germany in 1877 .
 The prospect of a swift French victory in the peninsula soon evaporated . Allied counterattacks were counter-attacked by the French .
 The Spanish army sustained a stubborn resistance, while the British army, under Wellesley, with Portuguese troops in support, denied the French control of Portugal . Wellesley and Wellesley were able to defeat the French .
 A combined push toward Madrid by the British and Spanish in the summer of 1809 resulted in a costly victory over the French at Talavera, but then had to be abandoned as further French forces approached . The push had been abandoned after the French forces advanced .
 France needed to devote ample forces to garrisoning territory it occupied . France needed a strong presence in its occupied territory .
 Its armies were harassed constantly by guerrilla bands, while campaigning against the tenacious Spanish regular armies in Spain as well as the British and Portuguese in Portugal .
 Wellington's victory at Salamanca, on July 22,1812, was a turning point . The French marshals found the rapid, decisive movement of army corps, in the established Napoleonic manner, was the key .
 Like all battles of the period, it was fought in an obscuring fog of gunpowder smoke . The countryside was increasingly denuded of food and fodder . The battle fought in a fog of smoke .
 Soldiers foraging for supplies were vulnerable to ambush by guerrillas . But soldiers had to seize what they needed from hostile villagers by brute force .
 Wellington was able to depend on supply by sea through Lisbon and cautiously and carefully organizing his supply and communication routes when advancing with his men away from the coastal regions .
 In 1810 a French army commanded by Marshal Massena invaded Portugal, but in September came up against the strong defensive lines of Torres Vedras that Wellington had prepared in front of Lisbon . The French army came up with a surprise surprise at the strength of the defence .
 Supply problems forced Massena to withdraw toward the Spanish border . The following spring, supply problems forced the Spanish army to withdraw . Massena was forced to withdraw from the border .
 Wellington's pursuit was cautious, for the French always had the potential to assemble forces large enough to shatter him . Wellington was cautious in his pursuit for the future .
 Indecisive battles with heavy casualties on both sides were fought at Fuentes de Ofioro and Albuera in May 1811 . Heavy casualties were fought in May .
 Henry Shrapnel's invention was a hollow iron sphere packed with explosive powder and musket balls . The British concentrated on reducing the pivotal fortresses of Badajoz .
 A time fuse was designed to ignite the explosive when the sphere, fired from an ordinary cannon, was above the heads of enemy soldiers . The sphere was intended to be fired from a cannon above enemy heads .
 The airburst hurled musket balls into the musketeers' ranks to deadly effect . It was the first airburst known to have hit the British troops .
 Shrapnel MUSKET BALLS had far greater range than canister, until then the standard way of firing multiple projectiles from a cannon . Until then, the standard . way of . firing multiple . projectiles from . a cannon. was . standard way to fire multiple projectiles . from a
 First used by British Army in 1808 during Peninsular War . Described by Wellington as ""a great benefit,"" it was first used by the British Army .
 War left Spain and Portugal devastated, economically backward and politically unstable . After the war, Portugal and Spain were economically backward, politically unstable.
 After the fall of Badajoz, Wellington advanced northward through Spain . The British enter France .
 In July 1812, at Salamanca, he decisively defeated Marshal Marmont in a battle that revealed an unexpected flair for bold opportunistic attack . The 1812 battle was the culmination of a series of battles in Spain .
 The French withdrew from southern Spain and abandoned Madrid to concentrate their forces against Wellington . The Spanish capital was occupied by the Spanish army in 1841 .
 Wellington was, in theory, outnumbered two to one by Spanish and Portuguese regulars . Even with Portuguese and Spanish regulars attached to his army, Wellington was outnumbered 2 to one .
 Spanish guerrillas were increasingly active, and French morale was low . But Spanish guerillas were also active, with French morale low .
 In spring 1813, Wellington resumed the offensive, pressing toward the French border . Wellington resumed his offensive against France .
 Many Spanish and Portuguese who fought in the Peninsula War embraced liberalism and resisted the reimposition of absolutist monarchy . He attacked an army .
 In Spain King Ferdinand VII faced a liberal revolt in 1820 that started the first of a series of civil wars that was to plague Spain throughout the 19th century .
 In Portugal liberals imposed a constitution on the king, who had fled to Brazil during the war . The king was forced to flee to Brazil, where he had fled during the conflict .
 Portugal's liberals won a civil war against a conservative reaction in 1828-34 . The Portuguese liberals won the war against the conservative reaction . The liberals were victorious in the civil war between 1828 and 1934 .
 Spanish colonies in the Americas were thrown into turmoil by the weakening of Spanish rule during the war and the conflicting political currents after it . The Spanish colonies were thrown in turmoil by weakening of the Spanish rule .
 In Brazil the son of the Portuguese monarch refused to return from exile and became ruler of an independent Brazil as Emperor Pedro I from 1822 . In Brazil he was known as Emperor Pedro I, who ruled an independent country .
 Wellington was ill-equipped for siege operations, which were a rarity in the Napoleonic Wars . Wellington succeeded in taking Ciudad Rodrigo by storm in January 1812 and Badajoz in April .
 The assault on the walls showed British soldiers at their best . The aftermath of the capture of the fortresses did not, degenerating into under King Joseph at Vitoria in June .
 The following October the British forces crossed the Pyrenees into southwest France . By the time Napoleon abdicated, in April 1814, they were fighting for the city of Toulouse .
 The Peninsular War had been a drain upon French manpower, tying down troops who otherwise might have been available for the struggle against Prussia, Russia, and Austria . The French government was forced to withdraw troops from the Spanish capital .
 At one time communication on the battlefield was limited to what soldiers could directly see and hear of each other while fighting .
 Flags and banners provided an effective means of visually communicating commands . Flags, banners were used to communicate with command commands .
 The French navy introduced number flags in the mid18th century . Originally these were simple, but flag codes were substantially improved in the 18th Century .
 This allowed many more increasingly complex messages to be transmitted . This allowed them to be more complex and more complex messages .
 Developments in optics such as high-quality telescopes and binoculars greatly increased the distance over which visual signals could be sent . Long-range signals can be sent over long distances .
 All visual communication suffered from the fact that poor weather conditions and smoke often obscured the battlefield . Poor weather conditions often obscured battlefield communication .
 battlefields were blanketed in smoke as soon as the firing started . This difficulty proved to be especially acute in the gunpowder era, when battlefields had to be blanketed .
 This painting depicts soldiers marching into the battle of Waterloo in 1815 . Napoleonic drummer boy .
 In the British Army, drummer boys accompanied their regiments into battle communication .
 The role of the messenger, whether traveling on foot, on horseback, or on a motorcycle, has remained prominent . Regardless of the advances in military communication, however, the role of messenger remains prominent .
 Even at sea in the era of sail, small boats flitted from ship to ship in the heat of battle delivering orders and messages .
 In the thick of battle, commanders often sent a series of soldiers with the same message, hoping that at least one would make it through . Carrying messages on the battlefield was notoriously dangerous work .
 Communication over longer distances developed in ingenious ways . Pre-electric communication developed in the 1930s . Communication over long distances developed over long-distance .
 By applying the principle of a chain of communication, it was possible to transmit messages with remarkable speed over long distances with very limited technology .
 System of fire beacons built around the English coast gave rapid warning of the approach of the Spanish Armada in 1588 .
 A widely spaced line of warships, each stationed within telescope range of its neighbor on each side, could transmit a flag-coded message in a few minutes .
 This detail from the Bayeux tapestry shows a young boy delivering a message to William the Conqueror during the battle of Hastings .
 Command on the battlefield was mostly exercised by a variety of visual and auditory signals before the 20th century . Command was exercised by visual signals, not auditory signals . Command is used to communicate signals to communicate with soldiers .
 For small units, agreed and understood hand gestures were effective when operating with stealth, changing to shouted commands once fighting was out in the open . Hand gestures were used to communicate with small units .
 Brass instruments such as trumpets and bugles were widely used to signal simple commands . By World War I, the replacement of gunpowder by smokeless propellant and explosive had improved visibility . The sheer scale of the battlefield made it difficult to make use of visual signaling .
 Color-coded signal rockets were effectively used in World War I trench warfare . The rockets were used by infantry calling for artillery support .
 Copper bugle was used by Trumpet-Major Henry Joy of the 17th Light Dragoons at the battle of Balaclava during the Crimean War .
 On October 25,1854, Joy sounded the Charge for the Heavy Brigade . A mirror that can be used to flash sunlight over great distances is a mirror .
 The most effective form of pre-electric long-range communication was probably the semaphore system (an alphabet signaling system) developed by French inventor Claude Chappe in the early 1790s .
 Semaphore stations were built during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars, primarily by France and Britain . They used paddles mounted on large pivoting arms as visual signals . Semaphores were used to send signals to the main naval ports in London .
 The chief disadvantage of the system was its inflexibility . It could convey messages only where lines of linked stations had been built . The system was inflexible .
 Long-distance communication continued to be conveyed no faster than a ship could sail, a horse could run, or a pigeon could fly . Carrier pigeons were an important means of communication in armies into World War I and beyond .
 The electric age brought inventions that revolutionized civilian and military communications . Increased range and increased range among the inventions of the era .
 Although the telegraph was extremely useful for long-distance transmitting, it did not serve on battlefields, which at that point in time were not extensive enough for such technology to be appropriate .
 Field telephone was in principle a flexible mobile system allowing units engaging the enemy to keep in contact with commanders in the rear on the ever-expanding modern battlefield .
 Telephone cables are vulnerable to artillery shells, and advancing troops often found their communications severed . As such it was an essential item of equipment for all armies in World War I .
 The field telephone remained a useful communication tool through World War II into the contemporary age . Field telephone was a useful communications tool through WWII into the modern age .
 Wireless communication was primarily used by navies . Developed in the early 20th century .
 It also played an important part in the naval war in World War I . The opportunity it presented for admiralties to interfere with the command of operations at sea was not always beneficial .
 Air-ground radio communications first developed in World War I to allow spotter aircraft to communicate with artillery . Ground stations were used for communication with bomber aircraft and airship airships .
 Improvements in radio allowed reliable voice communication between tanks and aircraft . The basis was laid for a new era of fast-moving warfare in which aircraft provided close air support for ground forces .
 Airmen could also be guided to targets by ground controllers, as well as receiving orders from their squadron commander and sharing what information they could see .
 In World War II, radios coordinated everything from U-boat operations to fighter interception of incoming bomber aircraft . radios coordinated U.S. submarine operations and fighter interception .
 The main drawback of radio was the ease with which signals could be intercepted by the enemy .
 A sudden cluster of radio signals might indicate a squadron of bombers taking off or a fleet setting to sea . And assumptions about enemy movements can be made from the volume of radio traffic alone .
 Global communication systems using satellites and computers have brought the potential for coordination and control of large-scale military operations to a new level . In the post-World War II era, global communication systems are using satellites, computers and computers .
 Control centers use many computers to sort through and analyze a vast input of information and generate precise commands . Control centers also use computers to analyze and create precise commands.
 Any soldier can potentially be in contact with a commander, anywhere in the world . Any soldier could potentially contact a commander anywhere from around the world.
 The modern soldier also has access to the latest CPS technology to plot his exact location . Although map and compass reading are still required skills, the modern soldier can use the CPS technology .
 Bell Telephone Company created in 1877 . Stock in the company soars from $50 to over $1,000 a share within three years . Bell Telephone Co. was created in the same year .
 Reid telephones are employed by the U.S. Army for the first time in military operations during the Spanish-American War .
 JSTARS is an airborne command and control system . Operation Desert Storm demonstrates the effectiveness of JSTERS .
 The Russian economy suffered from the French-imposed embargo on trade with Britain . The embargo was known as the Continental System, known as Continental System .
 Napoleon's creation of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw in 1807 and his expansion of the state in 1809 provided a threat to Russian control of Polish lands on its western frontier .
 By 1811 Tsar Alexander had withdrawn from his agreements with France and Napoleon had decided to subdue Russia by force . Napoleon had taken control of Russia in 1811 . Napoleon decided to take over Russia from Russia in force .
 Napoleon's downfall was warfare on an epic scale, unmatched in Europe before the 20th century . The catastrophic invasion of Russia in 1812 to defeat by the British and Prussians at Waterloo in 1815 was the downfall of Napoleon's reign . Napoleon's defeat was a major event in
 Armies numbering hundreds of thousands battled to subdue him and end two decades of conflict . Armies of hundreds of millions battled to defeat him, ending decades of war .
 By the time the first battle was fought, at Smolensk in August, the French supply line had broken down . Thousands of soldiers were dropping out through hunger, fatigue and disease .
 The battle was indecisive, although the Russian army again fell back, ceding Smolensk . The battle ended in a stalemate, but the Russians were victorious .
 The emperor's razor fell into British hands after his defeat at Waterloo . The razor was given to the British at the end of the war .
 Napoleon assembled an army of around 600,000 soldiers for an invasion of Russia in the summer of 1812 . Napoleon had assembled a large force of around 6,000 troops .
 About a half of them were from France, although even these included numerous men from recently annexed regions that were not ethnically French . About half of the men included men from recent annexed regions .
 The rest were troops exacted from client states such as the German Confederation of the Rhine, the Kingdom of Italy, and the Polish Duchy of Warsaw .
 France's reluctant allies, Prussia and Austria, also provided contingents that advanced on the flanks of Napoleon's army . Prussia, Austria and Prussia were among those who advanced .
 Napoleon knew that such a host would find it impossible to survive off the land in Russia . Napoleon made complex supply arrangements, but these were adequate only for a short campaign . Napoleon's supply arrangements were only adequate for the short campaign.
 Fie envisaged crossing the border, bringing the Russians to battle, defeating them, and imposing a humiliating peace . Fie wanted to bring Russia to battle and defeat them, he said .
 Napoleon continued his advance toward Moscow, reasoning that the Russians would feel bound to defend the city . The cautious Russian generals withdrew ahead of Napoleon, drawing him deeper into a costly victory . Napoleon continued to advance, reasoning correctly that the city would not be defended .
 Kutuzov, newly appointed to command the country's forces, took a stand at the village of Borodino . The veteran general is newly appointed as the new head of the armed forces in Russia .
 70,000 from both sides were killed or wounded in a single day as France overcame the Russian defensive position by frontal assault . What came next was mass slaughter .
 Napoleon had his victory, but it did not produce the result he expected . Napoleon's victory was a surprise, but the result was not expected .
 The Russian general kept his army in being, and even when the French occupied Moscow, Tsar Alexander refused to make peace . Even when he was occupied, he refused to stop his army .
 Napoleon could not provide for his army in Moscow, especially after part of the city burned down . Napoleon was forced to leave his troops in the city .
 The French began a withdrawal in mid-October after being shadowed by the Russian army . The French withdrew from the Russian-occupied Crimea in October .
 Surviving French troops were driven by hunger to eat their remaining horses, harassed by Cossack skirmishers, frozen once the winter snows set in . The surviving French troops became ragged, skeletal figures .
 After the catastrophic invasion of Russia in 1812, Napoleon could no longer resist his enemies in Spain and Central Europe . The defeat of France led to the defeat of the French Empire .
 Napoleon's military and political career was at an end after defeat at Waterloo . But the world emerged much changed from the wars the emperor had fought . Napoleon died in 1881 at the age of 31 .
 At the Congress of Vienna in 1814-15, the victorious powers returned Europe to the rule of the old dynasties . The victorious powers in Vienna returned Europe back to the old dynasty .
 Overall, the Napoleonic Wars had left France greatly diminished as a European power . Britain unchallenged as the world's most prominent naval power .
 Surrendering to a British naval squadron on board HMS Bellerophon in July 1815, he was interned for three weeks before being sent to the remote Atlantic island of St. St. Louis .
 In 1813 he built a new army of fresh French conscripts, Poles, and Germans, ready to battle as Prussia, Austria, and Sweden allied with Russia and Britain .
 Napoleon looked set to defeat his enemies again despite the odds, but in October's three-day battle of Leipzig, the weight of forces against him proved set . Napoleon was a ruler on the wane at the end of his reign .
 In December the anti-French coalition agreed to pursue the total defeat of Napoleon and invaded France . The coalition invaded France, already penetrated by the British from Spain during the Peninsular War .
 Napoleon once more rebuilt his army, calling up Frenchmen from the age of 16 to 60 . But there was scant enthusiasm for the draft and he could held little more than 100,000 . Napoleon rrA OOO ** ie number °f — ) VJ .
 At the end of March 1814, Paris was occupied by the Allies . He fought a brilliant series of defensive battles against the invading armies .
 The victors allowed him an honorable exile as ruler of the small Mediterranean island of Elba . He was exiled from the island after the defeat of the French Revolution .
 Napoleon seized the offensive, hoping to repulse his enemies before they L_ united . Gathering an army of young and old, Napoleon seized on the offensive . Napoleon's army was young, old and old .
 In June he invaded Belgium, attacking the armies of the Duke of Wellington and the Prussian general Gebhard Bliicher . In June, he attacked the armies in Belgium .
 After repulsing them separately on June 16 at Quatre-Bras and Ligny, he was beaten by the two together at Waterloo two days later . He was beaten twice by the pair at Waterloo and again in the French capital .
 The majority of his soldiers died, either through hardship or enemy action . His soldiers were either killed by hardship or by enemy action.
 Nowhere are the complexities of war's history so clearly displayed as they are in armor . Nowhere in the world is the complexity of war so clearly shown in armor. Nowhere is the complexities displayed as clearly displayed in armor?
 Trends have depended as much on the materials and the fabricating skills available, on tactical factors, and on the type of weapons likely to be deployed against the wearer . Trends depend on materials, the skills and the materials available, and tactical factors .
 A Roman legionary's lorica segmentata was made of iron strips laced together with leather cords for flexibility as well as strength . A legionary legionary made the strips of iron and leather for flexibility and strength .
 This medieval Russian armor shows clearly the influence of the Mongols in its overlapping scales and conical helmet . QJ
 The brigandine was a canvas or leather doublet with small plates of steel riveted inside . It was made of leather and canvas with small steel plates inside .
 The plate armor worn by a European knight in the 1 5th century was made of steel, fashioned by skilled metalworkers . A lighter alternative to plate armor, it was worn by European foot soldiers, often over chain mail .
 A Japanese samurai's armor from the 1 6th century onward was made of small iron plates sewn together with leather cord . Although heavy, it offered superb protection, allowing the mobility of the samurai to fight in the saddle or on foot .
 Early-modern infantry armor was used by an elite landsknecht mercenary, who would lead an attack on the pike-and-musket battlefield .
 Late 15th-century Ottoman warrior's chain mail coat was reinforced in the most vulnerable places with plates of steel . Napoleon's heavy cavalry wore iron cuirasses for protection and for show .
 Flak jackets became standard issue for U.S. troops in Korea and Vietnam . Plate would stop a sword thrust or cut and might deflect a musket ball, g Flak jacket .
 The pads of tightly woven fabric or ceramic plates gave some defense against bullets or shrapnel . The pads were woven into tight layers of fabric or fabric .
 Waterloo was fought south of Brussels on June 18,1815 . The last battle of the Napoleonic Wars was fought in Belgium .
 Napoleon sought to destroy an army of British and Netherlands troops, commanded by the Duke of Wellington, before it could be joined by the Prussians under Marshal Bliicher . Napoleon wanted to destroy a British and Dutch army of troops before the Prussian invasion .
 Wellington had withdrawn from an encounter with the French two days earlier at the battle of Quatre Bras . Wellington's army had taken up a strong defensive position on the Mont St. H aving withdrawn .
 Napoleon prepared to attack with 72,000 men to Wellington's combined British, German, and Dutch force of 68,000 . Napoleon prepared for the attack with a combined force of 72,00 men .
 Napoleon had a greater number of experienced soldiers and twice as many cannon at his disposal . The disparity in force was of more significant than the numbers suggest, for Napoleon .
 Wellington kept the bulk of his army hidden from view on the reverse slope of fthe ridge .
 Fie had fortified local farm buildings to form strongpoints in front of the ridge and these were first to come under attack . Fie's first attack was on a farm in the area which was attacked by the Taliban .
 Wellington's infantry formed up in line and their musket fire, along with the grapeshot and canister of the field artillery, sowed carnage through the French ranks .
 Wellington's heavy cavalry drove them back with a forceful charge . Despite this, the French infantry still looked set to overwhelm the British line until Wellington's cavalry led them back . The French infantry looked set for a crushing victory against the British lines .
 British horsemen unwisely continued their charge toward the French batteries and were cut down by a cavalry counterattack . Encouraged by their success, the British cavalrymen continued to charge . They were cut back by the French cavalry counterattacks .
 The red-coated British infantry formed squares bristling with bayonets, the horsemen surging around them . The British infantry were surrounded by horsemen in the battle .
 Sometimes a square was ripped apart by cannon fire, but otherwise the cavalry could not break in . The cavalry was decimated by volleys of musketry at close range . Sometimes the square was torn apart, sometimes the cavalry was destroyed .
 The crucial fortified farm of La Haye Sainte eventually fell to the French after long resistance, but too late for Napoleon . Bliicher's Prussians, a force of more than 50,000 men, were drawing near .
 Napoleon threw his Imperial Guard forward in a last bid to break Wellington's battle-worn soldiers . Napoleon's Imperial Guard was part of his army struggling to hold the Prussians at bay .
 The Imperial Guard wavered and then broke . But confronted with steady musket fire, it was the Imperial Guard that wavered . It was the first time they had to take action .
 The French were driven from the field, and the Prussian cavalry mounted a savage pursuit . The French died in the Battle of Mannheim, Germany .
 Napoleon's army suffered 25,000 casualties and 8,000 had been taken prisoner . Napoleon's forces suffered 8,500 casualties . Napoleon had been forced to retreat from the French capital .
 For most of the day his troops were outnumbered, but resolutely withstood the furious French attacks . The French were outnumbered by his troops, but he resolutely fought back .
 It was a war Britain did not want and, on the American side, was fought for unclear goals . Whether the U.S. intended to annex part or all of Canada was never clear . The war was fought on both sides .
 The background to the war between Britain and the United States lay in Britain's war with France, which had raged since 1793, and in the conflict with Native Americans .
 Creek faction known as the Red Sticks had begun fighting against the United States . A Creek faction of the U.S. has begun fighting in the past . The U.C. Creek faction has been fighting for the past two decades .
 Jackson's militia defeated and massacred the Red Sticks at the battle of Horseshoe Bend in 1814 . In 1814 Jackson's militias, supported by other Creek and Cherokee Indians, fought a campaign against them . The militia was supported by the Creek, Cherokee Indians .
 By 1814 the war was turning against the U.S. in spite of these successes .
 President James Madison pushed through the decision by James Madison and the ""war hawks" The decision was a controversial decision, pushed through by President Madison and many of the "war hawk"
 The small standing army was supplemented by short-term volunteers, the Americans relied heavily on state militias . The U.S. relied heavily upon state militias, including militias .
 Madison was convinced that these forces would be adequate enough to occupy Canada . Madison was also convinced that they would be sufficient to occupy the country .
 Britain's greater resources were concentrated on its war with France, leaving minimal forces in Canada . This was possible in principle, as Britain was concentrating its resources on the war with Britain .
 A U.S. invasion of Canada launched in August 1812 degenerated into a debacle . Yet a United States invasion of the country was a major failure .
 The three-pronged attack was defeated by only handful of British soldiers, Canadian militia, and Indian warriors . Only handfuls of British troops were able to defeat the attack .
 These setbacks for the United States on land on land were offset by stirring naval victories . The U.S. won the battle in the Battle of the Atlantic in 1942 .
 The U.S. Navy was no given command of a small squadron of warships that were built on the spot to contest British control of the lake . Overall the United States Navy did not give command of the small squadron .
 On September 10, 1813, Perry took on and defeated a roughly equal British force . Perry defeated the British forces in the Battle of the Nile in 1813 .
 By controlling the lake waters, the U.S. retook Detroit, which it had lost the previous year, thus securing Ohio . The United States retook the city of Detroit, Ohio, in 2010 .
 Tecumseh, leader of the Shawnee tribe, was killed by the British in 1817 . He was fighting alongside the British, and was killed in the battle .
 When his allies retreated from Detroit, he had no option but to follow, pursued by the Americans under William Henry Harrison . When the allies retreated, he was forced to follow .
 In 1813, Tecumseh was killed by the British at the battle of the Thames . The battle was a bloody struggle for the British and Indians .
 With the pressure of conflict and the passage of time, the U.S. army developed greater discipline and found better leadership . The United States' army developed better discipline and leadership, the author says .
 General Winfield Scott emerged as an American hero in summer 1814 . 5,000 The total strength of the British regular army in Canada in 1812 .
 The number of British troops engaged in the war with France at the same time was around 250,000 .
 Americans also alleged that the British in Canada were stirring up trouble among the country's Indian tribes . They accused them of supporting the tribal confederation led by the Shawnee leader, Tecumseh, which was opposing expansion of the United States in the northwest .
 Between 1798 and 1800 an undeclared naval war was fought between the U.S. and France . Battles between warships and attacks on merchant shipping were fought .
 The Royal Navy's main force was committed to blockading French ports and could not be spared for the American war . The main force, however, was committed .
 U.S. frigates were more heavily armed than the British ones and manned by determined and skillful officers and crew . They were well suited to solo raids .
 USS Constitution triumphed in successive single combats with the British frigates Guerriere and Java . USS United States captured the frigate Macedonian . USS Constitution captured the Macedonian in a single battle .
 American warships and privateers also took a heavy toll of British merchant shipping . British merchant ships were also attacked by American warships .
 The most important American naval victory, however, was won on Lake Erie .
 Commandant Oliver Perry was when the U.S. mounted a second and more competent invasion of Canada . Perry was commandant during the Second World War . He was in charge of the Canadian invasion .
 He led his men to victory against the British in a sharp battle at Chippewa . He then badly injured in a fierce encounter at Lundy's Lane (present-day Niagara Falls) in July .
 General Andrew Jackson directed the defense of New Orleans in January 1815 . General Jackson was in charge of the Tennessee Battle of the New Orleans .
 Success in the battle made Jackson a popular hero in the United States . Jackson's death in 1842 made him popular in the U.S.
 This avenged the American firing of buildings in York the previous year . It avenged a similar attack on buildings in New York City earlier this year .
 In Europe Napoleon was deposed in April, freeing up British troops and warships . Napoleon's overthrow freed up British forces and warships in Europe .
 Despite the feats of U.S. sailors, the power of the Royal Navy was making itself felt .
 The American frigates USS Chesapeake and Essex had been defeated and captured, salvaging British naval pride . The frigates were captured by the British in the Battle of St. Michaels .
 An ever-tightening blockade of the U.S. coast impacted severely upon the American economy and government finances . The blockade impacted severely on the American government and economy .
 Free to attack the eastern seaboard at will, the British sent troops recently arrived from Europe to raid Washington, DC, in August 1814 . Burning the capital was burning the capital .
 They brushed aside militia defending the city and burned down public buildings . Commanded by General Robert Ross, they brushed aside militias defending city . They burned down buildings .
 The following month the British moved on to Baltimore, but were unable to take Fort McHenry guarding the port . Despite landing troops and a naval bombardment with mortars and rockets, the British failed to take the fort .
 Sir George Prevost escorted an army as far as Plattsburgh city on Lake Champlain . But Prevost's accompanying naval force was defeated by an American lake squadron . Prevost was forced to withdraw .
 The only point in continued fighting was to maneuver for potential advantage in the peace negotiations that had opened at Ghent in Belgium .
 Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane led a body of soldiers across from Jamaica . The British decided to grab New Orleans . Admiral Cochrane captured New Orleans in 1841 .
 On January 8, 1815, under the cover of darkness, an army commanded by Sir Edward Pakenham attempted a frontal assault on fortifications defended by the American general, Andrew Jackson, and his 5,000 men . Andrew Jackson was the only major American general to defeat Sir Edward
 Pakenham was among those struck down by U.S. fire before the whole operation was abandoned . The operation was eventually abandoned in the wake of American fire .
 The troops were unaware that a peace treaty -- the Treaty of Ghent -- had been signed two weeks earlier . The treaty was signed in Ghent, Belgium .
 The treaty ending the war was signed at Ghent in Belgium on December 24,1814 . The treaty ended the war in Belgium .
 William Congreve's rockets were developed at Britain's Royal Arsenal . Inspired by missiles used against the British by the Mysore Army in India, they were developed .
 The rockets were used with some success by the British during their 1807 bombardment ol Copenhagen in the Napoleonic Wars . They were used in their 1814 assault on Baltimore in the War ol 1812 .
 Smaller, more mobile versions were also deployed, usually less successlully, in various major battles, including the battle ol Waterloo against the French in 1815 . Smaller mobile versions also deployed in various battles .
 The only territorial change resulting from the War of 1812 was the United States gain of Mobile from Spain, and they were not even fighting .
 The war stimulated an upsurge of national consciousness both in the U.S. and Canada . The war also stimulated a national consciousness in the United States .
 The ""Star-Spangled Banner" was written by Francis Scott Key during the assault on Baltimore . It was later to become the U.S. national anthem .
 Further disputes over the US-Canadian border were determined by agreement in the course of the 19th century . Further disputes were settled by agreement between the US and Canada .
 The war brought freedom to thousands of slaves, who escaped their American owners by joining the British . Thousands of slaves joined the British in the war to escape their owners .
 The number of U.S. and British military personnel killed in action in the war . For Native Americans, the 3,900 killed were Native Americans . Native Americans were killed in the conflict .
 Florida was ceded by Spain to the United States in 1819, becoming an area where slave-owning was legal . Andrew Jackson led attacks on Native Americans and escaped slaves in Florida in the Seminole War in 1817-18 .
 After Jackson became president in 1829, an Indian Removal Act was passed, ensuring the eviction of Cherokee, Creek, Chickasaw, and Choctaw from their tribal lands . The act was passed by President Andrew Jackson .
 They were forced along the ""Trail of Tears"" to the Indian Territory in the 1830s . The Indians were forced to move along the Trail of the 18th century .
 The Haitian rebellion in the 1790s set up the first black-ruled state in the Americas . It was seen by most Creoles as a warning against revolutionary upheaval . Creoles feared it might end their domination of the pardo and black majority in Spanish colonies .
 When Spain allied itself with France against Britain in the Napoleonic Wars, links between colonies and Spain were disrupted by British naval control of the Atlantic .
 In 1806 Francisco de Miranda tried to invade Venezuela with British support, but was repulsed by a people still loyal to Spain . The Creole republican tried to take over Venezuela with the help of the British .
 By 1810 Latin-American Creoles decided to take government into their own hands . The Creoles took over the government in 1810 .
 The wars that resulted in the independence of Spain's colonies in South America were a complex series of conflicts . The wars were primarily fought between opposing groups of colonists and only secondarily against Spanish forces .
 From the confusion, a few individuals stand out as exceptional military leaders . A few individuals stood out in the confusion .
 Spain's independence movement is not united among those seeking autonomy from Spain . Spain's pro-independence movement has been in the throes of recent years .
 The poverty-stricken and the enslaved, mostly black or mixed race or black, hated the rich Creoles more than the Spanish authorities . The poor and enslaved lived in Spain for centuries .
 In many regions civil war raged and central government collapsed as caudillos ran their own localities . In many areas, caudillas ran localities rather than central government . Civil war raged in many regions and the government collapsed .
 The horsemen of the Venezuelan plains were a mix of bandits and fugitives from slavery and poverty . Only in Peru, the llaneros are known as llanos .
 llaneros became a vital component in Bolivar's liberation army . Initially they supported the royalists, but later supported the liberation of the colonies .
 A 10,000-strong expeditionary force under General Pablo Morillo was shipped across the Atlantic to occupy Venezuela and New Granada . General Morillo's force was a force of ten,000 .
 Morillo took control of the major settlements along the coasts but armed groups, with Bolivar's supporters, kept up resistance in the interior . Morillo says he will continue to fight for independence .
 Bolivar found an ally in Jose Antonio Paez, the new leader of the llaneros, and attracted the support of a British Legion . The British and Irish troops were left unemployed by the conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars .
 The series of Wars of Liberation in South America from 1812 to 1824 were conducted over a vast expanse of often daunting terrain, including mountains, swamps and jungles .
 In Venezuela a republic declared in 1811 was overwhelmed the following year in a royalist reaction led by Domingo de Monteverde . Bolivar's war in Venezuela was the first of its kind in the early years .
 Simon Bolivar was among the royalist soldiers in South America that were fighting for the I V-^r continuation of Spanish rule were Spanish . He was one of the most prominent Spaniards in the region .
 Most were American royalists fighting other Americans . The republicans fled to nearby New Granada . Most of the republicans were royalists .
 Bolivar launched an invasion in 1813 that trounced the royalists, occupied the city of Caracas, and re-established a republic . From there, Bolvar invaded Caracas and established a republic in Venezuela .
 Those among the defeated who did not escape the country established guerrilla forces in remote areas . Those among those who did escape established guerrillas in the country .
 The end of the Peninsular War and the return of Ferdinand to the Spanish throne in 1814 heralded a determined South American revolution .
 In January 1817, San Martin and O'Higgins led some 5,000 soldiers across the Andes . The Andes were the first time the two men led troops across the continent .
 Their surprise arrival in Chile allowed them to defeat the outnumbered royalists at Chacabuco . It cost them heavy losses—but their surprise arrival helped them defeat the odds .
 The Spanish sent an army to Chile from Peru under General Mariano Osorio . General San Martin defeated General Osorio at Maipu in the Andes in April 1818 .
 In 1820 San Martin launched an invasion of Peru, aided by a Chilean navy commanded by British Admiral Lord Thomas Cochrane . The invasion was the first of San Martin's invasion of South America .
 Under circumstances still not fully understood, after talks with Bolivar in 1822, San Martin withdrew to private life . San Martin died of his injuries in 1823 .
 Bolivar led the final campaign against surviving royalist strongholds in Peru . It was the last campaign against the royalist stronghold in the Peruvian capital . Bolvar died in 1881 .
 He won a cavalry skirmish at Junin in August 1824 before his second-in-command, Antonio Jose de Sucre, conclusively defeated the Peruvians at the battle of Ayacucho in December 1824 . He won the battle at the end of 1824
 Known as ""the Liberator,"" Simon Bolivar was born in Caracas in 1783 . Known as the "Liberator," he is also known as the Venezuelan revolutionary .
 He was the most prominent leader of the independence fight in Venezuela . He returned to Venezuela and fought for independence from Venezuela .
 The founding of Gran Colombia in 1819, with himself as president, seemed a step toward his goal of a federal state embracing all Latin America . Gran Colombia was founded by the former president of Colombia, who was president of the country .
 Simon Bolivar advanced into New Granada and routed the Spanish at Boyaca, occupying Bogota . Instead, even the state of Gran Colombia dissolved in disunity and he died in 1830 .
 A victory in 1821 at Carabobo in mixed success until the arrival of Jose de San Martin, an Argentine-born officer who had fought for Spain in the Peninsular War in 1812 .
 San Martin Venezuela gave him effective control of almost all New Granada and Venezuela, which were united as Gran Colombia . Gran Colombia is now Gran Colombia, which was formed from Gran Gran Granada .
 In Argentina a junta, a government of military leaders, was established in 1810 . Argentina's junta was established by military leaders . In Argentina, the government was formed by military junta members .
 The battle of Chacabuco took place February 12, 1817 . It fought the Spanish and royalists with the Argentines and Chileans .
 Bernardo O'Higgins escaped to Argentina with the remnants of his forces in 1814 . The Spanish and royalists were in control of Chile in the 1814-1815 war .
 San Martin conceived a plan to ally with O'Higgins for an invasion of Chile as a prelude to an assault on Peru . The former Spanish colonies found neither peace nor stability . San Martin's plan to invade Chile was rejected .
 The legacy of the wars included disputed frontiers and a tradition of power based on military force . It also included disputed land borders and a long tradition of using force .
 In the wake of independence, there were border wars between Gran Colombia and Peru, and between Argentina and Brazil . The SKIRMISHES continue the story .
 Gran Colombia soon split up into Colombia, Venezuela, and Ecuador . Gran Colombia was the center of Gran Colombia . The republic was later divided into Colombia and Venezuela .
 Paraguay fought Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, and Uruguay in the War of the Triple Alliance . The war cost around 400,000 lives . Paraguay also fought Argentina and Brazil in the 1950s .
 Even more damaging for South America was the tradition of the caudillo, founded in the liberation wars . The caudillillo was founded in South America in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Local warlords undermined authority of governments and seized political control in military coups . These local warlords with armed supporters undermined the authority of government . These armed supporters also undermined authority in governments .
 The Greek War of Independence led to the creation of an independent Greek state nine years later . Launched in 1821, the Greek uprising against Ottoman rule led to an independent state .
 The course of the war was determined by the intervention of European powers . European powers had enjoyed military superiority over the Ottoman empire in the 19th century .
 A bout one in four subjects of the Ottoman empire spoke Greek . The Greek War of Independence took place in 1821-29 .
 They constituted a socially and ethnically diverse population, ranging from the wealthy Phanariot families of Constantinople to the klephts and peasants of the mountain country of the Peloponnese .
 Through the centuries of Ottoman rule, a sense of Greek identity had been maintained chiefly through allegiance to the Greek dragged from church in Constantinople and hanged from a city gate .
 On the Aegean island of Chios in 1822 most of the population was either massacred or deported . Most of the island's inhabitants were either killed or deported from Chios . Chios was the last island of the Greek island to be taken over by the Turks .
 The defeat of Ali Pasha freed the best elements of the Ottoman army to focus on suppressing the Greek revolt . The Peloponnesian klephts under leaders such as Markos Botsaris were fierce fighters who defied the sultan .
 A kernel of resistance was also maintained at Missolonghi, in present-day western Greece, under the Phanariot Alexandras Mavrokordatos . The resistance was maintained under the name of Alexandras .
 By the early 19th century the Ottoman empire was in decline, neither able to exercise effective rule over its territories nor defend itself against external enemies . The Ottoman Empire was in a state of decline in the early 1900s .
 Battle of Navarino was the last major naval battle of the sailing ship era . The encounter between British, French, and Russian warships and the Ottomans and Egyptians took place on October 20,1827 . The battle was last major battle of sailing ships .
 The Ottoman sultans governed domains stretching from Mesopotamia to Algeria, and from the Balkans to Egypt . The sultan ruled domains stretching to Algeria and Egypt .
 Most of their provinces were controlled by local rulers, however, with little reference to Ottoman government . The Ottomans ruled their provinces in their provinces, but had little power .
 Pressure from Russia and Austria threatened Ottoman rule in southeastern Europe, encouraging resistance from the empire's Christian subjects .
 Ottoman rule in the Balkans was also contested by Muslim Albanian warlord Ali Pasha, based in loannina, who ruled over much of what now Greece .
 Sultan Selim III, who reigned from 1789 to 1807, tried to modernize his state but was overthrown by the janissaries, the traditionalist elite corps of the army . He reigned between 1789 and 1807 .
 Mahmud II, his successor, was similarly committed to reform, but pursued it with more caution . Mahmud Iyad was committed to reforms but pursued more caution than his predecessor . He died at the age of 92 at a young age .
 He suppressed the Serbian revolt in 1813, and in 1820 campaigned against Ali Pasha, whom he defeated in 1822 . In 1822, he was defeated in his defeat of Ali Pashas .
 In the early 19th century the tide of nationalism that swept through Europe in the wake of the French Revolution encouraged Greeks to aspire to national self-rule .
 Russia claimed to be a natural protector of Orthodox Christians and had many Greeks in its service . It sought support from Russia, which claimed to have many Greek officers .
 Alexander Ypsilantis, a Phanariot general in the Russian army, assumed the leadership of the Greek army . He was the first commander of the army in Greece .
 Russia refused to back him, and his forces were swiftly crushed by the Ottoman army . Russia refused back him and he was killed by the Turkish army .
 Uprisings broke out in the Peloponnese and other parts of the empire . Scattered uprisings erupted in the mid-17th century .
 Well-publicized Turkish atrocities won widespread sympathy in Europe for the Greek cause . At Easter 1821, the Greek Orthodox Patriarch, Gregory V, was assassinated .
 Byron traveled to Missolonghi aiming to join in the fighting, and died there amid a blaze of publicity in April 1824 . Byron was the son of Lord Byron, a British poet and poet who died there .
 Byron's idealism was inspired by British Admiral Sir Thomas Cochrane, later commander of the Greek naval forces . Byron's example was followed by Admiral Thomas Cochran, who later led the Greek navy .
 Egypt, officially part of the Ottoman empire, was, in practice, an independent state under Mohammed Ali . Mohammed Ali was a modernizing ruler who had succeeded in improving his armed forces in a way the Ottoman sultans failed to do .
 Sultan Mahmud sent his son Ibrahim Pasha with a large naval force and 10,000 drilled soldiers to reduce the Greeks to submission . Ibrahim's Pasha was able to defeat the Greeks at the end of the war .
 Ibrahim Pasha's Greek rebels were weakened by internecine struggles between rival factions and were in poor shape to resist the onslaught . The Greek rebels had been weakened by  internecine struggles between rival factions and were in a poor shape to resist Ibrahim P
 They were attacked by a less efficient but still formidable Ottoman army under Reshid Pasha from the north . They were simultaneously attacked by the less efficient and more effective Ottoman army .
 The number of Greeks left on the island of Chios after the massacres and deportations by Ottoman forces in 1822 . The Ottomans and Egyptians were also known as the Egyptians .
 Athens fell in 1826 after a ten-month siege of the Acropolis . The population of Missolonghi had originally been 50,000 . Athens fell the following year after ten months of siege .
 Sultan Mahmud took on the power of the janissaries, who had blocked his military reforms . Sultan took control of the Janissaries in order to get the military reforms implemented .
 By 1827 the Ottoman empire looked in better shape than it had for many years . With the Greek revolt doomed and the path open for modernization, by 1827 it looked in a better shape . The Ottoman empire was in a stable position .
 European public opinion had been horrified by the depredations visited upon the Greeks by the Egyptian forces in response to the guerrilla warfare of the klephts . Europe acts at last .
 Governments were reluctant to intervene but felt under pressure to take some action . Governments felt they were under pressure from the public to take action .
 In July 1827, in the Treaty of London, Britain, France, Russia and Russia agreed to support the creation of an autonomous Greek state and to send a fleet to the war zone . The treaty of London was signed by France and Russia in 1827 .
 In September an Egyptian fleet sent from Alexandria joined Ottoman ships at anchor in the bay at Navarino on the west coast of the Peloponnese . The Egyptian fleet was sent to join Ottoman ships .
 They found themselves blockaded by the British under Admiral Sir Edward Codrington, subsequently joined by Russian and French squadrons . They were joined by Russia and France in the blockade .
 Allied naval commanders did not have instructions to engage the enemy . They decided to provoke a confrontation, rather than face a long winter blockade .
 Firing started almost immediately and many Ottoman and Egyptian vessels were destroyed . Firing began almost immediately, and many of the vessels were lost .
 Russians seized the opportunity to pursue territorial gains by attacking the Ottomans in both the Balkans and eastern Anatolia . The sultan was defiant, so, in April 1828, the Russians seized on the opportunity .
 The number of Egyptian and Ottoman ships sunk at Navarino in October 1827, almost 90 percent of their fleet of 78 vessels .
 Other Europeans intervened diplomatically to bring the fighting to an end . Reluctant to see Russia gain too much advantage, other Europeans intervened .
 French expeditionary force lands in Greece to oversee repatriation of Ibrahim Pasha's forces . John Capodistrias, a former Russian foreign minister born in Corfu, arrives to head a Greek government .
 Eugene Delacroix painting represents the Ottoman atrocities on the island of Chios in the Aegean . Massacre at Chios is famous painting by the French artist .
 Exhibited in Paris in 1824, it expressed popular support for the suffering of the Greeks . Exhibited at the age of 1824 .
 In the aftermath of the war, the European powers dictated a settlement to the Ottoman empire . The Ottoman empire entered a period of decline and would not survive another century .
 Under the terms of the 1829 Treaty of Edirne, the Ottomans were forced to accept the autonomy of Greece as well as that of Serbia, Moldavia, and Wallachia .
 In 1830 Britain, France, and Russia decided that Greece should now be fully independent . In 1830 the three countries decided Greece should become fully independent.
 The allied powers insisted that Greece become a monarchy and Prince Otto of Bavaria became king . Prince Otto became king of Greece in 1883 .
 European powers saw a need to keep the Ottoman empire in existence, fearing the chaos its dissolution would bring . The European powers wanted to keep it in existence fearing chaos .
 They intervened in 1833 and 1839 to defend the Ottomans against Egypt, which threatened to take over much of the empire . They intervened against Egypt's attempts to take control of the Ottoman Empire .
 Japanese battleships shell the Russian fleet in the harbor of Port Arthur in 1904 .
 Japan opened itself up to trade in 1853 and rapidly adopted Western technology . After two centuries of isolation, Japan opened its doors to the Western world .
 China inflicted humiliating defeats on China in 1894-95 and Russia in 1904-05 . Its modern navy inflicted defeats on both China and Russia .
 Trains, steamships, powerful new artillery, and powerful new guns gave the United States and the industrialized countries of Europe enormous military advantages over the rest of the world . The United States, Europe and the U.S. had enormous advantages .
 Britain and other European powers rapidly expanded their empires in Africa and Asia . Britain and others expanded empires in Asia and Africa .
 Technology transformed warfare from flintlock muskets, cannonballs, and wooden sailing ships to steam-powered steel battleships . Machine guns, high-explosive shells, and steam powered battleships transformed warfare between 1830 and 1914 .
 The capacity of the world's leading industrialized states to mobilize military resources and productive power was formidable, bringing vast areas of Africa, parts of Asia, and all of North America under their rule .
 A wide gap opened up between the leading European powers, the United States and latterly Japan, and those states struggling to modernize, such as Spain, China, and the Ottoman empire . The gap between the U.S. and Japan widened between the European powers and those struggling to
 The gap was even more extreme with tribal peoples encountered in the course of colonial expansion . The gap between colonial expansion and tribal peoples was even greater .
 One-sided imperial conflicts were not a rigorous testing ground for new technologies . New technologies found their full expression in wars between similarly armed powers . The Chinese navy was utterly destroyed at Foochow by the French .
 A series of wars fought from the f 850s to the f870s—the Crimean War, the American German army in China, the 1900s . The Crimean War was the first of its kind .
 They arrived as part of a multinational force sent to quell the Boxer Rebellion . The Boxer rebellion was a Chinese nationalist uprising that sanctioned the Civil War, and the wars that unified Italy and Germany .
 Armed peace in Europe from 187f did nothing to slow the pace of technological development . An armed peace from the start of the century did not slow the progress of technology development .
 New high explosives and smokeless propellant ended the reign of gunpowder . High explosives and a new propellant replaced gunpowder as the first weapon of war .
 On land and sea rifled big guns could fire shells to a range measured in miles rather than yards . The rifled gun could fire at a range of miles, rather than miles .
 Rapid-fire rifles with metal cartridges became the standard infantry weapon . The rapid-fire rifle was the first weapon to be used by the British Army .
 Warships combined steam propulsion and steel construction with large breechloading guns . Warships included steam propulsion, steel construction and large breeching guns .
 The fruits of these developments were seen in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05 . Russo-Japan War was fought between Russia and Japan between 1904 and 1905 .
 This deserves more than any other to the title of ""the first modern war,"" with artillery bringing beyond line of sight, machine guns mowing down infantry, and telephone and radio used for communications . This is the first modern modern war .
 Major powers in Europe pursued military expansion at an accelerating rate through the brst decade of the 20th century . On the brink of global war, Europe's major powers were on the brink .
 Designed by William Armstrong, this wrought-iron 12-pounder was the first rifled breech-loading field gun .
 It was adopted by the British Army in 1859 and saw use in the American Civil War . France, Germany, Russia, and Austria would be able to held citizen armies .
 Britain increased the size of its armaments industry and its world-beating navy . Britain did not have a mass army, but increased its armament industry .
 Horses were the fastest means of transportation for men and supplies once they left a railhead . Horses were still the fastest way of transport for men .
 Submarines, airplanes, and airships were military novelties with barely explored potential . Submarine, airplanes and airship could be used in the future .
 As European powers approached 1914, they had greater military force at their disposal . This meant that, in the event of the than any previous societies in history, murder of all foreigners living in the country was possible .
 U.S. artilleryman's sword was used in the 1830s French Revolution . It was used to fight the French monarchy .
 The United States war with Mexico ends with the United States making massive territorial gains . The U.S. war ended with the loss of Mexican territory .
 British and French troops land in the Crimea and besiege Sevastopol . Battle of Solferino took place in 1854 . Battle was the first of its kind in Crimea .
 The battle of Balaclava is noted for the futile British light cavalry charge . The battle was fought in the Crimean Peninsula, Crimea, in 1805 .
 The Texans defeat the Mexican army at San Jacinto River and win independence . Britain acquires Natal in South Africa and Sind in India in 1843 .
 French intervention in Mexico ends with the execution of Emperor Maximilian . V Battle of Vicksburg ended with the Battle of Isandhlwana in 1867 .
 The United States seizes Guam, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico from Spain from Spain . The U.S. seizes Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines from Spain. Puerto Rico .
 Three Entente Powers oppose the Central Powers in World War I . Germany, Austria-Hungary, Germany and Austria-Germany opposed each other . Austria and Germany joined the Entente in the war .
 Italians are the first to use aircraft for reconnaissance and bombing . The Italians are also the first ever to use planes for bombing and reconnaissance .
 In southern Africa, the Boers declare war on Britain and besiege Kimberley, Ladysmith, and Mafeking . The Boers are defeated by the British in the Second World War .
 In 1903 the United States acquires a lease on Guantanamo Bay in Cuba for use as a naval base . In less than a year the volatile situation in the Balkans will spark off World War I . 1903 the U.S. acquires lease on the Guantanamo Bay . 1903 The United States
 Its causes were minor, but its political implications affected the whole of Europe . The causes of the attack on the continent were not minor .
 The first shots of the war were fired in November 1853 when the Russian navy sailed across the Black Sea and destroyed the Ottoman fleet at Sinope, Turkey .
 Faced with this threat to the Ottoman Empire and alarmed by possible Russian expansion toward the Mediterranean, Britain and France declared war in March 1854 . Faced by this threat, the British and French declared war .
 Italian state of Piedmont anxious to gain French support for its campaign to unite Italy . They were joined by the Italian state, which was anxious for French support . The state was joined by Italy's other Italian states, which wanted to unite .
 British and French forces faced logistical problems in marshaling troops and supplies so far from home . The French and British forces faced considerable logistical problems during the war .
 The Ottoman Empire was in decline by the mid-18th century, and the rise of Russian power in the region increasingly worried the major powers of Europe .
 The Russo-Turkish War in 1768-74 led to Crimean independence and Russian gains at the expense of the Ottomans along the Black Sea . The Crimean War saw the loss of the Crimean Crimea .
 Under the peace treaty, the tsar became protector of Orthodox Christians within the Ottoman Empire . Under the treaty, he was the protector of the Orthodox Christians .
 Further wars between Russians and Ottomans in 1787-92 and 1806-12 saw more territory ceded to Russia . Russia also ceded more territory to the Ottoman Empire in the past .
 Serbia gained autonomy from Ottoman rule in 1817, as did the Danubian provinces of Moldavia and Wallachia in 1829 after Russian intervention . Russia intervened in Russia's intervention in the region .
 Since 1774 Russia had regarded itself as the protector of Christian Orthodoxy in the Ottoman Empire . Russia had been seen as a strong force in the Middle Eastern Empire .
 In 1852 the Ottoman sultan allowed French Catholic monks to protect the holy places in Jerusalem, which was under Ottoman control . The sultan also allowed the monks to guard the holy sites in Jerusalem .
 A hussar's hackle was attached to a military cap . The Russians objected and occupied the Danubian provinces in 1853 .
 Allies ferried troops across the Black Sea to the Crimea with the aim of capturing the naval fortress of Sevastopol and nullifying Russian naval power in the region . This example belonged to a British assistant surgeon who served in Crimea during the battle .
 The French army included many troops hardened in campaigns in North Africa and was generally better organized than the British . The British were fighting their first European war since 1815 .
 Lord Raglan, 66, had never commanded a unit larger than a battalion and had no experience of modern warfare despite being 66 years old . He was 66 when he died .
 His troops were ravaged by cholera, and were poorly trained and badly equipped . To make matters worse, his troops had been badly trained .
 The Allies landed in the west of the Crimea and advanced south toward Sevastopol . The Allies arrived in the Crimea in March, 1944 . They landed in west of Crimea .
 On September 20, 1854 the Allies crossed the River but the British then faced the Russians at the top of a steep slope . The Russians were defeated by the Allies in the Battle of the Crimean Peninsula .
 British casualties were high, but poor leadership and inferior firearms forced the Russians to retreat . The Russians were defeated by the British in the Battle of the Crimea .
 The Russians blocked the entrance to the harbor, forcing the Allies to besiege the port from the land . The Russians had blocked the . entrance to . the harbor . The Allies were forced to . besiege . from the . land .
 Had the Allies arrived sooner, they might have taken their target at once, as the Russians had only just completed its defenses . The Russians were only just completing their defenses at the time .
 By the date of the attack, on October 17, 1854, the Russians were securely fortified against the Allied bombardment . The Russians were secure enough to withstand the bombardment .
 Russian forces advance toward the Allied base at Balaclava . In an attempt to break the siege, Russian forces advanced toward the allied base .
 Crimean War H Baltic Campaign took place between 1853-56 and 1854-56 . A battle took place on the hills above the port on 'S JCl IEI Crimea'
 These led to the fall of the government and a swift improvement in supply . The government was overthrown in 2010 after a decade of shortages .
 The British introduced wartime censorship of the press to prevent such stories appearing again . After the war the British introduced war censorship to prevent them again .
 In the third major battle of the campaign, the Allies managed to occupy an undefended ridge at the town of Inkerman, which commanded the approaches to Sevastapol . From here they held off repeated Russian attacks on November 5 .
 Casualties were high on both sides and the result of the battle was inconclusive . The battle was an inconclusive battle .
 British and French troops were forced to dig in as the siege was set to continue through the winter . The siege was the first of its kind to be held in France and France .
 The Allies were unprepared for the freezing conditions, with inadequate food, fuel, and clothing supplies . The Allies had inadequate food and fuel supplies .
 Without proper shelter and provisions they were soon impaired by malnutrition and cholera . Without proper food and shelter, the survivors were soon crippled by malnutrition .
 Conditions were so desperate that they were reduced to only 12,000 fit men . Conditions became so desperate they were . reduced to just 12,500 fit men.
 A British officer's hat is typical of the style of headgear that was popular in Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries, in imitation of Napoleon Bonaparte . Critical reports of the situation were sent back to London by The British .
 That night the Russians destroyed Sevastopol's defenses before evacuating the southern part of the city . The Russians destroyed the defenses and evacuated the southern parts of the Crimean Peninsula .
 Fighting also took place in the Baltic Sea, where a Franco-British fleet bombarded Russian positions, and threatened St. Peter the Apostle .
 The Russian fleet was too small to be effective, while the British and French believed that the Russian coastal fortifications were too strong to take on . But this theater of operations reached a stalemate early on in the war as the Russian .
 Russia's new tsar, Alexander II, was anxious to make peace with Crimea . Sevastopol fell in September 1855, and Alexander II was anxious for peace .
 By the 1856 Treaty of Paris, Russia recognized the territorial integrity of the Ottoman Empire . Russia gave up its guardianship of Orthodox Christians in the empire, but ultimately its dominant role in the Balkans was only temporarily reduced . The 1856 treaty of Paris saw Russia give up guardianship over
 War between the Ottoman and Russian empires broke out again after the Ottomans suppressed a rebellion in Bulgaria in 1876 . War between Russia and the Ottoman Empire broke out after a revolt in Bulgaria was suppressed .
 Alarmed by the creation of this large, pro-Russian state, the other European powers met in Berlin in July . They cut Bulgaria down in size and returned Macedonia back to Ottoman rule .
 In Britain Edward Cardwell, Secretary of State for War, abolished the purchase of commissions, introduced short service as the basis of enlistment .
 The battle of Balaclava was distinguished by three cavalry charges . Three cavalry charges were made during the battle . The battle was the first to take place in the Middle Ages .
 A Russian charge toward Balaclava was met by the ""Thin Red Line,"" two rows of British infantry from the 93rd Regiment stopped the charge with three volleys .
 Another Russian cavalry advance was repelled by the British Heavy Cavalry Brigade, charging uphill against advised military practice . The British cavalry charge is a form of military manoeuvre .
 The British Light Cavalry Brigade then misunderstood its instructions and charged down a valley toward a Russian field battery . The brigade then came under fire from Russian guns on either side . The incident happened in a valley near the Russian battery .
 This charge of the Light Brigade up and back down the valley is seen as one of the most futile actions in military history . The charge is one of Britain's most futile military actions in its history .
 Russia continued to expand its empire, conquering the northern Caucasus by 1864 and gaining control over the central Asian Muslim khanates by 1884 .
 French zouave troops distinguished themselves during the battle of Malakoff on September 8,1855 . The capture was captured by General MacMahon, who led the French troops .
 Millions of combatants have died in wars, most of them due to infections and diseases . Most of them were killed through lack of immediate or effective medical care .
 Only with medical advances of the 19th century did the care of wounded troops really begin to improve . Only with the medical advances in the 18th century, the care for wounded troops began to improve. Only with advances in medical advances, the treatment of wounded soldiers improved .
 In the West, wounded or sick soldiers did not receive special treatment . In the past, soldiers were not given special treatment for sick soldiers .
 Roman valetudinaria hospitals treated slaves and gladiators as well as soldiers . The hospitals were used to treat slaves and soldiers, including soldiers .
 In Jerusalem in the 12th and 13th centuries, wounded or sick crusading knights were treated by monks called the Knights Hospitallers at the hospital of St. St. John of the Crusades .
 Isabella of Spain pioneered the use of wagon ambulances at the siege of Malaga in 1487 . The wounded were taken to local civilian hospitals .
 The first specifically military hospital in Europe was not built until the late 16th century, when the Spanish, fighting a lengthy campaign against Dutch independence, established one at Mechelen in Brabant, Belgium .
 Florence Nightingale revolutionized the care of wounded soldiers in the Crimea with her attention to good nursing practice, in particular cleanliness . After the defeat of the Spanish Armada in The Angel of the Crimea, she became famous for her work .
 Surgeons in the Crimean War were expected to supply their own surgical instruments . Wounded English sailors were left to starve or beg in the Channel ports for five years before being offered a pension by Elizabeth I in 1593 .
 Until the 16th century, soldiers received the same treatment as civilians as civilians . Army doctors and surgeons were often the most experienced .
 In 1517, Hans von Gersdorff published the first field manual for the treatment of wounds received in battle . Then, in 1518, a German surgeon published a field manual of the treatment .
 Its woodcuts illustrated the different types of wounds a soldier might receive and explained how to amputate limbs . The woodcuts were illustrated by woodcutters and illustrated how to cut limbs .
 The crude saws and other tools used by early surgeons were not much different from those used by carpenters . The crude tools were used by surgeons in the early 1800s .
 Until the mid-1500s, wounds were usually cauterized (seared to prevent infection) with hot oil . Wounds were usually burned in hot oil to prevent infections .
 French military surgeon, Ambroise Pare, began sealing wounds with a mixture of egg yolk, rose oil, and turpentine, the latter having antiseptic properties .
 He pioneered ligatures (the closing of arteries) to reduce bleeding . He also pioneered the closing of artery ligatures to reduce blood loss .
 British soldiers wounded in the Somme Offensive in 1916 had their wounds bandaged at field dressing stations just behind the front line . Field dressing stations were set up behind the line of battle .
 In 2005 a MASH unit helped save earthquake victims in Pakistan .
 English surgeon Joseph Lister pioneers the use of antiseptics in surgery, greatly reducing deaths from subsequent infection . Lister pioneered the use in surgery in 1867 .
 The same symptoms appear in veterans of the Second Gulf War, beginning in 2003 . Veterans of the Gulf War also have the same symptoms .
 Napoleon's chief physician and surgeon-in-chief of his armies, Dominique Jean Larrey, introduced the practice of triage, or sorting, in Napoleon's first era .
 Triage prioritized patients according to the severity of their condition, dividing them into those who were likely to live regardless of their care, and those who died regardless of care . Those for whom immediate medical intervention might be life-saving, were prioritized .
 Horse-drawn wagons removed wounded soldiers (enemy soldiers included) during the battle after they had received early treatment on the field . Wounded soldiers were taken to centralized field hospitals well away from the action .
 He was also the first to treat large numbers of broken bones using plaster-of-Paris dressings . He introduced female nurses into Russian military hospitals just as Florence Nightingale was doing in British hospitals .
 The introduction of morphine and of antiseptics to the battlefield in the mid-1800s greatly reduced suffering and infection . Also, the introduction of antisesptics greatly reduced the need for painkillers to be used in combat .
 Union doctors Jonathan Letterman and Joseph Barnes ensured that every regiment had at least one two-wheeled ambulance cart capable of carrying three men during the Civil War .
 Wounded soldiers were transported to hospital by the relatively fast means of the railroad . They also pressed steamboats into use as mobile hospitals .
 Letterman used triage to good effect in forward regimental first-aid stations . Letterman uses triage technique to treat wounded soldiers .
 14,000 wounded Union soldiers and 6,800 wounded Confederate soldiers were treated in Camp Letterman . The effectiveness of his methods was shown after Gettysburg . The camp was nicknamed "Camp Letterman" after the Battle of Gettysburg.
 Mass production of penicillin began following vital research breakthroughs made in 1943 . Motor ambulances introduced in World War I . Most wounded soldiers then had a fair chance of survival if orderlies could reach them quickly .
 Three developments between the two World Wars revolutionized medical treatment for soldiers . Modern developments between WW2 and WWII revolutionized the treatment of soldiers .
 First was the discovery of penicillin in 1928, which opened the way for the proper treatment of bacterial infections . Penicillin is the first antibiotic to treat bacterial infections in the world .
 Second was the setting up of the precursor of the civilian Flying Doctor Service, which flew doctors to patients and patients to hospitals . The service was set up in the 1930s .
 Originating in Australia, the idea was taken up by the armies of various countries . The idea was developed in Australia and is now spread around the world .
 The Mobile Army Surgical Hospital is a unit designed to get medical personnel close to the front line . At the same time, the U.S. Army introduced the Mobile Army Hospital . The hospital is a mobile hospital that can be used to treat patients .
 Canadian doctor Norman Bethune developed the first mobile blood-transfusion service in 1936 . He administered life-saving transfusions on the spot to soldiers who might otherwise have died .
 Soldiers today are less at risk of dying from their wounds from wounds . Thanks to these developments, soldiers today are safer at risk from wounds than they would otherwise be .
 The sheer carnage caused by war and the side-effects of using certain weapons still pose a huge challenge for medical teams . But the sheer carnage still poses a huge question for medics .
 Two short wars in 1848-49 and then in 1859-61 transformed Italy from a collection of rival and largely foreign-controlled states . The process was completed over the next decade when foreign powers were finally driven from the peninsula .
 In 1796 Napoleon Bonaparte's French army invaded northern Italy to drive out the Austrians . In 1797 the French army was able to drive the Austrian army out of northern Italy .
 French rule was established over the northwest and center of the country . The rest of the kingdom was rearranged into the kingdoms of Italy in the north and Sicily in the south .
 Napoleon's failure to reunite Italy led patriots to form secret societies, such as the Carbonari, to fight for unity . The Carbonari was founded by Napoleon's failed attempt to unite Italy .
 After Napoleon's defeat in 1815, pre-war rulers and borders of Italy were restored . Austria now ruled a combined LombardyVenetia kingdom in the north and controlling three small duchies in the center .
 The separate Italian states had their independence restored after the defeat of Napoleon in 1815 . The restoration of their independence was part of the restoration of Italian states .
 I n February 1848 a revolution broke out in France that had a knock-on effect across Europe . The revolution was the first French revolution to break out in 1848 .
 Protests spread to Austria in March, with uprisings against Austrian rule breaking out in Milan, Lombardy, and Venice . Protests also broke out in Italy in March .
 King Charles Albert of Piedmont declared war on Austria to evict it from Lombardy, and Venice declared its independence . Taking advantage of Austrian weakness, Charles Albert declared war against Austria .
 The Piedmontese army besieged and took Peschiera then set out to occupy Custoza . The army then occupied the hill town of CustoZA .
 He then went on to re-occupy Milan and drive the Piedmontese out of Lombardy . He then drove them out of Milan and drove them to Italy .
 Austrian forces inflicted a defeat on the Piedmontese, at Novara, and ended the independence of Venice after a siege in August . A truce was declared but when war broke out again in March 1849, the Austrian forces again inflicted defeat . The Austrian forces then inflicted defeat on
 In response, the King of Naples and led uprisings in Naples in 1820, Piedmont and Palermo in 1821, and Modena and the Papal States in 1831—all were crushed . In response to the king of Naples, led to upris
 Victor Emmanuel II angered many by retaining his dynastic designation, rather than renaming himself Victor Emmanuel I of Italy . Although respected and well liked, he angered many .
 These setbacks sparked a Risorgimento of Italian nationalism . The setbacks sparked an Italian nationalism movement .
 Radicals led by Giuseppe Mazzini and other exiles in France set up the Young Italy movement to replace earlier secret societies and campaign for Italian unity . Young Italy was founded by ex-Radical ex-Italian ex-patriots in France .
 Charles Albert, the new king of Piedmont and Sardinia, encouraged by Charles Albert . Charles Albert was king of Sardinia and the region's new king .
 The new French president, Louis Napoleon, sent troops to reinstate him in 1860 . Garibaldi and the Redshirts fought for the Italian throne .
 By the night of June 30 the French had crushed the new republic . The Romans, helped by the arrival of the celebrated Italian nationalist, Giuseppe Garibaldi, from South America, defended the city .
 Nationalist hopes for Italian unity seemed doomed . Second Italian war for unity was fought in the Second Italian War for unity . Nationalist hope for unity seems doomed .
 The only product of the recent upheavals was the granting of a liberal constitution in Piedmont . The constitution was granted to the state of North Carolina in 1994 .
 Count Cavour signed a secret treaty with Emperor Napoleon III to gain his support against Austria . Cavour, signed the treaty with Napoleon III, to gain the support of Napoleon III .
 The Austrians were manipulated into declaring war on Piedmont, prompting the French intervention . The French intervention forced the Austrians to declare war on the Italian peninsula . France intervened in the war, which ended in 1883 .
 130,000 men and the same number of horses were moved to the war zone by train . This was the first mass military movement by rail in history .
 Italy was a collection of small states, whose rulers included the Austrian emperor . A small French contingent attacked across a canal from the west, while a larger force under the French attacked . The battle for Italy between 1815 and 1860 was fought between France and Italy .
 Most successful Italian campaigns in the struggle for unification took place between 1859 and 1860 . The most successful campaigns took place during the period of Italian unification .
 Austrian force held the French at the canal . Their progress was slow, however, allowing the far greater Austrian force to hold the French . Austrian force was slow to hold French at canal .
 MacMahon's troops eventually entered the town in the late afternoon, expelling the Austrians in house-tohouse fighting . The Austrians were eventually expelled from the town by the end of the day .
 French forces unexpectedly caught up with Austrian forces at Solferino . Austrian forces retreated eastward, losing control of Milan, but on June 24 French forces caught up .
 The Austrians were eventually dislodged, largely thanks to the skills of the French zouave infantry and foreign legionaries . The French were able to dislodge the Austrians thanks to their skills .
 Napoleon III hastily made peace with Austria after the carnage . Napoleon III was horrified by the carnage and made peace peace with the Austria .
 The battle of Solferino was the definitive engagement of the second Italian war of Independence . Piedmont gained Lombardy from Austria while losing some of its own French-speaking areas to France in the war .
 The French cannons proved more effective than the Austrian artillery over the course of the nine-hour battle . The battle was the first of its kind for the French and Austrian armies in France .
 After Italy was united, the kingdom continued to expand and to add Italianspeaking Austrian territory into its borders . After Italy's unification, Austria was added to the kingdom .
 South Tyrol, Trieste, and Istria were ceded to Italy under the terms of the Treaty of St. St. Georges, the region was ceded by Italy .
 Lateran Treaty of 1929 set up Vatican City as an independent state . Vatican City became independent state of Vatican City in 1929 . Treaty was signed by St. Germain, the Vatican City .
 After the Battle of Solferino, Swiss humanitarian, Henri Dunant, was horrified to see the wounded lying untended all over the battlefield . Dunant was horrified that the wounded had been left unattended .
 His proposals to help war victims led to the establishment of the International Red Cross in 1863 . 12 nations signed the Geneva Convention concerning the treatment of the wounded and the protection of medical personnel .
 He spent 14 years fighting guerrilla wars in South America . Fleeing Piedmont after an unsuccessful uprising in Genoa in 1834, he spent 14 . years in South American .
 He returned to Europe in 1848 and played a major role in the defense of the Roman Republic . He died in 1846 in a battle for his country .
 He commanded Piedmontese troops against the Austrians in 1859 and then led his Redshirts to conquer Sicily and Naples in 1860-61 . After another exile, he returned to Europe and led the Redshirts in Sicily, Naples and Sicily .
 Having given up his conquests to the king of Piedmont he continued to fight for Italian unity . He fought for the Italian unity in Italy .
 Austria lost control of three central Italian duchies, which voted for union with Piedmont . Austria's control of the duchy was reversed after the unification vote .
 Garibaldi defeated a Neapolitan army at Calatafimi and occupied Palermo . He then defeated the Neapolitan army and occupied the city of Pali .
 Under the gaze of the British Royal Navy, Garibaldi crossed to the mainland in August . The Italian was the first Italian to cross to the island .
 He took Naples with barely a fight, defeated Neapolitans again at Volturno in October . Then joined up with Piedmontese army marching south to besiege the rest of the Neapolitan army at Gaeta, which surrendered .
 In March Victor Emmanuel II became king of Italy, although the new kingdom still lacked Venetia and the Papal States surrounding Rome .
 Italy joined Prussia in the war against Austria in June 1866 and invaded Venetia . In a further attempt at unification, Italy invaded Venice in 1866 .
 The two armies met at Custoza where the Austrians were victorious, as they were at Lissa . The Austrians and the Russians were victorious at the end of the war .
 Italian troops occupied the Papal States and entered Rome, which became the new national capital . Rome was the new capital of the Italian Republic .
 Prussia and Austria contested the leadership of the Confederation, and so control of Germany itself . Austria and Prussia fought for control of the German Confederation in 1881 .
 Three wars in the 1860s ensured Prussian dominance and ended Austrian involvement in German affairs . Three wars between Prussian and Austrian armies ended Austrian influence in Germany .
 After the defeat of Napoleon in 1815 a confederation of 59 German states was created out of the remains of the Holy Roman empire . Schleswig War of Independence came to an end in 1866 . The Second 13 Third Italian War was fought in the Second 13 Italian War .
 Like the empire before it, this German Confederation was dominated by Austria . Prussia, the Confederation's second-largest state after Austria, was contested by Prussia .
 Reform of the Prussian army began under Gerhard von Scharnhorst, who was hired by King Frederich Wilhelm III in 1801 . Reform of Prussian armies began in 1802 .
 Count Helmuth von Moltke's understanding of logistics and technology gave Prussia a truly modern fighting force . Prussia continued to develop its fighting force in the early 1900s . Count Helmut von Molke's work continued later in the century .
 Otto von Bismarck became minister-president of Prussia in 1862 . He was the first German politician to become prime minister of Germany . He became president of Germany in 1883 .
 He took power at a time of conflict between a conservative government and a liberal parliament . Forced through controversial army reforms (including three-year universal conscription) while gaining liberal support for foreign policies .
 He directed the policies that led to the confrontation with Austria in 1866 . Convinced that Austria had no part to play in German politics, he directed policies .
 Prussian chief minister, Otto von Bismarck, set out to unify Germany under Prussian rule . The Prussian prime minister set out for unification of Germany .
 Ownership of the two duchies of Schleswig and Holstein was contested by Denmark and Prussia . The southerly Holstein had a German majority with a Danish minority . The northerly Schleswig had a majority of the population .
 In 1863 King Frederick VII of Denmark announced a new constitution for Denmark that incorporated Schleswig into the Danish Kingdom . In 1863, the Danish monarchy incorporated the region into a new state of Denmark .
 Bismarck made an alliance with Austria, and the two armies invaded Schleswig in February 1864 . The two armies were allied to defeat each other in the war . The war was the first of its kind in Germany .
 Second Schleswig War lasted eight months, the Allies following a battleplan devised by their chief-of-staff . The war was the result of a battle plan devised by the Allies .
 The plan was sound, but it was mismanaged until Moltke himself left Berlin and joined the battlefield . The plan for the future was sound but it wasn't well managed, and it was never fully implemented .
 His appearance changed the war; the Danes withdrew and soon agreed peace terms . The Danes soon agreed to peace terms with the King of Denmark .
 The Treaty of Vienna in 1864 saw Denmark surrender the two duchies to Austria and Prussia . Austria's refusal to accept Prussian dominance in northern Germany soon led to hostilities .
 The Prussian spiked helmet, or Pickelhaube, was designed in 1842 by King Frederich Wilhelm IV of Prussia . Austria allied itself with some smaller German states, while Italy joined Prussia Prussian army .
 It was made of boiled leather with a metal trim in return for Austrian-ruled Venetia . In return, it was required to complete Italian unification with Austria . The leather was made from boiled leather .
 The Italian dimension of the conflict was therefore part of the Third Italian War of Unification . The conflict was part of Italy's third Italian war of unification .
 Count Countess Helmuth von MOLTKE writes about the battle of Koniggratz . The Prussians under Crown Prince Friedrich Wilhelm overrun the Austrian defenses .
 Dreyse needle guns fired four times as quickly as the Austrians' muzzle-loaders . In the foreground, the defeated Austrian commander, Ludwig von Benedek, sits with his captured troops .
 Benedek withdrew his shattered troops to high ground in front of Koniggratz fortress . Benedek was forced to withdraw troops to a high ground near the fortress . The battle was between Benedek and his troops .
 Moltke's plan was for the Elbe and First armies to restrain the Austrians while the Second Army hit its right flank . The Second Army would hit the right flank of the Austrian army .
 The day of the battle brought driving rain and near disaster, for a breakdown in 'EM communications meant that the Second Army did not receive the order to attack . The Second Army was not able to attack because of a breakdown of communications .
 The other two armies attacked at dawn, but their advance stalled and they were driven back . Their advance stalled, but they were eventually driven back.
 Benedek did not press his advantage and the Prussians still had their superiority in rifles and firepower . Luckily for the Germans, Benedek didn't press the advantage . Benedek was able to defeat Benedek's team .
 The Treaty of Prague ended Austrian influence in Germany and created a Prussian-dominated country . The Treaty was signed by the Prussian government in 1903 .
 To ensure good relations in the future, Prussia did not demand compensation from Austria . Austria did not receive compensation from Prussia .
 The Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary was created out of the Austrian empire in 1867 . Austria-Austria was created from the former empire of Austria and Hungary . The Dual monarchy was formed from the Austriarchy of the Austrian Empire in 1866 .
 Prussia gained Holstein, Hanover, Hesse-Kassel, Nassau and the city of Frankfurt . Prussia also gained Hesse and Nassau .
 The German Confederation collapsed and a new North German Confederation controlling all states north of the River Main was established under Prussian control . The new German Confederation was established in 1881 .
 The Prussian king became its president and controlled its foreign policy and army . He was the king of the Prussian kingdom . He controlled the country .
 Baden, Bavaria, and Wurttemberg remained outside the Confederation but were forced to sign an alliance with Prussia against France . Three southern states remained outside of the Confederation .
 Von Moltke sent 278,000 troops against Austria and Saxony, leaving just 48,000 to face the various other German armies . The battle was fought in Austria, Saxony and the rest of Germany .
 This small force captured the Hanoverian army in just two weeks . It then drove off the remaining southern German troops .
 The larger Prussian force moved south on railroad lines and split into three separate armies . The Army of the Elbe and the First and Second Armies were to march into Saxony and Austria . The Prussian army was divided into three different armies .
 The Saxon army withdrew into Austrian Bohemia, pursued by the Prussians . But the Austrians, commanded by Ludwig Benedek, were unsure which Prussian army to face .
 The Prussians took the advantage, attacking the Austrians forced Benedek to withdraw . Benedek was forced to withdraw from the battle .
 The Prussians had won the Battle of Koniggratz and within three weeks the Austrian emperor sought a ceasefire . The Austrian emperor had to seek a ceasefire after the battle .
 The Austrians had more success in their battles against Italy, Prussia's ally, than Prussia . Prussia and Italy were allies of the Austrians .
 The Austrian and Italian armies met at Custoza, south of the Italian lakes . The Austrians and Italians fought for the first time in 17th century .
 Austrians tried to attack the rear of the advancing Italian army but failed . The Austrians failed to stop the Italian army advancing .
 Prussian bolt-action rifle features a needle that detonates the cartridge in the barrel when fired . Austrian rifled artillery outperformed the Italian smoothbore guns and an improvised charge by an improvised .
 A second battle, this time at sea off the Croatian island of Lissa in the Adriatic, was also won by the Austrians . The Austrians were victorious in the first battle, held off Croatian island Lissa .
 Wooden sailing ships and ironclad steamships engaged in the battle . The battle took place at the end of the Second World War . It was the first of its kind .
 The two victories were to no avail, as the main battle against Prussia was already lost . However, the two victories in the battle were not enough to defeat Prussia .
 The number of railroad lines used to transport Prussian troops to the Saxon border was used in the early 19th century .
 In his view, military strategy should be open to revision, since only the start of a campaign could be planned in detail, he says . In the future, he adds that military strategy must be open-to-examined .
 He therefore ensured that military leaders were trained for all options . He ensured that they were trained to all options.
 In 1870 the vacant throne of Spain was offered to Prince Leopold von Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, a member of the Catholic branch of the ruling house of Prussia . In 1870, the vacant Spanish throne was offered by the Catholic family .
 Wilhelm I of Prussia refused to give assurances that the offer would not be made again . He recorded the events of his meeting with the French ambassador in a telegram he sent to Bismarck . The French objected, Leopold withdrew .
 The latter edited the telegram to suggest insults had been exchanged and released it to the press . The latter then edited it to suggest that insults were exchanged . It was then released to the media .
 Prussian cavalry under Major-General Friedrich von Bredow overrun French artillery at Mars-la-Tour in one of the few successful cavalry charges in modem history . The charge was one of only a successful cavalry charge in modern warfare .
 The war between Prussia and France in 1870-71 transformed Western Europe . It created a unified German empire under Prussian leadership . It replaced the second French empire under Napoleon III with a republic .
 Prussia and her German allies had moved 300,000 troops in three armies along the French border . It also saw Germany taking over two French provinces . It was a cause of massive French resentment that itself became one of the causes of World War I .
 The French had the advantage of the Reffye Mitrailleuse, an early machinegun, and the Chassepot rifle that had a range over twice that of the Prussian Dreyse needle gun .
 Prussian breech-loading artillery, however, was superior to the French muzzle-loaders . The Prussian guns were superior to their muzzle-loaded artillery .
 The first encounters between the two sides in eastern France saw heavy Prussian casualties . The French were forced to withdraw by Prussian outflanking moves .
 Marshal Bazaine, in command of the French left wing in Lorraine, withdrew from Metz toward Verdun to avoid encirclement . Bazaine was in charge of the left wing of Lorraine .
 The Prussians were heavily outnumbered and risked defeat if the French attacked . The Prussian army was heavily outnumbered by the French . Prussian troops were forced to retreat from the French fortress .
 Prussian cavalry under Friedrich von Bredow launched a charge that disrupted French artillery and deterred the French from taking any initiatives until the main Prussian army could arrive . But the French were able to hold off the main army until they arrived .
 The Prussians cut the main road to Verdun, forcing Bazaine to withdraw toward Metz . Bazaine then took up a defensive position between Gravelotte and St. St. Louis .
 Prussians suffered huge losses as they advanced over open ground into heavy Reffye Mitrailleuse fire . On August 18 the Prussian attacked in force, but suffered heavy losses . The Prussian army was defeated in the battle .
 Bazaine, however, failed to launch a counterattack, allowing Prussia's Saxon army to take St. Louis . Bazaine died in the battle, but his troops were able to repel the Saxon attack .
 The Prussians lost 21,000 troops in the siege, removing them from the war . This was a strategic victory for the Germans despite their loss of over 21,00 troops .
 French Army of Chalons under Marshal MacMahon, accompanied by Napoleon III, set out to relieve Bazaine in Metz forces . Napoleon III and Napoleon III fought in Sedan . French defeat at Sedan was a French defeat .
 Prussian reprisals for these attacks and Trochu's unsuccessful sorties from Paris added to the mayhem . Trochu was killed in the fall of 1944 .
 On January 5, 1871, the Prussians began a bombardment of Paris, the first use of anti-aircraft . Paris was driven into a loop of the Meuse River at Sedan and encircled by the Prussian army led by Helmuth von Moltke
 On September 1 Prussian artillery on the hills overlooking the city opened fire and for two days pounded the French, whose own guns were too far away to respond . The French were unable to respond because of the distance from their guns .
 French cavalry bravely charged the Prussian lines, but the gesture was futile . Prussian troops died in the Battle of Mannheim . The Prussian army was defeated in the battle .
 Napoleon III surrendered, meeting Bismarck the next day to agree peace terms . Napoleon III met with the German dictator to agree to peace terms with the Germans .
 The surrender of Napoleon III, however, did not end the war . Napoleon III surrendered to the French Republic in 1877 .
 The emperor was formally deposed and a provisional republican government of national defense was created under General Trochu . Trochu's government was officially overthrown and the emperor formally removed from the throne .
 French cavalry revolver features one of the first designs of brass cartridge . As the Lefaucheux pinfire revolver, it was also known as a French cavalry gun .
 The hammer strikes a pin on the side of the cartridge, which fires the bullet . The bullet was designed to shoot down the balloons being used by French couriers .
 Over four months famine took hold and a final, major breakout failed on January 18, with heavy losses . At first the attack stiffened Parisian morale, but over four months it took hold of famine .
 In the provinces the Prussians were also routing the national defense armies . The Prussian army was also routing national defense forces .
 On January 28, recognizing their inevitable defeat, the French signed an armistice with Bismarck, bringing the war to an end . The French signed a peace treaty with the German dictator, ending the war in Germany .
 The number of francs France had to pay Germany within three years in compensation for the war . After the war, France would have to pay a total of $5 billion .
 Trochu rapidly organized the city's defenses . Prussians made for Paris, to besiege it on September 19 . Trochu quickly organized the defenses .
 Interior Minister Leon Gambetta left Paris by hot-air balloon to organize new Armies of National Defense in the provinces .
 The Treaty of Frankfurt signed in May 1871 transformed the political map of Europe . The Prussians fought hard against these treaties . The treaty was signed in 1871 .
 The Third Republic was created, but Paris rejected the new government and established the independent Paris Commune . The Commune was created by the Third Republic, but the government was not created .
 On 18 January 1871 King Wilhelm I of Prussia was proclaimed Emperor of Germany in the Hall of Mirrors in Versailles . King Wilhelm was proclaimed King of Germany .
 The new empire included all 25 states in north and south Germany, plus the new territory of Alsace-Lorraine . The empire included the new territories of France, Germany and France .
 Although targeted by Prussian artillery fire, his flight was successful . His flight was the first of its kind in the German Empire .
 They were supported mainly by Amerindians and mestizos, people of mixed race, but opposed by wealthier mestisos and conservative Spaniards . They feared for their privileges .
 Conservatives declared Mexico an independent republic in order to preserve the status quo . War against colonial authorities continued for ten years, but after liberals came to power in Spain in 1820 .
 Regional differences, conflicts over the form of government and the role of the church, and acute economic problems made the independent state almost ungovernable . A military strongman, he was a strong military leader .
 From then on, politics was dominated by powerful individuals, often army officers, seeking power for their own ends . It was then ruled out of power for the first time since the Second World War .
 In 1832 General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna seized power to become president for the first of 11 times . He seized power in 1832 and became president of the Philippines .
 In December 1835 a group of Texan volunteers drove the Mexicans out of San Antonio and occupied the old San Antonio de Valero . The Alamo was the site of the first massacre of the Alamo .
 Texan commander, Sam Houston, urged them to leave but they refused . Santa Anna's army was on their way to defeat the Texan .
 At independence in 1821, Mexico consisted of not just the present-day country but also what are now the southwestern states of the US . Mexico stretched from Texas in the east across to California on the Pacific coast .
 Tensions with the increasingly expansionist United States of America soon led to problems . Tensions led to the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 By the end of the decade there were more than 30,000 U.S. settlers . Native Mexicans outnumbered native Mexicans three to one .
 In 1830 Mexican troops occupied Texan towns and policed its borders, levying heavy duties on imported goods . The Mexican government perceived these settlers as a threat and in 1830 its troops occupied Texas towns .
 Stephen Austin was imprisoned for 18 months in Mexico City in 1832 . The Texan leader went to Mexico City to petition the government to make Texas an autonomous province .
 Mexican troops tried to disarm a group of Texans in the town of Gonzales in September 1835 . Mexican troops then returned and tension rose, until tensions rose, with a war with Texas .
 Texans defeated Mexican troops in the space of 18 minutes . The battle took place on April 21 . Texans took the much larger Mexican force by surprise .
 Santa 2,400 by the end of the year had evicted all Mexican troops from their state in a series of surprise attacks . The attacks evicted Mexican soldiers from Santa Santa Santa .
 Mexican President Santa Anna ordered an army to recapture the state . But the Mexican government was already preparing its response . The Mexican government had already assembled an army .
 It crossed the Rio Grande in February 1836 and advanced to San Antonio, Texas, in 1836 . The Army crossed the border and advanced into San Antonio .
 With the arrival of the Mexican army the prospects for an independent Texas looked bleak . But a convention was summoned to prepare a declaration of independence from Mexico .
 This was quickly drafted and signed on March 3, while the defenders of the Alamo were still holding out . This is the first time a player has been signed by the Texas Rangers since 2008 .
 The victims had all surrendered and given up their arms, expecting to be treated as prisoners of war . The victims were expected to have been treated as POWs, but they had given up arms .
 Santa Anna spread out his forces to cover as much territory as possible . Sam Houston, commanding the small Texan army, at first made a strategic retreat . Santa Anna then spread his forces across his territory .
 In May he signed two documents known as the Treaties of Velasco, bringing the war to an end . With Santa Anna now out of office, the government of Mexico refused to recognize Texas as independent .
 Many Texans, including the new president, Sam Houston, hoped to join the USA, but this idea was rejected by anti-slavery states fearful of slave invasion . Texas Rangers to keep out marauding bands of Mexican troops .
 Congress voted to admit Texas to the Union in 1845 . War with the United States ended in Texas's defeat of the Union .
 James Polk had won the recent presidential election because he supported Texas's admission and also wanted to acquire California . Polk won the election because of his support for Texas admission and wanted to buy California .
 He sent a delegation to Mexico City to negotiate a border settlement and the purchase of New Mexico and California for $30 million . The deal was reached in Mexico City .
 Polk sent troops to the disputed mouth of the Rio Grande on the Gulf of Mexico . Polk sent a delegation to the U.S. delegation, but the Mexicans snubbed the United States delegation . Polk was angered by the snub, causing Polk to send troops to a disputed mouth
 In the west General Stephen Kearny and 1,600 troops, including a group of Missouri volunteers led by Alexander Doniphan, easily captured Santa Fe in New Mexico . In the east General Kearny led 1,500 troops, 1,800 troops, and 1.600 troops .
 WILLIAM BARRAT TRAVIS, A DEFENDER of the ALAMO, 1836 owning Texas disrupted the balance of free and slave states in the Union .
 For the next nine years Texas remained an independent nation, although its border with Mexico was a matter of debate . Texas remained independent for nine years .
 Large sums were needed to maintain explorer and surveyor John Fremont . Fremont was the first explorer to explore the North American continent .
 Doniphan and his men headed south from Santa Fe to take El Paso and then cross the border to seize Chihuahua in northern Mexico . El Paso was the last stop in the desert, but the U.S. was still at the border .
 Santa Anna was summoned back to Mexico City to put down a revolt . He was perhaps fortunate that he was called back to help put down the revolt .
 Thousands of regular soldiers made up the United States army before the outbreak of war in 1846 . The U.S. became a major factor in the American Revolution .
 THOUSAND fighting men and staff were employed by the army by the end of the war .
 Short, stabbing, 19-in blade was of little practical use as a weapon . Short sword was issued to artillerymen in case their batteries were overrun by the enemy .
 Doniphan took Monterrey after a five-day siege in September . He crossed the Rio Grande, captured Matamoros and then headed inland to link up with his force . The Mexican army crossed the border and captured Matasoros .
 At this point, Santa Anna came back from exile in Cuba, where he had been since losing the presidency in 1844, to resume leadership of his country . Santa Anna had been in exile since 1844 .
 He raised an army and in February 1847 came close to defeating Taylor at Buena Vista outside Monterrey . In 1847, he raised a small army and fought Taylor .
 Polk ordered General Winfield Scott to lead a 12,000-strong army by sea to capture the Mexican port of Veracruz on the Caribbean coast . Polk ordered the capture in order to break the deadlock in Mexico .
 The city surrendered in March after a three-day bombardment . United States troops then headed inland to seize Mexico City . Mexico City surrendered after three days of bombardment .
 Santa Anna suffered three heavy defeats before he asked for an armistice in August . He asked for the end of the conflict in August after a series of heavy defeats .
 After two weeks of futile negotiations, United States troops resumed fighting and entered the city in September 1847 . They remained in the city until peace terms were agreed . U.S. troops remained at the city for two weeks .
 The U.S. had won largely because Mexico had been unable to present a united front . The United States had won the war largely because of Mexico's failure to present united front. The spoils of war were the United States and Mexico .
 The presidency had changed hands several times during the war and some provinces had refused to fight . Some provinces refused to participate in the fight .
 Per cent was the amount by which United States national territory was increased following the war of 1846-48 . The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed in February 1848 .
 Mexico recognized the independence of Texas and its subsequent entry into the Union . Texas became the first state to join the U.S. State of Texas in 1867 .
 It also agreed to sell what are now the United States states of New Mexico, Arizona, half of Colorado, Utah, Nevada, and California to the U.S. for $15 million .
 The border was fixed along the Rio Grande and then west to the Pacific . The border is now located in Texas and Texas .
 In 1853, in return for a further $ 10 million, the Santa Anna government agreed another boundary adjustment in southern New Mexico and Arizona . Santa Anna's government agreed to the adjustment in 1853 in exchange for $10 million .
 The land purchased would provide suitable terrain for the United States Southern Pacific Railroad to reach the Pacific . The land was purchased by the U.S. Southern Pacific .
 The discovery of gold in California in 1848 had transformed the state into one of the richest regions on the continent .
 Santa Anna returned as president in 1853 but he and the conservatives were ousted in a revolution in 1855 . Santa Anna was ousted as president of Spain in 1854 .
 The liberals introduced a new constitution in 1857, causing a civil war with the conservatives that ended in a liberal victory in 1861 . The liberal victory ended the civil war in 1861, ending in the death of Napoleon III .
 President Benito Juarez suspended interest payments on foreign loans . With the country bankrupt, the new president suspended interest on foreign debt .
 In January 1862 the three main creditors, Britain, Spain, and France, sent fleets to Veracuz to enforce payment of the debts . The ships arrived in January 1862 .
 France had a secret agenda and intended to conquer the country, so the British and Spanish withdrew . It emerged that France had plans to conquer France .
 French advance on Mexico City was halted at Puebla, where the Mexican army drove them back in May . The French advance was halted by the Mexican government in May after a Mexican army drive them back .
 The French had to await reinforcements and did not take Puebla until the following year . The French eventually entered Mexico City in June 1863, entering Mexico City .
 They installed the Habsburg Archduke Maximilian as emperor, but he was unable to rally support for his rule . They then installed him as emperor but he failed to win support .
 A guerrilla war against France ensued until the French emperor, Napoleon 111, withdrew his troops in 1867 . Napoleon 111 withdrew his forces from the French empire, ending the guerrilla war .
 For many of the Americans who fought against Mexico, it was their first experience of war . It was the first time they had been to war .
 The convention of 1787 that drew up the U.S. Constitution allowed each of the 13 states to decide for itself whether to allow slavery . The convention also allowed each state to decide whether to let slavery .
 The seven northern states abolished slavery, while the six southern states kept it, as slaves provided cheap labor on their lucrative cotton, tobacco, and sugar plantations . The southern states used slaves to provide cheap labor for their lucrative plantations .
 As new states were admitted to the Union, the southern states grew increasingly concerned that the balance would shift against slavery, leading to its abolition and massively damaging their plantation-based economy . The southern states were concerned that slavery would lead to the abolition .
 The Missouri Compromise of 1820 balanced the admission of free and slave states to the Union . It was part of a compromise that balanced admission of both free and slaves to the United States .
 In 1857, the United States Supreme Court overturned the Missouri Compromise as unconstitutional . The court ruled in 1857 that it was unconstitutional to overturn it .
 Lincoln promised that he would refuse to extend slavery to new territories in the west if elected . Lincoln was already a figure of hate in the southern states, having promised to refuse slavery to the west .
 Robert E Lee could have commanded either side in the war . Lincoln offered him command of the Union forces when the war broke out . Lee opposed to the 11 states leaving the Union .
 Tactical skill against numerically larger forces won him major victories at the Seven Days Battles, Fredericksburg, and Chancellorsville . Strategically he was less successful, failing to invade the North in 1862 and 1863, and losing at Antietam and Gettysburg .
 The four-year civil war that divided North and South in the U.S. was the most destructive war ever fought on the North American continent . Civil war was most destructive ever fought in North America .
 The outcome of its battles was often finely balanced, and in the first two years both sides tried but failed to achieve an outright victory they so desperately sought . Both sides failed to win outright victory in two years .
 Southern leaders withdrew their states from the Union before Lincoln was even inaugurated . The southern states withdrew from the union before Lincoln's inauguration .
 South Carolina left first, on December 20, 1860, and ten more followed early the next year . South Carolina was the first state to leave the South in 1860 .
 Together they set up the Confederacy, choosing Jefferson Davis as president and establishing a capital at Richmond, Virginia . Jefferson Davis was president and president of the Confederacy .
 On April 12, 1861, Confederate forces bombarded the Union-held Fort Sumter in South Carolina . The attack marked the start of the civil war, marking the start .
 The Union's population of 23 million dwarfed the Confederacy's 9 million . More than a third of whom were slaves were slaves . The Union had 23 million people .
 The Union held most of the country's industry and railroads, while the Confederacy lacked most essential supplies other than food . The Confederacy lacked essential supplies .
 Neither side had an army, for the regular U.S. army was only 16,000 strong and had divided with the states . Neither side, however, had a army .
 Both sides started to recruit 1 MILLION; are thought to have died on both sides in the U.S. Civil War . Some 618,000 soldiers, two-thirds of whom died from disease .
 The Union blockaded Confederate ports to prevent supplies from getting in, and began amphibious operations . The capture of New Orleans in April 1862 was the most successful of which was the capture of the city .
 Inexperienced troops under General Irvin McDowell headed south into Virginia, but faced a hastily assembled Confederate army in July 1861 . The Confederate army was reinforced by troops moved in by train, between Bull Run and Manassas rail junction .
 Sales of Colt .44 revolver soared during the U.S. Civil War . Colonel Thomas J Jackson's Popular pistol was used by Union troops .
 A counterattack saw off the Union troops at this first battle of Bull Run, earning ""Stonewall"" Jackson promotion to general . Jackson was promoted to general after the battle .
 Further battles in Virginia in 1862 showed the Union that the war would be hard won . Further battles showed that the Union would struggle to win the war .
 Union general, Ulysses S Grant, captured forts in Tennessee and forced the Confederates to abandon Nashville . A new front opened to the west when U. Grant captured forks in Tennessee . U.S. General Grant forced Confederate forces to leave Nashville, Tennessee, in 18
 Grant then advanced down the Tennessee River and waited near Shiloh Church for the Army of the Ohio to join him . Grant then retreated down the river and waited for his army to join in .
 Confederate battle flag has 13 stars—one for each breakaway state plus Kentucky and Missouri could meet . The Confederate flag has one star for each state plus one for each other . The flag was designed for the Confederate state .
 Confederate general Albert S Johnston launched a surprise attack on April 6, 1862 . Confederate general Johnston launched an attack on the battlefield in 1862 .
 Grant was forced back, but with the overnight arrival of Ohio troops he was able to launch his own attack at dawn the next day . The Confederates were forced to withdraw, forcing Grant to launch an attack . Grant's attack forced Confederates to withdraw .
 Union victory at Shiloh weakened Confederate hold of the west and opened the way to Union seizure and control of the Mississippi . New technology enabled the Union to defeat the Confederate forces in the battle .
 A range of naval craft took part in this campaign, including ironclad gunboats, gunboats and semi-submerged armored iron raft USS Monitor . The campaign included the USS Monitor, an armored armored raft .
 The two met in the first-ever clash of iron warships, although neither caused sufficient damage to decide the contest .
 Railroads eased communications over long distances, despite being vulnerable to enemy disruption . Railroads and the telegraph eased communication over long distance .
 Photographers and reporters brought the war home to people via newspapers . Photographers, reporters brought it home to the people .
 The muzzle-loading rifle-musket used Minie bullets that could be loaded quickly and fired accurately, but still only from a standing position . It was used in the early days of the Civil War era .
 Modern breech-loading repeater rifles were restricted to cavalry and sniper use, while cannon cannon were little improved from Napoleonic times . Modern repeater rifle use was limited to cavalry .
 These revolutionary craft were first seen on March 8, 1862, at the Battle of Hampton Roads . The revolutionary craft first appeared at the battle of the same day .
 Confederates clad the half-burned hull of the captured USS Merrimack with thick iron plates from the waterline up . Union blockade of the coast of Virginia was part of effort to break the Union blockade .
 CSS Virginia rammed and sank one Union ship, and drove two more aground . The CSS Virginia was the first ship to sink a Union ship . It was also called the CSS Virginia .
 The next day the Union navy responded . Stalemate was a stalemate .
 A Union army advanced toward Richmond but was met by a bold counterattack by General Robert E Lee at the end of June at the Seven Days Battles . General Lee's counterattack against the Union army was the series of encounters known as the Seven days Battles .
 General George B McClellan withdrew to the coast after the offensive unnerved his commander . The Union forces outnumbered their opponents and were better equipped, but were better armed than their opponents .
 Confederates then won a second battle at Bull Run in August and decided to invade the North . The Confederates won the second battle in August . They then won the Second Battle of Bull Run .
 McClellan learned of the invasion plan but was too slow to act, allowing Lee to regroup behind Antietam Creek in Maryland . Lee's plan was to invade the area, but he was too quick to act . Lee died in the Battle of Gettysburg, Maryland, in
 The one-day battle that followed was unevenly matched, as Lee's army was greatly outnumbered . Lee's forces were greatly outnumbered in the battle . The battle was fought in September 1862 .
 Antietam was costliest one-day battle of the whole war . The battle was the costliest single day of the war and costliest of all .
 The number of reserve Union troops fatally held back by General McClellan at Antietam enemy, and suffered 12,000 casualties . The Confederates suffered almost as many as the Union .
 A last Union effort to take Richmond failed in December that year . Union troops heading south to the city crossed the Rappahannock River in an attempt to seize Fredricksburg, but were repelled .
 North had far greater resources than the South, as well as command of the sea . Union forces had to conquer Confederate territory to secure victory . The conflict was always going to be a long war of attrition .
 The stalemate reached between the two sides by the end of 1862 was not broken until July of the following year . After the stalemate was broken in July of that year .
 Confederates continued to rely on Lee's tactical genius . Lee won the battle at Chancellorsville in May . Lee's tactics helped Confederate forces win the Civil War .
 McClellan lost his job for failing to pursue Lee after the battle at Antietam . Grant was promoted to commanderin-chief in 1864, giving the Union the military leader it needed to win the war .
 Lincoln won the 1860 election against a divided, pro-slavery opposition . Lincoln took less than half of the popular vote but won all the free states except one . Lincoln was elected president of the Union in 1860 .
 Confederates hoped he would be defeated by an anti-war candidate who would bring the war to an end . No longer able to vote as they had left the Union, the Confederates wanted him defeated .
 The crucial battle of the U.S. Civil War occurred at the small Pennsylvania town of Gettysburg in early July 1863 . Gettysburg was the first major battle in the Civil War .
 The battle itself was not planned and for three days its outcome was unclear . For three days it was unclear, but the result was overwhelming . The result of the battle was overwhelming.
 Confederate invasion of the North was stopped and the tide of war turned inexorably in the Union's favor . The Confederate invasion was stopped .
 Confederate Army of Northern Virginia, led by General Robert E Lee, advanced north up the Shenandoah Valley into Unionheld Pennsylvania in late June .
 The Union Army of the Potomac, led by General George Meade, had instructions to seek out and destroy Lee's army . In response, General Meade led the Union Army to seek revenge for Lee .
 When Lee heard that the Union Army was nearby, he ordered his scattered troops to gather at Gettysburg . Lee's scattered troops were able to defeat the Union in the battle .
 Hill arrived first and on July 1 entered the town in search of much-needed shoes . Hill arrived at the start of July 1 in search for shoes . He says he was looking for shoes in the shoes he needed .
 A small dismounted Union cavalry troop opened fire on them . The sound of gunfire drew in large numbers of troops from both sides . A small, dismounted Confederate cavalry troop opens fire on the small cavalry troop .
 Confederate infantry swept forward through the town, but the Union held an inverted, U-shaped, defensive line on the high ground of Cemetery Ridge to the south of the town . Confederate infantry then swept forward .
 On July 2 Lee launched an attack on the now reinforced Union lines . Lee launched the attack on July 2 . The Confederates halted .
 At the north end of the ridge they failed to capture Cemetery Hill and other Union-held positions . The battle was over in 18 months .
 They failed to capture Little Round Top at the south end, from where their artillery could have dominated the battlefield . Crucially, they also failed to take Little Top Top, from which they could have captured .
 Confederate bombardment softened up Union positions in the center . At around 1:00pm, Confederate forces softened up Confederate positions . Union positions were softened up by the bombardment .
 Confederate infantry, including a division under Major-General George Pickett, advanced through open fields but were met by heavy Union artillery fire . Two hours later, Confederate infantry were met with heavy Union fire . Confederate infantry advanced through fields but met by artillery fire.
 Union infantry opened up with volleys of Minie bullets fired from behind earthworks and stone walls . Union infantry opening fire on enemy lines . Minie bullet volleys opened fire on Union troops .
 The Confederates were stopped in their tracks and within an hour the battle was over . Within an hour of the battle, the Confederates had been driven from the battlefield .
 The next day, July 4, sporadic fighting continued until it petered out in the afternoon .
 Both sides collected their wounded and began to bury their dead . Lee's proposal for a prisoner exchange was rejected by Meade .
 Gettysburg was the largest battle ever fought on American soil . Gettysburg had been (and still remains) America's largest battle on U.S. soil, Gettysburg .
 About 85,000 Union troops faced 75,000 Confederates with both sides suffering heavy casualties . Both sides suffered heavy casualties in the battle .
 Sherman's troops ripped up railroad tracks, burned crops and destroyed farms in an effort to ""make Georgia howl" Sherman himself described it as an attempt to make Georgia "howl"
 Union states had a large industrial and agricultural economy capable of sustaining a long war . The Union states were able to sustain a long-lasting war .
 The breakaway Confederate states were mainly agricultural, needing to export their produce to pay for the import of war goods . The Confederate states needed to import war goods to help pay for their imports .
 Two years into the Civil War, neither Union nor Confederacy had gained a decisive military advantage . The Union and Confederacy were unable to win decisive military victories .
 A total commitment to win—at whatever cost, would now be required for either side to achieve an outright victory . The two sides must now commit to winning at whatever cost .
 Springfield rifle-muskets manufactured at various different factories across the states of the Union in the four years of the war . A MILLION number of Springfield rifle muskets were made .
 The Union was too slow to bring its superior resources to bear . Despite its naval blockade and successes in the west, there was stalemate in Virginia .
 T he issue of slavery had caused the war, and it was a resolution of this issue that President Lincoln used to break the deadlock . Lincoln used this resolution of the issue as a way to end the war .
 On January 1, 1863, he issued the Emancipation Proclamation, declaring free all slaves in states still in rebellion against the Union . The proclamation was issued in 1863 .
 Its immediate effect was limited, as it did not free slaves in the Union and could not yet be enforced in the Confederacy . It did not yet free slaves .
 Confederate hopes of recognition and support from Europe were dashed . But it gave the Union the moral high ground and ended Confederate hopes for recognition .
 Some 200,000 joined up, although they were paid less than white soldiers . They could not become officers and could not be officers . They were not allowed to become officers .
 Conscription, which the Confederacy had introduced in 1862, was enforced in the Union in 1863 . Conscription was enforced by the Union after the war .
 By the end of the war around 50 percent of eligible Union men and some 75 percent of Confederate men had been mobilized .
 Lincoln found Ulysses S Grant and William T Sherman the generals he needed to achieve victory . Grant and Sherman were the generals Lincoln needed to win the Civil War . Sherman and Grant were both generals Lincoln found .
 Superior manpower, greater resources, and the industrial production of weapons and other supplies did the rest . Superior manpower and greater resources were the key to success .
 He advanced into Union territory, advancing toward Pennsylvania . His tactical skills won a superb victory at Chancellorsville in May 1863 .
 Two months later his offensive was turned back at the fiercely contested three-day battle of Gettysburg . But two months later he was forced to retreat south and retreat south .
 Union forces finally took the city of Vicksburg on the Mississippi after a lengthy siege, cutting off the states of Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas from the rest of the Confederacy .
 The Union naval blockade slowly throttled the economy of the South . Lincoln's decision in April 1864 to end prisoner exchanges between the two sides was to the greater detriment of the resource-starved South .
 The Union Enfield bullet mold was used on both sides in the U.S. Civil War . Hand-held device made one bullet at a time out of carefully poured molten lead .
 Abraham Lincoln attended Ford's Theater in Washington, D.C. on April 14,1865, five days after the Confederate surrender . Lincoln was shot in wearied of fighting and was killed in 1864 .
 The character of the war changed, the skirmishes and pitched battles of the first two or so years replaced by a brutal war of attrition . The brutal war was designed to attack the Confederate economy and intimidate its population .
 Lincoln and Grant did not seek such a war, preferring to win quickly on the battlefield, but they were prepared to achieve victory at any cost . Grant and Lincoln were not interested in a long-term war .
 Grant planned to end the war with a giant pincer movement in March 1864 . Grant planned the end of the war in 1864 with the help of a giant movement .
 Grant had resigned from the U.S. army in 1854 and then lost his Missouri farm during the 1857 depression . The Army of the Potomac would head south into Virginia to engage General Lee's Army of Northern Virginia . Grant's resignation from the United States Army in 18
 Back in the army in the rank of colonel, he fought aggressively in Tennessee, notably at Shiloh, and was soon promoted .
 Lincoln appointed him commander-in-chief as the man he believed would best achieve victory in March 1864 . Lincoln appointed Lincoln as president of the United States in 1865 .
 Booth shot Lincoln with a .44 Derringer pistol by the actor John Wilkes Booth . Booth was a Confederate sympathizer . Booth's gun was fired at Lincoln in the head by Lincoln's assassin .
 All U.S. slaves were freed in 1865 when the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 became law as the 13th Amendment to the United States constitution . The 13th amendment was passed in 1865 .
 The 14th Amendment of 1868 granted them U.S. citizenship, and the 15th Amendment guaranteed their right to vote . They were also granted the right to citizenship .
 The defeated Confederate states were occupied by Union troops . They were later occupied by Confederate states .
 Defeated states were allowed to rejoin the Union only after they approved the 14th Amendment . The 14th amendment was approved by the U.S. Congress in 1881 .
 White Southerners manipulated laws to disenfranchise black people again in 1871 . All did so by 1871, but whites still disenfranchised black people .
 Cascabel, for moving barrel up and down finally capture the Confederate capital, Richmond, while further to the west, Sherman's army would sweep from Tennessee southeast into Georgia .
 The war in Virginia was bloody and initially inconclusive . The final months were the final months of the war .
 Union attacks at Wilderness and Spotsylvania in May 1864 and at Cold Harbor in early June failed to break through Confederate defenses . Union attacks in May and June 1864 failed to breach Confederate defenses at Wilderness .
 In June Grant crossed the James River to attack Richmond from the south, but the town of Petersburg lay in his path . The town lay in Petersburg .
 There developed a ninemonth siege, both sides digging defensive trenches and earthworks . Both sides dug trenches, earthworks and trenches to defend their territory .
 Tied down, THOUSAND Union troops were killed or wounded at Petersburg . Union troops died or wounded in Petersburg, Russia .
 Confederates grew increasingly hungry and demoralized as well-supplied Union reinforcements kept arriving . Confederates became demoralized and hungry as Union reinforcements continued to arrive . Union reinforcements were able to repel Confederates .
 In May 1864 Sherman and his troops swept into Georgia, taking Atlanta by the end of August . Sherman's troops captured Atlanta in August .
 His troops cut a 50-mile wide swathe of destruction as they headed east through Georgia . His troops then cut a swath of destruction across the state .
 At Petersburg the Union army employed a variety of siege tactics . At the ""Dictator"" railroad mortar at Petersburg at Petersburg .
 Confederate army now down to barely 60,000 men . Lee decided to withdraw from Petersburg, abandon Richmond, and try to link up with troops still fighting Sherman in North Carolina .
 On April 2, 1865, Union troops broke through and finally captured Petersburg . Petersburg was captured by the Union Army in 1865 .
 Lee managed to withdraw, but was blocked at Appomattox Court House on April 8 . Lee is scheduled to appear in court in Virginia on April 15 . Lee has been charged with treason in the Civil War .
 In the 15th century the Portuguese set up a number of trading stations down the west coast of Africa as they made their way south round the tip of Africa to India .
 The French, Dutch, and English followed in the 1600s, setting up trading and slaving stations c the West African coast . The Dutch, French and English set up trading stations in West Africa .
 The only substantial settlements were those established by the Portuguese after 1505 in what is now Mozambique, and after 1652, by the Dutch in the Cape Colony .
 There were also a number of powerful Islamic states that emerged in sub-Saharan West Africa during the 19th century .
 The Sokoto caliphate was established in northern Nigeria in 1820 . The Tukulor empire in the Niger Valley was founded in 1863 .
 At the beginning of the 19th century European contact with Africa was limited to trading stations . Those on the west coast played a major role in the shipping of African slaves to the Americas .
 By the end of the century almost the entire continent was under European control . Europe was under control of almost all of the continent .
 The coastal regions were swiftly subdued, but a determined resistance movement grew up around the figure of Abd al-Qadir . The coastal region was swiftly subdued by the Arab Spring .
 As France continued its conquests he proclaimed a holy war against the invading infidels . He proclaimed the holy war in France .
 The French retaliated with a brutal scorched earth policy and occupied his headquarters at Mascara . The French responded with a scorched-earth policy .
 In 1844 the Sultan of Morocco intervened but was defeated by the French in Morocco . The French defeated the Sultan in 1844 .
 Algeria soon became an important source of troops for the French army, notably the zouaves, who served as light infantry . Algeria was a major source of French troops during the French occupation of Algeria .
 British trading posts on the Gold Coast came into conflict with the gold-rich Asante kingdom . Trading posts in West Africa were first established in 17th century .
 An army of 34,000 men was landed, defeated the troops sent to oppose them and occupied Algiers on 5 July . The invasion took place on the same day as the invasion .
 A British expedition led by Sir Garnet Wolseley halted an Asante advance in November 1873 . The British expedition then moved into the interior, armed with artillery .
 Wolseley defeated the Asante in January at Amoafu and then burned down their capital, Kumasi, forcing their king, Kofi Karikari, to make peace . The Asante were defeated in January and then made peace with Wolsely .
 Further wars in the 1890s led to the establishment of a British protectorate in 1897 . The protectorate was established in 1897 after a series of wars between Russia and France .
 The establishment of a colony at Lagos in 1861 brought the British into conflict with the Sokoto caliphate in Sokoto . Elsewhere, a colony of a protectorate in Senegal in 1854 led to conflict with Tukulor empire . In 1854, the French established a protect
 In 1879 King Leopold II of Belgium set up trading stations on the Congo River . He established a personal empire in the region . The International African Association established trading stations in 1879 .
 The race to colonize the whole of Africa accelerated dramatically after 1885 . In 1881 France established a The Scramble for Africa .
 European explorers, adventurers, traders, traders and missionaries led the race into the interior of the continent . The Germans grabbed Namibia, Cameroon, and Togo in 1884 .
 European powers competed for African resources, markets, investments, peoples, and territories . A ""Scramble for Africa"" broke out in Africa in the 1930s .
 Otto von Bismarck, the German chancellor, convened a conference in Berlin in 1884-85 to control the situation . The conference took place in Berlin, Germany, in the summer of that year .
 It established a framework for expansion that largely avoided conflicts between the powers, opening the way for the total European colonization of Africa . It established an international framework for Africa .
 On September 2, his 26,000strong army met 50,000 men under the command of the Mahdi's successor at Omdurman . The battle took place in the heart of the country's largest city .
 The battle was one-sided, the British artillery decimating the Charge of the 21 st Lancers at Omdurman, Sudan . The British encountered a concealed force of 2,500 Mahdists .
 A young Winston Churchill took part in a cavalry charge in which he took part . The cavalry charge was one of the last by the British army, driven off by a young Churchill .
 These weapons were used by the Mahdi's army when it overran Khartoum, killing General Gordon, in 1885 . General Gordon was killed in the attack .
 Traditional African weaponry was of little use against modern rifles and machine guns . In a pitched battle, traditional African weapons were of little help against modern weapons .
 Although technically part of the Ottoman empire, Egypt had been autonomous since 1807 . The British in Egypt and Sudan were the first to leave the country . Egypt was ruled by the Ottomar empire until 1807.
 Ismail Pasha permitted the construction of the Suez Canal in 1869 . Pasha had modernized the country, but had run up huge debts in the process .
 Demands by creditors for repayment in 1881 led to riots in Alexandria that killed several British citizens . Several British citizens were killed in the riots in Egypt .
 In July 1882 British gunboats bombarded the port while a British army under Wolseley defeated a 38,000-strong Egyptian force at Tel el-Kebir in a 30-minute battle .
 Control of Egypt brought with it Sudan, which the Egyptians had conquered . Sudan was conquered by the Egyptians .
 In 1881 Muhammad Ahmad declared himself the Mahdi and waged a holy war against Egyptian rule . He annihilated a British-led Egyptian army of 10,000 men in 1883 . Muhammad Ahmad was killed by the Egyptian army in the same year .
 General Charles Gordon was killed by the Mahdi's troops on January 26, 1885 . The British government dispatched to evacuate citizens from the capital, Khartoum, but he stayed .
 The most successful of the early rapid-fire guns, the Gatling was developed in the U.S. in the 1860s . Gordon's death was avenged in 1898, Gatling gun .
 The ten-barreled model was used by the British army in Africa and India in the 1870s and 80s . It was used in Africa, India and Africa in the 70s and 1980s .
 Trail spade for anchoring gun to the ground . The gun was cradled on a yoke fixed to the center of the axle .
 The barrels moved from side to side automatically with the turning of the crank . The barrels move automatically when the crank is turned on .
 Early Gatlings were mounted on a carriage with two large wheels, like conventional field artillery . The gun was mounted in front of a projecting beam for balancing and towing the gun .
 Not until it was made lighter and mounted on a tripod was the gun’s full potential as an infantry weapon realized . The gun's full potential was realized when it was mounted on tripod .
 Each of the ten revolving barrels had its own breech, chamber, and firing pin mechanism . One cartridge at a time was fed into the breech by gravity from a magazine attached to the top of the gun .
 Mahdists even before they came within range of the deadly Maxim guns or the British trenches . Mahdistists were killed by Maxim guns and the British troops .
 The technological gap between wellarmed European armies and primitively armed native peoples mostly ensured European victory . The invaders often needed to enlist local allies and recruit large numbers of local troops to win .
 The colonization of Africa continued in the 20th century, with the French and Spanish takeover of Morocco in 1912 and the Italian invasions of Libya and Ethiopia . After the invasion of Morocco, the Spanish and French took control of Morocco .
 Of the European colonial powers, only one to suffer a lasting military setback was Italy . Italy was defeated by Ethiopia at Adowa in 1896 . Ethiopia defeated by Italy in 1897 .
 In 1935-36 Italy finally conquered the country, uniting it with its other East African colonies of Eritrea and Italian Somaliland . Italy also conquered Eritrea in 1935-37 .
 Many parts of Africa saw years of fierce resistance to European rule . The continent was ruled by European rule in the early 1900s .
 In 1926 it took a combined Franco-Spanish force of 250,000 men to put an end to the guerrilla campaigns of Abd el-Krim in Morocco .
 After World War II independence movements gained strength all over Africa . Independence movements in Africa gained strength in the aftermath of WWII .
 They slowly expanded their control of the region . They took Taiwan in 1683, Amur in Siberia in 1689, Mongolia in 1697, Tibet in 1720, and eastern Turkestan in 1760 . They also took Amur, Mongolia, Tibet and Tibet .
 Qing insularity brought China into conflict with European powers in the late 18th century . China's insularity led to conflict between European powers .
 Emperor Qianlong ruled ""an empire with no boundary,"" and recognized no equal . Like his predecessors, he ruled an empire with 'no boundary' and no equals . He ruled the Chinese empire, which he called an "empire with no boundaries"
 In 1793, at the height of European expansion, he was met by a British trade delegation . Lord Macartney sailed to China aboard HMS Lion, a 64-gun man of war .
 The emperor declined to offer any trading concessions to Britain . The emperor received the delegation, but declined any trade concessions .
 No European manufactured goods could be exchanged for Chinese exports, which could only be paid for in silver . The British king was welcome to pay homage to the Chinese king, George III, but he was not allowed to pay him .
 The demand for Chinese imports increased, while supplies of silver became scarcer . As a result, a crisis grew in Europe; the demand for silver increased .
 The Empress Cixi became ruler of China during the regencies of her son, Tongzhi, and her nephew, Guangxu . She became ruler during her son's reign .
 When Guangxu announced plans to modernize China she overthrew him and consigned him to house arrest until he died . She overthrew his plans and put him under house arrest for life .
 She opposed all reforms and supported the violently xenophobic Boxer rebels . She was opposed to all reforms in the Philippines .
 She is held largely responsible for China’s failure to modernize and for the Revolution of 1911 . She is also blamed for the failure of modernizing China and the 1911 Revolution .
 In the 19th century the Chinese Empire declined as foreign powers intervened in its internal affairs . Foreign powers slowly acquired parts of its territory . Wars in China saw the rise of the Empire .
 This erosion of Chinese power was accelerated by the highly conservative nature of the Qing government, which led to civil wars and finally to revolution in 1911 . The Qing government was extremely conservative, leading to civil war and revolution .
 C hina's ban on European imports and the increasing demand for Chinese tea, porcelain, and silk in Europe caused a huge trade imbalance between the regions .
 The British East India Company redressed this by illegally selling Bengali opium to China . The company illegally sold the opium to the Chinese in order to get the opium trade .
 The Chinese tried to suppress the trade, confiscating stocks of opium in Guangzhou and besieging the British merchants . The number of addicts rose as the number of opium addicts rose .
 44 British ships with some 4,000 marines were sent from Singapore to demand compensation . In June 1840 a fleet of 44 ships with 4,200 marines was sent to Singapore . The war was the first Opium War .
 The expedition blockaded the mouth of the Pearl River, then defeated the Chinese at the Yangtze River . The expedition blocked the Chinese from the Pearl to defeat them in China .
 Coastal towns were bombarded, Guangzhou was taken, and tax barges were seized, drastically cutting the imperial income . Guangzhou and Guangzhou were taken, cutting imperial income drastically .
 China's defenses were no match for ironclad steamships and European cannon and muskets . China's chief weapon of the Manchu soldier was still the composite bow .
 In 1842 the Chinese sued for peace and signed the Treaty of Nanjing, ceding Hong Kong to Britain . The treaty opened up five so-called ""treaty ports"" to British merchants, who remained exempt from the jurisdiction of local law .
 Hong Xiuquan established the Taiping dynasty as a way of legitimizing his rule . He minted coins to legitimize his court for the first time, and opening up ten new treaty ports .
 Merchants from all foreign powers were allowed to use all 15 treaty ports . Christian missionaries and other foreigners were given leave to travel throughout China .
 The Chinese failed to ratify the treaty immediately, only doing so after an Anglo-French force captured Beijing and burned the Summer Palace . The treaty was ratified after the capture of Beijing's Summer Palace by the French forces .
 European powers were attacking China from without, the country was assailed from within . Taiping Rebellion was the Taiping rebellion of the Chinese people .
 His aim was to overthrow what he saw as the ""foreign" Qing regime, to take the land into common ownership, and to ban the use of opium, tobacco, and alcohol .
 Rebels exploited people's fears about China's failing economy . Rebels rapidly grew in numbers and determination. Exploiting people's fear about the economy .
 Within two years, a million-strong army swept EAST ASIA . The Taiping Rebellion and the Sino-Japanese War were all over the world . The Boxer Rebellion was the first uprising in China in 1900 .
 During the siege over 100,000 rebels committed suicide, including Hong Hong, who took poison . Hong took poison during the siege . Hong was the first rebel to take his own life .
 France began to invade the Chinese-held north Vietnamese province of Tonkin in 1883 . France invaded southern and central Vietnam under its control by 1883, then invaded China's north Vietnam .
 Captain Henri Riviere marched into Hanoi and evicted the Chinese troops occupying the city . Captain Riviere was the first French captain to enter the city since the French invasion .
 Trade restrictions were lifted after the war, opium remained illegal in China . Opium was banned in China following the Boxer Rebellion in 1901 .
 In 1856 Chinese officials boarded the Arrow, a British-registered Chinese ship it suspected of smuggling opium . The Arrow was believed to have been smuggling opium from China .
 The British retaliated by seizing Guangzhou and attacking other Chinese ports . The French used the murder of a French missionary in China as a pretext for their attack .
 In 1858, with the British close to Beijing, the Chinese signed the Treaty of Tientsin, giving the British diplomatic representation at the imperial down the Yangtze valley . The Chinese took Nanjing, killing thousands of civilians and over 30,000 imperial soldiers . Thousands of civilians
 With Nanjing as its capital, the Heavenly Kingdom expanded to encompass much of south and central China, totaling some 30 million people at its height . At its height, Nanjing was Nanjing's capital .
 Hong was repulsed at Shanghai by the European-trained ""Ever-Victorious Army,"" led by American general Frederick Ward . However, its power began to wane in 1861 when Hong was defeated at Shanghai .
 French reinforcements won a series of victories forcing the Chinese viceroy to concede a joint protectorate over the province . French reinforcements then won a number of victories in the province forcing China to concede it .
 A multinational force tried to quell the uprising but was repelled by imperial forces . Imperial forces repelled the uprising in the early 1900s .
 Cixi then ordered the killing of all foreigners, the resulting dead included a German minister and a Japanese diplomat . The resulting dead include a German and Japanese diplomat.
 A far larger force entered Beijing in August ships destroyed its entire fleet of six new cruisers at Fuzhou . The force destroyed the fleet of ships .
 Japan and China clashed over the Chinese protectorate of Korea in the 1950s . Even worse was to come in the next decade when the two countries clashed over a protectorate .
 In August 1894 their two navies met on the Yalu River, on the border between Korea and China . The two countries first met in 1894, when the Korean and Chinese navies fought in Korea .
 Japan's superior tactics and weaponry, combined with Chinese ineptitude, gave Japan an Boxer Rebellion . Two of their ships were destroyed when their own paint and varnish caught fire . Resentment of foreign involvement in China reached its peak in the Boxer rebellion of 1899 .
 The I-ho-chuan society had the professed aim of ridding China of all its foreigners, particularly the Christian missionaries . Encouraged by the Empress Dowager Cixi in return for their support of the Qing dynasty .
 China's coastal forts were razed and all anti-foreign societies were banned . In the aftermath China was fined some $6. billion (in today's L terms)
 Foreign troops also stationed along the railroad from Beijing to Shanghai . Foreign troops were also stationed in the area .
 Clemens von Ketteler was one of the foreigners killed in the Boxer Rebellion . His killer was executed in the execution of the German minister .
 The collapse of Qing power led to revolution in 1911 and a long period of instability and war that only ended with the Communist takeover of 1949 . The collapse in 1911 led to the collapse of the Qing power .
 Sun Zhongshshshan proclaimed the Three Principles of Revolution (nationalism, democracy, and socialism) but gave way to General Yuan Shikai, who became president . Sun was the leader of the revolution .
 Shikai failed to unite the country, and by the time of his death in 1916 China was under the control of regional warlords .
 Shikai's eventual successor, Jian Jieshi, re-established central power from the new capital of Nanjing . He re-established central power in Nanjing, China .
 Expansion west across the Mississippi to the Pacific coast brought United States settlers into conflict with Native American tribes who lived on the Great Plains . Plains Indian Wars led to the deaths of Native Americans .
 Settler encroachment into their hunting grounds led to massacres and wars that would last until the end of the 19th century . Settler . encroachment . into their . hunting grounds . The settlements would last for centuries .
 The expansion of the United States westwards from its original 13 colonies on the Atlantic coast to the Mississippi River brought settlers into conflict with Native Americans . The U.S. expanded westward from 13 colonies to Mississippi River .
 The Indian Removal Act of 1830 allowed for the forced expulsion of native tribes to the unsettled Indian Territory west of the Mississippi River . The act was the result of the removal of Native American tribes .
 Resistance from Sac and Fox tribes of Illinois and Wisconsin led to the Black Hawk War of 1832 . The Creeks of Georgia and Alabama were crushed in 1836 . Resistance from the Sac, Fox tribes led to Black Hawk Wars of 1836 and the Creeks were crushed .
 The Seminole of Florida were defeated in 1837, and the Cherokees were evicted during the winter of 1838-39; on their ""Trail of Tears"" to the Indian Territory more than 4,000 lost their lives .
 By the 1860s the land west of the Mississippi was itself being encroached on by the settlers . The land was itself encroaching on by settlers .
 Great Plains west of the Mississippi River were peopled mainly by Sioux, Comanche, Cheyenne, Kiowa, and Arapaho tribes . Age-old way of life was disturbed when settlers appeared in the 18th and early 19th centuries .
 Congress had passed a series of bills that offered supposedly free or unowned land on the plains in return for minimal investment . But the settlers had legal backing; Congress passed legislation that offered land for investment . The settlers were able to buy land in exchange for minimal investments .
 Conflicts between tribes and settlers were inevitable, but war broke out in 1862 when bands of eastern Sioux, or Dakota, took up arms against settlers living along the Minnesota River .
 1840 number of hangings in a single day in U.S. history . The weapon replaced the heavier model of 1840. number of hangingings in single day . It was an effective thrusting weapon and replaced .
 The rest of the Dakota were expelled from Minnesota and sent to Nebraska and South Dakota . Their reservations were abolished by Congress in 1903 .
 The next major outbreak took place less than two years later, as the U.S. Civil War was ending . It was the first major outbreak since the Civil War ended .
 Black Kettle, had come to seek peace with the Americans after hostilities had flared between militant Cheyenne Dog Soldiers and white immigrants . White immigrants had entered their lands in search of gold .
 The atrocity led to over a year of war in Colorado between the two sides . The two sides used tactics that were replicated across the plains for nearly 40 years .
 Musket-rifles and pistols of the U.S. troops regularly found their way into native hands . Both sides largely fought on horseback, and both sides were largely horseback .
 Native Americans were skilled at guerrilla warfare and knew the land intimately . Indians from hostile tribes often provided scouts and information to U.S. troops .
 Each side inflicted massacres and atrocities on each other . Tragically, each side also inflicted massacres on the other .
 Red Cloud became the first Indian leader to sign a peace treaty with the U.S. government as a victor . Two years later Red Cloud signed the treaty as a victorious Indian . Red Cloud was the first Native American to sign the treaty .
 By the Treaty of Fort Laramie the white settlers were banned from using the Bozeman Trail . The United States army forts were abandoned by the treaty . White settlers were not allowed to use the trail .
 The Great Sioux Reservation was also established, encompassing all of modern ""West River"" South Dakota, including the Black Hills, and parts of Nebraska . It was established in 1877 .
 The U.S. government honored the treaty for just six years, until gold was discovered in the Black Hills in 1874 . The treaty was only six years old when gold was found in the area .
 As gold miners and traders poured in, Sioux and Cheyenne warriors fought back under the leadership of chiefs Sitting Bull and Crazy Horse . Sitting Bull, Crazy Horse were the leaders of the Native American tribes .
 The United States government sent three armies to force the Lakota tribes back to their homes in the spring of 1876 . One of the three was defeated at the battle of Rosebud . The Lakota defeated the U.S. government's three armies .
 On 25 June came the Sioux's finest hour; Lieutenant-Colonel George Custer . Removal of the Plains Indians to reservations from the 1860s onward precipitated a similar fate for Native Americans .
 Gold was the cause of a war waged in 1877 between United States troops and the Nez Perce peoples of Idaho . The war was fought between U.S. troops and Nezperce peoples .
 In 1863 their reservation was reduced to a quarter of its size to allow for mining . But after raids by both sides, their chief, Joseph, decided in 1877 that their future lay in Canada .
 They trekked north for five months, but were encircled at Bear Paw mountain . Bear Paw is just 40 miles (65 km) from the border . The group was encirched by Bear Paw, just 40-miles-from-the-border .
 Nez Perce gave up when they realized U.S. reinforcements were on their way . The two sides fought for five days, but the two sides gave up .
 The Apache were gradually confined to reservations after 1870 . Pressure from white settlers led the government to consolidate them in the arid San Carlos Reservation .
 One Apache chief, Geronimo, repeatedly broke out of the reservation, fleeing to Mexico and raiding settlements on both sides of the border, until he surrendered in 1886 . He was one of the last Apache chief to surrender to the U.S. authorities .
 Imprisoned in Florida and Alabama, he died in Fort Sill in the Indian Territory in 1909 .
 The Indian Territory changed soon after it was set up in the 1830s . It was the first place in the Indian Territory .
 Oklahoma was the 46th state to join the Union . It shrank in size in 1854 and again in 1890, and was abolished in 1907 . Oklahoma became Oklahoma in 1907, when it joined the Union as Oklahoma .
 By then, almost all native tribes had signed treaties with the U.S. government and moved into reservations . By that time, most tribes had already signed treaties .
 Some tribes received United States citizenship from 1855 . The right was extended to all in the Indian Territory in 1901 . Some tribes were granted U.S. citizenship in 1855, extending to all .
 Full U.S. citizenship was granted in 1924 to all Native Americans born in the country . Native Americans were granted full citizenship in 1924 .
 1860s following the discovery of gold in the region . APACHE CHIEF GERONIMO . 1860s .
 After numerous Sioux attacks on the trail, the U.S. army built three forts along its route . After numerous attacks, the United States army built forts .
 Red Cloud, attacked the forts, at one point holding a wagon train hostage on the trail . The forts were attacked by Red Cloud and held by the wagon train . Red Cloud was the leader of the Red Army during the early 1800s .
 The Sioux victory was decisive, but shortlived; the arrival of United States troops forced them to surrender in 1881 . The arrival of increasing numbers of US troops forced the Sioux to surrender .
 By the late 1880s most tribes were settled on reservations and officially the war was over . The end of the conflict was over, but their suffering continued .
 The buffalo were driven almost to extinction by the settlers' indiscriminate hunting . Not only had they lost their traditional lands, but their means of subsistence had been destroyed by the slaughter .
 The Sioux reservation was now so small that it could no longer support the population . Furthermore, the reservation was so small, the tribe was no longer able to support its population .
 Custer's 7th Cavalry Regiment surrounded by Lakota and Northern Cheyenne warriors near the Little Bighorn River on June 25,1876 . The half-starved Sioux turned to mysticism and the rites of the ""Ghost Dance,"" a religious ceremony associated with
 Custer's entire force is soon annihilated by the Sioux . The former world of the Sioux is destroyed by Custer .
 The Lakota of Pine Ridge and Rosebud performed it in October 1890, provoking the U.S. government to send troops to arrest the leaders . The ceremony was banned, prompting the United States government to issue a ban .
 They surrendered quietly to the 7th Cavalry at Wounded Knee Creek . On the night of 28 December 1890, they surrendered .
 The following morning, however, a scuffle broke out as the Sioux were being disarmed and a trooper was shot . The next morning, the trooper was killed in the incident .
 The soldiers moved in with machine guns and massacred the largely unarmed Sioux . The largely unarmed people were massacred by the soldiers .
 The war with the Sioux was finally over, leaving the white man master of the plains . The war ended with the death of the Sioux, but the war was never over .
 A common weapon among the Plains Indian tribes was a simple knife made from the head of a spear or lance attached to a wooden handle . The knife was a common weapon used by the Plains Indians .
 Later rifles contained a percussion cap that burst into flame when struck . The percussion cap burst into flames when struck by a bullet .
 The German arquebus was an early type of matchlock musket invented around 1475 . It was the first type of arqueba musket musket to be invented .
 Though largely superseded by the wheel-lock in the 16th century, it continued in use until the late 17th century because of its simplicity . It continued to be used until the end of the 19th century .
 Pulling the trigger plunged a smoldering match into a pan containing a small primer of gunpowder . Pulling a match into the pan plunged a small primer into a small gunpowder-filled pan .
 This ignited, sending a flash through a touch hole into the barrel to set off the main charge . The main charge was set off by the touch hole in the barrel . The flash ignited, setting off a main charge, then ignited, and ignited .
 Early models were heavy, clumsy, and unreliable . But later ones were lighter, and much more effective .
 This Indian matchlock musket was made in Mysore in the 18th century to a design first introduced to India by the Portuguese two centuries earlier .
 The British Baker rifle of 1800 was the first rifle officially adopted for use by the British Army, and only superseded in 1838 . The design was much copied, adapted, and decorated by Indian gunsmiths .
 Its slow or shallow rifling kept the barrel clean and usable for longer than weapons with unrifled barrels . The slow rifling is a groove of just a quarter turn along the length of the barrel to spin the bullet . The barrel was designed to keep the gun clean .
 The Spencer rifle was developed in the United States by Christopher Spencer in his spare time . Spencer rifle developed by the U.S.
 When it appeared in 1863, it was the world's first practical, manually loaded repeater rifle, holding seven rounds in a tubular magazine in the stock . When it was first appeared, the gun was held in the hands of the owner .
 The Italian Cavalry Carbine of 1891, often known as the MannlicherCarcano, used a modified version of the bolt-action used in the German Mauser Ml889 rifle . It was used in Italy and Germany .
 Lee Harvey Oswald used to assassinate President John F Kennedy in 1 963 . United States dealers bought many of them, one of which was used by Oswald .
 The AK-47 assault rifle was designed by Russian tank commander Mikhail Kalashnikov . It was adopted by the Soviet Red Army in 1949 after being designed by the tank commander . The assault rifle is now the world's most popular weapon .
 Its rugged simplicity, good handling, and ability to operate in almost any conditions made the rifle the most popular gun in the world . The rifle is now the world's most popular rifle .
 Model shown here is the experimental Series 1 version, with a fluted barrel . The model shown is a Series 1 model with fluted barrels .
 In the end, modern weapons and tactics defeated them, but not until they had dealt British prestige a major blow . The end of the war was not until the British prestige had been dealt a blow .
 Eleven days later Dingane's warriors massacred hundreds of men, women, and children at various trekker camp sites along the Bushman River . Hundreds of people were killed by Dingane warriors .
 The key battles were fought in the northeast of what is now KwaZulu-Natal Province in the Indian Ocean coastal region of South Africa . The Zulus and the Boers were fought between the two sides of the war .
 A scouting party reported the approach of a large Zulu force on December 15 . The trekkers crossed the Mzinyathi, or Buffalo River, when they crossed the river .
 Pretorius suspected that the Zulus were hoping to lure the trekkers into rocky terrain where they were attacked . Pretorius suspects that the soldiers were lured to rocky terrain . The 1,700 British troops were encamped at Isandhlwana on January 22 1879 .
 Boer homeland aspirations and British imperial ambitions in southern Africa in the 19th century faced a major obstacle— the mighty Zulus . The Zulus were the main source of British imperial aspirations in the South African empire .
 The Zulu heartland—Zululand— neighbored Natal in what is now eastern South Africa . The Zulus heartland, Zulu, was the heartland of the Zulu kingdom .
 Zulus became a large warring force after Chief Shaka seized power in 1816 . Once a small, peaceful tribe, the Zulus were once a peaceful tribe . Shaka took control of the tribe in South Africa in the early 1800s .
 In a series of brutal campaigns he massacred other tribes or forced them to join him . The tribesman massacred others in a brutal campaign of brutal warfare .
 On his death in 1828, his empire reached almost as far north as Swaziland . His empire was almost as much north as he died .
 In 1814 the British took over the Cape Colony, home to the Boers, white farmers of Dutch descent . The British took control of the Cape colony in 1814 .
 In 1835 some 12,000 Boers trekked northward in search of a new homeland . Alienated by British rule, they moved northward to find a new home .
 They headed for Natal, hoping to negotiate the peaceful cession of some land from Chief Shaka's successor . They headed to Natal to negotiate a peaceful settlement with the successor .
 Chief Dingane. next day the Zulus launched a mass attack with some 10,000 men . The Zulus. launched the attack on Dingane next day . The next day, the . Zulus . launched the mass attack . next day. the Zulu launched the .
 Shaka ruled that traditional Zulu throwing spears were cowards' weapons . But armed mainly with clubs and short stabbing spears, they faced a hail of rifle fire . Shaka had ruled that the traditional throwing spears are cowards'.
 Pretorius launched a counter-offensive with a group of horsemen . For two hours the Zulus charged repeatedly, then Pretorius fought back . Pretorius: "For two hours they charged repeatedly" Pretorius won the battle .
 After suffering heavy losses, the Zulus fled, with the trekkers in pursuit . The Zulus suffered heavy losses and were forced to flee .
 The Boers established an independent Republic of Natalia in 1838 . They continued to fight Zulus in Natal for another two years . Dingane's brother, Mpande, joined forces with the Boers, bringing with him a large number of men .
 Dingane was finally defeated in January 1840, and was assassinated later in the year . Dingane died in 1841, but was assassinated in 1840 .
 To the west they established the independent Orange Free State, to the north the Transvaal republic . To the north, the Free State was the Trans-Transvaal and the Orange Free state .
 The British had not finished expanding their southern African territories . But the British had already expanded into southern Africa .
 Anxious to claim territory before the Germans or Portuguese, in 1877 they annexed the Transvaal . In 1877, the South African government annexed the region .
 Gambling on a quick victory, and taking advantage of the slow communications between London and southern Africa, they took the initiative . They took advantage of a slow communications system, taking the initiative, and took the lead .
 Using a minor border incident as an excuse, they demanded that Zulu Chief Cetshwayo disband his army, knowing full well he would not . The Zulu chief refused to comply with the demands . He would not disband the army .
 The British marched across the Buffalo River into Zululand at Rorke's Drift in January 1879 . The Zulu term for the short stabbing spear they used was IKLWA . Lord Chelmsford took only 4,000 men with him .
 British troops inflicted heavy casualties on the Zulus at Isandhlwana before being overcome by sheer weight of numbers January 20, but did nothing to fortify it .
 2,500 troops were lured away by Zulu scouts, leaving 1,700 men behind . Most of the 1st Battalion of the 24th regiment was left behind . Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Pulleine in command .
 Chelmsford fatally underestimated the military abilities of the Zulu forces . 20,000 of them launched a typically disciplined attack on the British camp at Isandhlwana on January 22 .
 The Zulus used the stabbing spear and club as their main weapons . Despite suffering 2,000 casualties to both rifle and bayonet, the Zulus eventually overwhelmed the camp and slaughtered the British forces .
 Defiance at Rorke's Drift has entered British military folklore . Isandhlwana was one of the worst defeats in British military history . What followed later the same day and all the following night was a British military victory .
 At one point the two sides engaged in quite desperate hand-tohand combat . The two sides engage in hand-hand combat .
 The Zulus finally withdrew at dawn when they saw Lord Chelmsford's relief column approaching in the distance . The fighting lasted ten hours, with the Zulus withdrawing at dawn .
 The British government sent reinforcements and Sir Garnet Wolseley was ordered to take over command from Chelmsford . The British Government sent reinforcements to take control of the situation .
 Cetshwayo, meanwhile, was anxious to cease hostilities and end the slaughter . He was eager to end the conflict and end it, but was anxious for peace .
 Each warrior carried a shield made of hide, decorated with his regiment's colours . He knew that there would be no more A Zulu warrior's weapons . The Zulu warriors knew there would never be any more .
 His traditional weapons included a heavy ironwood club, 3 ft long, and a short, broad, broad-pointed stabbing spear .
 Eleven Victoria Crosses were awarded for gallantry at Rorke's Drift . The most ever awarded for a single action was awarded for the most ever .
 Chelmsford rejected all peace overtures from Cetshwayo . He was anxious to crush the Zulus before Wolseley could arrive .
 The showdown took place on July 4, 1879, at the Zulu capital of Ulindi . The showdown was the first of its kind .
 4,200 men armed with two Gatling guns and artillery, as well as the usual rifles, formed a hollow square formation, mounted troops covering the sides and rear, and awaited the Zulu attack .
 At least 15,000 Zulus soon surrounded the British in typical horn formation, stamping their feet and banging their shields as one . The Zulus beat the British to victory in the Battle of the Bulimans .
 None of the attackers got close enough to use a club or stabbing spear . The attack was the first time the attackers had used a weapon .
 Hundreds of people were killed by rifle and machine-gun fire, or by canister shot . Hundreds of those killed were shot by machine and machine gun fire .
 Many were chased down by British cavalry, who exacted revenge for Isandhlwana by butchering the wounded . Many were then chased down and killed by the British cavalry .
 Zulus were routed, their chief was taken prisoner, and their nation was defeated . The Zulus lost their nation in the Battle of the Zulus .
 Following the defeat of the Zulus, the British took control of all southern Africa . After the defeat, they were able to take control of the continent .
 After the Battle of Ulindi, Cetshwayo was exiled to Cape Town . He later visited Britain .
 Arguments between rivals for the throne led to civil war in the same year . Arguments led to the death of the king and civil war between the two sides .
 In 1897 Zululand became part of Natal, which joined the independent Union of South Africa in 1910 . Natal was part of the Union of the South Africa, which was formed in 1910 after joining South Africa .
 In 1880 Transvaal rebelled against British rule and defeated the British in 1881 at Laing's Neck and Majuba Hill . Britain recognized its independence before Britain recognized it as a nation .
 After defeat in 1902, they eventually joined the Union of South Africa . After defeat, the South African team eventually joined South Africa's Union .
 Swaziland, under Transvaal's control since 1895, became a British protectorate in 1905 . Swatiland was under Transvieteel's control from 1895 until 1905 .
 What should have been a routine imperial victory became a drawn-out affair that revealed the limits of British military power . The battle was a long-awaited victory for the British, but it was never a success .
 T he failure of the Jameson raid in 1895 poisoned relations between the Transvaal and Britain . The failure of a raid on Jameson in 1895 in South Africa poisoned relations .
 The British continued to put pressure on the governments of both the Transvaal and the Orange Free State . They felt threatened by Britain's support of the Uitlanders and by perceived imperialism .
 Both states declared war on Britain in October 1899 with the aim of forcing a negotiated settlement . In response, both sides declared war in response to the conflict .
 The British had close to 25,000 soldiers in the region when war broke out, but quickly called on a large standing army stationed elsewhere in the empire . The British called on the standing army to be stationed elsewhere .
 Relations between the Boers and Britain had been tense ever since the British took over the Afrikaans-speaking Cape Colony in South Africa in 1814 .
 In response to the Emancipation Act and attacks by local tribes, Boers began to leave the Cape Colony in 1835 . They set up the independent republics of the Orange Free State and Transvaal .
 The Transvaal was bankrupt by 1877 and threatened by the Zulus . The first BOER WAR was fought in 1877 in the first African war .
 Britain annexed the Transvaal in return for defending it against the Zulus . Britain, worried about German colonial expansion into the region, annexed the region .
 The Treaty of Pretoria, signed in April, restored the state of South Africa . It restored the country's independence from apartheid-era Yugoslavia .
 The discovery of gold in the Transvaal in 1886 attracted thousands of Uitlanders to the region . Thousands of gold was found in the region in 1886 .
 The Transvaal government refused to give them voting and other rights, which led to unrest . It led to the death of many of the South Africans .
 Close formation fighting was not that relevant or useful when faced with the Boers . The Boers fought in close formation fighting in wars around the world .
 The British stretcher-bearer at Spion Kop was Mohandas Gandhi, the future leader of India . Gandhi had organized the Indian Ambulance Corps in South Africa during the war to care for the wounded . In contrast, the Boers avoided set-piece battles, preferring
 They could call on around 83,000 men of fighting age, of whom around 40,000 were fighting at any one time . But they had no trained army. They had no training army. The British government had no army.
 They had a local militia system grouped into mounted commando units that varied in strength according to the population from which they were recruited . Instead of a militia system, they had a system of local militia systems .
 The Boers were not professional soldiers and did not have uniforms . Although it was a legal requirement that all adult men own a rifle, many Boers did not, or a modern Boer armband .
 The militiamen who fought the British wore armbands such as this one so they could be identified on the battlefield . The British were defeated by the British at the end of the Second World War .
 The relief of Mafeking caused ecstatic joy in Britain, out of all proportion to its significance . A nation relieved by the news of the victory in the war .
 President Paul Kruger of the Transvaal ordered 37,000 rifles and ten million cartridges from Krupps, the German manufacturer . For a time the expression ""to Maffick"" embodied celebrating extravagantly one, so President Kruger .
 Mauser model 1895 rifle was extremely accurate at long range and superior to the British Lee-Metford magazine rifle . Mauser was superior to British Lee Metford rifle .
 Boers also had a small quantity of modern French and German field artillery . The Boers had a large amount of modern field artillery in their arsenal .
 At the start of the war fast-moving Boer columns advanced out of the two republics, besieging Colonel Robert BadenPowell and his troops at Mafeking and the garrison at Kimberley . A 15,000-strong Transvaal force invaded British-run N
 The British, commanded by Sir Redvers Buller, sent out three columns to relieve the sieges . The British were able to repel the German invasion .
 The first column, a force of around 10,000 men with 16 guns, advanced northwest from the Cape toward Kimberley . They overcame Boer l resistance at the Modder River at the end of November 1899 . The first force of 10,500 men with around 16 guns advanced northwest
 Second column headed north from the eastern Cape to relieve Mafeking was defeated at Stormberg . However, it was then defeated by the Boers, led by Piet Cronje, at Magersfontein outside Kimberley .
 Third column heading from Durban in Natal encountered the Boers, led by Buller himself, at Colenso . The Boers were led by Louis Botha, who led the third column .
 The British third column numbered around 21,000 w Second Boer War . The British were superior in number but trench warfare and modern weaponry reduced their effectiveness .
 This type of warfare was a prelude to what would happen in the Great War of 1914-18 . The Boers were driven back by 6,500 Boers concealed in difficult terrain .
 Boer casualties, at around 50, were negligible, as they had been in the previous two encounters . Boers suffered no casualties in the encounter .
 The three defeats suffered by the British during this ""Black * \\ Week"" led to a rapid change of command in command . The JL* suffered three defeats during the three defeats .
 Field Marshal Viscount Roberts replaced Buller as chief-of-staff . Buller retained his local command, but was replaced by Field Marshal Kitchener .
 Buller made another attempt to finally relieve Ladysmith . The two rapidly reorganized the British forces to counter Boer mobility . Buller attempted to relieve the British capital .
 Buller divided his force into two; one, led by General Warren, attempted to take control of the commanding heights of Spion Kop to the west of Ladysmith . The balance being held in Magazine clip allowed Buller to retreat . Buller was forced to retreat from Spion
 Roberts had helped free Kimberley in mid-February . He then decided to strike at the Boer capitals . Roberts helped liberate Kimberley and then struck at Boers capitals .
 A 6,000-strong British force led by Kitchener trapped a slightly smaller Boer force on Paardeberg Hill and attacked it directly . The Mauser C-96 pistol and the Mauser 95 rifle were both used by the Boers .
 The Boers capitulated, signing a peace treaty in May 1902 . Faced with such harsh measures, the Boers signed a treaty with the South African government .
 The Boer War had a huge impact on those on both sides of the conflict . The Boers fought in South Africa during the Boers .
 The treaty was signed at Vereeniging on the Transvaal-Orange Free State border was lenient on the Boers . It was signed in the 18th century on the border between the two sides .
 The two Boer republics accepted British sovereignty and the promise of future self-government . Both republics gained British sovereignty in 1907 . The Boer Republics gained independence from the British Empire .
 The Boers were also compensated £3 million for restocking and repairing their farms . Boers also received £3million for repairing farms .
 Both Boer republics eventually joined with Cape Colony and Natal to become part of the Union of South Africa . The union was formed in 1910 .
 It had taken the British more than 500,000 troops to defeat a far smaller number of Boers . The British had already defeated the majority of the Boers in the Battle of the Second World War .
 Richard Haldane created a British Expeditionary Force ready to fight overseas at any time . The Territorial Force amalgamated all voluntary local militia forces into a single home defense force .
 The wisdom of these reforms was proved in the opening months of World War 1260-61 . The war had revealed Britain to be isolated diplomatically, with most nations supporting the Boers . Most nations in South Africa supported the British Boers during the war .
 What had once been a deliberate policy of ""Splendid Isolation"" from European affairs now became a liability . What had been the policy of 'Splendied Isolation' from Europe was now a liability.
 Britain moved to secure an alliance with Japan in 1902 and an entente, or understanding, with France in 1904 . The alliance settled outstanding colonial differences between the two nations .
 In 1906 the first in a series of confidential military conversations took place between their military staff in order to determine a common strategy in the event of a war against Germany . The first in the series of secret conversations began in 1906 .
 An entente with Russia, similar to that with France, was signed in 1907 . France and Russia signed an entente in 1907, but it was never formally established .
 2,000 men scaled the hill but discovered in daylight that they could not dig in, had no sandbags, and, worse, were overlooked by Boer artillery . On the night of January 24, 1900, the men were forced to abandon their attempt to get to the top of
 The British came under heavy fire, which they could not return, but reinforcements allowed them to keep the hill . The Boer attempted to scale the hill and engage them at close quarters .
 The Boers regrouped taking the abandoned summit and more than 1,000 casualties before Kitchener withdrew . By the evening both sides were exhausted and withdrew, the Boers took the summit .
 Roberts then subjected the Boers to an artillery barrage before they submitted . Roberts then took command and subjected them to a barrage of artillery barrage .
 He then marched on Bloemfontein, the Orange Free State capital, which he took on March 13 . He then headed north to Transvaal to take Johannesburg on May 31 and Pretoria on June 5 .
 The siege of Mafeking, which had been in progress since the start of the war, was over . As Roberts forged ahead, the siege was over, the battle was over for the first time ever .
 Defended by Colonel Baden-Powell, the town was relieved on May 17, 1900 . The town was finally relieved by the end of the siege .
 They sabotaged rail communications, attacked isolated outposts, and ambushed British troops . British troops were ambushed by the rebels in the Battle of Stonewall .
 The British burned Boer farms and destroyed crops to deny Boer fighters food and shelter . General Kitchener set up a series of refugee camps to accommodate Boer civilians who had become displaced .
 The 45 camps housed in the region of 100,000 Boers, mainly women and children . Known as concentration camps, it was the first time this term had been used anywhere in the world .
 A similar number of Black Africans who lived in Boer areas were placed in another 64 camps . The camps were also placed in 64 other camps across South Africa .
 Conditions were appalling and food rations meagre, leading to the deaths of 27,927 Boers . Of whom 24,074 were under 16, half the Boer child population were under .
 An estimated 15,000 Africans died, although these deaths were never properly recorded . The death toll was never recorded, although it was never properly reported .
 Almost every day he kept a diary recording the battles, marches, and hardships he endured . Almost every single day he recorded the battles and marches he endured.
 The diary lay unread until it was rediscovered by his great-grandson almost a century later . It gives a fascinating personal view of what it was like to fight in the war .
 F rederick Roseblade was bom in Northampton, England, in 1869 . He worked in the local shoe trade as a clicker, someone who cuts leather pieces used in the upper part of a shoe .
 On January 16, 1891, aged 21, he signed up for 12 years in the British Army . He served in Oxfordshire Light Infantry .
 In 1899 he sailed from Southampton to join the British, Australian, and other imperial troops fighting in the Boer War . He was promoted to sergeant while on board ship .
 The diary starts on December 21, 1899, the day before Frederick Roseblade sailed to war . The diary records his actions and thoughts from when he arrived in Cape Town on January 14, 1900, through to September 1900 .
 The Orange Free State and Transvaal declared war on Britain in 1899 . The Boer War had started in October 1899, when the Orange Free States and Transvitals declared war against Britain .
 This card is possibly from the men of Roseblade's regiment, wishing him good luck in civilian life . Events went badly for the British, the Boers besieging Mafeking, Kimberley, and Ladysmith in ""Black Week''
 In the photograph Roseblade is wearing the Queen's South Africa Medal and the King's South African Medal . The photograph was taken in South Africa at the time .
 The Queen's South Africa Medal Roseblade's own medal is lost, but would have had three of the clasps on this example, showing he had fought at Paardeberg, Driefontein, and in Transvaal . Roseblade would have three of these clas
 His also had a Kimberley clasp . in December 1899, defeating three columns of troops sent to lift the sieges . in . December 1899 . His victory in the Battle of the Somalian Peninsula was a success .
 The British commander, General Sir Red vers B uller, was relieved of his command and replaced by Field Marshal Viscount Roberts, with General Kitchener as his chief-of-staff . Field Marshal Roberts was replaced as the British commander with Field Marshal Kitchener .
 Roberts advanced toward Kimberley and then headed east to capture the capital of the Orange Free State, Bloemfontein . Roberts advanced to Kimberley before capturing the capital, Bleemfonti, in South Africa .
 Roberts' columns left Enslin in the Northern Cape to march to Bloemfontein . On February 12, Roberts marched to the South African capital from Enslin .
 The troops covered around 10 miles by mid-morning before it became too hot to march . Each day started early, around 5:00am, with troops covering 10 miles .
 Roseblade records meeting Kitchener, who was encouraging his men to move heavy guns to the top of a koppie, a small hill rising out of the veldt, in order to shell Boer positions .
 On February 18, Roseblade took part in the bloody battle of Paardeberg . Roseblade was killed in the battle on February 18 .
 Boer army led by General Piet Cronje was attempting to retreat across the Modder River . British cavalry led by Brigadier General John French had found its way blocked by British cavalry . The Boers had successfully lifted the siege of Kimberley .
 Kitchener ordered a frontal attack on the Boer positions on Paardeberg Hill, in which Roseblade took part . Roseblade was killed in the battle .
 As casualties mounted, Roseblade held his position as the British pounded the enemy with heavy guns . Roseblade was killed in the Battle of the Somalian Peninsula .
 Frederick Roseblade kept his war diary in a small notebook, writing his neat entries on every page . Roseblade on the aftermath of the death of PAARDEBERG, February 28, 1900 .
 That day at Paardeberg was the fiercest fighting Roseblade and his regiment experienced on their tour of duty in South Africa . A different kind of war .
 On February 27, Cronje and his army of 4,000 were finally forced to surrender to the vastly superior British force . Cronje surrendered to the British forces in February .
 Roseblade played a less dramatic role in the war as the Boers avoided pitched battle and waged a guerrilla campaign against Lord Roberts' troops . Thereafter, Roseblade fought less dramaticly for the South African side .
 The diary continues to record various skirmishes with the enemy . It is dominated by descriptions of long marches, cold, hunger, and thirst .
 Roseblade got back to England in August 1902, just after the war had ended . Roseblade returned to England just after he had returned from the war .
 He was discharged on January 15, 1903, having completed 12 years of service . He went back to Northampton, where he married in February 1908 .
 Rivers were frequently polluted by the bodies of dead men, horses, and mules from earlier battles . Rivers were often polluted by bodies of men, mules, horses and mule .
 Dysentery killed many British troops on Lord Roberts' march to Bloemfontein . Lord Roberts died of dysentery on his march to South Africa .
 The Rough Riders were one of three voluntary cavalry regiments raised in 1898 during the SpanishAmerican War . Teddy Roosevelt's Rough Riders are one of the three voluntary military regiments .
 They were also called the Weary Walkers as they invariably fought on foot . They were known as the 'weary walkers' as they were also known as 'wearing-walkers' They were called the 'Weary Walkerers'
 By the end of the 19th century the U.S. had become a major naval and trading power in the Caribbean .
 In 1867, the United States purchased Alaska from the Russian government for $7.6 million . The purchase confirmed its role as a Pacific power .
 In 1867 it annexed the island of Midway, in the central Pacific, and gained rights to open a naval base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii . It annexed Midway in 1867 and opened Pearl Harbor in Hawaii in 1877 .
 By the end of the 19th century the Spanish Empire had shrunk to just Cuba and Puerto Rico in the Caribbean, the Philippines in eastern Asia and Guam in the western Pacific .
 Spain was ruled by Spain from 1868 to 1878 . A further uprising began in 1895 after a war for independence began in 1868 .
 Four different parties were involved in the Spanish-American-Cuban-Filipino War of 1898 . The conflict occurred in two places on opposite sides of the world .
 T he Cuban rebellion of 1895 was caused by growing discontent with incompetent Spanish rule and resentment against restrictions placed by Spain on Cuban trade .
 Spanish troops set up a series of fortified towns in which to intern the rural population . Aiming to isolate the rebels from the rest of the population and cut off their supplies, he set up the towns .
 Within a year, some 300,000 Cubans died of starvation and disease in Cuba . The towns were effectively concentration camps in which, within a year of starvation, disease . The atrocity caused an outcry in the US, where Cuban emigres were agitating for intervention .
 Some politicians believed that Cuban independence would increase trade between the two nations . They thought it their duty as democrats to support the island's struggle for independence .
 The ship had arrived at the end of January, allegedly to offer protection to the 8,000 American citizens in Cuba . The ship was allegedly intended to protect American citizens . It arrived in Cuba in January and is now being operated by the Cuban government .
 A United States naval enquiry was unable to pin responsibility on anyone particular, but Spanish culpability was assumed . This gave the Americans the justification for military action that they required .
 The United States Congress called for war against Spain, which began on April 21 . The U.S. Congress voted to send the first strike against Spain . The war began in Spain in Spain .
 The United States Asiatic Squadron was ordered to proceed from its anchorage off China to engage the Spanish in the Philippines . The U.S. lacked a base of its own in the Far East .
 Commanded by Commodore George Dewey, the six warships and three support vessels entered Manila Bay on the night of April 30, opening fire on the moored Spanish fleet .
 The U.S. destroyed six of their seven ships by midday . The seventh was scuttled by its captain . The Spanish ship was destroyed .
 With the Spanish navy neutralized, United States and Filipino troops overran the Philippines . The United States took the Philippine capital, Manila, on August 13 . The Spanish navy was neutralized .
 The Americans prevented Filipino troops from entering the city . The event outraged the Filipinos and led to the Philippine-American War . The Americans wanted to keep the port as a base .
 Captain Glass informed the officer that they were at war, then took him prisoner and sent him back to the island under escort to discuss surrender terms . Captain Glass sent the officer back under escort under escort . The officer was captured and taken prisoner .
 The next day the 54 Spanish infantry stationed on the island were disarmed and Guam was taken . Guam was the first American to take the island from Spain .
 The United States planned to capture the city of Santiago de Cuba, in the far southeast of Cuba . The U.S. planned to destroy the main Spanish army and fleet stationed there . The city was captured in Cuba's far southeast .
 On July 1 some 15,000 United States troops and 4,000 rebel Cuban forces attacked Spanish positions at El Caney and San Juan Hill in the hills .
 The United States force included regular infantry and cavalry regiments, AfricanAmerican regiments (notably the Buffalo Soldiers), and the 1st Volunteer Cavalry, known as the Rough Riders . The force was the largest in the United States during the Civil War .
 Theodore Roosevelt resigned as Assistant Secretary to the Navy in the U.S. government to fight in the war . Roosevelt had recently resigned from his post in the United States government . The latter were recruited, trained, and led by Theodore Roosevelt .
 The Spanish were secure in their trenches on the hill, and were excellent marksmen . That main attack was difficult, as the heat was intense and the Spanish were strong marksmen.
 The Rough Riders took the first target, the smaller Kettle Hill, during the day . Eventually United States infantry managed to cut through the barbed wire surrounding the Spanish positions and take San Juan Hill .
 The sinking of the USS Maine in Havana harbor in 1898 became a rallying call for Americans to support the war against Spain . USS Maine sank in Cuba in 1898 .
 11,000 United States troops arrived in the Philippines in August 1898 to replace the departing Spanish . The Philippines was the first country to become a U.S. colony .
 The ensuing war with Filipino rebels left 1 million Filipino civilians dead . 1 million Filipinos were killed by the ensuing war .
 The United States won the war in 1902, but resistance continued until 1913 . The U.S. won the battle in 1902 .
 The United States gained a perpetual lease on the naval base at Guantanamo Bay in 1902 . The island became independent in 1902, the U.S. gained a permanent lease on Guantanamo Bay .
 The new Cuban constitution gave the U.S. the right to supervise Cuban affairs . The Americans relinquished this in return for a trade deal in 1934 .
 The year after the war ended, the United States gained control of the eastern Samoan islands in the south Pacific . The U.S. gained control over Samoan territory in the year after it was captured .
 United States support for Panama in 1903 secured Panama's independence from Colombia . The new government gave the U.S. ownership of a thin strip of land across the isthmus on which to build the Panama Canal .
 U.S. navy and marines secured Guantanamo Bay as a base in early June . U.N. fleet sailed on to blockade the main Spanish fleet anchored at Santiago de Cuba .
 On July 3 the six ships of the Spanish fleet tried to evade the U.S. blockade but were caught and either destroyed or grounded by United States firepower . The six ships were captured by the United States on July 3 and grounded .
 To the east, on Puerto Rico, a squadron of 12 U.S. ships bombarded the capital, San Juan, on May 12 and blockaded its harbor . Puerto Rico's capital was also bombarded by the United States .
 Approximately 3,300 U.S. troops landed in July and encountered some resistance, but military actions were suspended when peace was agreed on August 12 .
 The number of U.S. casualties during the naval attack on the Spanish fleet in Manila Bay is known as the number of casualties .
 Captain Henry Glass on board the cruiser USS Charleston was ordered to capture the island of Guam . In the western Pacific Captain Glass ordered the capture of the island .
 The Battle of Manila Bay destroyed the Spanish fleet at Cavite naval yard in Manila Bay . George Dewey's United States Asiatic Squadron destroyed Spanish fleet in the battle . Spanish officer not knowing that war had been declared, came out to ask for gunpowder .
 Spanish commander, Patricio Montojo, anchored his ships at harbor to give his men a better chance of escape . The Spanish commander anchored his men at harbor .
 Following civil war in 1863-68, Japan's restored imperial regime built a powerful navy and modern army . It pursued an aggressive foreign policy and pursued a powerful foreign policy .
 The Russo-Japanese War was the first major war of the 20th century . The 1904-05 conflict propelled Japan to the front rank of modern world powers . Japan was defeated in the Russo-Russian War .
 Japan employed tactics and weapons that were next seen in World War I, NEW LANDS . Its victory was the first, modern times, of a non-Western nation over a European one .
 Between 1871 and 1900 Japan acquired an empire in east Asia, gaining the Ryukyu and Bonin islands in the Pacific, and the Kuril Islands to the northeast of Japan .
 Russia viewed Japan's influence over Korea with great concern, while Japan was alarmed when Russia secured a lease from China on the Liaotung Peninsula of Manchuria in 1898 .
 Russia stationed troops throughout Manchuria in 1900 and built a railroad linking Port Arthur to Siberia . The tension heightened when the railroad was built between Port Arthur and Port Arthur .
 Russia refused to carry out an agreement undertaken in the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 to witlidraw from Manchuria . Conflict became inevitable when Russia refused an agreement to withdraw from China . Japan and Russia fought in 1903 .
 Russia sought a warm-water port with access to the Pacific for its navy and maritime trade . Russia's recently built port of Vladivostok on the Sea of Japan was ice-bound in winter—so Russia had no intention of leaving Port Arthur .
 Admiral Togo Heihachiro launched a surprise night-time attack on Russia's First Pacific Squadron at Port Arthur in 1904 .
 Ten Japanese destroyers fired their Whitehead torpedoes at the Russian ships, but no ships were actually sunk . No ships were sunk .
 With Russian searchlights sweeping the sea, the attack had to be called off . The attack was called off because of the threat posed posed by Russian searchlight .
 Japan blockaded the port, but had no choice now but to plan a long land siege of Port Arthur . Port Arthur was the first port to be besieged by Japan .
 Thousands of Japanese died in the hail of Maxim machine-gun fire in repeated attempts to take this strategic hill . There followed four months of bloody fighting in a new battle for the Japanese .
 The Japanese launched mass infantry attacks against Russian troops dug in on hilltop positions heavily fortified with barbed wire, after first pounding Russian positions with heavy guns .
 The key hill was the highest one,203 Meter Hill, overlooking the harbor . It was a key hill for the city .
 On August 10, 1904, the Russian First Pacific Squadron steamed out of Port Arthur into the Yellow Sea to join the rest of the Russian fleet at Vladivostok .
 The Japanese Fifth Army crossed the mountains to the west of the city and attacked the Russian left flank . The main Japanese assault began against the Russian centre and right flank .
 The ensuing bloody battle raged for 19 days, with the Japanese held back by withering Russian machine-gun fire . The Japanese were held back against Russian machine gun fire .
 Both sides used forward observers linked by telephone to rear gunners, so they could direct them to fire on targets out of sight . Forward observers used telephone to direct gunners to fire .
 Russian troops, unable to resist the flanking Japanese, withdraw to the north . At last the stalemate broke as the Russian troops withdrew to north .
 Japan had won the land war decisively, despite great losses . With all Manchuria now in its hands, Japan won the war decisively . The war ended in defeat .
 Japan's victory over Russia in the 1904-05 war ended centuries of European assumption of racial superiority . Victory over Russia ends centuries of assumption of European superiority .
 Japanese forces were better led, trained, and motivated than the Russians . It was gained largely because of the Japanese forces being better trained and motivated .
 China leases Port Arthur to Russia . Four battleships and two cruisers caught up and attacked . Japanese victory and later that day four battle ships attacked .
 Togo's Mikasa, one of the most advanced battleships in the world, was struck many times, but greater damage was done to the Russian flagship, the Tsesarevich . Rear Admiral Vitgeft and all his senior officers were killed in the battle .
 Eventually, with night falling and no hope of escaping the Japanese ships, most of the Russian ships returned to Port Arthur . Most of the ships were forced to return to port .
 Russian troops Fushan RUSSIA occupy Manchuria Vladivostok 'alu River V Apr 27-May 1,1905 Yellow Sea ' Wonsan Seoul KOREA 1905: Japanese protectorate 1910: Japanese crown colony .
 Four of their ships, including the Tsesarevich, found sanctuary in neutral ports, where they were held for the rest of the war . Four of the ships were held by neutral ports where they found sanctuary .
 Russian fleet stationed at Vladivostok would not have been surprised by the threat . Neither would the small Russian fleet that was stationed there would have been stationed .
 This fleet had steamed into the Sea of Japan to meet the squadron but was chased back by the Japanese with the loss of a cruiser . This fleet was chasing back into the sea of Japan .
 Japanese troops overran Korea, then pushed aside a Russian force on the Yalu River . They moved into Manchuria in May 1904, pushing aside Russian forces .
 At Liaoyang in August, 125,000 Japanese faced 158,000 Russians . The Russians were reinforced with a corps that had come in on the Trans-Siberian Railway . The Japanese and Russian forces were reinforced by Russian troops .
 The Japanese successfully repulsed two Russian assaults, but the results were indecisive . The Japanese lost some 23,000 men and the Russians around 18,000 . The Russians lost some 19,000 troops .
 General Kuropatkin retreated north to the Manchurian capital of Mukden . He was forced to retreat north to Mukden, Manchuria .
 In 1905, the major land battle of the war took place in February-March 1905 . The battle was the first of its kind and lasted for more than a year .
 THOUSAND Russians were killed at the Battle of Mukden . Russian forces involved in the battle were vast, with thousands of Russians killed .
 After the war Japan assumed responsibility for Korea's foreign policy and dominated Korea's economy . Japan took over the Korean peninsula after the war and assumed responsibility .
 Russia's failure in the war led directly to revolt at home, as discontent with the war grew . Tsar Nicholas ll's refusal to allow reforms led to protests in January 1905 . Protests broke out in 1905 .
 The crest revolt went on into 1906 . The tsar made some concessions after a general strike . The Russian general strike ended in 1906 .
 Togo inflicted a crushing defeat on the Russian fleet in the Tsushima Strait between Japan and Korea . The defeat forced Russia's government, now facing a workers' revolt at home, to seek a humiliating peace treaty .
 After the war, the war seriously weakened Russia and strengthened Japan's influence in East Asia . After World War II, Russia was weakened by Japan's defeat of the Soviet Union .
 U.S. mediation led to the signing of the Treaty of Portsmouth in 1905 . Japan and Russia both agreed to leave Manchuria . Russia handed over Liaotung Peninsula to Japan, as well as southern half of island of Sakhalin .
 Russia's ambitions in East Asia were at an end, Japan now dominated the region . The United States had emerged as a world power prepared to intervene and mediate in other countries' affairs .
 The two-day naval battle in the Tsushima Strait between Japan and Korea ended in May 1905 . The war between Russia and Japan reached an epic climax at the end of May 1905 with the battle in Tsushima .
 The battle of Tsushima was the greatest and most costly encounter at sea since Trafalgar on the other side of the world almost exactly a century earlier . The battle was the biggest and most expensive encounter in the history of the Battle of the Tsushima .
 It was the first, and last, great naval action of the ironclad, pre-dreadnought era . It was also the first and last great naval battle of the Ironclad era .
 Most of the Russian fleet was stationed over 20,000 miles away in the Baltic Sea . The outbreak of war between Russia and Japan saw most of the fleet stationed in the Pacific .
 The decision was taken to send most of these ships halfway round the world to engage the Japanese . The decision to send these ships was made to send them to engage Japan .
 They left port on October 15, 1904 under the command of Admiral Rozhdestvenski and headed out across the Baltic . The ship set sail from port to port in the Baltic Sea .
 After seven months Rozhdestvenski's fleet crossed the Indian Ocean to reach Van Fong Bay in French Indochina . The Russian fleet prepared for battle with the French army .
 It consisted of eight battleships, eight cruisers, nine destroyers, and three smaller craft . It was the largest ship in the world's history .
 Admiral Togo Heihachiro's Japanese fleet of 4 battleships, 27 cruisers, 21 destroyers, and 16 torpedo boats . This was an impressive number but their quality was dubious, with most vessels obsolete in design and suffering from inferior leadership and gunnery .
 By the time Rozhdestvenski reached Van Fong Bay, Port Arthur had fallen to the Japanese and the Russian fleet trapped there had been captured . Port Arthur was captured by the Japanese in 1942 .
 Togo and his fleet lay in wait in the Tsushima Strait . Running short of coal, Rozhdestvenski opted for the most direct and risky route .
 Togo was informed by the new radio technology, Togo prepared to attack . The new technology will be used in the future of the country .
 The Russians, suffering from confused orders and poor seamanship, remained huddled in a group . Using his greater speed and tactical awareness, he maneuvered his fleet into a line . The Russians suffered from confusion and bad seamanship .
 The Japanese used their better speed, training, and range-finding technology to deadly effect . Togo rules the waves at the end of the season .
 High-explosive shells smashed into Russian ships, with devastating effect . Their high-exploited shells smashed . into the Russian ships . The Russian ships were hit by the shells, which smashed into them .
 Admiral Rozhdestvenski's flagship Knyaz Suvorov was hit, and the Russian admiral himself was seriously wounded . Four Russian battleships were sunk, and Admiral Nebogatov was left with a serious injury .
 At 10:30am on May 28, Nebogatov surrendered those ships under his immediate command while the Japanese continued to hunt down the rest of the Russian ships .
 Twenty-eight Russian ships had entered the strait, but only three made it to Vladivostok . Only three of the ships made it through the straits .
 Of the rest, 17 were sunk, 5 were captured, and 3 headed south for the Philippines . The two fleets lose sight of each other in fog and smoke .
 AI ex ci i l ^fijTOGO * |T| ROZh Japanese turn to avoid torpedoes . Russian battleship Oslyabya sunk .
 Further wars stripped the empire of almost all its European and African territories and caused great instability throughout the region . Within a few decades, the empire had been stripped of most of its European, African territories . The empire's loss of control of Europe and Africa has led to great instability .
 The decline of the Ottoman empire accelerated during the 19th century as its peoples struggled for independence and Russian influence rose across the Balkans . The Ottoman empire was known as the Ottoman Empire .
 The Ottoman empire lost its first European domains in 1817, when Serbia gained autonomy . The empire's first European domain was lost to Serbia .
 Pro-Ottoman Egyptian forces retook the country in 1825, but when the Ottomans rejected mediation with Russia in 1827, Britain and France, sent a combined fleet that destroyed the Egyptian navy .
 Britain and France supported the Ottomans and attacked Russian-held Crimea in Crimea . Russia's Crimea was invaded by the Ottoman Empire in 1897 .
 The war ended in 1856 with an Ottoman victory, but it was only a temporary reprieve . Uprisings against Ottoman rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1875 and Bulgaria in 1876 .
 Its ""Bulgarian atrocities"" outraged European opinion and gave Russia the excuse to declare war on behalf of its fellow Orthodox Christians in July 1877 . Russia declared war in response to the atrocities .
 A Turkish force led by General Osman Pasha marched north to reinforce and defend Plevna in July . On learning that the town had been bombed into submission before it could be relieved, he occupied the town and quickly increased its fortifications by setting up gun emplacements .
 General Schuldner's Russian army was unaware of what Pasha was doing and when the Russians were ordered to occupy the city, they were not in a position to do so . The Russians were unaware of Pasha's actions .
 A lengthy siege began, the 400,000-strong Ottoman army surrounded by 100,000 Russians . The siege began at the end of the Ottoman summer of 1877 .
 After many unsuccessful assaults, Russian reinforcements eventually tipped the balance, and Pasha surrendered in December .
 Russian forces then headed for Constantinople, causing the Ottoman sultan to sue for peace . The sultan then sued for peace with Russia . Russian forces headed for the city .
 The peace treaty was signed at San Stefano, outside the Ottoman capital, in March 1878 . Greater Bulgaria was signed in 1878.
 The First Balkan War was the decisive battle in which Bulgaria was defeated by Russia . Its terms created a large, autonomous Bulgaria, although the country was to be occupied by Russian troops for two years .
 Ottoman empire dealt severely with its enemies, as this depiction of the massacre at Montkirk in Serbia illustrates . El First and Second Balkan Wars were fought in 1912-13 .
 Both sides carried out similar atrocities through Macedonia to the Aegean Sea . Both sides were involved in similar atrocities in the area of Macedonia .
 Serbia, Montenegro, and Romania received their independence, while BosniaHerzegovina was granted self-rule, and Russia gained territory on both sides of the Black Sea . Serbia, Montenegro, Serbia received independence, while Bosnia 
 News of this treaty caused concern among the major European powers . It created a large pro-Russian state at the heart of the Balkans, giving Russia huge influence in the region . The treaty created a pro-Russia state in the Balkans .
 European diplomats hurriedly met in Berlin and in July enforced a new settlement . European diplomats met in Germany and agreed a new deal in July .
 Under the revised agreement Bulgaria was reduced in size and divided into three separate regions . Austria-Hungary occupied Bosnia-Herzegovina, Russia handed over its gains on the western shore of the Black Sea to Romania, and in a secret clause Britain occupied Cyprus .
 Ottoman empire was severely weakened and Bulgaria was embittered at losing so much territory . The outcome was to have long-lasting effects, for the Ottoman empire and Bulgaria .
 Greece took the province of Thessaly in 1881, while Crete, though effectively under Greek control, became self-ruled in 1898 . Greece also took the island of Crete in 1898, but Crete remained under control .
 In 1908 the Young Turks reform movement took power in the Ottoman empire after widespread army mutinies . Young Turks forced the sultan to reintroduce the liberal constitution of 1876 and convene parliament .
 With the empire in turmoil as liberal reformers and traditional Islamic leaders tussle for power, its enemies pounced . The empire was in turmoil during the 1950s and '60s .
 Austria-Hungary annexed Bosnia-Herzegovina, while Bulgaria declared full independence . Bulgaria had already recovered part of its lost San Stefano lands, now declared independence .
 In 1909 hardline Islamic elements staged a coup in support of the sultan . The final decline was the final decline of the Ottoman Empire .
 When Albania rose up in revolt in 1911, Italy seized Libya in North Africa . Italy bombarded Tripoli and other coastal ports and defeated Ottoman armies at Derna and Sidi Bilal .
 Targets were also bombed from the air for the first time when an Italian pilot dropped grenades from his aircraft onto the Ottoman camp near the Taguira oasis .
 Italian navy threatened Constantinople before withdrawing to seize the Dodecanese Islands, including Rhodes, in the Aegean . Italian navy then threatened Constantinople, then withdrew to seize islands in the region .
 The war with Italy gave Serbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, and Greece the opportunity to form an alliance . In October 1912, Serbia attacked Ottoman-controlled Macedonia .
 The Allies were able to muster approximately 340,000 troops, with a similar number in reserve . The Allies had the advantage of Greek naval control in the Aegean Sea, which prevented the movement of Ottoman soldiers to the Balkans .
 They also had the benefit of superior leadership, although 240,000 Ottoman troops matched them in courage and stamina .
 As the Greek army moved north, defeating the Turks at Venije in November, the Serbs moved south, forcing the Ottomans to evacuate the Macedon capital of Skopje and retreat to Monastir .
 Serbs attacked recently reinforced Ottoman army but were repelled with great losses . On November 5, the Serbs were attacked by the recently reinforced army . The Serbs fought the Ottoman army, but were defeated .
 The Turkish center was so weak that a renewed Serbian frontal attack broke through . However, the Turkish center remained weak and was unable to repel a renewed attack .
 As the Greeks approached from the south, Ottoman resistance collapsed and nearly 20,000 soldiers were killed or captured . As the Greek army approached, the resistance collapsed, killing or capturing thousands .
 Four days later the strategic Ottoman garrison of Salonika surrendered to the Greeks . Four days after the surrender, Salonika was declared a Greek victory .
 To the east, the Bulgarians moved into Thrace and besieged Constantinople, while a joint Bulgarian and Serbia force seized Adrianople . To the west, the Bulgarian and Serbian forces captured Adrianople, while to the east they moved to Thrace .
 By the Treaty of London, the Ottoman empire lost all its European possessions to the four victors except for a narrow strip of land alongside the Turkish Straits, and Albania, which was declared an independent state . By the end of the treaty, Albania was declared independent state.
 Italians bombed the Turkish railway station of Karaagac in October 1912 . They then used bombs with x-shaped tails and impact detonators during the siege of Adrianople in 1913 . I Italians bombed Turkish railway stations in 1912 and used bombs that had an impact detonator .
 Bulgaria felt aggrieved about its limited gains in Macedonia and in July attacked Serbia and Greece . Bulgaria also attacked Serbia, Greece and Montenegro in July .
 The Romanians advanced towards Sofia, the Bulgarian capital, while the Ottomans regained Adrianople in Thrace, thus preserving a foothold in Europe . The Romanian and Bulgarian armies advanced to Sofia and Sofia .
 Bulgarian resistance quickly collapsed, and by the Treaty of Bucharest, signed in August, it had lost most of its Macedonian gains of the first war as well as some territory to Romania . Romania also lost some of its first war gains as a result of the war .
 Abdul Hamid II was the 34th Sultan of the Ottoman Empire . He inherited a power in decline and inherited a declining power . He was assassinated in 1908 .
 The effect of the first and second Balkan Wars was felt almost immediately, as the wars soon turned global . The first and first Balkan wars were felt in the early 1900s .
 Serb nationalists had opposed the Austrian takeover of Bosnia-Herzegovina in 1878 . They sought to incorporate the province into a greater Serbia .
 Serb nationalist Gavrilo Princip assassinated the heir to the Austrian throne in the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo .
 Austrians blame the Serb government and declared war at the end of July . The Austrians blamed the Serbs for the collapse of the country .
 Third Balkan War soon became global, as European alliances came to their allies' support . Ottoman empire entered World War I alongside Germany and Austria against Russia, in the hope of regaining some of its lost territories .
 The Ottomans were weakened by the Arab revolt in 1916 and by British advances through Mesopotamia and Palestine, finally asking for peace in the last weeks of the war . Although successful in repelling an Anglo-French attack at Gallipoli in 1915, they were weakened .
 The Ottoman empire collapsed in 1922 and the Turkish republic was established in 1923 . The Ottoman republic was formed in 1923 after the collapse of the Ottoman empire .
 Henri Dunant founded the Red Cross movement after witnessing the aftermath of the battle of Solferino in 1859 . The Red Cross was founded by Dunant in France in the 18th century .
 His aim was to provide neutral and impartial help to relieve suffering in times of war . He said he wanted to help relieve suffering during war and relieve suffering .
 The red cross emblem was adopted in 1876 in countries where the population was largely Muslim . The symbol reminded soldiers from the Ottoman empire of the crusaders of the Middle Ages . In 1876, the emblem of the red crescent was adopted as an alternative .
 Most Allied bombing raids in Italy were designed to disrupt German communications . Most Allied raids were meant to disrupt communications between the two sides .
 Bombing targeted industrial complexes and civilian populations of cities . Elsewhere in Europe bombers targeted industrial complex and civilian population .
 World War I and World War II had their origins in the mistrust between Germany and its rivals in Europe . The mistrust between the two sides in Europe led to the outbreak of World War One and the Second World War .
 World War II became an even wider conflict when Japan launched an attack on the U.S. and its allies in the Pacific . Both wars spread to involve other theaters of war beyond Europe and beyond .
 1914 and 1945 the world's major powers twice clashed in total war . 1914-1945 were the first two years of total war. 1914-19191942 was the first time the world had seen total war in two years .
 The entire resources of modern states were devoted to the destruction of their enemies with little or no moral limit on the means employed . Modern states have little moral limits on what they can do to destroy enemies .
 Together, World War I and World War II probably cost at least 70 million lives . Together, the two wars probably cost more than 70 million people .
 The war that broke out in 1914 was one that European states had long anticipated . World War I was one of the most anticipated conflicts in the world .
 France, Britain, Russia, and Germany soon found themselves in an attritional stalemate . The principal combatants in the battle were France and Britain .
 Once trenches were dug, the defense held the advantage over the offense . The defense held on to the advantage .
 Industrialized Europe was able to supply its millions of soldiers with unprecedented firepower, and massive casualties were inevitable .
 The deadlock extended to the sea, where submarines and mines unexpectedly inhibited the operations of the mighty battle fleets . Submarine and mines were unexpectedly inhibited by the battleships .
 The strategic situation changed when the United States entered the war in 1917, bringing the stalemate to an end . The U.S. entered the conflict in 1917 and the war ended in 1918 .
 New offensive tactics were developed with better coordination between advancing infantry and artillery . New offensive strategies were developed to combat the Soviet Union .
 Tanks and aircraft, though still primitive, provided a glimpse of a more mobile form of warfare . Tanks, aircraft and aircraft were still primitive in World War II .
 War spread to other theaters, notably the Middle East where Ottoman Turkey fought as Germany's ally . Although Europe was the crucial battlefield, war spread to Europe . Ottoman Turkey was Germany's most important ally .
 Hopes that this might have been the ""war to end wars,"" however, soon proved vain . Hopes of this may have been a war to end war were dashed .
 In the postwar chaos, movements arose in Europe embracing aggressive, nationalist militarism . Fascism in Italy, Nazism in Germany, fascism in Germany . In the post-war chaos, nationalist movements emerged in Europe .
 In Asia in the 1930s Japan began a campaign of expansion at the expense of China . Conflict renewed in Asia after the war .
 The end of World War I proved to have been merely a truce in an ongoing global conflict . World War II proved to be only a truce between the two sides of the war .
 World War II began in 1937 in China, 1939 in Europe, and 1941 in the Pacific . World War I began in China and Europe in 1937 .
 Tanks and motorized infantry provided the mobility that World War I armies had lacked, with improved aircraft supporting them as aerial artillery . The Battle of the Great War saw the end of World War One in 1918 .
 Both sides used strategic bombing to disrupt enemy's industrial production and demoralize civilian populations . Both sides were able to disrupt industrial production, demoralize civilians .
 Aircraft carriers revolutionized naval warfare, ending the reign of the battleship, and amphibious operations were developed on an unprecedented scale . Aircraft carriers were the first aircraft carriers to carry out carrier operations .
 Germany and Japan won stunning early victories, but in the long run they had no answer to the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The changing face of war changed the course of the war in the short run .
 World War II was fought with equipment more advanced than, but not radically different from, that used in World War I . But as the conflict drew to a close, technological developments were transforming the military scene .
 The first jet aircraft, experiments with guided weapons, ballistic missiles such as the German V2, and above all the dropping of atomic bombs on Japanese cities, marked the start of a new era in warfare .
 The U.S. 8th Airforce flew daylight raids, targeting factories, oil refineries, airfields, and other strategic installations in Nazi Germany . B-l 7 bombers were sent to Germany from 1942 .
 Until long-range fighter escorts were introduced in late 1943, the missions suffered heavy losses . The missions were carried out with heavy losses by the Allied forces .
 The Jagdpanzer, or tank destroyer, was an anti-tank gun mounted on a tank chassis with heavy sloping armor at the front . It was a heavy-sloping armor that protected the front of the tank .
 Austria-Hungary declares Germany makes first effective war on Serbia . use of poison gas at second AUGUST battle of Ypres . Austria declares war against Serbia in October .
 Germany declares war on land on land at Gallipoli . Allied troops, including ANZAC forces, were killed in the battle . Germany declared war at the end of World War One .
 Britain declares war on Germany; Germany enters Belgium in Belgium . Russia and France join forces with France in World War Two .
 Germans drive British and French out of Belgium and defeat Russians at Tannenberg . Germans drive French and German forces to Belgium in 1940s .
 Anglo-Indian troops surrender to Turkish forces at Kut in Mesopotamia . Turkish forces capture British troops in Kut, Iraq, in April 1918 .
 British and German fleets meet in the North Sea in the indecisive battle of Jutland . The battle took place in the same year as the Battle of the Second World War .
 Battle of the Somme ends, with over half a million casualties . Battle of Somme ended in November, with more than 500,000 casualties . The battle was the first major battle of World War II .
 Failure of French Nivelle offensive on the Aisne is followed by mutinies in the French army . Failure of the French offensive led to mutiny in the army . Mutinees in French army followed by failure of offensive on Aisnes .
 Treaty of Versailles imposes territorial losses, arms limitations, and financial reparations on Germany . Treaty imposed on Germany in 1919 . Treaty was signed in 1918 .
 1918 MARCH Treaty of Brest-Litovsk gives Germany control of large area of former Russian empire . Treaty of 1918 gives Germany access to large areas of former Russia empire .
 British troops begin an attack on German forces at Passchendaele in October . British troops attack German forces in a series of attacks on German troops .
 A German and Austrian offensive at Caporetto drives the Italian army into flight . The Italian army was defeated by the Germans and Austrians .
 British-led offensive on the Amiens front initiates final phase of the war on the Western Front . AUGUGUGUS British led offensive on Amiens .
 Bolsheviks open peace negotiations with Germany at Brest-Litovsk . The Bolsheviks opened peace talks with Germany in December 1917 .
 Germany signs an armistice and fighting stops on the Western Front . Germany and France sign a cease-fire in November 1918 .
 France begins construction of the Maginot j Line on its border with Germany . France will begin construction of a border line on the border with France .
 The Washington Naval Conference opens in 1921 . The major naval powers agree limitations to fleet size limits .
 In Morocco, Abd el-Krim's Rif rebellion is crushed by the Spanish and French Foreign Legions . World War I battleship USS Texas was the first battleship from World War One .
 The London Naval Treaty, agreed by the major naval powers, sets new limits on naval forces . In Ireland civil war follows an agreement between Britain and Irish republicans that ends the Irish War of Independence .
 The Soviet Union joins the attack on Poland, which is defeated within four weeks . Poland was attacked by the Soviet Union, which was defeated within a month .
 British battleship Royal Oak sunk by a German U-boat in Scapa Flow in October .
 German battlecruiser Graf Spee is scuttled after battle of the River Plate . Graf spee was destroyed in the Battle of the South American River .
 German claims on the Sudetenland bring Europe to the brink of war . Agreement is reached at the Munich Conference .
 The German Afrika Korps under En/vin Rommel arrived in North Africa in February . Rommel was the first German to arrive in North African .
 Singapore Island falls to the Japanese . Jk: Singapore island falls to Japan .
 Germany changes strategy and starts bombing campaign against London and other British cities—the Blitz . Germany changed strategy and started bombing campaign in Blitz . Blitz was the first German bombing campaign to bomb London in the Blitz .
 U.S. bombers begin daylight raids on Japan from bases in the Marianas Islands in November . Bomber raids begin in November 1944 .
 Japanese pilots carry out mass kamikaze attacks on Allied fleet . British torpedo aircraft attack Italian fleet in harbor at Taranto .
 Axis forces in Tunisia surrender Line is finally broken with an Allied bombers destroy to the Allies . In Italy the German Gustav Gustav forces in Italy surrender lines are finally broken .
 The two blocs drew up plans for fighting one another . Engaged in an arms' race, the U.S. and China drew up arms plans for each other .
 France and Russia had allied with each other in 1894 . Outbreak of World War I was the first major outbreak of the conflict in Europe .
 Britain formed a Triple Entente with France and Russia from 1907, and developed military cooperation with France . Britain formed an alliance with Russia and France from 1907 to 1914 .
 AustroHungarian government blamed Serbia for the archduke's assassination and declared war on July 31, 1918 . Austrohungarian government declared war against Serbia on July 28 .
 Efficient rail networks allowed countries to move troops rapidly to assembly points near the frontiers . Efficient train networks allowed troops to move quickly to assembly point .
 All the major European powers went to war in the summer of 1914 with plans for rapid offensives in pursuit of swift victory . World War One was the first major war in Europe since 1914 .
 Generals convinced that all-out attack would triumph over defense . Generals were convinced that an attack would win over the enemy .
 Germany came close to striking a decisive blow in neutral Belgium, while fighting a holding action in the east . They were proved wrong, although Germany came to blows in France and Belgium .
 German leaders brushed aside last-minute peace moves that might have interfered with their military deployment . German leaders are committed to this plan, German media say .
 The country declared war on Russia on August 1 and on France on August 3 . France declared war against Russia and Russia in August 2013 .
 12 MILLION reservists at hand to the French, Germans, Russians, and Austro-Hungarians in 1914 . German invasion of Belgium would have prevented Britain going into war with Germany .
 Britain declared war on Germany on August 4, 1945 . It was as a treaty guarantor of Belgian neutrality that Britain declared the war against Germany .
 Flag-waving crowds greeted the declarations of war in all the combatant capital cities . Flag waving crowds greet the declaration of war .
 German soldiers occupy Brussels on August 20 1914 . Although many people did German occupation of Belgium . German soldiers occupied Brussels in 1914 .
 The invasion ensured Britain's entry into the war . Few opposed the war at its outset . The invasion of Germany in 1945 ensured Britain entered the war in 1940 .
 The Russian threat drove most opposition Social Democrats to support the war effort . Political divisions were set aside for the moment . In Germany, for example, the threat of the Russian threat led most opposition to support war efforts .
 On the whole, the rapid mobilization of mass armies was achieved with great efficiency . The rapid mobilization was achieved by great efficiency, says historian .
 In Britain 750,000 men volunteered for military service within two months of the outbreak of war . 750,500 men volunteered to serve in two months after outbreak of conflict .
 Thousands of trains —11,000 in Germany alone by mid-August— carried about six million men to railheads near the frontiers . Thousands of . trains worked to precise timetables, working to precise . timetables .
 AustriaHungary's attack on Serbia became a general European conflict . The British Expeditionary W ithin just one week after the attack . Austria and Serbia were involved in the conflict .
 All the continental powers were caught up in an arms' race with elaborate hopes to expand their armies whenever war threatened . The continent's continental powers had elaborate hopes of expanding their armies .
 Hundreds of thousands of reservists (men who had previously been given military training) were called up from civilian life . Hundreds of thousand reservists called up .
 No nation wanted to be left behind when its enemies sent their troops into the field . This process of mobilization took time and was complicated; but no nation wanted its troops left behind .
 Russia announced plans to mobilize its army in support of Serbia on July 30 . On July 30 Russia said it would mobilize its troops to support Serbia . Serbia has been fighting a growing insurgency in the past year .
 The German military leadership set in motion their long-established Schlieffen Plan for winning a war against Russia and France . Interpreprepreviously interpreted this mobilization as a threat, the German military leaders set in .
 The Germans anticipated that Russia would be the slowest nation to mobilize its massive armies . The Germans thought that Russia was slowest country to mobilize .
 Faced with a war on two fronts, Germany planned to overpower France in a lightning offensive mounted through Eastern Front . The Western Front was planned to overwhelm France with an offensive through the Carpathian Mountains .
 Major battle Force —a small professional force in contrast to the mass conscript armies on the Continent—shifted 100,000 men across the Channel and deployed them near the Franco-Belgian border .
 At first the German offensive in the west, based as it was on optimistic assumptions, came surprisingly close to success . At first it was based in optimistic assumptions .
 German forces advanced swiftly over Belgium, overcoming resistance of forts at Liege and Namur with heavy Krupp guns . The Schlieffen Plan was implemented by the German government .
 BEF found itself in the line of the German advance at Mons . The BEF was forced to retreat alongside its French allies . The German advance forced the BEF to retreat from Mons .
 Large-scale French offensives in Alsace and Lorraine were hugely costly failures . The supposed elan of France's soldiers proved no match for heavy machinegun and artillery fire .
 Helmuth Johann Ludwig von Moltke, Germany's chief of general staff, now began to advance his forces south from Belgium, intending to surround the French armies engaged in eastern France .
 Days of marching exhausted his footsore infantry, and his supply lines, dependent upon horse-drawn transport, became overextended . His supply lines were dependent on horse drawn transport, and he had to rely heavily on horses .
 The line of advance also exposed his right flank to the Paris garrison . The Paris garrison was also exposed to the French .
 General Joseph Joffre, pulled forces back from the eastern frontier to confront the invading soldiers . General Joseph Gallieni, in charge of the defense of Paris, sent an army to attack the German flank. General Joseph Goffre pulled forces out of eastern France .
 To avoid striking France's border defenses head on, the Schlieffen Plan provided for France to be attacked via neutral Belgium . The combined counter-offensive, Germany's attack on France and Belgium, was planned for Belgium .
 German troops overran much of northern France but failed to reach Paris . In the event, German troops failed to make it to Paris .
 East Prussia, Germany hastily transferred two army corps from the Western Front . The move was a contributory factor in the failure of the Schlieffen Plan . East Prussian army corps were transferred from the western front to the east .
 General Erich Ludendorff, achieved an overwhelming victory at Tannenberg in East Prussia at the end of August . General Ludwigendorff was victorious in the battle of Tannenburg .
 Russian troops killed or injured some 40,000 Russian troops, and took some 100,000 prisoner . The Russians were killed or wounded by the Allied forces, killing or injuring up to 80,000 .
 Germany's Austro-Hungarian allies suffered reverses against the Russians in the Austrian province of Galicia, and also failed to overcome the Serbs . Meanwhile, Germany's allies also failed in the battle to overcome Serbs in the Serbia .
 On the Western Front in September 1914, there was still clear space for maneuver between the Aisne and the northern coast of France .
 First Battle of the Marne, known as the First Battle, drove the Germans back to the Aisne River in northeastern France, was fought in August 1914 . The battle was the first battle of its kind in which the Germans were driven back .
 The collapse of the Schlieffen Plan meant that the war was lost, von Moltke suffered a nervous breakdown and was replaced as Germany's principal commander by Erich von Falkenhayn . The collapse was caused by the collapse of Schlieffen Plan and von M
 German calculations had been upset by the unexpected speed of Russian mobilization . Meanwhile, on the Eastern Front, the German calculations were upset .
 French troops went to war in 1914 in colorful uniforms and soft hats . Faced with the Russian forces advancing into its province of Scarlet and blue .
 Soon they and all armies would be wearing duller shades of camouflage clothing, topped with protective steel helmets . Soon they would soon be wearing a duller shade of camouflage .
 A F T E sides clashed and then dug themselves into defensive positions to protect themselves from each other . Both teams clashed and dug themselves in defensive positions before the match .
 The Germans fought successfully to overcome remaining Belgian resistance around Antwerp, but ran into French and British forces in Flanders in October . Stalemate was a stalemate .
 There followed a series of vicious battles, known collectively as the First Battle of Ypres, which lasted into mid-November .
 The sheer desperation and savagery of the fighting was typified by the deaths of 25,000 German student volunteers . The death toll was 25,500 German students who volunteered to fight the Nazis .
 The onset of winter toward the end of 1914 brought a lull in the fighting on all fronts . hopes of a rapid end to the war utterly dashed .
 Both sides still intended to fight until victory was won . Few considered trying to make a compromise peace .
 The fighting left German troops in control of almost all of Belgium and a swathe of northern France . The fighting has left German forces in control in Belgium and France .
 Casualties by the end of 1914 were tragically high . The cost of fighting in the Great Depression was too much to bear .
 Around one-third of the British soldiers sent to France had been killed . Around one third of those soldiers were killed in the war .
 Russia and Austria-Hungary each counted more than a million dead, wounded, or taken as prisoners of war . The two countries were involved in the conflict in the early years of World War One .
 A contributory factor to the very high casualties in 1914 was the lack of adequate head protection for soldiers . The lack of head protection in 1914 contributed to many of the high casualties .
 In 1915-16 steel helmets such as the British Brodie and the German Stahlhelm were universally adopted . Steel helmets were widely adopted by the British and German armies .
 Ideas about civilized behavior in war had been disregarded . The British steel helmet was designed with shrapel damage policy .
 The actions of German forces in Belgium outraged world opinion, and influenced the future policy of the U.S. The actions in Belgium shocked world opinion and influenced future American policy .
 Germans pursued a policy of Schrecklichkeit to cow popular resistance . Allied propaganda was exaggerated by Allied propaganda, but the Germans did pursue it .
 Millions of men fought and died on the Western Front between 1915 and 1917, with no apparent decisive result . Millions of people died and millions were killed in the Great War .
 The front line in late 1917 had moved little from its position three years before . Three years later, the front line had remained in the same position .
 A t the start of 1915 the opposing armies recognized the urgent need to mobilize maximum military and industrial resources for a long conflict . The opposing armies agreed to mobilize the necessary resources for the long war .
 Already France was struggling to find sufficient manpower for both factories and the front . Already France struggled to find enough manpower for the war effort .
 Britain created mass armies out of volunteers before resorting to conscription in 1916 . Conscription began in the spring of 1916 and ended in 1918 .
 British output of shells rose from 6 million in 1915 to 76 million in 1917 . It also vastly expanded its war production of shells .
 German manpower had to be split between the Eastern and Western fronts . German manpower was divided between the two fronts of the war .
 German soldiers wearing gas masks defend a trench in 1916 . German soldiers wore gas masks in the trenches .
 Despite new resources, the generals puzzled over how to win a war in which both sides were entrenched and maneuver had become impossible . Despite their new resources the generals struggled to win the war .
 Through 1915 the French launched offensives in Artois and Champagne, the British at Neuve Chapelle and Loos, and the Germans at Ypres, to little effect . The French and British launched attacks on each other in France and France .
 In 1916 more troops, guns, and shells only served to increase the slaughter . A war of attrition in 1916 was one of the most bloody years of the Great War .
 In the summer Britain's volunteer New Armies were blooded in a vast Allied offensive on the Somme . The volunteers were bloodied in the summer during the Allied offensive .
 At Verdun, the battle lasted from February to December . The fighting here continued into November .
 Germans probably lost at least 800,000 dead and wounded in two battles . British and French casualties in the two battles totalled over a million .
 The immensity of the losses was directly related to the size of the armies engaged, the duration of the battles, and the quantity of munitions . There were mistakes of generalship on all sides but the losses were direct .
 At the Somme in 1916, Canadian troops emerge from their trenches with bayonets fixed .
 The failure of either side to achieve a decisive advantage by the end of 1914 left opposing forces dug into trenches on the Western Front .
 By 1915 the British and French empires were becoming an important source of manpower on the Western Front . The Western Front was virtually a continuous line from the north coast of France to neutral Switzerland .
 British Indian and French North African troops fought in the key battles of 1914 . French and Indian North African forces fought in key battles .
 Troops from Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa were initially used in Africa and the Middle East . From 1916, they became a highly respected presence on the Western Front .
 Land battles were dominated by the ever-increasing artillery forces on both sides . New weapons were also coming into use in World War II .
 Chemical warfare began on a small scale in 1914, when France experimented with tear gas and Germany fired shells containing a chemical irritant . Chemical warfare was first started in France in 1914 .
 The first lethal gas used was chlorine released by the Germans at the Second Battle of Ypres in April 1915 .
 Other gases, including phosgene and mustard gas, followed and were employed on a wide scale by both sides, causing large numbers of casualties . Other gases were also employed by the British and German armies .
 Howitzers had shorter barrels than other artillery guns . German artillery guns were used in World War One .
 They were ideal for trench warfare because their shells flew in a high trajectory, dropping on top of a concealed enemy . The shells were used in trench warfare as a means to get close to the enemy in the trenches .
 Through 1917 persistent rain and the effects of artillery bombardment turned the Flanders battlefield into a wasteland of mud . Aftermath of combat at Passchendaele .
 The stalemate on the Western Front led to a search for new tactics that might deliver the elusive breakthrough . After I _ J .
 Tanks were first fielded by Britain at the Somme, but they were too slow and vulnerable to be effective . Tanks first fielded in Britain at Somme but were too fast and vulnerable for effective use .
 More than one-third of the fighting was lost in the first day of fighting . More than a third were lost in first day's fighting and it proved impossible to exploit the initial breakthrough .
 Cambrai did point to the effective use of tanks by the Allies in 1918 . Cambraei did not mention the effectiveness of tanks in the battle .
 The Allies sought alternatives to the Western Front stalemate in fighting elsewhere . The Allies only reproduced static trench warfare in new locations . The Western Front was a stalemate .
 In 1918 the outcome of the war would be decided by great land battles in France, says Haig . In 1918, the outcome would be determined by great battles in the land battles, Haig says .
 Despite the evolution of the war into brute attrition, a decisive breakthrough was still the ultimate goal . The battle was still going on, and the war was still being fought for a decisive victory .
 General Robert Nivelle was given command of the French Army in December 1916 . He promised an offensive that would win the war . General Nivele promised to take the French capital Paris .
 When he launched his attack the following April it failed completely . But when he launched it again the attack was completely unsuccessful .
 Nivelle was succeeded by Philippe Petain, the hero of Verdun . Petain focused on rebuilding morale .
 German forces, now under Hindenburg and his deputy, Ludendorff, settled for the defensive . Meanwhile, German forces sacrificed territory in withdrawing to the Hindenburg Line .
 Only Field Marshal Douglas Haig, the commander of the BEF, remained committed to a breakthrough, launching the Third Battle of Ypres in June 1917 . Field Marshal Haig launched the battle against the British Army in March 1917 .
 His forces made some progress but became bogged down in the Flanders mud . They finally took Passchendaele in November at immense cost and no decisive effect .
 Despite repeated failure of offensives, warfare on the Western Front was not simply futile mass slaughter . It was a test of endurance for the Germans . Despite repeated failures, it was not a futile war on the western front .
 Armies strove to improve their fighting methods in search of a decisive advantage . Armies experimented with new techniques and tactics. Armies fought for a decisive victory in the early years of the war .
 Use of artillery in support of infantry improved, as did cooperation between air and land forces . The use of air and ground forces improved during the Second World War .
 The chief quality required of a soldier was endurance under near-intolerable conditions . But the chief quality of a solider required is endurance under close-close contact .
 Howitzers often mounted on siege platforms for firing . In trench warfare, howitzers were often mounted in siege platforms . Howitzerers were mounted in trenches .
 When war broke out in Europe in 1914, it also ignited conflicts in the Pacific, Africa, and the Middle East . Much of the fighting was on a relatively small scale . About one million people were killed in the conflict .
 Britain's ally since 1902, Japan declared war on Germany on August 23,1914 . Britain was its first major ally in the Middle East since 1902 .
 It occupied German-ruled Pacific islands and fought a brief campaign to seize the German stronghold of Tsingtao on the Chinese coast . The U.S. occupied a number of Pacific islands in the Pacific .
 Togo fell to the Allies at the start of the war . German South-West Africa was invaded and occupied by South African forces by mid-1915 .
 Any German resistance in Kamerun ended in 1916, but in German East Africa General Paul von LettowVorbeck fought an inspired guerrilla campaign and remained undefeated at the end of the war .
 Turkish military government aligned itself with Germany before the war . Enver Pasha had aligned himself with Germany in the 1930s .
 Britain deposed pro-Turkish khedive Abbas Hilmi in December 1914 . Britain had military control of Egypt, nominally part of the Ottoman empire .
 Egypt served as a base for Allied operations in the eastern Mediterranean . The Suez Canal was a vital imperial lifeline for the British Empire . Egypt was a key base in the Allied World War II .
 While stalemate prevailed on the Western Front, warfare raged across Southern and Eastern Europe, from the Italian Alps to the Baltic, and around the Ottoman empire from Gallipoli to Iraq .
 Less advanced states with a doubtful hold on their people's loyalty began to collapse under the strain of modern war . Less advanced countries with doubtful hold of their people’s loyalty collapsed under modern warfare .
 T he entry of the Ottoman empire into the war as an ally of Germany opened up new arenas for British, French, and Russian forces .
 A French magazine depicts Serbia being attacked from behind as it resists Austria-Hungary and Germany . A seemingly simple plan was conceived for Tnnmal British and French warships to force a passage through the Stab in the back .
 Dardanelles and bombard the capital, Constantinople, to bring about an Ottoman surrender . The Ottoman Empire was defeated by the Ottoman Empire in 1877 .
 Turkish mines and land guns forced the Allies to change their plans . But the warships came to grief on a combination of Turkish mines, land guns .
 A force of 75,000 soldiers, including Australian and New Zealand volunteers, was landed on the Gallipoli Peninsula on April 25, 1915 .
 The landings were almost a success, but confusion and hesitation allowed the Turkish defenders to corner Allied troops in narrow beachheads . The Turkish defenders were able to corner the Allied troops .
 Fresh landings at Suvla Bay in August momentarily revived the campaign . Turkish commander, Mustafa Kemal (who would later rule Turkey as Kemal Ataturk), determinedly resisted all Allied efforts .
 A soldier had roughly a one in three chance of escaping unscathed . The stalemated Allied force was evacuated in January 1916 .
 A seaborne invasion of Ottoman-ruled Iraq by British and Indian troops in 1915 also led to initial disaster when the force was besieged at Kut and obliged to surrender in April 1916 . The invasion of Iraq in 1915 led to the collapse of the Iraqi government .
 In the Caucasus, Turkish forces were defeated by the Russians, who then invaded Anatolia . In Anatolia, Anatolia was invaded by Anatolians, who were defeated in Caucasus .
 The Turkish response was to launch a massacre of Armenians under the cloak of brutal deportations, costing more than one million men, women, and children their lives . More than 1 million Armenians were killed in the massacre .
 The Ottomans' Arab subjects revolted in 1916, aiding a British advance from Egypt into Palestine . The British advance into Palestine was the result of the revolt .
 The Turks suffered severe setbacks in 1917, with Baghdad falling to the British in March and Jerusalem in December . The Turks were defeated by the British .
 The Serbians had held out in 1914, but in 1915 they faced a joint offensive by German and AustroHungarian forces, while also being invaded by Bulgaria . Serbia was inevitably overrun . The Turks sought an armistice after being defeated by the British in September 1918 .
 Italy entered the war in 1915 on the Allied side and fought a border war against Austria-Hungary at the foot of the Alps . Italy fought the Austrians-Hungarians in the border war in the early 1900s .
 Six divisions of experienced German troops effected a breakthrough at Caporetto in October 1917 . A series of failed offensives produced nothing but casualties until six divisions of German troops made a breakthrough .
 Russia's opening attack on Germany was defeated at Tannenberg in September 1914 . However, initial advances further south against the Austrians were more successful . Russia's initial advance against the Germans was successful .
 Russians captured much of Austria's province of Galicia later in 1914 . Both sides were badly trained, ill-equipped, and often incompetently commanded .
 The Eastern Front was never as static as the Western Front, because the armies were spread out over a much larger area . The war was fought on the Eastern Front, with the armies spread over a larger area of land .
 The Russians suffered heavy casualties in a series of battles against the Germans in 1915 . The Russians lost large areas of territory in what are now Poland, Belarus and Lithuania .
 Russian armies still fought on and achieved by far their greatest success of the entire war with an offensive mounted by General Alexei Brusilov against the Austro-Hungarians in Galicia .
 Brusilov's forces advanced some 60 miles before German troops arrived to halt their progress . The Russian troops advanced 60 miles in advance before they were stopped by German troops .
 Romania was also crushed by German forces in late 1916 . Romania was tempted to enter the war on the Allied side by the prospect of imminent victory .
 Brusilov's offensive had entailed huge casualties—probably half a million men killed or wounded . Brusilova's offensive in Russia entailed massive casualties . The Russian Revolution in Russia was overthrown in 1917 .
 In July the disastrous failure of the Kerensky offensive left the army in disarray . The new Provisional Government tried to keep fighting, but in July the army was in chaos .
 Mutiny and desertion were rife as revolutionary soldiers' committees challenged the authority of officers . Mutiny, desertion and mutiny were rife in the early days of the revolution .
 The Bolsheviks signed an armistice with Germany at Brest-Litovsk in December . The following March reluctantly agreed to a punitive peace treaty . Ottoman troops wore Germanstyle uniforms, apart from the distinctive kabalak helmet .
 Russia did not concede any decisive amount of territory until the Bolshevik revolution of October 1917 undermined its war effort . The Bolshevik revolution in 1917 undermined the Russian government's efforts . The Eastern Front was pressed back by the Germans, but Russia was never defeated .
 In 1915, Thomas Edward Lawrence was recruited as a British intelligence officer in Cairo . Lawrence was an archeologist before the war . He was recruited by the British government in 1915 .
 Adopting Arab dress and customs, he fought alongside Feisal ibn Hussein, the future king of Iraq, in the Arab revolt of 1916-18 .
 Lawrence and the Arab irregulars contributed to the defeat of the Turks in Palestine and Syria in 1918 . Lawrence and his irregulars proved exceptionally gifted at guerrilla warfare . Lawrence was the first Arab to join the Arab resistance movement in the war .
 Lawrence felt that promises made to the Arabs in the war were not kept by the Allies in the postwar settlement . Lawrence felt they were not keeping promises they made to Arabs . Lawrence said he felt that the Arabs were not being kept in the post-war settlement .
 The last Ottoman sultan was deposed in 1922 and Turkey became a republic . Turkey is now a republic after the sultan's overthrow .
 Britain and France took control of the former Ottoman territories of Palestine and Syria . The two countries took over the territories from the Ottoman Empire .
 Air warfare developed in all aspects, from fighter combat to strategic bombing . Meanwhile, air warfare developed to include strategic bombing and air warfare .
 Germany's drive to challenge British dominance at sea began under Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz in 1898 . Britain's naval dominance in the early years of the First World War .
 HUS Dreadnought, launched in 1906, was the first battleship to be built in Britain . This provoked Britain to build ever bigger and more powerful battleships, beginning with the HUS dreadnought .
 The ship so outclassed all earlier battleships that these were dismissedively referred to as pre-dreadnoughts . The ship was the first of its kind to be called a dreadnoughton .
 The naval arms race became so intense that by the outbreak of war in 1914, Germany had 24 dreadnoughts and battlecruisers to Britain's 34 . By the end of the war, the world's most powerful naval powers were Germany's .
 The first ever air attack was carried out in 1911 by an Italian plane in Libya . The first air attack in 1911 was in Libya by Italian plane .
 In August 1914 the flimsy flying machines of all the combatants totalled just 500 . The flimsy machines were made up of just 500 flimsy aircraft .
 As the ship approached Ireland, it was struck by a torpedo fired by German submarine U-20 . The ship was the first to be hit by a German submarine in World War II .
 The sinking of the Lusitania turned public opinion in the neutral U.S. decisively against Germany . Public opinion in neutral United States turned decisively against the Germans .
 Germany claimed that the liner had been transporting war material . There was some small-arms ammunition in the ship's hold .
 World's greatest naval power entered a war that it had to win on land . Britain entered the war in 1914 with the hope of winning the war on the ground .
 The Royal Navy was able to maintain a trade blockade of Germany, but although this severely weakened the Germans in the long run, it could not be decisive . The blockade was a major factor in the success of the German War .
 Alternatively, a naval catastrophe could have driven Britain out of the war . Alternatively, it could have led to a naval disaster .
 Germany knew that if it could win command of the sea through the defeat of the British fleet, Britain would be unable to supply its army in France . Britain might even be open to invasion by German land forces .
 The Kriegsmarine sought opportunities to wear down the British fleet, in the hope of one day meeting it on equal terms and contesting maritime superiority . The German fleet sought to one day meet the British in equal terms .
 It had to maintain its superiority over the Kriegsmarine, while also keeping vital British trade routes open . It had had to keep vital British routes open while maintaining superiority .
 If it failed to do this, Britain's war industries would soon collapse and its people starve . Britain's people would soon starve and its war industries soon collapse, says David Cameron .
 The most serious problem for the Royal Navy was the existence of new weapons that undermined the value of its large surface warships . The Royal Navy could not maintain a close blockade to prevent German shipping reaching German ports .
 Fear of hidden hazards limited Jellicoe's ability to maneuver . Fear of these hidden hazards severely limited his maneuvering ability .
 Britain soon disposed of any German surface warships that threatened its ocean trade . But when U-boats began unrestricted attacks on merchant ships in February 1915, their success was alarming .
 Germany resumed full-scale warfare in February 1917 . Fear of U.S. civilian deaths led to U-boat attacks in 1916 .
 Over the next six D Actions involving main British and German fleets dates 1914-18 Location North Sea H U-boat activity in the Atlantic and H Mediterranean .
 The Bristol F-2B Fighter was a two-seater introduced by Britain's Royal Flying Corps on the Western Front in 1917 . Clashes between Italy and Austria in the Adriatic and between Turkey and Russia in the Black Sea .
 As well as operating in the fighter role, the F-2B served as a reconnaissance, bomber, and ground-attack aircraft .
 The observer in the rear cockpit had a Lewis gun to defend against an enemy attack from above and behind . The observer also had a gun to protect himself from enemy attack .
 The main offensive weapon was a fixed, forward-firing Vickers machine gun operated by the pilot .
 The east coast of Britain was bombarded by German surface raiders in December 1914 . It was the first time the east coast was bombed by the Germans .
 The Royal Navy had excellent signals intelligence, which gave warning of later German sorties .
 Admiral John Jellicoe's Grand Fleet was able to surprise its smaller German equivalent, the High Seas Fleet, when it made a rare venture out to sea in May 1916 .
 The resulting encounter, now known as the battle of Jutland, revealed deficiencies in the Royal Navy's ship design, fire control and night fighting .
 Battle of Jutland was to confirm the Royal Navy's command of the sea . The Germans could only fight a holding action, fleeing once in contact with the Grand Fleet's battleships . Hundreds of Allied merchant ships were sunk in the battle .
 Aircraft were primarily an adjunct to armies on the ground . Aircraft were used to carry out operations in the air .
 Biplane construction with two pairs of wings braced by wires and struts became almost universal . It was far more robust than contemporary monoplane designs . They quickly proved their worth for reconnaissance in the mobile fighting of 1914 .
 Despite its name, the Bristol Fighter was a multi-purpose aircraft . It was suitable for reconnaissance and ground attack as well as for air combat .
 The two-wheel main undercarriage was not retractable so it created a great deal of drag that slowed the aircraft down . The aircraft was not fully equipped with retractable undercarriages .
 Forced to fly at high altitudes to escape interception, airships had lost effectiveness by the end of 1916 . Airships had been forced to fly to avoid being intercepted by airmen .
 The development of ever larger multi-engined airplanes allowed the German strategic bombing campaign to continue . The development allowed the Germans to continue their bombing campaign in Germany .
 From June 1917 both London and Paris were raided by German Gothas and R-planes . The raids took place from June 1917 to June 1917 .
 British, French, and Italian airplanes also launched raids against enemy cities late in the war .
 First true aircraft carriers emerged in 1918, with a flat deck for take-off and landing . In Britain more than 5,000 people were casualties of air raids in World War I .
 First purpose-built aircraft carriers, Britain's Hermes and Japan's Hosho, were built in the early 1920s . The first purpose built aircraft carriers were built by Japan in the 1920s.
 Italian General Giulio Douhet argued that air power could win a future war on its own . After the war, Italian General Giuseppe Douhet said air power was the key to winning .
 Heavy bombers would destroy cities and industries until the enemy surrendered . Relegating armies and navies to a minor defensive function, fleets of heavy bombers destroyed cities .
 This view was adopted in the 1920s by air commanders such as General Billy Mitchell and Britain's Sir Hugh Trenchard . Once the trenches were dug, the view of air commanders was adopted once they had dug .
 Flying over enemy lines, airmen photographed trench systems, ""spotted" for artillery, observing where their shells fell, and reported on troop movements .
 They also dropped small bombs on targets such as stations and railyards . The bombs were dropped during the Second World War .
 A number of aircraft were fitted with guns to shoot down enemy reconnaissance aircraft and bombers . Before long these aircraft were fighting one another .
 Civilians desperate for an alternative to the grim industrial warfare of the trenches were gripped by the idea of war in the air . Civilians .
 Hastily trained airmen had, at times, a life expectancy measured in weeks rather than months .
 Tens of thousands of aircraft were rapidly put into service . The construction of aircraft moved from craft workshops to mass production in factories . Aircraft production was rapid and mass production was mass production .
 In addition to ongoing land campaigns, aircraft were used for strategic bombing . The U.S. used to target cities from above .
 German Zeppelin airships bombed the city of London for the first time in May 1915 . The first time the city was bombed by German airships .
 The two-bladed propeller was driven by a Rolls Royce Falcon VI2 engine . The huge machines inspired terror in the civilian population, but soon proved hopelessly vulnerable to British airplanes using .
 Nights in the trenches were quiet, a time for bringing fresh troops, ammunition, and supplies up to the front line under cover of darkness .
 In some sectors, however, there are regular raids aimed at disrupting the enemy's movements .
 Paul Nash was Britain's official war artist during World War I . Painting shows a mule train trying to cross a shattered landscape of burned trees and flooded trenches .
 The Bolsheviks came to power in October 1917 and withdrew Russia from the war . Russia was defeated in the war by the Bolsheviks in 1917 .
 The peace treaty of Brest-Litovsk was imposed on Russia by the Germans in March 1918 . It was the first peace treaty between Russia and the West .
 The treaty confirmed German control of vast swathes of Central and Eastern Europe formerly part of the Russian empire . It also confirmed the existence of the German-occupied region .
 The Russian defeat released large numbers of German soldiers for transfer to the Western Front . The defeat undercut popular support for the war in Germany, which had been motivated largely by fear of Russia .
 Many German workers were attracted by the ideals of the Russian Revolution . Many of them were attracted to the ideals .
 Neutral America was already a major source of supplies and finance for Britain and France . But neutral America had already been a major supply source for the two countries .
 On April 6 Wilson asked Congress to declare war on Germany, which it quickly did . Wilson's war was declared by Congress on April 6, 1917 .
 Wilson issued his Fourteen Points, based on freeing territories won by Germany and establishing self-determination for subject nationalities of European empires . Wilson issued the Fourteen points in January 1918 .
 He supplanted the civilian government as director of the country's war effort . Appointed German chief-of-staff in August 1916, he supplanted civilian government .
 With Ludendorff, his principal assistant, he led Germany’s futile offensives in 1918 . He led the German army to victory in the Battle of the Second World War . He died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 President from 1925 until 1934, he did nothing to prevent Hitler from rising to power . He was President of the U.S. from 1925 to 1934 .
 The Germans advanced menacingly toward Paris, then were relentlessly driven back toward their own frontier . The Germans were driven back into their own territory in the 1930s .
 With its armies retreating, its allies collapsing, and revolution brewing at home, Germany signed an armistice on its enemies' terms . Germany signed a peace treaty on the terms of an agreement with its enemies, ending the war .
 Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg, and his deputy, General Erich Ludendorff, took control of their country . They subordinated Germany's economy and society to the needs of war production .
 The gamble on unrestricted U-boat attacks only resulted in the U.S. joining the war . The U.K. joined the war against the Nazis in 1941 .
 Despite the collapse of Russia, Germany was bound to lose the war once the U.S. resources of manpower and industrial production were brought to bear on the Western Front . The United States was bound for the war when the war was won by Germany .
 The United States had to recruit, train, and equip a mass conscript army virtually from scratch . The U.S. had to train, train and equip its own army from scratch.
 General John Pershing refused to allow troops arriving in Europe to join the British and French armies at the front . Instead, he methodically built up an independent army . Pershing was the commander of the American Expeditionary Force .
 Hindenburg and Ludendorff staked everything upon a last titanic offensive that might win the war . General Pershing's men were ready to join the battle before the battle began .
 Germany's Kaiserschlacht, or Michael Offensive, was launched on the Somme on March 21, 1918 . Germany's spring offensive was launched in March 1918 .
 Germany had increased its troop strength on the Western Front by 30 percent before the offensive . The offensive was mostly carried out by transfers from the now quiet Eastern Front .
 Germans had also developed new tactics to achieve a breakthrough in depth . But the Germans also had new tactics, including new tactics and new tactics .
 Their role was to punch holes in the enemy lines and infiltrate in depth, bypassing strongpoints . They bypassed strongpoints to maintain momentum and wreak havoc in the rear .
 British defenses were shattered by a hurricane artillery barrage as stormtroopers attacked . Stormtroopers were attacked by British troops in the Battle of Stonewall .
 When a follow-up offensive in Flanders opened in early April, there were fears the Allied armies might crack .
 For the first time the British and French forces were brought under a single Supreme Commander, France's Marshal Ferdinand Foch . Foch was Foch's first Supreme Commander in charge of the Allied Forces .
 The image of Uncle Sam in James M Flagg's now famous poster captivated the American public . America needs you. The image was captured by Flagg in his famous poster .
 As German casualties in successive offensives rose toward a million, the fresh American troops began to arrive . First blooded in June at the battle of Belleau Wood .
 On July 15 a German offensive was held and then thrown back in the second battle of the Marne . The battle was held on July 15 and was turned around in two days .
 Canadian and Australian infantry spearheaded a large-scale Allied offensive at Amiens . Then, on August 8, Canadian and Australians led the offensive .
 Ludendorff called it ""the black day of the German army"" and declared that there was no further hope of Germany winning the war . Ludendorf called it the black day, and declared there was no further hope of Germany of winning .
 The Allies broke through Germany's Hindenburg Line (a defense system in northeastern France) into territory the country had held since 1914 . Over the next three months, the Allies attacked and advanced steadily .
 Pershing led half a million U.S. troops in the battle of St. Louis in September . Pershing was a major commander of the Army in the early 1900s .
 The MeuseArgonne Offensive in the last weeks of the war was a major offensive in the final weeks of World War II . Mihiel and more in the Meuse Argonne offensive .
 Many German soldiers resisted, but there were signs of war-weariness and low morale . Many surrendered, but many surrendered .
 From the summer of 1918 German soldiers surrendered in ever-increasing numbers . Meanwhile, Austria-Hungary was on its knees, its army retreating in Italy and threatened from the Balkans by German prisoners of war .
 Some 350,000 were taken prisoner in the last three months of the war, decisive evidence of demoralization . Some 300,000 taken prisoner during the war's final months .
 Stormtroopers were used to break through the weak points in the Allied line and penetrate in depth, forcing the enemy to withdraw . The stormtroopers broke through the enemy's weak points and forced them to retreat .
 Both AustriaHungary and Bulgaria would soon seek an armistice, as would Ottoman Turkey after heavy defeats inflicted by British empire forces in Iraq and Palestine . Ottoman Turkey would also seek an end to the conflict .
 They declared their acceptance of his Fourteen Points as a basis for peace . 6,250,000 “military casualties in the war, of whom about two million died . About two million people died .
 Pershing argued against negotiating an armistice at all, believing that the war should continue until the Germans were totally defeated . Britain and France insisted on tough terms for a peace deal .
 Germany had to cede much of its military arsenal and allow Allied occupation of the Rhineland in return for an end to the war . In the event, Germany was told that it had to give up its arsenal to the Allied forces .
 Sailors of the High Seas Fleet mutinied, triggering revolutionary outbreaks in German cities . Sailors also mutined during the Great War .
 A nation reduced to starvation by the Allied blockade had lost faith in its leaders . It was the first time a nation had been starved of food by the blockade .
 The country was declared a republic on November 9; Kaiser Wilhelm abdicated and fled the country . Kaiser Wilhelm was the last president of the United States .
 The war destroyed the German, Russian, Ottoman, and Austro-Hungarian empires . After the war, the British Empire collapsed .
 Europe's borders were redrawn, resulting in the creation of a number of new states . The creation of the new states was a major event in Europe's history .
 Versailles Treaty was imposed on Germany after its signing in France on June 28,1919 . It forced the country to disarm and was harsh in territorial terms . It was also forced to disarm Germany .
 Germans resented the ""war guilt"" clause declaring them responsible for the war and the victors' demand for the payment of huge financial reparations as well as coal, agricultural products, and even horses and cows to replace those people killed .
 Some 9 million troops had died, including 2 million Germans, 1 million Russians, 1. million French, and some 900,000 from Britain and its empire .
 Of 116,000 U.S. troops who lost their lives, thousands died in the ""Spanish flu"" epidemic at the end of the war's end . Thousands died in an epidemic of the Spanish flu at the time .
 Civilian losses are impossible to estimate, but a figure of 6 million is credible . Civilians are estimated to be at least 6 million, but it's impossible to say .
 A late-medieval siege gun was immobile and could only be fired a few times a day . A siege gun could be fired only a few shots a day in medieval times . The siege gun is a medieval siege gun that fired a single shot at a single time .
 Self-propelled guns firing every few seconds can hit precision targets far beyond the line of sight with explosive munitions . Self-powered guns can also be fired at close range with precision precision .
 There were smaller, hand-held versions of the gun which were really muskets . Hand-held guns were also known as 'hand-held' guns .
 This mid-15thcentury veuglaire is a breechloader made in Burgundy, France . It was made in the 15th century .
 Q Mons Meg was a bombard made by the Duke of Burgundy's artillery artificer, Jean Cambier, in the 1450s for King James II of Scotland . Veuglaires usually had a removable chamber so spare chambers could be readied for firing .
 The French 12-pounder cannon was introduced by Jean-Baptiste de Gribeauval in the 1770s . It was used until the end of the Napoleonic Wars and was introduced in France .
 The soixante-quinze field gun, a French 75mm, was revolutionary when introduced in 1898 . It was the first time a field gun was made available in France .
 With hydraulic recoil, it could fire up to 30 high-explosive or shrapnel rounds a minute . The weapon has hydraulic recoil and can fire 30 rounds per minute .
 The Skoda 5. in howitzer was a Czech-made gun used by the Central Powers in World War I . Firing explosive shells in a high trajectory, howitzers were ideal for trench warfare .
 The German 88mm flak gun proved to be as effective against tanks as it was against aircraft . Q The 88mm gun was used in the Second World War .
 The new revolutionary government was engaged in armed struggle from the very start, says the president . The new government is engaged in an armed struggle, he says .
 The uprising of February 1917 that overthrew Tsar Nicholas II set up a Provisional Government . The uprising was the end of an era for the Tsar .
 The coup was masterminded by Leon Trotsky, leader of the Petrograd Soviet (revolutionary committee) Armed workers and revolutionary former soldiers played a prominent role .
 Alexander Kerensky, head of the Provisional Government, called on the army to regain control, but it failed . It failed, confirming Lenin's grip on power . Lenin's hold on power was confirmed by the collapse of the revolution .
 Azerbaijan, Poland, Belarus, Ukraine, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Georgia, Armenia, and Finland became nominally independent German satellites . Now Azerbaijan, . Belarus, . Ukraine, . Lithuania, . Estonia, . Latvia, . Georgia, . Armenia, . Finland, . Azerbaijan,
 The collapse of the Russian empire in 1917 triggered a complex series of interlocking conflicts that lasted into the 1920s . The Civil War is estimated to have cost 13 million lives, mostly civilian victims of famine and of the massacre and depredation practiced by all sides .
 The Russian Civil War and Japanese invasion of Japan began in 1917 . At the time of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty that took Russia out of World War I, Lenin's Bolshevik revolutionary government controlled the cities of Petrograd and Moscow .
 Leon Trotsky founded the Worker's and Peasant's Red Army in February 1918 . Initially based on the Red Guards who had helped bring the Bolsheviks to power .
 The situation is complicated by the presence of foreign troops in the country . The situation has been described as a humanitarian crisis .
 In spring 1918 some 30,000 Czechs were traveling along the TransSiberian Railway toward the Pacific port of Vladivostok, from where they intended to join the Allied forces in France .
 Local clashes with the Bolshevik authorities en route flared into full-scale fighting . Locals clashed with Bolshevik authorities in the city of Moscow .
 Czechs soon controlled a swathe of Siberian territory, allowing Admiral Alexander Kolchak to establish himself as head of a Siberian-based anti-Bolshevik government . The Czechs were able to establish themselves as a Russian-backed government .
 The northern ports of Murmansk and Arkhangelsk were occupied primarily by the British; Japanese and American troops took control of Vladivostok; and the French landed forces at Odessa on the Black Sea .
 These interventions were in part motivated by a desire to prevent weapons and munitions sent to Russia for use against Germany falling into the wrong hands . The interventions were part of an effort to keep weapons from falling into wrong hands.
 Allied governments also wished for the overthrow of the Bolshevik regime in order to prevent its ideas of revolution spreading to their own countries . Allied governments wanted to prevent the ideas of the revolution spreading .
 The intervention was deeply unpopular with working-class movements in Britain and France, and with many of the military personnel sent to Russia . Many of the troops were sent to Moscow, and many of them were killed .
 A mutiny by ^fcV, T * . lit Soviet commemorative poster . Celebrating third anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution .
 French sailors at Odessa in April 1919 underlined the severity of the problem . Most of the foreign troops had left by the end of that year .
 Britain and France continued to supply and encourage the White armies . France and Britain continued to support the White Army .
 Unopposed intervention by foreign forces was possible because of the chaos that dominated Russia in 1919 . Unoppopposed foreign forces were possible due to the chaos in Russia .
 As well as the Cossacks and the White armies, there was a peasant ""Black Army"" led by anarchist Nestor Makhno that established a formidable presence in Ukraine .
 The war was conducted with almost inconceivable savagery, crude terror serving as a weapon on all sides . The war in Afghanistan was conducted by the Taliban in 1991 .
 Much of the strategy focused on extracting grain from peasants to feed men and horses . The side that got the grain would win would win, the peasants always lost . The strategy was the grain extracted from peasants .
 The Russian people suffered untold hardships during the Civil War and its aftermath . Fought over wide distances with few * 1 flats of land .
 The famine in the Volga region in 1921-22, partly caused by war and revolution, killed five million people . Five million people were able to exploit the disunity of the enemy, and defeated .
 Mikhail Tukhachevsky was captured and shot in February 1920 . Commanded by 26-year-old Mikhail, the Red forces won back Siberia from Kolchak in 1919 .
 The Reds also triumphed over General Denikin in southern Ukraine . His army had been weakened through clashes with Makhno's Blacks . The Reds and the Blacks fought for control of the country .
 In October, the Bolsheviks almost lost Petrograd to Yndenich's 20,000-strong army . The Bolsheviks were defeated by the army in Petrograd .
 Trotsky prepared a desperate defense of the city and Yudenich halted in the outskirts of the outskirts . The following month, Trotsky withdrew the following month . Trotsky prepared .
 Marshal Josef Pilsudski was eager to establish his country's borders as far east as possible . The Polish army was involved in the creation of Poland in the early 1900s .
 It was the last major war in which the cavalry was an offensive force . Aided by anti-Bolshevik Ukrainian Nationalists, Polish forces tanks or aircraft involved in the war .
 Leon Trotsky forged the Red Army into an effective instrument of war . The survival of the Bolshevik regime depended upon Leon Trotsky's ruthless organizational genius . The Red Army was created by Trotsky in 1917 .
 The ranks were filled by peasants conscripted at gunpoint, and thousands of former tsarist officers were recruited as ""military experts" to lead the forces .
 Discipline was enforced by terror, with the families of officers held as hostages to ensure their loyalty . Families of officers were also held hostage to ensure loyalty . The families of soldiers were held hostage by the British government .
 The number of foreign soldiers present at some time in Russia during the Civil War . Although they were surrounded by enemies, the Reds were not without enemies .
 The men came from 13 different countries. invaded Belarus and the Ukraine, occupying Kiev and Minsk with ease. The men were from 13 countries. They came from around the world and occupied the country .
 The Red Army launched a counterattack in June, spearheaded by Semyon Budyonny's First Cavalry Army . The Red army launched the counterattack against the rebels in June .
 The Russians managed to sweep the Poles back across the border, and had pursued them to the gates of Warsaw by August . The Russians were able to sweep across the Polish border and into the city of Warsaw .
 Polish forces regrouped, fought back, and claimed a historic victory . Aided by a French military mission, the Polish forces fought back and claimed victory .
 The last of the White generals, Wrangel, has launched an offensive from the Crimea . Wrangel launched his offensive from Crimea . Meanwhile, the last of Wrangel had launched an attack on Crimea .
 Once the fighting in Poland ended, he was doomed and had to retreat to the coast . However, once the fighting was over, he had to return to the sea .
 The Red Army then turned on Makhno's forces, which were brutally crushed . Makhino's forces were then brutally crushed by the Red Army .
 This marked the end of the Civil War as a serious contest for power, although scattered fighting continued until Vladivostok fell to the Red Army in October 1922 .
 Allied troops, including Japanese, American, and British, parade through the Russian Pacific port of Vladivostok . Allied troops included American, British, Japanese and British troops .
 Soldiers conscripted their sons and stole their grain, peasants ceased to grow crops . The peasants stopped growing crops because of the soldiers .
 Worsened by drought, the collapse of the harvest led to a famine in 1921 that killed millions . Millions died in the famine, which was caused by drought and drought . Drought led to famine that led to collapse of harvest in 1921 .
 Civil War hero Tukhachevsky played a leading role in modernizing the Red Army in the 1930s . He was one of the most prominent figures in the Soviet Union .
 He was advocate of ""deep operations,"" which involved the combined use of tanks and aircraft . He was an advocate of 'deep operations'
 In 1937 he was one of a number of men arrested and shot as part of Stalin's Great Purge of likely opponents . In 1937, he was among those arrested and killed in Stalin's 'Great Purge' of opponents .
 Russia's new government established its rule over much of the pre-war Russian empire . It regains most of the territory lost under the Brest-Litovsk Treaty .
 It had to accept the loss of land to Poland and the independence of the Baltic states and Finland . However, it had to . accept the . loss of territory to Poland . The Baltic states, Finland and Baltic states became independent .
 Japanese encroachment began with the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894-95, giving Japan control of Taiwan and Korea . Japan also took control of Korea and Taiwan .
 During World War I Japan gained the German concession in China's Shandong province . Japan gained control of the area during the war .
 China became a republic in 1912, but authority was fragmented until the Kuomintang Nationalist government of Jiang Jieshi extended its rule over much of the country in 1926-28 .
 China failed to crush the Chinese Communists in 1927, who survived as rural guerrillas at war with the Nationalists . It failed, however, to crush them in 1927 . The Nationalists failed to win control of China's capital, Beijing, in 1926 .
 The Sino-Japanese War began in 1937 . Simmering conflict between Japan and China flared into full-scale war in China .
 The Japanese invasion of China can be seen as the beginning of World War II in Asia . Part of the track on the Japaneseowned South Manchurian Railway was blown up in 1931 .
 Claiming the explosion was the work of the Chinese, Japanese forces seized control of Mukden . Claimed the explosion to have been the work by the Chinese .
 Fighting spread south to the port-city of Shanghai with its various foreign enclaves . Fighting also spread to the city of Shanghai .
 Clashes between Chinese troops and Japanese marines became the pretext for a Japanese aerial and naval attack on of Manchuria .
 Japanese installed Pu Yi, China's deposed last emperor, as ruler of the new puppet state of Manchukuo . Pu Yi was China's last emperor before the Japanese installed him in the puppet state .
 Jiang Jieshi's Chinese Nationalist government used truce with Japan to strengthen its forces with the aid of military advisers from Nazi Germany . Nationalists and Communists used truce to strengthen forces .
 It exploited the opportunity to launch a crushing offensive against the Chinese Communists . It also exploited the chance to launch an offensive .
 In 1934 the Communist Red armies were forced to retreat to Shaanxi province to avoid annihilation, with Mao Zedong leading EAST ASIA a — Q Occupation of 0 Sino-Japanese War .
 JAPANESE ""THREE ALLS"" order to ARMY UNITS in CHINA, 1940 . Order to ARMy UNITS IN CHINA brought widespread international criticism and condemnation . Japanese ""TH THREE AllS"" Order to Armies in Chapei residential
 From January to May 1933 Japanese land forces from Manchuria started to push south of the Great Wall, scattering Chinese armies and threatening Beijing . The Great Wall was built in China's eastern border .
 Battle of Wuhan was fought 8,000 miles from Jiangxi in the now famous Long March . But the drift to war was then paused by a truce that left Japan securely in control of the city .
 Nationalists and Communists formed a ""united front" against the Japanese in late 1936 . Chinese patriotic sentiment and hostility toward Japan was still strong . Nationalist and Communists now became the focus for the rapid escalation of the conflict .
 The Chinese attack in Shanghai had not succeeded in overrunning the Japanese defensive perimeter . The attack was not successful in defeating the Japanese forces .
 Japan countered with amphibious landings of troops supported by naval and air bombardment . Japan responded with amphibian landings and naval bombardment of Japan .
 A contingent of Japanese troops was stationed in Beijing under the terms of the treaty imposed on China by the foreign powers after the Boxer Uprising in 1901 . By the beginning of October 200,000 Japanese soldiers were engaged in the War resumed .
 On July 7, 1937, there was a confused outbreak of fighting between Japanese forces and local Chinese soldiers at the Marco Polo Bridge in Beijing .
 The incident could easily have been contained, but both sides reinforced their troops and the fighting spread . Both sides reinforce their troops, but the fighting spreads .
 The Japanese Kwantung Army had been spoiling for a fight and now occupied the entire region around Beijing and Tianjin . The Japanese army was in the midst of a massive invasion of the region .
 Jiang Jieshi ordered an attack on the Japanese garrison in Shanghai . The attack was the first to attack the Japanese forces in Shanghai since the war .
 Japanese type 96 light machine-gun entered service in time for the invasion of China in 1937 . Folding bipod replaced by folding bipod .
 Around a quarter of a million Chinese soldiers were killed or wounded in the battle . The combined firepower of Japanese aircraft, warships, and artillery inflicted heavy casualties .
 Japanese commanders had expected an easy victory and were shocked by the ferocity of the resistance they encountered .
 As relations between the U.S. and Japan worsened through 1940-41, the United States increasingly backed the Chinese Nationalists . The Chinese Nationalist Party was formed in 1941 .
 U.S. pilots were authorized to join the American Volunteer Group . The group provided air cover for the Chinese in Chongqing, China .
 From December 1941 to the end of World War II, China fought as one of the Allied powers . China fought in the war as a member of the Allies .
 This ruthless rape of Nanking helped turn world opinion sharply against the Japanese . This ruthless attack on Nanking, along with the earlier bombing of Shanghai, helped .
 Jiang Jieshi's armies retreated westward along the Yangtze River and on to Wuhan . Jiang Jyinghi's army retreated to China's capital, but was unable to reach it . His armies retreated to the westward side of the river .
 A large and complex series of battles was fought here in late summer of 1938 . The Battle of the Second World War was fought in the summer of that year .
 Chinese ground troops were supported by elements of the Soviet air force sent by Josef Stalin sent by Stalin . Chinese ground forces supported by Soviet air forces .
 In fact, he was not even able to protect his provisional capital against repeated Japanese bombing raids .
 A number of Communist armies based at Yanan in Shaanxi, carried out a series of attacks on Japanese positions in 1940, known as the Hundred Regiments Offensive, but these brought terrible retribution upon peasants in areas of Communist areas . A low estimate of the number of Chinese who died
 Japan used biological weapons to spread cholera, typhus, anthrax, bubonic plague, and typhoid dysentery . Japan r r r ’ rr:\ i JAPANESE GOVERNMENT 10 CENT NOTE USED in POW CAMPS .
 Nazi Germany had dropped relations with Nationalist China in favor of rapprochement with Japan . Stalin feared Japan's ambitions on the Soviet Union's eastern border . This intervention marked an important diplomatic shift .
 The Chinese were forced to withdraw westward to Chongqing in the mountains of Szechuan . Despite this aerial assistance, the Chinese were again forced to retreat westward .
 This remote city would be Jiang Jieshi's provisional capital for the rest of the war . It would be the provisional capital of the Chinese government for the next two years .
 By the end of 1938 Japan had won control of the whole of eastern China . It proceeded to form into various puppet entities under the nominal rule of a range of Chinese collaborators .
 Chongqing, the provisional Nationalist capital, was attacked by Japan in 1939 . The Nationalists consolidated their position by building a supply road to British air attacks .
 The sight of Chinese civilian suffering helped turn U.S. opinion against Japan military activity .
 The Japanese moved through the countryside, destroying entire villages and killing every living being—human and animal—in sight . The Japanese destroyed entire villages, killing all living beings and killing all of them .
 Japan held all the regions of China that, from its point of view, were worth having . Japan held . All of the regions that were worth .
 Japan found itself committed to a long-term struggle that tied up around 40 percent of its armed forces . Neither the Communists nor the Chinese Nationalists would give in .
 Threatened with Japanese encirclement, Chinese forces withdrew from Shanghai and retreated to the relative safety of the Nationalist capital, Nanking .
 Exhausted, disorganized, and short of ammunition, Chinese soldiers failed to hold fortified strongpoints between Shanghai and Nanking .
 The capital was attacked by the Japanese on December 9 and occupied four days later . It was occupied by Japan four days after the attack on the capital .
 Japanese troops ran amok, killing at least 40,000 civilians and fleeing soldiers, and raping . Spanish Civil War began with revolt of right-wing army officers against a left-wing government elected in 1936 .
 In 1920 Berbers in the Rif region of Spanish Morocco rebelled against colonial rule . In 1920, Berber tribes rebelled in revolt against Spanish colonial rule of Morocco .
 Abd el-Krim inflicted a severe defeat on the Spanish at Annual in 1921 . The Spanish defeated them at Annual Annual in 1922 .
 Over the following two years, Spanish and French forces crushed the Rif revolt . The revolt was a two-decade-long uprising in the region .
 The Spanish Army of Africa was formed by the Spanish Foreign Legion and Moroccan troops . It emerged as a battle-hardened force under officers such as General Franco .
 In 1930-31 mounting unrest in Spain led first to the deposition of Primo de Rivera and then the overthrow of the monarchy .
 The democratic republic born of this peaceful revolution degenerated into a fierce political battleground . Fascism, anarchist, socialist, and monarchist movements were in contention .
 A full-scale workers' revolt in the northern province of Asturias was crushed by the army in 1934 .
 E lections in Spain in February 1936 brought to power a Popular Front government . The Popular Front was a coalition of liberal and left-wing parties . The Spanish government was formed in 1936 .
 Over the next few months there were many outbreaks of violent disorder promoted by both the right and left wing . Over the following few months, violent disorder was promoted by right-wingers .
 On July 17, a group of Spanish generals, including Francisco Franco, attempted to seize power in a military coup . Franco was killed in the July 17 attempt to take control of Spain .
 They controlled the Army of Africa in Spanish Morocco, but were less successful in mainland Spain . The coup failed in the face of resistance by loyal paramilitary forces and workers' militias .
 The Nationalist revolt was saved from defeat by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy . The revolt was the first to be saved by the Nazis and Italy .
 Luftwaffe Junkers Ju-52 transport aircraft were sent to ferry troops from North Africa to southern Spain . It was the first military airlift in history . The first airlift of its kind .
 The division of Spain between the Popular Front's Loyalist Republicans and Nationalist rebels was complex, both politically and geographically . The division between the two sides was complex and politically .
 The Republicans included Basque and Catalan separatists, and every shade of left-wing group from the moderate socialists to communists, anarchists, and Trotskyists . All were often bitterly hostile to one another .
 The Nationalist side ranged from Catholic conservatives to fascists and monarchists, but was held together by the dominant personality of General Franco . General Franco gradually imposed himself as undisputed leader .
 The Spanish Cross was awarded to the Germans who served on the Nationalist side in Spain . From the outset, the war was marked by massacres and atrocities on both sides .
 The war gave German forces invaluable combat experience . But the killings carried out by the Nationalists were more systematic and claimed far heavier toll .
 Despite Republican forces being made up primarily of irregular militias, there was little guerrilla warfare . The Republican forces were made up of mainly irregular militias .
 The style of combat was conventional and often static in the manner of World War I, with entrenched infantry confronting one another for long periods on immobile fronts . The style was often static and static with entrenched troops confronting each other for long .
 The ""modern"" element in the fighting was aircraft and tanks, mostly came from foreign forces . The "modern" element of the fighting came from abroad .
 Some 50,000 Italians and 12,000 Germans, as well as contingents from Portugal, were sent to fight for the Nationalists . The Nationalists were defeated by the Italians and Germans .
 A much smaller number of military personnel sent by the Soviet Union made a vital contribution to the Republican cause, organizing air and armored forces . The Soviet Union also sent a small number of personnel .
 Some 40,000 foreign volunteers fought for the Republic in the International Brigades, organized by the communists . The International Brigade was organized by communists .
 Britain, France, and the U.S. followed a policy of non-intervention, imposing an arms embargo that, in practice, favored the Nationalists .
 Franco's Army of Africa, marching up from the south, looked unstoppable . Republicans halted by Republicans in the Guadarrama mountains . Franco's army pressing toward the capital from its northern headquarters at Burgos halted .
 In November it pushed into the suburbs of Madrid . After relieving a Nationalist garrison that had been besieged by Republican militias in Toledo, in November it moved into Madrid .
 The Republican government fled to Valencia, but makeshift militia forces and International Brigade volunteers, backed by Soviet tanks and aircraft, held firm . The Republic fought back, but the Republic was defeated .
 Madrid was battered by a heavy air and artillery bombardment, but it did not fall . Madrid was hit by heavy air, artillery bombardment but not fall, but did not .
 International Brigades fought the Army of Africa to a standstill in the Jarama valley east of Madrid in 1937 . Republican morale was further lifted when, early in 1937, the International Brigade fought the army of Africa .
 Nationalist offensive was beaten at Guadalajara by Republican forces in March . Republican forces included anti-fascist Italians of the Garibaldi Battalion . Nationalist forces beat Nationalist troops in Guadalaja .
 Thousands were victims of massacres, the majority carried out by the Nationalist rebels . The majority of the massacres were carried out during the war .
 Nazi Germany strengthened its predominantly aerial forces in Spain in response to the Nationalist failure to win a quick victory .
 These high-performance machines outclassed the Soviet aircraft on the Republican side . The Republican aircraft were the best in the world .
 In the spring of 1937 German and Italian air support enabled the Nationalist armies to take control of northern Spain, including the Basque country . The infamous bombing of Guernica took place during this campaign .
 The Republicans made an offensive at Brunete outside Madrid in July, but it was a costly failure . This communist poster calls on the Republicans to stop their war of words and unite in armed struggle .
 The communists put a high priority on crushing rival political factions on their own side . But they were unable to exploit it quickly enough and were unable . In fact, the communists were under orders from the Soviet Union . The Soviets were not able to exploit this quickly enough .
 The same thing happened at Teruel in Aragon from December 1937 to February 1938 . Teruel was also in Teruel, Spain, during that period .
 Republicans first seized the city, then lost it to the Nationalist counter-offensive . Nationalist superiority of both manpower and materiel was decisive . Republicans seized city in harsh winter weather .
 Franco followed up the victory at Teruel with a drive east to the Mediterranean, cutting off Catalonia from the rest of the Republican-held areas . Losing no time, he followed up his victory by driving north and east .
 The Republicans launched their final offensive on the Ebro in July 1938 . Although severely weakened by in-fighting, the Republicans were forced to withdraw . The Ebro was destroyed by the collapse of the Spanish capital in July .
 As the fighting dragged on over the following months, their forces suffered heavy losses . Their forces, inferior on the ground and in the air, suffered losses .
 The Nationalists occupied Barcelona in February and Madrid in March, bringing the war to an end . The Condor Legion was supporting the Nationalist offensive in the Basque country .
 The attack became a symbol of the destructive power of aircraft and, more specifically, of the Luftwaffe . Publicized worldwide, the attack was the first of its kind in Germany . The attack was widely publicized worldwide .
 He entered into negotiations with the Nazis, meeting Hitler at Hendaye in October 1940, but the two sides failed to agree terms for Spain's entry into the war . He met Hitler in Hendaye, Spain, in 1940 .
 For those fighting for the Republic, defeat was a catastrophe . Defeat was a disaster for those in the Republic .
 Some 50,000 were executed; many more were held prisoner for years and used as slave labor . Many more were used as slaves and used to be held as slaves .
 A few escaped capture and maintained a low-level guerrilla campaign into the 1950s . A few of the guerrilla fighters escaped capture .
 About half a million Republicans fled across the border into France when the war ended . About half-a-half-million Republicans fled to France when it ended .
 Republican soldiers Militiamen prepare for action in Andalucia in September 1936 . Republican soldiers were involved in the fight against the Spanish government .
 The Republicans were often short of war supplies, including bullets for their World War l-vintage bolt-action rifles . The Republicans often had to rely on World War II-era ammunition .
 T he oldest form of war propaganda is the glorification of the heroic leader . War propaganda is often glorified of a heroic leader.
 Paintings and reliefs on the palaces of Ancient Egyptian pharaohs and Assyrian kings celebrate their glorious victories, representing the ruler and his army in triumph and the humiliated enemy either slain or enslaved .
 Roman generals and emperors staged highly dramatic triumphs during the course of which a defeated enemy was executed . Victorious Roman generals often staged dramatic victories and marches to celebrate triumphs .
 These ancient celebrations of victory in war confirmed the prestige and power of the entire system, the empire, its army, and its gods . The ancient celebrations confirmed not only the prestige of the individual leader but also of the whole system .
 The main purposes of propaganda in warfare are to persuade one's own men to fight, to demoralize the enemy, and to generate support for the war effort on the home front . In modern times, depiction of the enemy killed Propaganda .
 Mass media from the printing press to television and the internet have expanded the distribution of propaganda, but it is as old as warfare itself . or humiliated is no longer seen as good propaganda. or humiliated. It is as well as warfare .
 In general, more democratic times have seen the ordinary soldier celebrated as much as the leaders, and sacrifice stressed more than, or more, than, glory .
 Propaganda circulates these ideas, making them known to friend and foe . Propaganda makes these ideas known to friends and foes . It also circulates ideas in the media .
 Alexander of Macedon presented his campaign against the Persians as advancing Greek civilization against barbarians, stage-managing a visit to Troy to identify himself with the Greek heroes of the Homeric age . In the 4th century bce, Alexander of . Macedon . presented his .
 In medieval times, religious war was preached by Christian popes and Muslim caliphs . The medieval period saw religious war preached by both sides of the ages .
 The pulpit as well as the mosque provided platforms for the statement of war aims . It was the pulpit and mosque where the statement was made .
 In the 18th century, American and French revolutionaries fought in the name of freedom and human rights . Their beliefs were proclaimed in speeches in assemblies and published in newspapers .
 In the 20th century, fascism, communism, and democracy became major subjects of propaganda, each promising liberation from the others . Modern technology provided the means of reaching a larger audience .
 Slandering the enemy is as established a function of propaganda as glorifying one's own cause . Vilifying the enemy can be as established as propaganda, as propaganda . The U.S. should be careful not to glorify the enemy .
 Publicizing enemy's crimes and massacres or ridiculing their cultural and racial characteristics are also standard aspects of propaganda . Publicizing the enemy's crime and massacres is also standard in propaganda .
 The printing press made it possible to distribute to a wide public images of a vicious enemy . During the religious wars of early modern Europe, Protestant fought Catholic .
 Pope Urban II promised wealth and salvation to those who fought to avenge the alleged atrocities perpetrated by the Muslims in Jerusalem .
 During the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars, British cartoonists portrayed the French as covetous and malnourished . French cartoonists depicted the French during the wars .
 Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 provoked a similiar response in World War II . U.S. propagandists' representation of the Japanese was clearly racist .
 A poster of Che Guevara in the 1960s had the same function of enlisting troops for a global Marxist revolution . The poster was a poster of the same image as a photo of the Cuban revolutionary leader .
 From the mid-19th century, liberal states had to contend with the war journalist and photographer . The war photographer and photographer was a major source of information .
 Keeping control of what people see and hear has become increasingly important, as has broadcasting of a biased version of events to the enemy .
 World War II was perhaps the conflict in which propaganda was at its most effective . Propaganda played a large role in the success of states in mobilizing their populations .
 During the Vietnam War in the 1960s, the United States suffered an almost total loss of official control, and even influence over how the war was presented to its people back home . In contrast to the situation in World War II, the U.S. suffered almost total control of the
 This was a result of a mistaken belief by those in power that the media would voluntarily support a national war effort . This was not so much the direct effect of television . It was the first televised war .
 After Vietnam, military authorities clawed back control over coverage of war coverage . Military authorities effectively clawed in control of coverage of the Vietnam War .
 In the age of digital photography and the internet, it has become even more difficult to suppress unwanted coverage of events . Spin-doctors show little sign of losing the battle to keep official views in the forefront .
 At the same time, terrorist movements are devoted to the idea of ""propaganda by the deed,"" carrying out military actions with the sole purpose of publicizing a cause and influencing world opinion . Terrorists carry out military action with the purpose of 'propaganda'
 propaganda has always been to recruit men to fight . A major function of propaganda is to recruit soldiers to fight for their country .
 Pope Urban II's appeal for the First Crusade in the late 11th century was a striking example of successful voluntary enlistment . The appeal by Urban II was the first example of voluntary enlistments by the Pope .
 The World War I recruitment poster is a good example of the propagandist's art . The poster is one of the best examples of propaganda art .
 The images of Lord Kitchener saying ""Your Country Needs You"" in Britain, and of Uncle Sam with ""I Want You for the United States Army"" in America, are simple, direct, and aimed at the most basic instinct of national solidarity .
 Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels was a master of radio broadcasting . Radio broadcasting was one of the key propaganda mediums of the 1930s and 40s .
 Sponsored by the War Office, it fosters British patriotism and portrays the horrors of trench warfare . The War Office film is based on the war's depiction of the trenches .
 Information about the progress of the war is controlled by government agencies . Information on the progress has been tightly controlled by the government .
 Hitler expanded German armed forces and marched troops into the demilitarized Rhineland in 1936 . Overturning the Versailles Treaty, Hitler expanded his armed forces .
 Hitler occupied Czechoslovakia's Sudetenland region in September . Last-minute deal at September's Munich Conference averted war . Hitler occupied the region after a last-minute agreement at the Munich Conference .
 Britain and France rapidly rearmed but hoped that Hitler would be ""appeased” by these territorial gains . France and Britain hoped that he would be pleased with their gains .
 By March 1939, Czechoslovakia had already been occupied by German forces . Czechsoslovakia ceased to exist in March 1939 .
 Britain and France responded by guaranteeing Poland against German aggression . The deal was part of the German-SOVIET Pact .
 Hitler wanted a return of Danzig to Germany and adjustments in the border territories, but the Poles refused to accept any of these demands . Hitler wanted Danzig back to Germany .
 While Germany prepared to invade Poland, the Western democracies tardily sought to make an agreement with the Soviet Union . The Western democracies sought to avoid war with the USSR .
 The Soviets instead chose to do a deal with Hitler's Nazis, their ideological enemies . But the Soviets chose to deal with the Nazis instead of doing so with their ideological foes .
 The signature of the GermanSoviet Pact on August 23,1939, inevitably cleared the path to war . The pact, signed in 1939, was a precursor to the outbreak of World War II .
 The Soviet Union refused to succumb to the shock of Blitzkrieg . But Britain remained undefeated and the Soviet Union did not succumb .
 In theory, the declaration of war by the Western Allies placed Hitler in a perilous situation . Hitler's fate could have been catastrophic for the German leader .
 With majority of German armed forces thrown into the invasion of Poland, Germany's western border was weakly defended . The majority of Germany's armed forces were in the invasion .
 France was committed to a defensive strategy based upon the supposed impregnability of the Maginot Line border fortifications built in the 1930s . Britain's army was very small, and France's defence was very weak . But France's strategy was based on the supposed impregnability
 The British and French planned a three-year war of attrition and blockade, but failed to provide the Poles with military assistance of any kind . The Poles were defeated by the French and British in the early years of the Second World War .
 In mid-September, with the Germans already at the gates of Warsaw, the Soviet army invaded Poland from the east . The invasion was the first invasion of Poland since the fall of the Second World War .
 On September 28, Germany and the Soviet Union divided the defeated country between them . Germany and Soviet Union split up the divided country .
 Hitler now instructed his commanders to prepare immediately for an attack on France and Belgium . Hitler now ordered to prepare for the attack on Belgium and France .
 In May 1940 the British Expeditionary Force was cut off by the rapid German advance from the Ardennes, and troops fell back on the port of Dunkirk . Although a British expeditionary Force took up its KEY MOMENT DUNKIRK, it was not the first time
 evacuation of British troops by sea began on May 25 . French and British troops held a defensive perimeter . Evacuation began May 25. British troops were evacuated by sea .
 While under constant air attack, men were taken off from the port itself and beaches outside of the town .
 Royal Navy warships bore the brunt of the operation, but hundreds of volunteer civilian vessels joined in . Local boats ferryed men from beaches to larger vessels offshore .
 French and Belgian troops joined the British in the last few days of the evacuation, which ended on the night of June 3-4 .
 Almost 340,000 soldiers were evacuated in total, 220,000 of them British . They were forced to leave most of their weapons behind, but most of them were British .
 At its height, German command of Europe stretched from the Atlantic to the Caucasus . The occupation of Europe was at its height in Germany .
 Despite talk of creating a ""New Order" in Europe, Germany never advanced beyond the crudest exploitation of the countries under its control . The Allied armies were content to stay on the defensive .
 Throughout the winter of f 939^0 the only war that raged was in Finland . Finland was invaded by the Soviets on November 30, and held out fiercely until March .
 Finland avoided occupation or being turned into a vassal state . An armistice was finally agreed on March 12 and Finland avoided being occupied or turned into an EU state .
 Allies prepared naval and land forces for an intervention in neutral Norway . Allies were aiming to cut off supplies of Swedish iron ore shipped to Germany from Norwegian ports .
 On April 9, 1940, they occupied Denmark and began landings in Norway by sea and air . They quickly captured airfields in both countries, capturing airfields .
 The Allies countered with their own landings on Norway's coast and inflicted considerable losses on the German Navy . The Allies landed on the coast of Norway and inflicted casualties on the Germans .
 Germans were superior in leadership, organization, and equipment . But on land, they were superior on land . They also gained command of the air .
 The Germans launched their offensive in France and the Low Countries on May 10, 1941 . Axis powers and satellites of Germany occupied France and colonies occupied by Germany and territories occupied by the Allies .
 Hitler had adopted a plan, proposed by General Erich von Mannstein, for a swift thrust through the Ardennes region of southern Belgium .
 The tanks would break the Allied line and head westward, encircling the Allied forces in Belgium . The battle would end in a victory for the Allies .
 The German invasions of the Netherlands and Belgium held the attention of the Allied commanders . General Heinz Guderian's tanks surged out of the Ardennes, pressing on to the Channel coast .
 Stuka dive-bombers wreaked havoc among retreating infantry and civilian refugees . Luftwaffe established command of the air, and Stuka air attacks were devastating .
 Operation Barbarossa was a major invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941 . It was the first invasion of Soviet Russia since the Second World War II . The Soviet Union was invaded by Soviet troops in 1941 and 1941 .
 Hitler intended the conquest of the USSR to be another quick victory . Supplies and equipment were inadequate for a long campaign . Hitler intended to be a quick victory; supplies and equipment was inadequate .
 Blitzkrieg, literally ""lightning war,"" was the name given to the technique used by the German forces in their great successes of 1939-41 . Blitz krieg is the name of a technique that was used in the German military's great successes .
 Tanks and mechanized infantry broke through weak points in the enemy's defenses . They advanced at speed to cut communication lines . Tanks broke through enemy defenses and advanced to cut communications lines .
 Aircraft, notably Stuka dive-bombers, acted as aerial artillery in support of the tanks . Aircraft were used in the Second World War as part of the German invasion .
 Blitzkrieg depended heavily on causing the collapse of enemy morale and, subsequently, a total breakdown of command and control . The collapse of the enemy morale was key to the success of the war .
 Winston Churchill urged his country to fight on after the evacuation of Dunkirk . Winston Churchill was the prime minister of the UK during the evacuation .
 Mussolini only just had time to bring Italy into the war before France surrendered to the Germans on June 21 . Mussolini had just arrived at the end of the war .
 Northern and western France came under German military occupation, with a collaborationist government led by Marshal Petain operating from Vichy . France was occupied by the Germans during WWII .
 He toyed with plans to invade Britain while over the south of England, his Luftwaffe fought the Royal Air Force . He fought with the British Air Force in the Battle of Britain .
 By fall 1940, the Germans were bombing British cities and Hitler was looking east to the Soviet Union for new conquests . But by that time, the British cities had already been bombed by the Germans, and Hitler had been looking east .
 Detailed planning for the invasion of the USSR began in September 1940 . The invasion was planned for September 1940 and 1941 .
 German forces were distracted the following spring by problems in the Balkans . The Italians had invaded Greece from Albania in October and required assistance . The Germans were distracted by the Italian invasion of Greece .
 The German invasion of the USSR, known as Operation Barbarossa, began on June 22, 1941 . The Eastern Front began on the Eastern Front . The Soviet Union was invaded by the Germans in 1941 .
 Hitler expected another swift victory and his troops were not equipped for winter warfare . Hitler expected a swift victory but his troops did not have the time to prepare for winter .
 Three million German troops and a further million from Germany's allies were involved in the operation . Operation involved a far larger scale than any operation Hitler's forces had previously attempted . Operation took place on a massive scale and involved three million troops .
 Stalin refused to believe the reports of German military preparations . His forces were caught off-guard by the discovery of the Germans .
 German armies rapidly out-fought and outmaneuvered their enemies . Once again German armies were rapidly out of-fierce and out-prepared .
 German soldiers killed in the campaigns of 1941 . Hundreds of thousands of soldiers killed .
 Fall rains exposed serious supply problems in German armies still dependent on horsedrawn transport . The fall rains, followed by a bitterly cold winter, exposed serious problems in the army .
 The Soviets suffered appalling casualties but still managed to push the Germans back from the outskirts of Moscow . Thrown forward in suicidal counter-offensives, the Soviets suffered horrific casualties . The Germans were forced to withdraw from Moscow in 1944 .
 By the end of 1941 the period of lightning victories was over, and Germany now faced a long war of attrition in the east .
 Germany was supreme in Europe but overstretched strategically . Germany was now supreme in the world but overstrained strategically . Hitler spoke to senior officials before Operation Barbaros .
 Exploiting its conquered territories was essential to sustaining the war effort . Exploited territories were essential to sustain the war .
 The Nazi leadership saw its country as short of food and manpower . German rule in Europe was seen as a problem for the Nazis .
 The Germans used prisoners of war and civilian workers from all over Europe, treating many with appalling brutality . Many were treated with appalling cruelty, including the use of torture .
 Nazis planned to leave 30 million "surplus" people in Poland and Soviet Union to starve to death or die of disease in order to release food supplies for Germany . In addition to killing Europe's Jews, the Nazis also planned to kill 30 million ""surplus"" people in the Soviet
 An M4 Sherman tank rolls through the North African desert in 1943 . Americans in the desert in North Africa were used to train German workers .
 Sherman tankers were outclassed by German tanks in armor and firepower . Sherman was produced in large numbers for the British and American forces . Sherman tanks were produced for British and U.S. forces .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt had made his country an ally of Britain in all but name . The U.S. entered the war in December 1941 .
 Roosevelt declared the United States neutral at the start of the war . Changes to U.S. neutrality laws soon allowed American factories to begin supplying munitions to Britain and France .
 The United States also began a limited build-up of its 45 BILLIONTl™ in dollars of U.S. Lend-Lease aid to all of its allies during the war .
 Reverse Lend-Lease from the Allies to the U.S. armed forces amounted to some $8 billion . It introduced conscription in 1940, introducing conscription .
 The Lend-Lease program, initiated in March 1941, supplied Britain and other allies with war materials they did not have the money to pay for . The program was started in 1941 and funded by the British government .
 The U.S. remained at peace until the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941 . The United States entered the war with the Japanese in 1941 .
 Hitler declared war on the U.S. in support of Japan, an Axis ally . Hitler promptly declared war against the United States . Roosevelt declared war in response .
 By 1942 Germany was at war with the United States, the Soviet Union, and the British Empire, which were vastly superior in manpower and resources . The Turning Tide is the story of the Second World War .
 The Germans kept the upper hand at first, threatening to establish an unassailable hold on Europe before American strength was brought to bear . Yet the Germans remained in the grip of Europe before the U.S. intervened .
 Soviet claim to be sustaining the brunt of the war against Germany with only limited help from its Western allies . H Eastern Front Dates 1941-43 Location Western USSR B North Africa Dates 1940-43 .
 The British were engaged against both Germany and Italy in the North African desert . There was no comparison with the scale and ferocity of the battles on the Soviet front . The battles were no longer comparable to the battles fought on the Russian front .
 Hitler and Stalin, took over supreme command of their armed forces and mercilessly drove them into a combat to the death . The two men were killed in a battle to death in the Second World War .
 Stalin rallied the Soviet people after the great defeats of 1941 during Germany's Operation Barbarossa . Stalin appealed more to traditional Russian patriotism rather than Communist ideology .
 Discipline in the army and on the home front was also brutally enforced by the secret police . The secret police were also brutally enforcing discipline in the military and home front .
 Germany had overrun most of the USSR's industrial areas, but new factories were improvised beyond the Urals and began turning out large quantities of simple but highly effective weapons, notably the T-34 tank .
 A series of attacks ordered by Stalin in the first half of 1942 failed disastrously . The Soviet armies were left exposed to a renewed German advance .
 Hitler directed his main thrust south toward the Caucasus, aiming to cripple the Soviet war machine by capturing the oil fields at Baku . Baku is the main oil hub for the German invasion of the Soviet Union .
 Stalingrad on the Volga was the focus of the battle for the Soviet Union in 1944 . But the battle was overshadowed by the success of the Battle of the Second World War II .
 The German Sixth Army entered Stalingrad but failed to subdue its defenders in the ferocious battle that ensued . The battle was a fierce battle between the Germans and the Russians .
 General Georgi Zhukov organized a vast encirclement from late November that trapped and destroyed the German forces inside the city . Meanwhile, General Zakhov organized an operation to trap and destroy German forces .
 By the time the German Sixth Army surrendered at Stalingrad in January 1943, American troops faced a THOUSAND tanks and armored vehicles made in the USSR in 1942 .
 The number of tanks and armored vehicles made in Germany in 1942 was 1,500 . The tanks and vehicles were made in North Africa .
 The fighting in the Mediterranean theater had begun with Italy's entry into the war in June 1940 .
 A Soviet poster calls lor the extermination of Hitler's invading armies .
 The Soviet state mobilized its people for the war effort with a mix of exhortation and terror . The state mobilized the Soviet state with a mixture of exhorts and terror, including terror .
 The PPS 43 submachine gun was highly effective, sturdy and easy to manufacture in large quantities . Introduced in the middle of the war in 1945, the submachine guns were highly effective and sturdy .
 General Erwin Rommel in February 1941 presented an altogether stiffer challenge than General Rommel . Rommel died at the hands of German forces in the Battle of the Second World War in 1945 .
 Britain's Eighth Army struggled to stop Rommel's tanks from overrunning Egypt and threatening the Suez Canal . While the Royal Navy battled to keep the sea route from Gibraltar to Malta and Alexandria open, Rommel’s tanks overran Egypt .
 To Hitler the desert war was a sideshow, and the Americans took a similar view . The Americans took the same view as Hitler, who saw the desert as sideshow . The desert war in the desert was a 'sidehow'
 The British were pessimistic about their chances of a successful seaborne invasion of France . They persuaded the United States to land forces in North Africa as offering an immediate prospect of engaging an enemy army .
 On October 23, 1942, British general Bernard Montgomery began an offensive at El Alamein, which drove Rommel's forces out of Egypt . Rommel was driven from Egypt by British forces .
 Allied forces under the U.S. general Dwight D Eisenhower landed in French North Africa in Operation Torch . Operation Torch landed in France on November 8, 1944 .
 The German and Italian forces were soon trapped in Tunisia between those of Eisenhower and Montgomery . The two sides were soon stuck in Tunisia .
 Axis forces in North Africa surrendered in May 1943 . Some 200,000 Germans and Italians were captured . In May 1943 the Axis forces surrendered .
 The titanic struggle on the Eastern Front raged unabated . Germany's last attacks in Russia were the last attacks on Russia .
 In February 1943 the Germans fought back in fierce battles for the city of Kharkov . The city was captured by the Russian army in February 1943 .
 The battle at Kursk was the largest armored encounter in history . With some 2,000 tanks engaged, the battle was the biggest armored encounter ever . The battle was fought in Russia in the early 1930s .
 Despite heavy losses, the Soviet forces repulsed the Germans and followed up with a counter-offensive that drove the enemy back into Ukraine and Belarus by winter . The Soviet forces were driven back into Belarus and Ukraine in the winter .
 The Americans wanted to invade France as soon as possible, but British leaders persuaded them that this was not feasible in 1943 .
 Victory in Tunisia was succeeded by invasion of Sicily in July . Instead, victory was succeeded in an invasion of Italy .
 Marshal Pietro Badoglio, signed an armistice when Allied troops landed in mainland Italy in September . Marshal signed the peace treaty when Allied forces landed in Italy .
 The Germans swiftly took over the defense of the Italian peninsula . But the Germans quickly took over from the Italian government .
 By the year's end Allied forces were stuck in front of the Gustav Line, the strong defensive position passing through the ancient abbey at Monte Cassino . The Gustav Line was a strong defensive line passing through an abbey .
 The contrast between the fighting in 1942^43 and the earlier Blitzkrieg phase of the war was pronounced . The contrast in 1942*43 was pronounced.
 The offensive power of armored troops had been subdued by anti-tank guns and tank-busting aircraft . Anti-tank weapons and aircraft were used to subdue the offensive power .
 Whether at El Alamein, Kursk, or Monte Cassino, mass artillery firepower and dogged foot soldiers were as crucial as tanks in battles that resolved into trials of strength .
 The tide of war had turned, but the Allies would find no easy route to victory . The tide had turned and the Allies found no easy way of victory .
 Bernard Law Montgomery was the most successful British commander of World War II . Montgomery was always popular with his troops because of his care not to throw away their lives . Montgomery died in the Battle of Britain in 1945 .
 Commanding the Eighth Army in the Western Desert in August 1942, he raised troop morale with his flamboyant presence . He resisted pressure from Churchill to begin a premature offensive .
 He commanded land forces at D-Day but was downgraded as American generals came to the fore . He commanded the land forces but was later downgraded by American generals .
 Montgomery demonstrated an unusual boldness in planning Operation Market Garden in September 1944 . The airborne assault failed at Arnhem, but Montgomery was bold enough to plan the attack .
 Allied armies ground forward on the Eastern and Italian fronts in the first half of 1944 . Allied armies enjoyed an increasing advantage over the Germans in men and materiel .
 Allied forces were put ashore at Anzio, between the Gustav Line and Rome, January 22, 1944 . The deadlock between the two sides of the world's most famous dividing line began January 22 .
 The destruction of the monastery at Monte Cassino by Allied bombers in February also achieved nothing . Allied bombers also destroyed the monastery in February .
 On the Eastern Front in 1944 Soviet forces outnumbered the Germans by two to one . The Soviets outnumbered Germans by 2 to 1 in Eastern Front . Soviet forces were outnumbered by 2-1 in 1944 on Eastern Front.
 Pushing the Germans back in a series of large-scale offensives, their advance ran out of steam just short of Warsaw in late July . The Germans were pushed back by the Allied push to Warsaw in July .
 In 1942 German forces advancing across the Soviet Union were ordered to capture Stalingrad, an industrial center on the river Volga . U.S. General Mark Clark was sent to Italy in June 1944 .
 An entire German army was caught and crushed in the trap of Soviet soldiers . Defended to the death by Soviet soldiers, the city turned into a trap in which an entire German Army was caught .
 Stalingrad was the first major defeat for Hitler's forces on the Eastern Front, one from which they never fully recovered . The battle was one of the most significant defeats for the German forces .
 German Sixth Army under General Friedrich Paulus began fighting its way into Stalingrad in September 1942 . The city had already been reduced to ruins by Luftwaffe air attacks before the invasion .
 General Vasilii Chuikov, in command of the Soviet 62nd Army, had orders to hold the city at any cost . The city was occupied by Soviet troops during the Second World War II .
 His troops fought the advancing Germans street by street and building by building with the Volga River at their backs . The Volga river was at their back .
 Supplies were ferried across the river by night to Soviet soldiers who turned ruined factories and apartment buildings into fortresses . Each had to be taken at a heavy cost in time and lives .
 To prevent the Germans from exploiting their superiority in artillery and aircraft, Chuikov had his men 'hug' the enemy . Chuikkov's men were sometimes fighting inside the same building .
 German forces reached the River Volga in November but could not dislodge Red Army resistance . Even though German troops reached the river Volga they could not reach the river .
 Soviet commander Georgi Zhukov had prepared a masterly counterstroke . The trap is sprung .
 Soviet forces to the south and north of Stalingrad broke through a defensive perimeter weakly held by Romanians and other Axis allies . On November 19, Soviet forces broke through the defensive perimeter held by the Soviets .
 Within four days they had closed their pincers behind Paulus's army, leaving him encircled . Paulus had been surrounded by his army .
 Hitler ordered Paulus to stay put and fight on, supplied by air, but the Luftwaffe did not have sufficient transport aircraft . Paulus was killed in the Battle of the Second World War in 1944 .
 In December the Soviet forces around the city fought off a German attempt to break through and relieve the trapped army . In December, Soviet forces fought off an attempt to relieve the besieged army .
 The German troops ran short of food, ammunition, and fuel, as Zhukov tightened the noose . The Russian troops ran out of food and ammunition in the fall .
 By the third week of January the German Sixth Army was doomed . All hope gone by the end of the month .
 Suffering from frostbite and malnutrition, the Germans could barely barely hght on . Suffered from frosty conditions, they were barely able to hold on to life .
 Paulus Paulus appealed to Hitler for permission to surrender but it was refused . Paulus was forced to surrender to the German dictator .
 Hitler promoted Paulus to Held marshal to instill resolve, but on January 31, Paulus surrendered . Paulus was promoted to held marshal, but he surrendered .
 Within the service, factions argued over whether to devote resources to submarines or surface warships . The U.S. Navy has been criticized for spending too much money on submarines .
 Admiral Erich Raeder, navy commander-in-chief until late 1942, backed Plan Z to build a fleet of battleships and aircraft carriers . Plan Z was backed by Admiral Raeder and instead backed by Plan Z .
 The Royal Navy believed that it had found the way to overcome the U-boat threat . SONAR DETECTION was the answer to the problem .
 By 1939 it had a sonar device known as ASDIC to track submerged U-boats and depth charges to sink them . By 1939, the U.S. Navy had a depth charge device to sink the U-boat .
 ASDIC ignored the fact that German U-boats spent as much as 90 percent of their time on the surface . Sonar was useless for surface detection, sonar often used to detect U.S. submarines .
 Britain was dependent on imported food and raw materials, including all of its oil . Britain was uniquely vulnerable to naval blockade . The Battle of the Atlantic was the first naval clash between the British and American .
 Had the Germans succeeded in closing the Atlantic trade routes, the British would have been defeated and the U.S. shut out of the war in Europe in Europe . The Germans would have shut out the United States .
 Germany bases on the Atlantic coasts of Norway and France gave them bases . The bases were from which the Germans could launch sorties into the Atlantic . Following the entry of the Soviet Union into the war, they threatened convoys bound for Russia's Arctic ports .
 From June 1940 the Royal Navy also had to fight the Italian Navy in the Mediterranean . The Royal Navy was involved in the fight against Italy .
 German surface warships suffered huge losses off Norway in spring 1940, but in the early war years had given Britain some scares .
 The heavy cruisers known as ""pocket battleships,"" Admiral Graf Spee and Admiral Scheer, were both deployed with some success raiding commerce ships .
 Graf Spee was put out of action following the battle of the River Plate in the South Atlantic in December 1939 . However, he was put back in action after the battle in South Atlantic .
 The breakout of the powerful battleship Bismarck into the North Atlantic in May 1941 threatened Allied shipping . It was tracked and sunk by a group of Allied battleships, aircraft carriers and cruisers .
 The battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau were both out of action by the end of 1943 . The battle ships were the first two battleships to be sunk in World War II .
 Donitz's U-boat fleet came close to victory in the battle of the Atlantic . However, the U-boats didn't come close to winning the battle .
 Several major British vessels were sunk in 1939, but it was only after the U-boat bases moved to Brittany from June 1940 that the Germans mounted a full-scale campaign against Allied shipping .
 The British adopted a convoy system for merchant ships in 1939, yet did not have enough escort ships to protect them properly . The British had to adopt the system because of lack of protection from the sea .
 Donitz deployed his U-boats in groups known NORTH ATLANTIC 1 r □ □ E Q U-boat campaign El Attacks on Arctic Dates 1940-41 convoys . U-Boat campaign El attacks .
 In one five-day period in October 1940, a wolf pack sank 32 ships in two convoys . In the same period, 32 ships were sunk by a pack of wolf packs .
 The Royal Navy responded by increasing the number of escorts and improving the training of its men and equipment .
 By March 1941 these incremental changes reached the point where they tipped the balance . The US President Roosevelt's administration was in full control of the war .
 A Royal Navy destroyer on convoy escort duty attacks a submerged German U-boat with a depth charge during the battle of the Atlantic .
 The Canadian Navy expanded and the United States helped protect convoys in the western Atlantic . The U.S. was officially neutral in the 1930s and '1940s . The United States, officially neutral, helped protect the convoys .
 Unexpectedly, the United States entry into the war in late 1941 gave the German U-boats a new opening . U.S. entry to the war gave the Germans a new opportunity to attack the U-boat .
 In the first half of 1942, the U-boats operated off the U.S. east coast, where there was no convoy system . The U-boat operation was based off the United States east coast .
 From summer 1942 German U-boats again concentrated in the mid-Atlantic, exploiting the ""air gap"" beyond the range of Allied shorebased patrol aircraft . The U-boat was the first to use the air gap .
 In World War II all forces had to encipher radio messages, since these were easily intercepted by the enemy . The climax came in March 1943, when ENIGMA was enciphered .
 The Enigma machine was used by German forces as an encryption device . Every U-boat, for example, had its own machine on board . Enigma machines were used as encryption devices for German forces .
 The machine automatically encrypted a message typed on the keyboard and its settings were changed daily . It automatically encrypts messages typed on a keyboard .
 An operator could also use his own Enigma machine and the daily settings to decode messages that had been received . An operator also could also decode messages from his own machine .
 The reading of German naval messages is credited as a major contribution to the defeat of the U-boats . Germany's intelligence was at times equally successful at cracking British naval ciphers .
 U-boats sank 480,000 tons of Allied ships in the Atlantic, raising real fears that Britain's lifeline would be severed . WINSTON CHURCHILL, in his MEMOIR, wrote: ""THE SECOND WORLD War"" U-boat sank 480-000 tons
 The Allies had steadily improved their equipment for the detection of U-boats . Their codebreakers intermittently succeeded in reading the transmissions of German navy Enigma machines .
 Donitz briefly withdrew his U-boats from the Atlantic during the war . When operations resumed later in the year, they were no longer a threat to the Allied effort .
 The outcome of the battle of the Atlantic appeared to show the failure of the U-boat . But by the war's end the submarine was evolving into a far more effective weapon .
 All German submarines were ordered into the Channel to combat the invasion fleet, yet their impact was negligible . Their impact on the Channel was negligible.
 In return for the sinking of a handful of Allied vessels, 26 U-boats were lost . In return, the U.S. lost 26 of its U.boats .
 The types of U-boat employed in the battle of the Atlantic were ""submersibles,"" rather than true submarines . U-boats could not operate for long periods under the sea .
 In 1943 Germany developed the Type XXI submarine, which was capable of operating submerged for days . In 1943 it was able to operate submerged for a day or more .
 Only two Type XXIs saw active service, but the design was the precursor of modern submarines . Owing to production problems, only two of the type XXIs were ever used .
 Aircraft played a vital role in the land and sea war in World War II . Aircraft fought autonomous air campaigns, carrying out strategic bombing and contesting air superiority .
 Germany, Britain, and the United States all sought decisive advantage through air power alone . The U.S. and Germany all sought to use air power through air superiority .
 Of the many possible uses of air power, the bombing of cities was the focus of most attention in the run-up to World War II— both as strategy and moral conundrum . The bombings of cities in the lead up to the war were the subject of most interest in WWII .
 Heavy Japanese bombing of Chinese cities was also widely condemned . Heavy Japanese bombings of China cities were also condemned . The bombing of China was also condemned by the Japanese government .
 In both cases, air raids conducted against defenseless targets led to exaggerated expectations of destruction in a war between major powers . Air raids in both cases led to an exaggerated expectation of destruction of destruction .
 Fear of German air power led Britain to concentrate planning and resources on air defense . The Allies were worried about the threat of air attacks by Germany .
 Britain's Royal Air Force developed radar early warning system and produced new fighters .
 Political leaders in Britain and the United States were keen to develop strategic bombing forces . Despite denunciation of the bombing of cities and their civilian populations by political leaders, both countries were keen .
 An exclusively aerial campaign only began with the Battle of Britain in the summer of 1940 . To help the German Army's Blitzkrieg ground offensives of 1939 and 1940, the Luftwaffe bombed Warsaw and Rotterdam .
 Battle of Britain was ordered by Hitler to drive RAF from the skies ""in the shortest possible time"" as a prelude to an invasion of Britain . Hermann Goring, commander-in-chief of the Luftwaffe, was ordered to drive the RAF out of the skies
 Fleets of German bombers with Messerschmitt fighter escorts attacked a range of targets, including airfields and factories . German bombers flew in daylight from bases in northern France .
 Ground controllers scrambled RAF fighters to meet the intruders . Alerted by radar, ground controllers scrambled by radar to meet them . RAF fighter jets scrambled to intercept the aircraft .
 Hugh Dowding had a clear concept of the battle as an attritional struggle, in which the goal was to keep his aircraft and pilots in being as an effective fighting force . The head of RAF Fighter Command had a vision of the fight as a 'attritional struggle' and 'att
 Their objective was to crush the RAF and degrade Britain's military and economic capacity to make war . Only later did Hitler hope that attacks on cities would also produce demoralization among the population .
 First German daylight bombing raids on the city of London were made on September 7, 1940, and in later raids in the city .
 RAF initially had few resources to combat night bombing but soon began putting radar-equipped night fighters into service . For its part, the RAF had to put radar equipped night fighters in service .
 RAF also began night bombing raids on Germany in 1940, but first ineffectually . RAF also started night raids in 1941, but they were ineffectively .
 British RAF commanders were eager advocates of strategic bombing, but were singularly ill-prepared for it . British RAF was singularly unprepared for strategic bombing in the 1930s .
 Early raids showed daylight attacks were suicidal, yet Bomber Command was not equipped for night fighting . Bomber Command did not know daylight attacks would be suicidal, but they were not .
 At first its bombers could not even locate cities in the dark, let alone the specific factories or railyards that were their targets . At first, the bombers couldn't even find cities or factories in the darkness .
 Bomber Command generally gave up its attempts at precision attacks and adopted an ""area bombing"" strategy . Bomber Command aimed to lay waste whole cities and kill or demoralize civilian inhabitants .
 The policy was implemented under the leadership of Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Flarris . It was implemented in the 1950s and 1960s during the Air Force .
 Four-engine Lancaster and Flalifax bombers entered service, carrying heavier bomb loads, and various navigational devices that allowed bombs to be dropped with some accuracy .
 The Germans responded by developing effective night defenses, their anti-aircraft guns and night fighters . They took a heavy toll of British bomber crews . The Germans developed their own night fighters in response .
 Hundreds of RAF bombers took part in a single raid on German cities . German cities suffered grievously during the raid . RAF bombers were involved in the raid on the German capital .
 Raids on Hamburg in July 1943, for example, started a firestorm that killed 40,000 people . Raids began in Hamburg in 1943, when the city was bombed by the Nazis . The firestorm in Hamburg was a major cause of many deaths .
 Later versions of the North American P-51 Mustang had the range to escort Allied bombers to Germany and back . The Mustang fighter was the first of its kind in North America .
 During 1942 the U.S. Army Air Force started its own bombing campaign from bases in eastern England and later also from North Africa and Italy . During 1942, the United States Air Force began bombing from eastern England .
 The Americans believed that their B-17 and B-24 bombers were fast enough and had enough defensive firepower to carry out mass daylight raids without prohibitive losses . The U.S. believed that the bombers were capable of carrying out daylight raids .
 The Norden bombsight was meant to allow them to hit specific industrial targets . But accuracy proved hard to achieve under combat conditions . They also had a proto-computer that allowed them to shoot specific targets .
 German fighters and AA guns savaged the massed bomber formations . The United States lost 60 bombers on a single day in August 1943 . The U.S. lost 60 of its bombers in one day .
 What was needed was a fighter aircraft with sufficient range to escort the bombers deep into Germany . The aircraft was needed to escort them deep into the country . The RAF was forced to withdraw its bombers from the base .
 Once long-range variants of the P-51 Mustang arrived in late 1943, the balance of the air war over Germany was transformed . Long-range versions of the Mustang were used in World War II .
 In mid-1944 the Allies established almost total air superiority over the Germans . The Allies established air superiority to the Germans in mid-1945 .
 Hitler's war production minister, Albert Speer, achieved little less than miracles, relocating industrial plant underground and forcing workers to work underground .
 Technological developments late in World War II meant no air war would ever be fought again . The atom bomb and jet aircraft were the main weapons weapons of the war .
 The first atom bomb, developed in the U.S. in the Manhattan Project, was dropped on Hiroshima on August 6, 1945 .
 Nuclear bombs and warheads gave an apocalyptic destructive power to bomber aircraft and missiles . Aircraft and missiles could be used to carry nuclear warheads and warheads .
 The most successful was the Messerschmitt Me 262, used to intercept bombers attacking Germany from July 1944 . The Me 262 was the most successful in intercepting German bombers attacking the Germans .
 The British Gloster Meteor was used chiefly to intercept VI flying bombs over southern England . The 12,500 tons of TNT of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima on August 6, 1945 .
 Disputes about the morality and effectiveness of strategic bombing have continued ever since the war .
 Estimates calculate 420,000 German civilians and 70,000 non-Germans were killed in the war . Current estimates calculate that 420,00 Germans were killed .
 British and U.S. bomber crews suffered among the highest percentage casualties of any Allied forces in the war . British and United States bomber crews .
 Aircraft and artillery desperately needed at the fronts were diverted to air defense . Aircraft, artillery and aircraft were diverted from the fronts .
 Supplies of fuel, successfully targeted by the Allied air campaign, were also much reduced . Supplies were also reduced by Allied air strikes .
 The devastation of German cities in the final months of the war reached a point where no further obvious strategic purpose was being served . The destruction of Dresden in February 1945 was a point of no further strategic purpose being served by the Germans .
 The morality of such attacks has increasingly been questioned in the years since the end of the war . the German bomber force took heavy casualties . the morality of the attacks has also been questioned .
 By October the Luftwaffe had abandoned their attempts to win daylight command of the air in favor of the night bombing of cities . By October 1944, the German air force had begun to focus on cities .
 The Blitz ended in May 1941 when the majority of German aircraft were shifted to support the invasion of the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa . Known as the Blitz, this campaign continued throughout the winter, until intensive bombing ended .
 Luftwaffe had not been as well prepared for strategic bombing as for tactical air strikes in support of an army 66,000 . The number of bomber crew from U.S. 8th Air Force based in England killed, wounded, or captured in 1942-45 .
 Germans had developed effective techniques for night navigation, using radio signals to guide bombers to their targets . But the Germans used radio signals, using night-guiding techniques .
 A single raid on Coventry in November 1940 destroyed a third of the city's housing . A third of Coventry's housing was destroyed in the raid .
 Some 43,000 civilians were killed during the Blitz, by far the heaviest losses to air attack that the world had . Germany responded to the devastation of its cities with the ""vengeance weapons" The VI flying bomb and the V2 rocket were developed by Germany .
 Vis were unpiloted jet aircraft, packed with explosives and controlled by a primitive guidance system . The Vis were packed with bombs and controlled with a primitive navigation system .
 Beginning in June 1944, thousands of these simple but effective devices were fired at London and Antwerp .
 Arriving by day and night in all weathers, they caused substantial damage and casualties . Anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft soon became skilled in shooting them down .
 There was no defense against the V2 ballistic missiles, first used in September 1944, again primarily against London and Antwerp . The V2 missiles were used primarily against Antwerps and London .
 Large numbers of these missiles went astray, missing urban areas altogether . Their launch sites were also priority targets for Allied air attacks .
 Allied leaders met for a conference at Tehran in November-December 1943 . Roosevelt, Stalin, Churchill, Churchill and Roosevelt met at Tehran .
 Churchill and Roosevelt agreed to mount an invasion of France in spring 1944, satisfying the Soviet demand for a ""second front"" in Western Europe . 3 MILLION of military personnel assembled in the UK under Eisenhower's command for the invasion .
 Germans prepared for a seaborne invasion, strengthening their coastal fortifications in 1944 . Plans for the invasion were revealed in 1944 in a bid to prevent a British invasion .
 A successful Allied deception plan led the Germans to believe that Calais was more likely to be the invasion point than Normandy . However, the Germans believed that Calais would be the main target of the invasion .
 By summer 1944 Germany was battling against overwhelming odds, but the Nazi regime did not collapse . The German armies kept on fighting . The Fall of Hitler is a documentary based on the fall of Hitler's regime in 1945 .
 The war in Europe only ended when Soviet soldiers raised their flag in the heart of Berlin, where Adolf Hitler had killed himself a few days before . The war only ended after Soviet troops raised the flag in Berlin .
 Soviet and American troops meet at Torgau on the Elbe River in central Germany on April 25, 1945, to celebrate victory over the Nazis .
 A merican, British, and Canadian forces under . General Dwight D Eisenhower landed on beaches in Normandy, northern France, on June 6, 1944 . Wooden stock; most had a simpler metal type A . type A Merican type .
 The D-Day landings clearly showed the material superiority of the Allies in industrial output, manpower, and organizational ability . The Allies showed material superiority to the Germans in the war .
 American forces suffered heavy losses on one of the five landing beaches, codenamed Omaha . U.S. forces lost heavy losses during the invasion of Omaha .
 The failure of an attempt by German officers and bureaucrats to assassinate Hitler in July ensured the survival of Nazi rule and a fight to the death . Failure of a failed assassination attempt ensured the existence of the Nazi regime .
 Paris was freed on August 25, by which time the Allies had landed in southern France, thus opening up a new front . The Allies landed on southern France on August 26, 1944, opening up the new front in France .
 The Germans still had to keep the largest part of their forces on the Eastern Front to face the Soviet army .
 From late June into August, the Soviets won a crushing series of victories in Belarus and the Ukraine . The Soviets won the elections in Belarus, the Ukraine and Belarus .
 As the end of the war approached and occupied countries were liberated, a number of political disputes surfaced . In the aftermath of the Second World War, political disputes emerged .
 Allied forces were overwhelmed by a simultaneous onslaught from east and west in 1945 . Allied advances into Germany in 1945 were met by simultaneous attacks from both sides of the war .
 The Soviets and the Western Allies did not race one another to occupy territory but followed an agreed strategy . The Western Allies followed a similar strategy to the Soviets and Allies .
 Most countries had governments-inexile but not all of them commanded popular support . Most of the world's most successful governments were in the form of government-inextile .
 General de Gaulle's London-based Free French forces succeeded in establishing control of France at the liberation of France . Despite the substantial Communist element in the internal French resistance movement, the Free French Forces succeeded .
 In Yugoslavia various monarchist and communist resistance groups vied for Allied support . The Communist Josip Broz Tito won out in Yugoslavia .
 Monarchist government-in-exile was only able to regain control with the support of the British Army . In Greece, a monarchist government in exile only regained control of the country with the help of British troops .
 Italians were split three ways, some fighting with the Allies on behalf of the Italian government, others joining Mussolini as support to the German forces . The Sten gun was a cheap, but effective, British 9mm submachine gun, much used by resistance fighters in Europe .
 Russian soldiers observe fallen Nazi symbol in Berlin after the fall of Berlin to the Soviet army in May 1945 .
 Allied victory in Europe resulted in the division of Europe—and of Germany, by the ""Iron Curtain"" between Communist and non-Communist states . under Communist leadership for the liberation of northern Italy . under Communists leadership .
 Polish Home Army, loyal to the London-based government, staged an uprising in Warsaw in August 1944 . In August 1944 the Home Army staged a revolt against the government .
 Soviet forces, within sight of the city, dropped supplies and allowed a Polish division to fight its way in . The Polish division fought its way into the Soviet-controlled city .
 Despite their best efforts, the uprising was soon crushed by German troops . People suffered desperately, especially at the hands of Russian soldiers . sympathy was in short supply as the overrunning of camps such as Auschwitz revealed the mass murder .
 Advancing American and Soviet troops met amicably on the Elbe River on April 25, 1944 . Advancing U.S. and Soviet forces met on the river .
 By agreement between the Allies and the Soviets, the costly honor of taking Berlin fell to the Soviets . By agreement, the Allies agreed to give Berlin the right to take the city .
 On April 30, as Soviet forces fought their way into the German capital, the city of Berlin .
 On May 2 German commanders surrendered in Italy, and in Germany on May 4 . On May 4, German forces surrendered in Germany and Italy .
 He launched an offensive through the Ardennes region of Belgium in May 1940 . Attempting to repeat the success of May 1940, he launched an . offensive . The Ardennes area of Belgium .
 By February 1945 this so-called Battle of the Bulge was over and the scene was set for the final act . But by February 1945 it had been over for the first time .
 Soviet forces entered Germany from the east, closing in on Berlin, and in March the Western Allies crossed the Rhine . In March 1944, the Soviet Union entered Berlin and entered the country's capital .
 Some of the most prominent Nazi leaders were tried for war crimes at the Nuremberg trials from 1945-46 by the International Military Tribunal . The trials were held at the International Criminal Tribunal of Military Tribunal of International Criminal Tribunations . The German trial was held in 1945-1946
 Changes to European borders were far slighter than after World War I . The Soviet Union kept the Baltic states and eastern Poland, while Poland took over a vast area of pre-war Germany .
 During 1945-48 Communist-led governments ruled all Soviet-occupied areas in Eastern Europe . While democratic governments aligned with the United States returned in Western Europe .
 Eisenhower commanded Allied forces in North Africa in November 1942, it was his first combat assignment . Eisenhower was the U.S. President of the United States . Eisenhower commanded the Allied forces during the Battle of North Africa .
 He had several temperamental generals under his command, such as Patton and Montgomery, yet proved an ideal boss . He had a temperamental personality, but proved to be a good boss .
 As Supreme Allied Commander, he kept subordinates under control and liaised comfortably with political leaders . He kept his bickering subordinates in order to keep them under control .
 British POWs in Germany received personal parcels from relatives and friends . As well as Red Cross food parcels, POWs received personal gifts from family members .
 Lance-Corporal Les Kerswill was sent a pair of well-made boots by his mother . He was in one of these when he was given the boots by a mother .
 Les was one of the tens of thousands of young men sent to France in late 1939 to join the British Expeditionary Force . Les was a member of the British expeditionary force in France .
 4th Battalion the Royal Berkshire Regiment, stationed in Reading, was woken just after Christmas to prepare to leave .
 From Reading to Southampton they traveled by train to Southampton, where they embarked on a crowded troopship to Cherbourg . From Reading, they traveled to the French capital, France .
 Les would not return to England until the very last day of the war in Europe, in May 1945 . Les would never return home again until the end of the War in Europe .
 In northeastern France, the Berkshires lived under canvas, in farm buildings, and even in an empty chateau . They prepared to counter the threat of German invasion as they prepared .
 On May 10, 1940, they were ordered forward in the attempt to stop the German advance through Belgium . They were ordered into action in the aftermath of the invasion .
 They were bombed and strafed by Stukas and fought a number of short, bloody actions with the enemy . Constantly on the move, plugging gaps in the line, they were bombed, strafed and fought with enemy .
 Outmaneuvered and outgunned, the British retreated to the beaches of Dunkirk . Dunkirk is the first time the British have been captured since the First World War began .
 Les was among those detailed to make a last-ditch stand against the Germans to give the rest of the British forces time to make their escape . Les was one of the soldiers detailed to fight off the Germans in the Second World War .
 340,000 troops were shipped back to safety in England . Some 340,00 troops were sent back to England .
 As the German bombing intensified, Les could see Dunkirk burning behind him . Les, who had been wounded by a piece of spent shrapnel, was wounded by shrapnel .
 He and his few remaining comrades had been in action now for three weeks and, exhausted by their efforts, fell asleep in a ditch . They had been fighting in the desert for over three weeks .
 Les was imprisoned in a series of camps in Germany, where he worked in a variety of jobs, ranging from digging ditches to working in a schnapps distillery . Les worked in various jobs, including digging a ditch in Germany and digging a railway line .
 It was there that he received the Red Cross parcel with new boots from his mother . It was the first time he had received a Red Cross package from his mom .
 His own army boots had long since fallen to pieces and he was making do with wooden clogs . The soldier had to make do with his own clogs because he had fallen out of his boots .
 As the Soviets advanced westward into Poland, the opportunity arose to put the boots to good use . The boots were used to help the Soviets advance into Poland .
 Les and a friend managed to escape during the Second World War . Les was transferred away from battle zones by the Germans during the war . Les escaped with a friend and managed to get away from the Germans .
 In the winter of 1944-45, Poland's roads were filled with all kinds of people on the move . The March to freedom was Poland's first step to freedom in Poland .
 Keeping out of the way of the retreating Germans were refugees, deserters, and escaped prisoners of war . Refugees, desersers, and escapees were among those who hid out of sight .
 The Chinese dragon commemorates the exploits of the Royal Berkshires in the First Opium War of 1839-42 . Almost all of the regiment's cap badges were made of Chinese dragons .
 Germans detailed to escort prisoners were more concerned with saving their own skins than protecting their own skin . Germans were more interested in protecting themselves than protecting the prisoners .
 A mark on the leather upper is a souvenir of a night spent on a Czech farm . Scrounging food from farmers and sleeping in barns and cowsheds, he says .
 When Les tried to put his boots on again in the morning, they were frozen solid . When he put them on again, they froze solid . Les says he has never had a frozen boot in his life .
 Leather was burned when the farmer's wife put them on her stove to thaw . The leather was burned after being put on the stove for thawing .
 Les Kerswill's memories of his wartime escape are still astonishingly vivid, although he is sometimes uncertain about the exact order in which the events happened . Kerswill had to rely on their wits and the kindness of local people to survive .
 From Poland they eventually found their way into Bohemia— the part of Czechoslovakia annexed by Hitler in 1939 . The group eventually made their way to Bohemia, which was annexed by the Nazis .
 By the time they reached Bavaria in southern Germany, the Russians were close behind, while the Americans were advancing rapidly from the west . By the end of the war, the U.S. was advancing rapidly .
 At Regensburg the two men were taken in by the United States 3rd Army . They were treated to huge meals of frankfurters and beans . The two men had been taken by the U.S. Army in Germany .
 Les was flown to Reims in France, then back to England, just in time for VE Day, May 8, 1945 . After helping the Americans to interrogate German prisoners, he was flown back to France .
 The original hobnails on the soles of the boots survived the journey more or less intact . LES KERSWILL, DESCRIBING HOW he walked from Poland to the U.S. The boots are now being used in a museum in Poland .
 Les’s mother had chosen well when she bought these military-style boots to send him to her son . Les's mother chose the military-like boots for her son to send to him .
 They show obvious signs of wear and tear, but are remarkably well preserved . The images show the remains of a pair of young men and women .
 The hee s of the boots British prisoners after Dunkirk German soldiers march their captives off to camps in Germany . German soldiers marched the British prisoners off to war camps in Dunkirk .
 Initial lightning victories failed to give the Japanese the impregnable strategic situation they sought . A vigorous American reaction gradually turned the war around, until Japan was fighting a desperate defense against mounting odds .
 J apan's war plan was to capture the British and Dutch Southeast Asian colonies . He wanted to capture Malaya, Singapore, Singapore and the Dutch East Indies .
 Pearl Harbor would buy Japanese time to establish a far-flung defensive perimeter in the Pacific . U.S. Pacific Fleet would be crippled by a huge surprise attack on Pearl Harbor in Hawaii .
 The Japanese leaders hoped that the US would be daunted by Japan's strong position and make peace on terms favoring Japan . The US was seen as a nation lacking in martial spirit, they hoped .
 Pearl Harbor was a surprise attack on the U.S. Navy base on December 7, 1941 . The Japanese aircraft carriers struck the base early on December 9, 1941, in the Pacific .
 Allied troops in New Guinea had to fight in intolerable conditions . Eight U.S. battleships were sunk or disabled in the Jungle War .
 Such an attack, delivered before a declaration of war, was a blow the Americans would never forget or forgive . Such a blow would be a blow America would never forgive or forgive, he says . The attack was delivered before the U.S. declared war .
 Japan's attacks in Southeast Asia were synchronized with the Pearl Harbor raid . Troop landings in Malaya and air strikes on U.S. bases in the Philippines .
 Japan's troops were well trained and equipped for fighting in jungle terrain, and were ably supported by aircraft . Japan's forces were well equipped and well trained .
 They advanced rapidly through Malaya and in mid-February 1942 forced the surrender of the British base at Singapore . Singapore was a major blow to British prestige in Asia . The British base was taken down by the Japanese in 1942 .
 Japanese landings in the Philippines trapped American and Filipino troops in the Bataan peninsula . The Japanese invasion of the Philippines was equally successful .
 General MacArthur, was ordered to leave before the majority of the soldiers surrendered in April . General MacArthur was forced to leave the U.S. during the invasion of Vietnam .
 Japanese Navy brushed aside Allied warships attempting to defend the Dutch East Indies, which were then Q r\ percent of the torpedoes launched U vj by Japanese aircraft in the attack on Pearl Harbor .
 Japan's military-dominated government was convinced that only the creation of an empire in Asia would give it the resources to be one of the world's major powers . Japan was convinced only to create an empire would allow it to be a major power .
 With France and the Netherlands defeated and Britain under siege, Japan saw an opportunity to take over European colonies in Southeast Asia . The region was rich in oil, rubber, and other strategic materials, and rich in strategic materials .
 Japan signed the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy in September 1940 . Japan signed a pact with the German and Italian governments .
 The Japanese Army leadership favored further expansion from Manchuria into Mongolia and Siberia . A short border war with the Soviet Union in 1938-39 ended in defeat at the Battle of Khalkin Gol .
 Japan signed a non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union in April 1941 . Japan signed the pact in 1941 . The Soviet Union was the first country to join Japan in the war .
 Stalin, facing a potential German attack, needed security in the East, while Japan redirected its attention toward Southeast Asia . Stalin was facing a possible German attack .
 Germany's victories in Europe in April to June 1940 had a profound impact on Japanese preparations for war . The United States stood as a major obstacle to Japanese expansionism, backing China against Japan .
 The United States responded by imposing an oil blockade on Japan and demanding Japan's withdrawal from Indochina and China . The U.S. responded to the blockade by imposing a blockade of Japan .
 General Tojo Hideki became prime minister of Japan in October 1941 . He began to prepare for a war in Southeast Asia and the Pacific . General Hideki was prime minister .
 By the end of May 1942 the Japanese had also taken most of Burma from the British . The Japanese also took most of the British-held territory in Burma .
 These successes were exhilarating for the Japanese, but there were soon signs that their strategy was failing . There were signs that they were failing, but the Japanese strategy was not working .
 The raid on Pearl Harbor had not destroyed the U.S. Navy's aircraft carriers, which were fortuitously at sea at the time .
 American cryptographers had also managed to break Japanese naval codes, giving the U.S. command an inestimable advantage . The United States command was also able to break the codes .
 U.S. carriers in the Coral Sea met by the Japanese in May 1942 . The Japanese were trying to extend their defensive perimeter to include the Solomon Islands and New Guinea .
 This battle ended in a draw but was followed by a more decisive encounter at Midway in June . The two teams met in June at the end of the summer .
 Four Japanese carriers were sunk, a defeat from which Japan's naval aviation never recovered . Japan's aviation was never recovered from the loss of four carriers .
 Japanese and American forces fought a ferocious series of battles for control of Guadalcanal in the Solomons . The battle began in August 1942 and ended in August 1944 .
 A samurai scatters the Allied fleet, the flags of Japan's Axis allies behind him . The Allied fleet was scattered by the samurai .
 Despite their alliance, the Japanese and Germans made no real effort to coordinate their strategy . Germany and Japan were united against each other in the fight against the Nazis .
 General MacArthur led an Australian and American thrust through New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, aiming eventually to return to the Philippines . MacArthur led the Australian and U.S. forces to New Guinea .
 Admiral Chester Nimitz began an ""island-hopping" campaign by the United States Navy and Marines across the Central Pacific .
 The Japanese never had time to consolidate their rapidly won Southeast Asian empire, although they managed to hold onto most of it until the end of the war . This offensive relied on the largest shipbuilding program in history, providing the U.S. with the United States .
 The Japanese referred to their conquests in Asia as a ""Co-Prosperity Sphere,"" styling themselves as leaders of an Asian liberation from European colonial rule . The Japanese refer to the conquests as a "co-propositions"
 Asians suffered brutal oppression and exploitation in Japan . This idea won some followers, but mostly Asians suffered oppression . The Indian National Army and Burmese nationalists fought on Japan's side .
 Dutch, and British Empire prisoners of war taken by the Japanese from 1941-42 . DUjUUU Dutch, British and Dutch Empire prisoners .
 An overwhelming superiority in aircraft carriers and a vast fleet of landing craft for amphibious operations . About one-third of them died in captivity .
 The Japanese knew that they lacked the industrial and manpower resources to match the United States . The U.S. lacked the strength to match Japan's strength and industrial resources .
 The readiness of Japanese troops to fight to the death ensured that the war would be fought at mounting cost . Japanese troops were prepared to fight the war at a mounting cost.
 At Tarawa in the Gilbert Islands, in November 1943, more than 1,000 men killed taking a small coral atoll defended by some 3,000 Japanese, only 17 of whom survived to be taken prisoner . In November 1943 the U.S. Marines took over the small coral
 Allied submarines began to take a heavy toll of Japanese merchant shipping in 1943 . The loss of shipping made it impossible to transport essential materials to Japan .
 Eighty percent of Japanese merchant shipping was sunk by the end of World War II . Eighty per cent of Japanese ships were sunk .
 Allied forces fought in New Guinea and the Solomons into 1945, and invaded the Philippines from 1944 . The Philippines was the first major battleground in the Pacific War .
 Hawauai Pearl Harbor ""f on * Sunda Strait/' //\ /r> Feb 28, 1942 . Hawaii .
 The Allies bypassed these gains, heading directly for Japan in 1944-45 . The Allies went directly to Japan in 1945-45.
 The war ended with the apocalyptic destruction of Japanese cities from the air . The end of the war was the end of World War II .
 I n spring 1944, the Japanese Army was still able to mount offensives in Asia . The Japanese Army still managed to mount an offensive in Asia in spring 1944 .
 Operation Ichi-Go was the largest-scale Japanese campaign against China's National Revolutionary Army since 1938 . Lasting from April through to December, the campaign lasted from April to December . The Japanese army was defeated by the Chinese army .
 In China, the Japanese troops carried all before them; in Burma their soldiers were defeated and driven back southward . In Burma, Burma's soldiers were beaten and driven southward. In China and Burma their troops were defeated . In China they carried all . before them .
 Growing naval and aerial superiority in the Pacific allowed the Americans to thrust directly toward Japan . But neither outcome was strategically significant, for growing naval superiority .
 U.S. Navy and Marines opened a campaign to seize the Mariana Islands with landings on Saipan in June 1944 . America's Pacific advance was the start of a war to take over the islands .
 Japanese admirals sought to bring their still powerful battleships and cruisers into play for a final epic showdown . In desperation, Japanese admiral sought to make a last epic showdown with the Americans .
 Every available Japanese warship was sent to attack U.S. naval forces in Leyte Gulf . In October, the United States naval forces massed to support landings in the Philippines at Leyte . Japanese warships were sent to support the landings .
 At the start of 1944 Japan still held large areas of Asia, but its position in the Pacific was desperate and a powerful American secret weapon was nearing completion . After the defeat at Leyte Gulf, Japan's position was hopeless, but the determination of its soldiers never wavered .
 The balance of naval forces in the Pacific was turning against Japan by 1944 . The United States launched 90 aircraft carriers in 1943-44, while Japan launched seven . The U.S. launched nine aircraft carriers .
 The new American naval aircraft were superior to their Japanese counterparts . Their pilots were better trained and better trained . The new U.S. naval aircraft was superior to the Japanese aircraft .
 Early on in the war the Japanese mainland was protected from Allied air attack by sheer distance . The Japanese mainland is protected from air attacks from Allied aircraft .
 U.S. bomber aircraft launched from carriers attacked the capital, Tokyo, in April 1942 . This was a one-off attack, but it was one of only a single attack .
 A sustained bombing campaign had to wait for the introduction of the very long-range B-29 Superfortress in the summer of 1944 . A sustained campaign of sustained bombing was first introduced in 1944 .
 Britain, Germany, Japan, and the U.S. were all aware of the possibility of creating an atom bomb .
 Only the U.S. devoted the necessary resources to nuclear research and development in its Manhattan Project . Only the United States devoted the resources to the necessary .
 The bomb was originally intended for use against Germany, but it was agreed that if Germany had surrendered by the time the device was ready, it might be used against Japan .
 Up to 90 percent of the buildings in the city were destroyed or badly damaged . Island island closer to mainland Japan was also badly damaged by the quake .
 The U.S. Marines became more experienced at carrying out opposed landings, utilizing a range of new amphibious vehicles and tactics, but even when backed up by naval and air bombardments, they found Japanese resistance harder and harder to overcome .
 The United States taking of Saipan saw some 13,000 casualties . The taking of the islands saw 13,500 casualties .
 Iwo Jirna, an island of volcanic rock, was taken in February-March 1945 at a cost of 26,000 casualties . The island was taken by the U.S. Army at the end of 1945 .
 The next target was Okinawa, one of the Ryukyu Islands and officially part of Japan itself . Okinawa is one of Japan's most popular islands . The island nation is part of the island nation of Japan, but is officially an island of Japan .
 These intense battles, fought in confined spaces with no possible retreat, ended in the near annihilation of the Japanese defenders . The Japanese defenders were almost completely destroyed by the battle .
 The number of Japanese soldiers and sailors killed in the battle for Iwo Jima in February-March 1945 was 21,700 . 95 percent of enemy troops died . On both Saipan and Iwo .
 Japanese commanders adopted a policy of no surrender, instructing their troops to launch suicidal banzai charges . U.S. soldiers were not able to take prisoners during the war .
 A massive Allied naval force was assembled to support the assault on Okinawa, with a significant Royal Navy contingent joining the United States Fifth Fleet .
 Allied warships were attacked by aircraft used by the Japanese to mount suicide attacks . Stationed within range of airbases on the Japanese mainland, the Allied ships were assaulted by aircraft . The Japanese aircraft were used to attack Allied warships .
 Although these inflicted some losses, they failed to disrupt the plans . The plans were not disrupted by the attacks, but they were successful .
 Allied forces in the seizure of the islands were to bring Japan under aerial bombardment . One of the fundamental objectives of the Allied forces was to bring the country under aerial bombardments .
 In July 1944 American B-29 bombers began raiding Japan from Nationalist-controlled China . The extreme range of Japan's mainland limited the bombers' effectiveness . The B-30s were used in World War II raids .
 It was not until October 1944 that a sustained campaign of bombing would become possible, when airbases were built on the Marianas . The Marianas airbase was built in 1944 .
 Attacking by daylight at high altitude, the bombers had difficulty locating their targets . Attackers had difficulty finding targets at high altitudes .
 In March 1945, under General Curtis LeMay, the B-29s adopted new tactics . They attacked Japanese cities at low altitude by night and mostly dropped incendiary bombs . The planes attacked Japan at low altitudes by night .
 A raid on Tokyo on March 9 ignited a massive firestorm, killing up to 80,000 people . The raid on the Japanese capital, Tokyo, ignited a firestorm that erupted in March 9 .
 The defeat of Germany in May 1945 and the fall of Okinawa in Okinawa the following month left Japan facing certain defeat . Japan faced certain defeat after the defeat of Japan in 1945 .
 B-29 bombers were devastating Japan's defenseless cities while an Allied naval blockade threatened the Japanese people with starvation . The high cost of peace was the cost of the war and the threat of starvation .
 The U.S. Army was preparing for an invasion of Japan, with landings on Kyushu planned for November . Landings were planned for the November invasion . The United States Army was planning for the invasion .
 U.S. Marines raise the Stars and Stripes on JK&w Mount Suribachi, Iwo Jima, February 23 -*— ■— 1945 .
 Subduging Japanese resistance on the island took five weeks . Subduing Japanese resistance in the Marianas Islands was five weeks long . The island was captured in 1941 .
 It called on Japan to surrender absolutely; the Japanese government rejected it . It called for the surrender of Japan to be absolutely destroyed .
 Three days later Nagasaki was hit and Soviet forces invaded Manchuria . The city was hit by the city of Nagasaki and invaded by Soviet forces .
 Emperor Hirohito of Japan told his government that they must ""bear the unbearable" and consent to Allied terms . Emperor Hirokito told the Japanese government they must bear the unbearable terms . Hirohita's government agreed to surrender to Allied forces .
 Japanese air forces started using suicide tactics to attack Allied warships in October 1944 . The Japanese air force used suicide tactics against Allied warships .
 Outnumbered and outclassed, the Japanese pilots were no longer able to cause significant damage with bombs and torpedoes . The Japanese pilots no longer were able to carry out significant damage in the battle .
 Kamikaze units were an elite at first, but during the battle for Okinawa in 1945, suicide tactics became a cynical form of warfare . Suicide tactics became an elite unit in the Japanese military .
 Hundreds of barely trained men were presented with headbands that depicted the rising sun before being flung into battle . Hundreds of young men were given headbands depicting the sun .
 Few would penetrate the U.S. fleet defenses and succeed in crashing their aircraft onto an enemy warship . Few would try to penetrate the United States fleet defense and crash their aircraft on an enemy ship .
 The kamikaze sank some 50 Allied ships, but at the cost of around 4,000 pilots’ lives . The Allied ships were sunk by the kamakaze, which sank around 50 of the Allied ships .
 The approximate number of Japanese soldiers killed in the battle for the island of Okinawa in April-June 1945. was split, though. The estimated number of soldiers killed was split .
 The ""peace party"" wanted an armistice that would keep the enemy off Japanese soil . The United States would never have conceded a deal the U.S. would not have accepted .
 At the Allied Potsdam Conference in July 1945, the Soviet Union agreed to join in the war against the Japanese . The Soviet Union joined the Allied war against Japan in 1945 .
 Japan formally surrendered on board USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay on September 2, 1945 . atom bombs, tested in New Mexico on July, 16 were sent to the Japan .
 After the war, Japan was controlled by General Douglas MacArthur . The war ended in Japan's defeat .
 Some Japanese leaders, including General Tojo Hideki, were tried as war criminals, but Emperor Hirohito was left on the throne . Some leaders including General Hideki were tried for war crimes, but not the Emperor .
 Estimates vary widely from 80,000 to 140,000 for Hiroshima and 35,000 from Nagasaki . Estimates range from 35 to 70,000 per cent for Nagasaki, Hiroshima .
 The Nazis murdered millions of their own and other countries' citizens . The Nazis were responsible for the deaths of millions of people .
 The British death toll was around 350,000, including more than 60,000 civilians . More than 300,000 British people were killed in the conflict .
 British troops reinforce other British troops and Afghan police in the ongoing battle against Taliban forces in the region . Their task was to reinforce other UK troops and the Afghan police . The Taliban forces are active in the area .
 This never came to nuclear conflict, but conventional wars continue across the globe . In Africa and the Middle East, conventional wars still take place .
 After World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union emerged as the world's two superpowers . Instead of disarming they embarked on a headlong arms race that saw the development of awesomely powerful nuclear arsenals . The U.S. and Soviet Union were the two super
 High-tech arsenals and other high-tech equipment were developed for use in a third world war that never happened . These arsenals were developed in the hope of a Third World War that never did .
 The U.S. intervened militarily on a large scale against communist movements in North Korea and later in Vietnam . The practice of ""limited war"" prevented escalation to a superpower conflict .
 This mode of warfare was widely adopted by anti-colonial movements . It used advanced infantry weapons such as the AK47 and the RPG7 rocket launcher .
 Against guerrillas, major powers' arsenals proved largely ineffectual . Helicopter gave mobility and firepower to counterinsurgency forces .
 Decolonization left a range of festering regional disputes in its wake . Decolonized nations have been at odds with each other for decades .
 The creation of the state of Israel gave rise to a series of Israeli-Arab wars that were testing-grounds for state-of-the-art conventional weaponry mostly supplied by the superpowers . The superpowers inevitably backed rival sides in any regional conflict .
 By the 1980s cumulative changes in military technology had transformed the battlefield . By the 1990s, the battlefield had been transformed by technological advances .
 Missiles were . ubiquitous, computers and sensors made some attack forces all but invulnerable to less sophisticated defenses . Stealth technology (which renders SAS desert combat vehicle aircraft, ships, and Named the Pink Panther after submarines invisible to its camouflage, this vehicle is used radar, infrared, and son
 The United States was able to demonstrate the superiority of its arsenal of cruise missiles and smart bombs in the demolition of the Iraqi army in 1991 . The ending of the Cold War changed the rules of the strategic game .
 The post-Cold-War world proved to be no more peaceful than the old one, however . The Cold War ended in a peaceful world, however, .
 Wars continued to proliferate, although they did not escalate into conflicts between the major powers . Wars continued, but not escalated into conflicts with major powers.
 The collapse of the Soviet Union was followed by widespread nationalist conflicts . The Middle East remained chronically unstable, and warfare in Africa was endemic . War in Africa is endemic .
 Interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan in the 21st century showed again that, once war descended to the guerrilla and terrorist level, major powers had little advantage on the ground over enemies equipped with up-to-date infantry weapons .
 The U.S. sought to increase the distance between killer and killed by deploying unmanned drone aircraft to attack enemy targets . Their operators sit hundreds of miles away in perfect safety . The United States has been criticized for drone deaths .
 International terrorists, only too ready to die for their cause, used suicide tactics to target soldiers and civilians . Meanwhile, international terrorists are using suicide tactics .
 Ahmed Shah Massoud's mujahideen capture Bagram from the Taliban on October 20,1996 . Massoud: "Bagram is a victory for the Afghan people"
 The town is a key junction between the Panjshir Valley and Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan . The town has been hit hard by Taliban violence in recent years .
 UN forces drive the invaders back, but then China intervenes on the side of the North . Predominantly U.S. forces drive them back, and China intervene .
 Threat of war between the U.S. and the USSR averted when Soviets withdraw their missiles from Cuba . Soviets withdraw missiles from the Cuban territory .
 1964 Gulf of Tonkin incident leads to heavy U.S. involvement in Vietnam . Che Guevara was the leader of the United States' anti-Vietnam coalition .
 Country is sucked into conflict on its eastern border between Rwanda and Hutu refugees . Rwanda has been drawn into conflict with Rwanda and Rwandan refugees . Rwandan Hutu refugee camps are located in Rwanda's east .
 Submarine-launched missiles gave nations the ability to retaliate quickly to a surprise attack, deterring such an attack being made in the first place . Submarine missiles are difficult to detect because submarines are hard to detect, like this United States Trident .
 Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin met at Potsdam in 1945 to plan the postwar world . The three main Allied wartime leaders met at Yalta in the Crimea to plan peace . Churchill, FDR and Stalin planned for peace .
 Russia agreed a four-way division, with France, of Germany and Austria, settled the new eastern and western borders of Poland, and allowed the USSR a free hand in Central Europe . The USSR was allowed to take control of Central Europe in the 1930s .
 The distance in kilometers I UU , across Sovietdominated East Germany, between West Berlin and West Germany, is measured by kilometers . The distance I U.U. is a distance of 1.5 kilometers .
 Berlin was within the Soviet zone of occupied Germany during the Second World War . It was agreed that the city would be divided between the four Allies . Berlin fell to Soviet troops in 1945, but was agreed to be divided by the Allies .
 The Western Allies would be able to reach Berlin from West Germany along road, rail, and air corridors through the Soviet zone . The Allies would have been able to get to Berlin from the Soviet-zone .
 After the hot war of World War II, the Cold War of ideas and propaganda broke out between the former allies of the Communist East and capitalist West . The Cold War began in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Cold War kept the peace in Europe for 50 years but sparked conflict in other continents and threatened an annihilating nuclear exchange . The end of World War II in Europe brought peace .
 Soviet troops freed the east from Nazi rule, while American and other Allied troops liberated the west . American and Allied troops had liberated the east .
 The two sides faced each other along a frontier nicknamed the Iron I . MUTUALLY ASSURED DESTRUCTION . The form of nuclear stalemate in which each side has the ability to destroy the other, even after being attacked first .
 The USSR helped to set up Communist states in the east by 1948, while democratic governments resumed control of the liberated countries in the west .
 President Truman promised to help any country being threatened by a Communist takeover . The Marshall Plan was launched in 1947 in response to the threat of Communism .
 He pledged immediate aid to Greece, then enduring a bitter civil war between royalists and Communists . Greece was then enduring an election-year-long civil war .
 The Marshall Plan was open to any country in Europe, but only those in the West accepted . Only those in Europe accepted the plan, and only the West did .
 Communist bloc formed Comecon, the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, in 1949 . It tied their economies to the Soviet Union . Comecon was formed by the Communist bloc .
 The USSR feared a reunited Germany, while the U.S. and Allies wanted to rebuild the country as a peaceful, pro-Western state . The USSR and Allies feared a united Germany .
 Western Allies merged their zones and introduced a new currency for West Berlin in 1948 . Their differences came to a head in 1948, when the West Berlin zone was merged .
 USSR responded by cutting road and rail links between the city and the West . The USSR responded to the situation by cutting links between Moscow and West .
 Western Allies airlift up to 13,000 tons of supplies into the city every day . With the city facing starvation, the city was airlifted up to 12,000 tonnes of supplies every day.
 The airlift lasted almost a year, until the USSR ended the blockade in May 1949 . The blockade lasted almost one year .
 Berlin blockade showed that while both sides would stand their ground, neither wanted to face armed confrontation . The Berlin blockade shows that both sides will stand ground, but neither wanted armed confrontation.
 The Soviets exploded their first nuclear bomb in 1949, ending the United States nuclear monopoly . The U.S. had a monopoly on nuclear weapons .
 Both sides developed increasingly powerful thermonuclear weapons in the 1950s . Both sides then developed increasingly stronger thermonnuclear weapons .
 In 1957, the USSR tested the first intercontinental ballistic missile . Unlike bombers, these missiles were impossible to intercept . Nuclear weapons were initially designed to be dropped from aircraft .
 Both the United States and the USSR deployed numbers of these weapons and, from the 1960s, versions launched from submarines . Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union launched numbers of such weapons .
 A system of deterrence gradually developed; neither side could use its nuclear weapons for fear of a devastating counter-strike . Neither side was able to use its own nuclear weapons in fear of being hit by a counter-attack .
 On October 14, 1962, a U.S. U-2 spy plane photographed a Soviet missile site under construction in Cuba . The site was just 90 miles (145 km) from the United States .
 President Kennedy imposed a naval blockade on Cuba and demanded the removal of the missiles . President John Kennedy imposed the naval blockade of Cuba in 1961 .
 The world waited anxiously as the two sides faced each other down . The USSR refused to comply unless the United States removed missiles from Turkey . The U.S. and the USSR faced off for the first time .
 A deal was reached on October 28 that saw the Soviet missiles removed in return for a U.S. promise not to invade Cuba .
 Spies on both sides of the Cold War were equipped with disguised, concealed, and miniaturized equipment with which to take photographs, record voices, and eavesdrop on their opponents without their knowledge .
 Reel-to-reel tape uprising in Hungary in 1956, built a wall to seal East Berlin from the West in 1961, and crushed new reforms in Czechoslovakia in 1968 . StasI PEN CONTAINING HIDDEN MICROPHONE .
 Alliance systems tied countries everywhere to one side or another . Despite the growth of the non-aligned movement, India and Yugoslavia were among the leaders of the movement .
 Aware that deterrence might fail catastrophically, both sides tried to reduce tension . Both sides were aware of the possibility of a nuclear war .
 Treaties made during the 1960s limited nuclear testing and sought to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to new countries . Treaties were aimed at limiting nuclear testing in order to prevent spread of nuke weapons .
 The United States and the Soviet Union agreed to limit their nuclear arsenals in 1972 . The first stage in a process known as detente was the first stage of detente . The U.S. and Russia agreed a limit in 1972, the first step in detente.
 Tension between the two sides over human rights abuses in the East turned detente into deep freeze during the 1980s . The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 turned the Soviet-U.S. relations with the United States into a Cold War post .
 The United States response under President Ronald Reagan was to raise military spending by 50 percent . The U.S. response to the crisis in the 1980s was to increase military spending . President Reagan's response was a 50 percent increase in military spending.
 The Soviet economy was unable to compete with the new level of American military developments . The resulting confrontation continued until Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in the USSR in 1985 .
 Reagan began a series of summit meetings with Reagan that removed all intermediate-range missiles from Europe . Reagan was committed to a reform of his country through policies of glasnost and perestroika .
 Gorbachev's reforms also meant that Communism weakened its hold in the USSR and across Eastern Europe . However, the reforms also weakened Communism's hold in Eastern Europe and in Russia .
 With the collapse of the USSR in 1991, the Cold War came to an end . The Cold War ended as Communism collapsed across Europe and the Soviet Union itself disintegrated .
 Opposition parties were legalized in Hungary, while the Polish elected the first non-Communist government in Eastern Europe since 1948 . Opposition parties in Hungary and Poland were legalized, while Poland elected a non-communist government .
 Hungary opened up its borders to the West, thus tearing the Iron Curtain open . Hungary was one of the last few countries in the Cold War to open its borders up to the west .
 The Berlin Wall was the hated symbol of the divided city . East and West Germany were reunified in October 1990 .
 Gorbachev's attempts to reform the USSR led to growing unrest and demands for independence from the country's 15 individual republics . The USSR was ruled out of the Soviet Union in the early 1980s and the West in the 1980s .
 Hardline Communists staged a coup in August 1991, but were defeated by Russia's new leader, Boris Yeltsin . Hardline Communist Party was defeated by Yeltsins in 1991 .
 One by one, the republics declared independence, forcing him to resign as president on Christmas Day 1991 . The USSR itself ended in 1991, bringing the USSR itself to an end .
 Huge armies fought massive battles in a war little known in the West but which has continued to have a huge impact right up to the present day . The Battle of Stonewall in the Middle Ages is little known but little known to the West .
 Nationalists and Communists collaborated to some extent in fighting the Japanese, but both also prepared for a later struggle over the control of China . Nationalist and Communists were prepared for later struggle .
 War had raged almost continuously in China since the 1920s . First rival warlords fought for power, and then Mao Zedong's Communists challenged the Nationalists .
 Continued fighting between Nationalists and Communists, and then Chinese and Japanese, left many towns and cities in the populous east of China in ruins . Nationalist army enters Kweilin .
 In 1911 Sun Zhongshshan's Nationalist party overthrew the Qing dynasty and declared China a republic . In 1911 the Nationalist Party overthrew China's Qing dynasty .
 General Jiang Jieshi established a national government with its capital at Nanjing in 1928 . Rival warlords fought for power until his eventual successor, General Jiang, established the national government in 1928.
 Mao Zedong set up a Soviet republic in Jiangxi province in 1934 . Nationalist pressure forced them to abandon it in 1934, forcing them to move to a new base in Shaanxi province .
 The renewal of the Chinese Civil War began after Japan's surrender at the end of World War II saw the Communists begin with most of the advantages .
 The Communists had led popular resistance to the Japanese occupation . They had gained expertise in guerrilla warfare . The Communists were known for their guerrilla tactics .
 Soviet forces had seized the weapons from the Japanese at the very end of the war, before handing the arms and the province over to the Communists . Their arsenal was now increased with enough weapons for 600,000 troops .
 Nationalist army had mainly held the rural south and west and increasingly lacked the support of the people . In contrast, the Nationalist Army had largely held rural areas and lacked support of people .
 The army quickly seized the coastal cities from the Japanese as they departed, helped by a U.S. sea and air lift . 500,000 Nationalist troops were transported into central and northern China . Nationalist forces seized coastal cities as the Japanese departed .
 Nationalists had been allies of the United States during the war and expected that alliance to continue in peace . The Nationalists expected that peace would continue .
 In October 1945, as both sides tried to consolidate their territory, peace talks failed to find any agreement . Peace talks sponsored by the U.S. ambassador failed to found any agreement between the sides .
 The Communists defeated the Nationalists at the battle of Xuzhou . But their progress into Manchuria was blocked by a US-negotiated ceasefire . The Nationalist army then moved north, only to find its progress blocked .
 The rival armies now regrouped before hostilities were renewed in spring . The two sides are now in the middle of hostilities .
 Nationalist army lined up across northern China cutting Manchuria off from rest of the country . Other divisions attacked Communist strongholds to their south and west .
 The PTRD anti-tank rifle was made in the USSR during World War II . It was supplied in large quantities to Chinese Communist forces during the Civil War .
 It was most effective when used against light armored vehicles . It killed or captured some 400,000 Nationalist troops during 1947 .
 In late 1947 the Communist Fourth Field Army under Lin Biao took the offensive in Manchuria . The Chinese army took control of the region in late 1947 .
 His troops split the Nationalists into distinct pockets and picked them off one by one until they captured Mukden in November 1948 . Mukden was the last Nationalist garrison in the province of Manchuria .
 The biggest formal battle of the war began in September 1948 . The decisive battle was the decisive battle in the Battle of the Second World War .
 Communists' Third Army moved east, out of Shaanxi province, and into Shandong province south of Beijing . Nationalist's Seventh Army, led by Du Yuming, pushed south toward the Huai He River .
 At least four divisions in the center of Du's line changed allegiance to the Communists . At least 800,000 troops who defected during the course of the war defected .
 With the enemy center now disintegrating, the Communists attacked the two wings during November and December . The Communists cut communications, surrounding their troops, and bombarded them into surrender .
 The battle was won on January 10,1949, when the Communists at last took Xuzhou . The battle is won by the Communists .
 Jiang Jieshi ordered his air force to bomb his own lines, killing many of his own troops, to prevent arms and equipment from falling into the Communist USSR hands . The situation was so bad for the Nationalists that he ordered his own air force .
 The defeat was disastrous for the Nationalists, who lost 250,000 men . Among them were the commanders of two army groups . The defeat left the Spanish Nationalists without a permanent base .
 The Communists were now on the offensive, with far greater firepower, mobility, numbers, and popular support than the Nationalists, who were ill equipped and poorly led . The Communists had far more firepower and mobility, mobility .
 Many unlicensed copies of the German Mauser C96 pistol were manufactured in China in the first half of the 20th century and were used by both sides in the Civil War . It was welcomed as the one force that could bring the long years of war to an end .
 The fall of Beijing brought the Communists control of all north and east China . The fall brought the Communist Party control of the country .
 In April Communist troops began to move south, taking the Nationalist capital, Nanjing, without a fight, on April 24 and then the commercial city of Shanghai on May 27 . In April, Communist troops took the city of Nanjing and Shanghai .
 Faced with defeat and mass desertions, the Nationalist leaders decided to flee to the offshore island of Taiwan . They took the nation's art and treasure collection and gold reserves and took it with them .
 Mao Zedong announced the formation of the People's Republic of China on October 1, 1949 . Mao stood on the Gate of Heavenly Peace in Beijing and announced the country's formation .
 China has rarely intervened directly in the affairs of other nations . Other than that, China has never intervened directly into other nations' affairs .
 China exploded an atom bomb in 1964, becoming the world's fifth nuclear power . China exploded a nuclear bomb in 1960s, the first atomic bomb to be detonated in China .
 Communist China has exercised growing power and influence in the world since 1949 . Since 1949 Communist China is exercising growing power in power .
 Mao Zedong's revolutionary zeal inspired revolutionaries in other countries . He was the first Chinese revolutionary leader to take over China . His revolutionary fervor inspired other nations to follow his example .
 At the end of the Chinese Civil War, Nationalist forces controlled only Taiwan and a few small offshore islands . Nationalists control Taiwan and the rest of Taiwan .
 Taiwan claimed to be the legitimate government of all China and held China's seat in the United Nations until expelled in 1971 . Neither Nationalist Taiwan nor Communist China recognized the other, Taiwan claiming to be a legitimate government .
 A defense treaty with the United States in 1954 guaranteed Taiwan's independence . Taiwan's defense treaty also guaranteed its independence from the U.S. in 1954 .
 Relations with China remain tense to this day, although direct air and shipping routes were established in 2008 .
 Following the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894-95, Korea gained independence from China . It soon became the subject of intense economic and political rivalry between Russia and Japan .
 Japan annexed Korea in 1910, ruling it until Japan's defeat in World War II in 1945 . In 1910 Japan formally annexed Korea, ruled it until 1945 .
 At the end of the war, the U.S. and USSR agreed that Soviet troops would occupy Korea north of the 38°N parallel . American troops occupied the south, pending the establishment of a unified, independent, democratic Korea .
 Soviet troops remained in place until establishment in Pyongyang in September 1948 of the Soviet-backed Korean People's Democratic Republic .
 United States troops remained until June 1949 to support the newly formed Republic of Korea . U.S. troops were stationed in Seoul, South Korea, in August 1948 .
 UN attempts to reunite the Korean peninsula failed when the USSR did not support all-Korean elections . UN attempts failed when Soviet-backed elections did not take place in the country .
 Border incursions by the rival sides increased tension on the peninsula . The Korean peninsula has been at the center of tension between the Koreas .
 The North Korean invasion of South Korea was the first major open battle of the Cold War . It pitted former allies, the US, USSR, and China on opposite sides .
 The war lasted for three years and ended in stalemate, the unity of the divided country still not achieved today . The war ended in a stalemate .
 E quipped with arms from the USSR and with tacit agreement from Communist China to send military support if required . E. E. quipped that the Soviet Union would send arms from its territory .
 North Korea made a surprise dawn attack on South Korea on June 25, 1950 . North Korea attacked South Korea in the early hours of the morning .
 Statements made by senior American figures suggesting that the U.S. might not defend South Korea against such an invasion may have played a part in the move .
 Seven infantry divisions and one armored division headed south, capturing the South Korean capital, Seoul, within three days . The invasion was the first major invasion of the Korean peninsula since the Korean War began .
 Many of the North Korean troops had fought in the recent Chinese Civil War . They were skilled and experienced fighters . They had the advantage of operating on home territory .
 The South was ill prepared for the attack and appealed for international support . The South appealed to the international community for help in the fight .
 The United States pushed a resolution through the United Nations Security Council . The USSR was boycotting the council, and was unable to use its veto power . The pro-US Chinese Nationalist government of Taiwan occupied China's UN seat . The U.S. gained approval to lead an international
 MacArthur was commander of the post-World War II occupation forces in Japan (the closest sizable body of U.S. troops) MacArthur was appointed commander of North and South Korea in Korea .
 First UN troops arrived on July 1, but were immediately pushed back by 23 ft barrel North Korean forces . North Korea pushed back the first UN troops into North Korea in July .
 UN and South Korean troops retreated to a defensive perimeter line around the port of Pusan in the far southeast . Throughout July and August the UN and S. Korea troops retreated .
 General Walton Walker did not have enough troops to defend this line but made good use of intelligence to warn him of North Korean attacks and concentrate his forces .
 The arrival of reinforcements by the end of August helped stabilize the situation in North Korea . British troops included included British troops . Bombing raids and naval bombardment restricted their army's effectiveness .
 By early September MacArthur was confident he could hold Pusan and therefore went over to the offensive . MacArthur was also confident he would be able to keep Pususan at bay .
 The successful September 1950 landings at Inchon were captured by the U.N. forces . North Korean troops were captured during the successful invasion .
 The battle for Seoul proved to be more intense, as the North Koreans fought to the death despite having fewer numbers . The battle was more intense than the battle for the Seoul .
 On September 26, X Corps met up with the forces driving up from Pusan and soon cleared South Korea of its northern invaders . X Corps was the first unit to arrive in South Korea .
 General MacArthur now asked for permission to invade the North . MacArthur now wants to invade North Korea . MacArthur has asked permission for invasion .
 Harry Truman worried about provoking a Chinese response but gave his approval . President Harry Truman gave the approval of the move . Truman: "I'm not sure what I'm doing, but I'm sure I'm going to do it"
 The Korean War was the first war in which jet fighters played a major role . The last major war was the last major battle in which propeller-powered fighter planes were involved .
 At the outset of the war, North Korea achieved air superiority with Soviet-made MiG-15 fighters . The introduction of the United States F-86 Saber gradually tilted the balance toward the UN forces .
 First aerial combats in history involving jet aircraft took place between these jets over the Yalu River . The first aerial combat in history took place in the early 1900s .
 American pilots gradually established air supremacy over the Koreans . Although rival claims of success are hard to verify, the U.S. pilots maintained air supremacy .
 They had to fight their way south, suffering heavy losses of men and equipment . They had been forced to retreat south, but suffered heavy losses .
 In the east, an attacking force of United States Marines also found itself under pressure and retreated . The U.S. Marines made a fraught retreat in the east .
 In January 1951, a new surge of Chinese and North Korean troops pushed the UN forces south of Seoul . In 1951, UN forces were forced to withdraw from Seoul after a surge in China and North Korea .
 Pyongyang clashes began with Chinese soldiers who had crossed the frontier . Tracks produced a top road speed of 24 mph peninsula, taking the northern capital of Pyongyang .
 From this time on, MacArthur regularly disobeyed orders and publicly disagreed with the less aggressive policies of the Truman administration . MacArthur often disobeyed his orders .
 MacArthur did not take reports of Chinese involvement too seriously because he assumed they were not part of a major armed incursion . MacArthur ordered a final assault up to the Yalu River border with China in an attempt to bring an end to the war .
 His Eighth Army came under attack from massed Chinese infantry units that were hidden in the mountains . Two days later his Eighth Army was attacked by massed China infantry units .
 MacArthur gave the order for the troops to retreat but they found their way blocked by Chinese forces who had closed in behind them . MacArthur was a new U.S. ground commander .
 General Matthew Ridgway (who assumed supreme command in 1951), stopped the retreat . General Ridgways was the only general to stop the retreat in 1951 . The Battle of the Second World War was the first major battle of the war .
 He drew up his forces on a line across the peninsula and slowly pushed north, using artillery and air firepower to take enemy positions . He used artillery, air firepower and air fire on the peninsula .
 The Chinese responded to 'Ridgway's meatgrinder' with wave after wave of human attacks, beaten back at huge cost . The Chinese response to the 'meatgrinder', was called 'the worst of the worst of all'
 After three months of heavy fighting, UN troops stabilized the front along the pre-war border . UN troops stabilised the border after heavy fighting between the two sides .
 The previously mobile war settled down to a static stalemate, with the sides exchanging artillery fire . The sides exchanged artillery fire and initiated a small number of infantry engagements .
 Peace talks were started in July 1951 and dragged on for another two years . Armistice ending the war and setting up a demilitarized zone between the two sides was agreed on July 27, 1953 .
 North Korea's nuclear and missile programs seen as threatening by the rest of the world . North Korea remains divided and heavily militarized to this day .
 North and South Korea are still technically at war with each other, as no peace treaty has ever been signed . Their common border is the most heavily fortified international frontier in the world . The two Koreas are still at war, while their border is heavily fortified .
 In 1972, the two governments pledged to seek unification of the peninsula through peaceful means . In 1972 the two countries pledged to unite in peaceful terms .
 North-South-South relations are still poor relations between North and South . Their heads of state met in Pyongyang in 2000 but relations between the two remain poor .
 North Korea is still ruled by a repressive Soviet-style veterans memorial, regime . North Korea still has a repressive military regime .
 North Korea conducted a nuclear test in 2006 and has also developed missile technology . Fearful of invasion from the south, North Korea has also tested nuclear weapons and missiles .
 In stark contrast, South Korea has prospered economically to become one of the strongest free-market economies in the region . South Korea is one of Asia's most successful economies .
 The Japanese invasion of Southeast Asia in 1941-42 swept away the European colonial empires . Decolonization in Southeast Asia was a major event in history .
 In 1945 the European powers expected to resume their rule, but faced nationalist revolts in almost every country . The European powers faced a nationalist revolt in almost all of the world .
 In little over a decade, the nationalists had won and the region was free from European rule . In little more than a decade later, the region had won .
 British arranged a truce in November 1946 that provided for a United States of Indonesia linked to the Dutch crown . The British arranged the truce in 1946 . The Dutch-British alliance provided for the U.S.
 Dutch powers launched punitive police raids in July 1947 . But it was not long before the two fell out again, causing the Dutch powers to launch punitive raids .
 A US-brokered ceasefire began in December 1947, but collapsed in September 1948, when the Dutch launched powerful attacks against the Laminated wooden stock nationalists . The Laminated Nationalists were fighting for independence from the Netherlands .
 The Dutch bombed Jakarta heavily in December 1948, but worldwide protests forced them to agree to convene a conference in The Hague in August 1949 to settle the colony's future . The Dutch agreed to hold a conference to settle Jakarta's future at the Hague .
 The Dutch handed over power to Achmad Sukarno as president of the new republic in 1949 . The new republic was the first republic of Indonesia .
 Vietnam took advantage of the brief lapse of power that arose following the defeat of Japan in 1945 to declare an independent government .
 In July 1941, Japan occupied French Indochina, including Laos and Cambodia . Japan occupied the region in July 1941 and occupied it .
 Vietnamese nationalists and Communists formed the Viet Minh resistance movement under Ho Chi Minh in order to fight the occupation . They received help from the United States. The movement was formed under the leadership of the Vietnamese government .
 When Japan surrendered in 1945, the Viet Minh declared Vietnam independent under Ho Chi Minh’s leadership . Vietnam was declared independent under the leadership of Ho Chi-Minh .
 In 1942 Japan invaded Southeast Asia, taking the British and Dutch colonies . In 1942, Japan took over the British, Dutch colonies in Southeast Asia .
 The Japanese were largely welcomed as liberators from colonial rule and many nationalists collaborated with them . Many nationalists collaborated on the Japanese .
 In August 1945, the PNI seized power and on the 17th declared Indonesia independent . independent republic in the northern city of Hanoi .
 In March 1946, the French signed an agreement with Ho Chi Minh that recognized Vietnam as a free state within an Indochinese federation . The agreement allowed French troops to return to the north of the country .
 This agreement soon broke down when the French decided to keep control of Cochin China in southern Vietnam . However, this agreement soon led to the French keeping control of the area .
 In November 1946, French soldiers attacked the Viet Minh-held port of Haiphong, killing 6,000 people . The attack was the first French attack on the port in 1946 .
 France called on troops from the Foreign Legion and from the French army in Europe . France had better weaponry and naval support, and called for troops from Foreign Legion . France also called on French troops in Europe to fight back .
 The Viet Minh army led by General Giap received military supplies first from the Chinese Nationalists and then, after their victory in 1949 in the civil war, China's new Communist government . Vietnam's victory in the war in 1949 was the result of a victory in China's war with
 In the early years of the war, the French quickly took control of all the major northern cities, sending assault teams to attack Viet Minh bases . The French captured the majority of the northern cities of Vietnam in 1945 .
 In response, the Viet Minh fought a classic guerrilla war, attacking French targets but avoiding set-piece battles . In response to the attacks, the Vietnamese fought to avoid set-pieces battles .
 In 1949 the French installed Bao Dai, local emperor of the French Vietnamese province of Annam, as emperor of an independent Vietnam . In 1949 he was installed by the French as the emperor of a newly independent country .
 Bao Dai's government was recognized by France, but failed to gain widespread support in Vietnam or among its neighbors . Soviet-manufactured weapons were supplied to North Vietnam and then passed on to the Viet Cong guerrilla fighters .
 The war soon turned into a stalemate, with the French holding the northern cities and a few outposts . The Viet Minh held control of the northern countryside, while the French held control .
 After World War II he took command of the Viet Minh army and led it to victory against the French at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 . He led the Vietnamese army to victory over the French .
 He remained in charge against the Americans and their allies in the Vietnam War . He achieved the unification of the country under Communist rule in 1975 .
 In an effort to break the stalemate, the French attempted to engage the Viet Minh at Dien Bien Phu . The French attempt to engage them in an attempt to end the conflict in Vietnam .
 French defeat in May 1954 effectively brought an end to the war . The French defeat effectively brought the war to an end in 1954 .
 Japanese occupation stimulated nationalist opposition to British rule in Malaya . The British returned unopposed to power in 1945 after the occupation .
 In 1948 Britain set up a federation of Malay states, but resentment by ethnic Chinese at Malay dominance fueled a Communist guerrilla campaign . The Malayan Races Liberation Army broke out in the same year .
 Nationalist and anti-Communist struggles led to bitter conflicts in Vietnam and elsewhere . Nationalist, anti-communist struggles in Vietnam led to bloody conflicts in the country .
 British imposed a state of emergency and began a jungle war in Indonesia . The Indonesian government is still at war footing in the country .
 British use of helicopters and specially trained jungle warfare troops contributed to victory . British establishment of protected villages to guard local people and close supervision of foodstuffs to cut off guerrilla supplies . Failure of the guerrillas to convince the mainly Malay population that communism would benefit them, contributed to
 In 1957 Britain accelerated plans to give Malaya independence, denying the guerrillas an anti-colonial platform . The guerillas were denied a platform by British authorities .
 Opposition to British rule in Burma led some Burmese people to welcome the Japanese as liberators in 1942 . Burma opposition to Japanese rule led some to welcome Japanese invasion of Burma .
 Leading nationalists Aung San and U Nu set up a puppet government in Myanmar . Both later helped British and Indian forces to evict the Japanese . U Nu and San helped British forces evict Japanese .
 In 1946 the British agreed to grant Burma independence, which was achieved under U Nu in 1948 . Burma became independent from the British in January 1948 .
 The new republic faced an immediate rebellion by Karen and other separatist groups, followed by a Communist insurrection . It was followed by an uprising by Karen separatists and a Communist uprising .
 The army under Ne Win took power in 1962 and set up a dictatorship, cracking down on dissent . The army took over from the government in 1962 . Ne Win's government was overthrown by the army in 1968 .
 Separatist groups had seized two-fifths of the country by 1976 but a government offensive effectively ended the rebellions by 1996 . Separatists had seized 2.5 per cent of the population by 1976 .
 Aung San Suu Kyi led political opposition to military rule, which continued into the 21st century . She was a key figure in the opposition to the military's rule of Myanmar .
 The army under General Suharto brutally crushed a Communist revolt in 1965 . The army brutally crushed the revolt in the country's capital, Jakarta, in 1965.
 Indonesia also fought a repressive campaign in East Timor until the island gained its independence under supervision of the United Nations in 2002 .
 France recognized the independence of Vietnam in the Geneva Accords of 1954 . France recognized Vietnam's independence in 1954 .
 In 1963 Malaya, Singapore, and the British colonies on Borneo formed the Federation of Malaysia .
 Britain helped Malaysia fight a border war with Indonesia on Borneo until 1966 . Malaysia fought the war against Indonesia until 1966, when it was ruled out of Indonesia .
 Use of helicopters to carry troops trained in jungle warfare to remote areas helped the British defeat the Communist insurgency in Malaya in the 1950s .
 The French colonial rulers of Vietnam planned the crucial battle of Dien Bien Phu to break the stalemate in their war with the Viet Minh guerrillas seeking independence . The French rulers of the Vietnam colonial rulers planned the . battle of the . crucial battle .
 Their intent was to entice what they thought was a largely peasant army to join a battle in which French firepower would win the day . The French wanted to lure the peasant army into a battle they thought would win in which they would win it .
 On November 20, 1953, the first of 16,000 French regulars, Foreign Legionnaires, and loyal Vietnamese troops parachuted in . They drove out the defending Viet Minh and fortified a series of outposts up to 4 miles away from the airstrip .
 The Viet Minh commander, General Giap, reacted by quickly surrounding the strip and building up his strength . The Vietnamese commander quickly surrounded the strip, quickly building his strength.
 On March 13, 1954, the main Viet Minh assault began, quickly taking the outlying Gabrielle and Beatrice outposts . The main attack began, taking outlying outposts in March 1954 .
 Anne-Marie fell when its previously loyal T'ai tribal defenders melted away or defected on March 17 . The northern outpost of Anne Marie fell when it was overruned by the tribe .
 Viet Minh artillery on the hills and machine guns near the base now covered the airstrip . All French supplies had to be parachuted in and were vulnerable to attack or capture .
 The Viet Minh artillery proved to be highly effective, shooting down 62 French planes and damaging another 107 . French planes were shot down and damaged by the artillery .
 After a lull in the fighting, the Viet Minh renewed their assault at the end of March . The fighting has intensified in recent months .
 One by one the French outposts were overrun, the result of effective mining, artillery fire, and finally direct assault . The French outpost was overrun by the end of the war .
 The French did have some successes, setting their 105mm howitzers to zero elevation and firing into Viet Minh troops attacking Dominique on March 30 . Another French force near the airstrip opened fire with anti-aircraft guns, forcing a retreat . The French were able to set
 The French success in recapturing part of the Eliane outpost on April 11 undermined Viet Minh morale, for they had suffered high casualties . Up to 6,000 dead, 10,000 wounded and 2,500 captured by that point .
 On April 22, the Viet Minh took the initiative again, overrunning Huguette and now commanding almost all of the airstrip . The Vietnamese government is now in control of the airbase in Vietnam .
 Final assault began on May 1, with Soviet Katyusha rockets used for the first time . The final assault began with the first use of Katyusha rocket launchers .
 On May 6 the Viet Minh detonated a mineshaft dug under Eliane and blew away its defenders . Eliane's defenders were blown away by the blast . The Vietnamese government detonated the mine in May 6 .
 The next day, the remaining French positions were captured, the Viet Minh took 11,721 French soldiers prisoner . The Vietminh captured the rest of the French positions .
 Only 73 men of the original French garrison managed to escape to Laos; the rest of the garrison was dead . Only 73 of the French troops were able to escape .
 Ho Chi Minh led the Communist-controlled Democratic Republic of Vietnam in the north . Ngo Dinh Diem led South Vietnam . Ho Chi-Minh was the leader of Vietnam's communist-controlled DRC in the 1970s .
 North Vietnam authorized southern Communists to begin an insurgency in 1956 . North Vietnam sent cadres to the south to organize guerrilla war in 1959 .
 Their arrival marked the official start of U.S. military involvement in Vietnam . Their arrival in Vietnam marked the start of United States military involvement .
 Agent Orange was a defoliant used by the Americans to destroy vegetation in Vietnam . Its name derives from the orange-striped barrels in which it was shipped .
 Agent Orange killed plants, stripping all vegetation from the land, denying cover to enemy soldiers . Agent Orange also stripped vegetation of the land to deny cover to enemies .
 The spray included chemical compounds that are poisonous to humans . However, the spray included compounds that were poisonous to human beings .
 Of the 4. million Vietnamese exposed to Agent Orange, 400,000 died or suffered disabilities . 500,000 children were born with birth defects . Of the . million exposed to the . 4 million people exposed to . Agent Orange .
 The helicopter was used extensively in Vietnam for the first time in the history of warfare . It carried out attack missions, transported large numbers of troops, and flew the wounded to aid stations .
 The United States sent troops to South Vietnam in order to prevent the country falling under Communist control . The Vietnam War was the first war in which the U.S. troops were sent to Vietnam .
 The war was the lengthiest, most brutal, and most unpopular war American troops had ever fought . The war ended in their withdrawal and the eventual defeat of their objectives .
 President Kennedy sent the first American troops to South Vietnam to train its army in guerrilla tactics in May 1961 . The Green Berets were the first to train South Vietnam's army in guerrilla tactics .
 Kennedy was concerned about rising Communist strength across Southeast Asia . He saw South Vietnam as an important bulwark against this growing power . Kennedy was worried about rising communist strength across the region .
 By the time of his death, Kennedy had increased troop numbers to 16,300 . The president's troop numbers were at the highest level of troop numbers .
 By mid-1964 the Communists were clearly gaining ground in South Vietnam . They seemed set to take control of the country unless the U.S. massively increased its military support .
 On August 2, USS Maddox clashed with North Vietnamese torpedo boats in the Gulf of Tonkin near North Vietnam's coast . The Maddox was the first ship to clash with the North Vietnamese on August 2 .
 President Lyndon Johnson used the incident to gain Congressional authorization to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed forces, to assist South Vietnam .
 Operation Rolling Thunder was a major U.S. operation against North Vietnam in Vietnam . The operation was part of the U.N. effort to counter North Vietnam's rise in the communist regime .
 Operation Rolling Thunder bombed North Vietnam in March 1965 . The bombing campaign aimed to destroy North Vietnam's will to fight, by attacking its transport network, air defenses, and industrial base .
 The first United States Marines came ashore in South Vietnam in March to protect the airbases used in Rolling Thunder . The first U.S. Marines were deployed in March .
 Further units -- from Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand -- joined them . The U.S. military says it has deployed to South Korea and Australia .
 Ruling out an invasion of North Vietnam as too costly and risking a confrontation with China and the Soviet Union, the U.S. preferred to use its massive firepower to mount search-and-destroy missions against Communist-controlled areas in South Vietnam .
 South Vietnamese troops were sidelined in this conflict, as their morale was low and leadership poor . Their morale was high and their leadership was poor .
 In contrast, both the North Vietnamese Army and the Viet Cong were disciplined fighters . Both the North and Viet Cong are disciplined fighters, according to reports .
 Among them were a spike plate that broke in two to penetrate the lower leg, and a grenade detonated with a trip wire . The Ho Chi Minh and Sihanouk trails were used to carry out the attacks in Laos and Cambodia .
 They used local knowledge and support to surprise the Americans, before melting away into the jungle . They used locals' knowledge to surprise them, and then melt away .
 Their sniping skills and use of booby traps proved effective against the United States troops . The U.S. troops, unused to guerrilla warfare, were unprepared for guerrilla warfare .
 In mid-1967 General William Westmoreland, United States commander in Vietnam, saw ""light at the end of the tunnel" and hoped American soldiers could withdraw within two years . The Tet Offensive was the first major Tet Offensive in Vietnam .
 Events proved wrong in January 1968, when the Viet Cong launched the Tet Offensive . Events proved him wrong in .
 The offensive struck targets across South Vietnam, aiming to incite a popular uprising . The offensive was aimed at inciting an uprising against the government .
 The Viet Cong even managed to attack the U.S. embassy in the South's capital, Saigon .
 The Chinese supplied the Viet Cong with cases to hold maps . Mapping the war maps was a key component of the war effort .
 This map shows the details of transport routes and the location of enemy bases . This map was created by World War II to show the extent of the threat posed .
 The rising death toll in 1968, more than 14,000 in 1968 alone, added to the anger . The rising deaths in 1968 were the highest in the country's history .
 Johnson announced in March that he would not seek re-election and sought peace talks with North Vietnam . In March, Johnson announced he would seek peace talks and seek peace with the North Vietnamese .
 Communist-controlled areas bombed by United States . North-South Demarcation Line agreed at Geneva Conference . North Vietnamese attacks reported on United States destroyers .
 Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, commits United States forces to war (Ion Thien Sep 1966) L Dai Do Apr-May 1968 . L Dai Dai Do was a member of the Vietnamese government of Vietnam .
 At the same time, Nixon expanded the bombing campaign against Viet Cong bases and supply trails in Laos and Cambodia . The bombing campaign expanded in Vietnam .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese forces briefly invaded Cambodia in 1970, hoping to block supply routes . United States and South Vietnam forces then briefly invaded the country in 1970 .
 U.S. civilians are evacuated by helicopter from Bien Hoa . United States civilians evacuated from the rooftop of the embassy .
 The Paris ceasefire agreement provided for talks between North and South Vietnam on the future of the country . But hostilities continued after the Americans had left the United States .
 In March 1975, the North Vietnamese finally overwhelmed the south, capturing Saigon in April . In April, Saigon was captured and brought to an end to the war .
 Vietnamese Army launched a full-scale invasion of the south with Sovietsupplied tanks and heavy artillery . Vietnamese Army invaded south with Soviet-supplied tanks, heavy artillery and tanks .
 The attack was initially successful, giving North Vietnam control of large areas of the south, but was turned back by July . North Vietnam turned back in July after the attack .
 In January 1973, the United States and North Vietnam signed the Paris Peace Accords . North Vietnam and the U.S. agreed on a ceasefire in January 1973 .
 In 1975 Khmer Rouge guerrillas seized control of Cambodia and implemented a revolutionary restructuring of its society . Over one million Cambodians were murdered in the process .
 Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1979 and installed a pro-Vietnamese government . Cambodia was invaded by Vietnam in 1979 . Vietnam invaded the country in 1979, overthrowing a government in Cambodia .
 North Vietnam had support from both the Soviet Union and China during its war with the United States . In 1978, North Vietnam turned more toward the USSR in favor of China .
 The Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia led the Chinese to invade Vietnam briefly in February 1979 . The Chinese invaded Vietnam briefly after it invaded Cambodia in 1979 .
 Prisoners were allowed matches and pencils only toward the end of their captivity . Prisoners had to be held captive for more than a decade .
 The soap provided by the guards was for personal hygiene and for washing clothes . The soap was used to wash clothes and personal hygiene . It was also used to clean clothes .
 It was a precious commodity and small fragments were carefully pressed together to form a larger piece . Small fragments of small pieces were carefully placed together to make larger pieces .
 Matches were banned for most of the time Schulz was in prison . Home-made bamboo clothespins were banned from Schulz's prison time .
 Prisoners were allowed to smoke but had to wait for a guard to light their cigarettes for them . Prisoners waited for guards to light the cigarettes for prisoners .
 After interrogation and torture, torture, his treatment improved, but conditions were basic . Conditions were basic as evident from the few possessions that a prisoner was allowed .
 After college, he joined the Naval Aviation Cadet Program in January 1956 . He served in the Navy's aviation fleet .
 He was commissioned as an Ensign in the United States Navy in April 1957 . He served in the U.S. Navy .
 On November 16, 1967, Schulz flew a mission to a target near Hanoi, the capital of North Vietnam . Schulz was shot down and captured on his second tour of duty .
 The mission came under surface-to-air missile attack and his plane was hit . He was hit by a missile that hit his plane .
 He and his fellow crew member ejected and landed safely in North Vietnam . He and another crew member survived the ejection landing .
 As required by the Geneva Convention governing the treatment of prisoners of war, Schulz gave his name, rank, serial number . Schulz was a POW in World War II . He died in a POW camp in 1944 .
 Lieutenant Commander Schulz was reunited with his family at an airbase in California . Schulz's first day back in the US was March 16, 1973 .
 His interrogators wanted to know more about the target his mission was attacking . The interrogators asked more, asking for information about his mission . He said the target was the target of the attack .
 When he refused to answer, he was subjected to the first of three sessions of torture . He was tortured for refusing to answer the question .
 Forced to sit on the floor with his legs straight out in front of him, his head was pushed down so that his nose touched his knees while his arms were pulled up behind him . Forced to sat with legs out of front, he sat with his head pushed down and his arms pulled
 The pain was excruciating, as if the ligaments in the backs of his legs were being ripped out of his body . The pain felt like it was ripping out of the back of his own body .
 This method of torture was specifically designed to leave no scars, unless the interrogators made a mistake . This method was designed for torture, not to leave any scars, as it was designed to do so .
 Schulz: When forced to answer, Schulz named old targets . Schulz was forced to name old targets. Schulz says he's not lying. He says Schulz is not lying, but he's lying .
 When interrogators asked from which carrier he had flown from, he again gave false information . When asked where he'd flown, he gave false answers .
 When Schulz refused to answer, he was tortured again, this time suffering a dislocated jaw and shoulders . Schulz was tortured by his tormentors until he refused to give up on the question .
 He was eventually released on March 13, 1973, and returned home to continue his naval career . He retired from the U.S. Navy in 1987 .
 The United States intervened in the internal affairs of Latin American and Caribbean nations throughout the Cold War . The U.S. supported right-wing governments against left-wing opponents .
 Its main focus was the revolutionary government of Fidel Castro in Cuba . The film was based on the Cuban government .
 Castro had previously tried to depose Batista in 1953 when he launched an attack against the Moncado Barracks . Castro was arrested and sent to prison in 1953 .
 He founded the 26th of July Movement, named after the date of the failed attack . Released in an amnesty two years later, he fled to Mexico, where he founded the movement .
 In Mexico he met other Cuban exiles, as well as Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, a revolutionary from Argentina who shaped Castro's political beliefs . In Mexico, he also met other ex-Cuban ex-cubaists, including Ernesto "Che" G
 Castro's second attempt at seizing power started disastrously, when most of his small band was quickly killed or taken prisoner . Castro was killed or captured in his second attempt to take control of the country .
 The United States has regularly intervened in the politics of the Caribbean and Central America . The U.S. has intervened to protect its own investments and prop up friendly governments in the region .
 The Mexican Revolution that began in 1910 destabilized the country . The U.S. sent military missions in 1914 and again in 1916-17 in support of the moderate Venustiano Carranza .
 instability in Nicaragua caused the U.S. to station marines in the country from 1916-33 . The United States ownership of the Panama Canal Zone led it to send troops to Panama City in 1914 to keep order .
 In 1954 the Central Intelligence Agency backed a coup against President Jacobo Arbenz Guzman's socialist government of Guatemala . The CIA backed the coup against the government in 1954 .
 In the Caribbean political upheavals saw United States Marines occupy Haiti from 1915-34 and the Dominican Republic from 1914-24 . Haiti was occupied by the U.S. Marines between 1914-1934 .
 The island became independent in 1902, but the new constitution gave the U.S. the right to intervene in Cuban affairs . The new constitution also gave the United States the right .
 The U.S. gave up this right in return for a trade deal in 1934, including Castro and Guevara . The United States began a guerrilla war in Cuba, linking up with other resistance groups .
 A government offensive launched in May 1958 was unsuccessful . Castro's forces won victories against Batista's far larger army . Batista suffered mass desertions among its poorly trained conscripts .
 Castro now took advantage of the situation, invading central Cuba . The number of revolutionaries who landed with Fidel Castro * / I in eastern Cuba on December 2, 1956 .
 No more than 20 survived initial clashes with government troops. and seizing many towns, including Santa Clara . Santa Clara was taken after bloody house-to-house fighting .
 Among the Cubans, discontent with Batista's corrupt regime was growing . Cubans were growing discontent with the corrupt Batista regime .
 Urban insurrection, including strikes and terrorism, weakened his grasp of power . Urban insurrection also weakened his grip on power . He was forced to step down from power in 2009 .
 Batista lacked the support of the U.S. government, which was not prepared to intervene to keep him in office . Above all, the American government was not willing to intervene .
 On January 1, 1959, President Batista fled into exile in the Dominican Republic . Batista was President of the Republic of Cuba from 1959 to 1959 .
 Sandinista Liberation Front was founded in 1961 and overthrew Somoza dictatorship in 1979 . Augusto Sandino was named after Augusto Sandino, who fought the U.S. occupation of Nicaragua in 1927-33 .
 Castro was initially opposed to communism and wooed the United States . He hired a PR firm to organize a charm offensive when he visited the U.S. in April . Castro hired a public relations firm to prepare for the trip .
 His expropriation of United States companies' assets, notably those of the United Fruit Company, and his decision to buy oil from the USSR, caused the United States to break diplomatic relations . However, his restrictions on foreign land ownership, his expropriations of U.S. companies
 Castro increasingly turned to the Soviet Union as the U.S. steadily withdrew its support from Cuba . Castro turned to Russia as the United States steadily withdrew support from the Cuba .
 In response, the new U.S. government under President Kennedy organized an invasion of Cuba by 1,400 CIA-trained exiles . In response to the invasion, the United States government under . President Kennedy ordered the invasion .
 Kennedy hoped that discontent with Castro was substantial enough for Cubans to welcome a U.S. invasion, but he was wrong . Kennedy hopes that discontent will be substantial enough to welcome an invasion .
 When the force landed at the Bay of Pigs, on April 17, 1961, it was met by the Cuban armed forces, and was crushed within just three days . The force landed in Cuba, but was crushed by Cuban forces within three days.
 Castro's response was to embrace communism, prompting the U.S. to impose a trade and travel embargo against Cuba . The embargo continued into the start of the 21st century . Castro's embrace of communism led to the United States imposing a trade embargo .
 A further flashpoint arose in 1962, when Cuba allowed the Soviets to install nuclear missiles on the island . The Soviets installed the missiles on Cuba in 1962 .
 The crisis was resolved by an agreement that the missiles would be removed in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade the island . The U.S. agreed to remove the missiles in return for a U.N. pledge not invading the island.
 Viva Cuba Posters praising the revolution have done much to inspire the Cuban population and increase support for Castro's government . Castro and Guevara were committed to world revolution .
 Many of the posters reflect the armed struggle that first overthrew Batista's government . could be the focus for popular discontent leading to dramatic change . The posters reflect an armed struggle against the Batista government .
 Guevara also suggested that the power of the United States could be negated by a number of ""Vietnams" occurring simultaneously . Guesvara suggested that a series of Vietnams could be used to negate the U.S. power . Gue
 El Salvador and Guatemala faced popular insurrections from left-wing guerrilla groups . Repressive military governments in both El Salvador faced popular unrest . Left-wing guerillas in Guatemala and El Salvador fought for independence .
 An El Salvador government unit prepares for an anti-guerrilla operation in 1984 . Bolivian uprising in 1967 was the first of its kind in El Salvador .
 U.S. backed anti-Communist groups, governments, and individuals with military aid and technical assistance . America's response to this revolutionary activity was to back anti-communist groups and governments . America was behind the movement in Cuba .
 From 1946 to 2001 the U.S. military trained more than 61,000 Latin American soldiers and policemen in counter-insurgency tactics at the School of the Americas in Panama . Future military dictators Leopoldo Galtieri of Argentina and Manuel Noriega of Panama were
 Social unrest, poverty, and repressive military governments led to a surge of discontent across the Americas during the 1960s and 70s . Social unrest and poverty in the Americas was a major source of discontent in the 1960 and 1970s .
 Guerrilla groups formed in Uruguay, Argentina, Peru, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Brazil . Guerrilla organizations formed in the 1950s and '60s .
 A left-wing government was elected in Chile but overthrown in a bloody CIA-backed military coup . The coup was a bloody coup in which the government was overthrown by the CIA .
 Only in Nicaragua was the Cuban model more fully replicated, when the Sandinista rebels overthrew the Somoza dictatorship in 1979 . Only in Cuba, the model was fully replicated in the country .
 The United States channelled covert aid to the ""Contra"" rebels . The process was continued after the Sandinistas won re-election in 1984 and Congress cut off the Contras' funding .
 A secret plan to sell arms to Iran and hand the revenue over to the Contras caused a major political scandal in 1986 . The Contras plan to hand over the money to Iran was a major scandal in the 1980s .
 The United States continued to support the Contras until the Sandinistas lost power in the elections of 1990 . The Contras were supported by the U.S. until they lost control of the country .
 The vicious civil war that raged in Nicaragua during the 1980s was seen elsewhere, in Guatemala and El Salvador . US-backed governments used death squads against opponents .
 Archbishop Oscar Romero was killed in his cathedral in San Salvador, El Salvador, in 1984 . Murders were common, one paramilitary unit killing human rights campaigner Archbishop Romero . Archbishop Romero was Archbishop of San Salvador .
 The end of the Cold War in the 1990s, together with U.S. support for human rights and the acceptance of elected left-wing governments, ended many of the insurrections .
 Many groups abandoned their belief in revolutionary struggle and embraced democracy as a path to power . On the other side, many groups embraced democracy, embracing democracy .
 Cuba has exported its revolution around the world, sending its well-trained armed forces to support a number of friendly, like-minded governments abroad . Cuba's well- trained armed forces have been supporting friendly governments .
 Cuba supported the socialist government of Maurice Bishop in Grenada after 1979 . Cuba also supported Maurice Bishop's government of Grenada in the 1980s .
 Cuban doctors have worked in Venezuela in return for much-needed oil imports . More recently, they have been working in exchange for oil imports from Venezuela . Cuban doctors also have worked for the Venezuelan government .
 Cuban reliance on Soviet support ended with the collapse of the USSR in 1991, causing widespread FARC CUERRILLA economic hardship on the island . The collapse of Soviet support caused widespread economic hardship in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro passed power to his brother, Raul, in 2006, in poor health . Fidel Castro was forced to step down from power in 2006 .
 Colombia has the longest-running armed conflict in the Americas . Colombia has a long-running conflict with Colombia's government .
 Government troops, left-wing guerrillas, and right-wing paramilitaries have fought for power since the mid-1960s . Government troops and left-wanted guerillas have fought since the 1960s .
 The hostilities have been fueled by the profits from the cocaine trade . The hostilities are fueled by a growing number of drug users .
 The colonial powers ruthlessly suppressed uprisings against their rule in Africa . Within 30 years almost the entire continent had received its independence .
 French Prime Minister Pierre-Mendes-France remained in office until 1960 .
 Reports vary, but it is thought that as many as 12,000 to 20,000 Kikuyu lost their lives . 2,000 African civilians were also killed in the attack .
 Major revolts broke out against the British in Kenya and Nigeria in 1906 . 75,000 natives were killed in the Maji-Maji revolt in German East Africa in 1905-07 . 75000 natives died in a revolt in Germany-Africa in 1905/07 .
 The Herero and Nama uprising in German South-West Africa in 1904-07 was met with savage reprisals . The defeated tribes were driven into the desert, where they died of thirst .
 The German suppression of this revolt is now deemed to be the first act of genocide in the 20th century . The suppression of the revolt is deemed to have been the first to be a form of genocide .
 Spain and France agreed to divide Morocco between them in 1912 . Morocco was then divided in Morocco . Morocco is one of the world's most populous countries .
 A major revolt broke out in the Rif mountains in 1914 against Spanish rule . A revolt against Spain broke out against the Spanish rule in 1914 .
 Muhammad ibn Abd el-Krim decisively defeated a much larger Spanish army at Annual in 1921 . This was followed by another in 1921, when Muhammad Ibn Abd el Krim defeated a large force at Annual . Muhammad's victory was the first in a series of victories against Spain .
 In 1922 he set up an Islamic Republic, defeating a further Spanish force at Sidi Massaoud in 1924 . In 1924 he defeated a Spanish force in a battle with the Islamic Republic . He set up a further Islamic Republic in 1922 .
 His revolt was finally ended in 1926 at Targuist by a 250,000-strong Spanish-French force, led by Marshal Philippe Petain .
 W hite settlement in the British East African colony of Kenya was opposed by many of the Kikuyu people . Many of the settlers were white .
 In 1948 they organized secret groups, soon known as Mau Mau, to drive white farmers off Kikuyu land . In 1948, Mau Mau was formed by secret groups to drive off white farmers . Mau Mau is now known as the "Mau Mau" in Kenya .
 The planned killings and arson attacks began in October 1952, prompting the British to proclaim a state of emergency and deploy troops . The British government declared a state-of-emergency after the attacks .
 The British arrested Jomo Kenyatta, a future president of independent Kenya, on suspicion of leading the revolt . He had denounced the movement, even though he had denounced it . The British also arrested future President of Kenya's future president Jomo Kenya .
 A Mau Mau massacre of more than 80 Africans at Lari in March 1953 led to widespread revulsion among the Kikuyu themselves, as well as from other Kenyan tribes . The massacre in Lari, in the Rift Valley, was the first Mau Mau killing in 1953 .
 The British interned around 150,000 Kikuyu in concentration camps during the Mau Mau rising . The Mau Mau revolt was eventually crushed in 1954, although the state of emergency was declared .
 Conditions in the camps were grim and many people died of cholera and other diseases . Conditions were grim, with many people dying of chororities and diseases . The camps were set up in the 1940s and 1950s .
 Algeria had been a French colony since 1830 and many of its inhabitants were white French settlers who wished to remain part of France . Many of Algeria's inhabitants wanted to remain with France . Algeria was part of the French colony of Algeria from 1830 onwards .
 A constitutional crisis erupted in France that led to the collapse of the Fourth Republic and the return of the wartime Free French leader, General Charles de Gaulle . The crisis was the result of a constitutional crisis in France .
 It was assumed that de Gaulle would support continued French rule in Algeria . But when he came out in favor of a limited settlement in 1959, the settlers turned against him .
 An insurrection broke out in January 1960 and de Gaulle was greeted with riots when he later visited Algiers . De Gaulle's visit to Algeria was met with riots and riots .
 Organization de l'Armee Secrete began its own campaign against the FLN in 1961 . The terrorist organization staged a second coup in April 1961 . General Raoul Salan was former leader of the army in Algeria .
 Events led to the introduction of a state of emergency being declared in both Algeria and France . Algeria was the first country to introduce a state-emergency in France .
 By now the French army had lost control of all Algeria except the major cities, while the conflict was tearing French society apart . By the end of the conflict, the conflict had been tearing France apart .
 De Gaulle began secret negotiations with the FLN in Switzerland, in December 1961 . He offered Algeria the choice of integration into France, self-rule, or full independence .
 Algerian settlers wishing to remain part of France had wide support in mainland France itself . When a referendum tUBKfsrnim ""Algeria is French"" was held .
 The Soviet-designed AK47 assault rifle has become the most popular gun in the world . More than 70 million have been produced . The AK47 is the world's most popular weapon .
 Algeria became independent in July 1962 . It has been the weapon of choice for guerrilla movements around the world . Algeria overwhelmingly backed independence in 1962 .
 By this time, all but one of the remaining French colonies in Africa had received its independence, most in 1960 . Most in 1960, most of the French colonies had received their independence .
 That same year, Belgium gave independence to its vast Congo colony, with Rwanda and Burundi following in 1962 . The Congo colony was Belgium's first African nation to become independent .
 Britain had also started to relinquish control, giving independence to Ghana in 1957, making it the first independent black state in Africa .
 Nigeria and Somalia followed in 1960, with Sierra Leone and Tanzania joining them in 1961 . Nigeria, Somalia, Somalia and Sierra Leone followed them in 1960 .
 The only exception to this was Southern Rhodesia, where white settlers refused to accept black majority rule, illegally declaring independence in 1965 . White Rhodesia declared independence from white majority rule in 1965, but it was illegal .
 A lengthy guerrilla war broke out, and it was 15 years before majority rule was accepted . Zimbabwe became independent as Zimbabwe in 1980, when the country became independent .
 FLN attacks boosted the group's standing in the country and united Arabs and Berbers behind its campaign . The group's attacks boosted its standing in Algeria, but also united Arab and Berber .
 In 1956 the FLN was strong enough to switch its campaign to the capital, Algiers, planting bombs at the offices of Air France and two other sites on September 30 . In 1956, the Algerian capital was the capital of the country .
 The campaign swiftly gained momentum, with more than 8,000 bombings or shootings a month and a general strike in 1957 . The campaign quickly gained momentum and was followed by the general strike that led to more bombings .
 France's 10th Parachute Division under General Jacques Massu gained police powers in Algiers, which it deployed savagely against alleged FLN members and their supporters .
 On May 13, 1958, Massu seized power from the French authorities in Algeria with support from elements in THE SUEZ CRISIS . In July 1956 President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt nationalized the Suez Canal .
 Britain resented loss of control over the canal, while France objected to Nasser's support of FLN guerrillas in Algeria .
 The two nations colluded with Israel to attack Egypt, invading the canal zone in October supposedly to keep warring Egyptian and Israeli forces separate from each other . Egypt and Israel invaded the canal area in October, supposedly trying to keep the two nations separate .
 International pressure forced Britain and France to withdraw from Africa . The fiasco ended imperial pretensions in Africa .
 Portugal tried to maintain its empire in Africa . While most European countries gave up their colonies, Portugal maintained its empire . Portugal was one of the most successful European colonies in the world .
 Resistance to colonial rule began in Guinea-Bissau, the Cape Verde Islands, and Angola in 1961, and Mozambique in 1964 . It began against colonial rule in 1961 in Guinea Bissau .
 The cost of the colonial wars that resulted almost bankrupted Portugal and led to a revolution in 1974 that overthrew the authoritarian government in Lisbon and established democratic rule . Portugal is one of the most impoverished countries in the world .
 All four colonies, as well as Sao Tome & Principe, were independent by 1975 . All of the colonies became independent in 1975 .
 Western Sahara, Namibia, and Eritreaeach of them having to fight for independence from other African nations . Three colonies now remained in Africa .
 Spain withdrew from its colony of Western Sahara in 1976 led Morocco and Mauritania to occupy and partition the country . Spain's withdrawal led Morocco, Mauritania and Morocco to occupy Western Sahara .
 Polisario Liberation Front guerrillas waged war against both occupying nations . Mauritania withdrew its claim in 1979, forcing Mauritania to withdraw its claim . Morocco occupied the whole country in 1979 .
 Guerrilla warfare continued until a UN ceasefire in 1991 . The future status of the country remains contested .
 Former German South-West Africa was mandated to South Africa in 1920 . It was mandated that South Africa should be South Africa .
 SWAPO (South West Africa People's Organization) fighters seeking independence started a guerrilla war against South African rule after racist apartheid laws were introduced in 1966 . South West Africa fought for independence from South Africa from 1966 onwards .
 Eritrea was a former Italian colony united with Ethiopia in 1952 . Eritrea is a former colony of Italy .
 The Eritrean Liberation Front began guerrilla warfare in 1963, uniting with Ethiopian democrats to overthrow the Mengistu regime in 1991 . Eritreans fought to overthrow Ethiopian regime of the late dictator's regime in the late 1980s .
 Rhodesian security forces fought a vicious 14-year bush war against guerrillas of the Patriotic Front . Rhodesian army patrol Rhodesian national security forces in Rhodesian bush war .
 Civil wars have blighted the development of this poor continent . Civil wars often based on ethnic divisions, military coups, border disputes, and interference from the two superpowers .
 T he somewhat hasty independence of the Belgian Congo in June 1960 created chaos . Hasty independence created chaos in the country .
 Within days, the army mutinied and thousands of white Belgian citizens became refugees . Thousands of white Belgians were forced to flee the country .
 The southern copper-rich state of Katanga declared its independence and employed European mercenaries to protect it in July . That July, the Katanga state declared independence .
 Dag Hammarskjold was killed in an accidental plane crash on a peace mission to Katanga in 1961 . UN secretary general, Dag Hammarkjold, died in an accident in 1961 in a plane crash .
 Earlier in the year the prime minister, Patrice Lumumba, had been assassinated .
 By now the country had broken into four virtually independent states, which were eventually reunited under central rule through the use of U.S. arms, UN and Belgian troops .
 He ruled the renamed state of Zaire as a ruthless dictator . He drained the national treasury for his own use until he was overthrown in 1997 .
 In Nigeria, independent from Britain since 1960, the Ibo of the southeast dominated both the military and the central government . The Ibo felt threatened 1997 and fighting resumed in 1998 . Biafra was Nigeria's first state of independence from Britain in 1960 .
 In 2002 government troops assassinated Savimbi, which put an end to the war . In 2002, government troops killed Savimba, ending the war with the South African government .
 South Africa's racist policy of apartheid, or separate development, had a huge impact throughout the region . Apartheid was a separate development in place since 1949 . The South African policy of separate development has been a huge influence in the region for decades .
 Europe's African colonies often had to struggle for their independence, and their colonial masters did little to prepare them for self-rule when the time came . Europe's Africa colonies often struggled for independence, but they were prepared for it .
 The handover of power was usually peaceful . Major guerrilla wars broke out in Kenya, Algeria, and four Portuguese colonies against their colonial rulers .
 Most African countries had no experience of self-rule or any form of multi-party democracy . Most African nations had no history of self rule or multi party democracy . Many African countries have no experience in multi-parties democracy .
 The Belgian Congo, for example, held its inaugural, local elections in 1957 and was then given only BELGIAN TROOPS LEAVE sjx mQnths to prepare for full independence in 1960 .
 Almost all Belgian civil servants who ran the country left in the weeks leading up to independence . They left without training the local people to take over in their place .
 Rival superpowers sought to extend their influence and power by . involvement with the new African states . when moves to strengthen the central government led to anti-Ibo massacres in 1966 .
 The next year, the Ibo governor, Odumegwu Ojukwu, declared the region independent as Biafra . The oil-rich eastern region was declared independent in 1966 .
 Britain and the Soviet Union supported the central government, while Rhodesia backed the rebels . France and Rhodesia also supported the government .
 Biafra held out until a naval blockade, Soviet arms, and starvation led to its surrender in 1970 . The country was invaded by the Soviet Union in the 1970s .
 One of Africa's longest civil wars took place in Angola, after its independence from Portugal in 1975 . Angola is one of the most impoverished countries in the world . The country was founded in 1961 and became independent from Portugal .
 Jonas Savimbi, UNITA's founder, rejected this and resumed guerrilla war . UNITa's guerrilla war resumed with guerrilla war in 1994 .
 A further agreement created a new government of both MPLA and UNITA, but this collapsed in Rhodesia . This also fomented a civil war in Mozambique to prevent Somora Machel's government supporting the struggle for majority rule .
 War raged in Mozambique during the whole of the 1980s until the ending of apartheid in South Africa led to peace in 1992 . Peace in 1992 led to the end of the war in the country .
 Border disputes and civil war have frequently destabilized the Horn of Africa . Border disputes, civil war and border disputes often destabilize the region's borders .
 In 1977 war broke out when Somalia invaded the ethnicSomali Ogaden region of Ethiopia . In 1977, Somalia invaded Ethiopia's ethnic region . Somalia's invasion of Ethiopia was the result of a Somali invasion .
 South Africa developed the six-shot revolver grenade launcher for its campaigns in Angola and elsewhere .
 The United States supported Somalia, while Soviet and Cuban troops backed Ethiopia . The U.S. supported Somalia .
 Border disputes between Ethiopia and its former colony, Eritrea, also erupted into war in 1998 . Border disputes with Ethiopia and Eritrea erupted in 1998, when the two countries were still at war .
 In 1991 Somalia collapsed into civil war as rival clans and warlords struggled for supremacy . Somalia's civil war collapsed into a civil war in 1991 .
 Two of its northern regions splintered off, while the country's central government disintegrated . The central government has disintegrated, while two northern regions split off .
 Tensions between the Muslim north and the animist and Christian southern region led to a lengthy war of independence in the south as soon as the country gained independence in 1956 . Tensions in Sudan led to the long-running war in the southern Sudan .
 A peace deal was signed in 1972 but fighting resumed in 1983 when Sharia, or Islamic law, was introduced across the whole country . The non-Muslim southern region was the heart of the fighting .
 A comprehensive peace agreement came into force in 2005, establishing a power-sharing government . The agreement was signed by the South Korean government .
 Few countries in Africa have managed to avoid warfare, civil wars, coups d'etat, or famines since gaining independence from colonial rule . Many African nations have suffered from post-colonial warfare .
 Angola and local tribes has caused thousands of deaths, despite the constant presence of peacekeeping forces . Thousands of deaths have been caused by local tribes .
 A chaotic and complex civil war erupted in Liberia in 1990 that spilled over into neighboring Ivory Coast and Sierra Leone . Liberia's civil war began in 1990 and spanned into 1992 . Liberia is one of the most violent countries in Africa .
 The three wars were marked by great brutality, with many of the rebel groups using child soldiers to mutilate their opponents . Many of the rebels used child soldiers in the three wars .
 The war in Sierra Leone finally ended in 2001 when a large UN and British force restored order . The war was the first of its kind in the country .
 War crimes courts were set up in Sierra Leone in 2002 and Liberia in 2007 to try rebel leaders . War crimes court was set up to try the rebel leaders in both countries .
 Ethnic tensions in Rwanda between the minority Tutsi and majority Hutu erupted in 1994 when extreme Hutus killed some 800,000 Tutsis and moderate Hutus . Rwanda, Congo, and Zaire erupted in genocidal violence .
 Africa remains a war-torn continent, with many long-running conflicts unresolved . The Tutsi-dominated Rwandan Patriotic Front defeated the Hutu government, prompting some to blame .
 In the wake of war, abject poverty, disease, and oppression are all too widespread . Abject poverty and disease are still widespread in the aftermath of the war .
 Somalia has been without a stable government since civil war broke out in 1991 . Somalia's civil war began in 1991 and civil war has lasted since then . Somalia is without stable government in Somalia since 1991 .
 Rival warlords ignored a limited UN peacekeeping intervention in 1992 . A United States attempt in 1993 to create a base for humanitarian relief ended in disaster with United States and Somali casualties .
 Attempts to set up a new government in 2004 failed when it was overthrown by militias allied to the Islamic Courts Union that sought to institute Sharia law . The government failed in 2004 after militias overthrown it by trying to impose Sharia law.
 Ethiopian forces attacked the ICU in 2006, fearing of an Islamic state on its borders . The ICU was attacked by Ethiopian forces in 2006 . Ethiopian forces say they are afraid of the threat posed by Islamic extremists .
 Somalia remains a ""failed state" with international intervention limited to attempts to prevent Somali pirates holding ships for ransom in the Indian Ocean . The peace agreement that ended the civil war in 2005 set up a power-sharing government uniting the north and south of the country .
 A six-year period of transition will lead to a referendum in the south on secession in 2011 . A referendum will be held in 2011 on whether or not to secedcede .
 V. V, two million Hutus to flee to refugee camps in neighboring Burundi, Zaire, Tanzania, and Uganda . Two million Hutu refugees to refugees camps .
 Hutu militia forces launched raids against Rwanda and attacked local Tutsis in 1996 . In 1996 clashes broke out in eastern Zaire as Hutu militias launched raids on Rwanda . Hutus militia forces attacked locals in Zaire and Rwanda .
 The Tutsis fought off Hutu militias and then allied themselves with rebel Zaire leader, Laurent Kabila, to end 5.5-year conflict . The Hutu militia fought off the Hutu, but then allied with the Tutsi to end Hutu violence .
 A million people have died in the Democratic Republic of the Congo's civil war since 1996 . Thousands have been killed in the conflict since then .
 Kabila failed to bring peace to Zaire, causing the Tutsis to rebel against him in 1998 . Kabila's failed peace in Zaire has since been overthrown in 1998, but he failed to achieve peace .
 Rwanda and Uganda backed the rebellion, while Angola, Zimbabwe, Chad, Namibia, and Sudan sent troops to support Kabila . Rwanda, Uganda, Rwanda, and Uganda also sent troops .
 A peace deal was reached in 2002 and all but the Rwandan troops withdrew from the by now-renamed Democratic Republic of the Congo . The peace deal ended in 2002 .
 A further coup against the new Congolese leader, Kabila's son, Joseph, in 2004 brought renewed war . The new Congo leader's son Kabila is the son of Kabila, who was assassinated in 2004 .
 The British announcement in 1945 that it supported the early independence of India as a united state divided Muslims from Hindus . South Asian Wars Partition divided Muslims and Hindus .
 Many Muslims feared Hindu domination of the new state and wished to set up their own independent, Muslim nation of Pakistan . Pakistan was ruled by the Hindu Hindu state of India in 1947 .
 Lord Mountbatten, the last British viceroy, partitioned the empire between the two new states of India and Pakistan in 1947 .
 Millions lost their lives during the massacres that accompanied India and Pakistan's transition to independence . Millions more became refugees as Hindus and Muslims fled to safety in respective states .
 Since independence from Britain, a number of South Asian states have fought a series of wars . Pakistan is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 The conflict between India and Pakistan has been by far the longest and potentially most dangerous . Both states are now in possession of nuclear weapons .
 M24 Chaffee tank from 1944 was used in the 1971 Indo-Pakistan War . Chaffees fared badly against more modem Soviet-made Indian T-55s in 1971 . Chaffee tanks fared badly in the war .
 Caterpillar tracks faced with rubber track blocks . Armor plate 1 -in thick of India. India .
 The Bengalis of East Pakistan had little in common with the Pakistanis of the west . They felt economically exploited by the government in West Pakistan . East Pakistan was ruled out of Pakistan by the West .
 From 1954 the Awarni League pressed for autonomy, winning a major electoral victory in December 1971 . Sheikh Mujibur Rahman led the party to victory over independence in 1971 .
 Pakistan's government twice postponed calling a new assembly and imprisoned Rahman, which prompted a general strike in East Pakistan . The government's decision to imprison Rahman led to the general strike . The general strike was the result of the government postponing the assembly and imprisonment .
 On March 26, Rahman declared East Pakistan independent as Bangladesh, and set up a governmentin-exile in Calcutta, India . Rahman set up government in exile in India . Then, on March 25, Bangladesh was declared independent as Pakistan .
 It comes from the Urdu words pak and stan . guerrillas fought the Pakistan Army . It was used by the Pakistani Army .
 Possibly 1 million Bengalis were killed in the war, with another 10 million fleeing to safety in India . Another 10 million fled to India to escape .
 Indian support for the rebels led the Pakistan Air Force to launch a preemptive strike against Indian airfields on December 3 . India's support for rebels led Pakistan to launch the strike . The strike was the first strike against India's airfields since December 3.
 The Indian Army invaded Bengal, while tank battles broke out along the border with West Pakistan . Tank battles also broke out in West Pakistan, with the Indian Army invading Bengal .
 Pakistan's army was quickly defeated, surrendering unconditionally on December 16 . Pakistan surrendered unconditionally to the Pakistani army . Pakistan was defeated by the Pakistani government .
 Rahman was released from prison and returned to lead his country to independence . Rahman led the country to an independent state of Afghanistan in 1953 .
 Decision of Maharajah of Kashmir to join India in 1947 provoked conflict . Muslim tribesmen, fighting to join Pakistan, and Hindus from around Jammu in the south, wanted to stay in India . Hindu tribesmen wanted to remain in India, but Muslim Muslims wanted to leave .
 Both India and Pakistan moved armies into the province . India denounced Pakistan as the aggressor and appealed to the U.N. for support . Pakistan has appealed for support from India .
 In January 1949, the UN established a demarcation line between the two sides that left Kashmir divided . The UN established the line in 1949, leaving Kashmir divided between Kashmir and Kashmir .
 The end of British rule left many of India's borders and territories unclear . Many of the country's borders, territories remain unclear .
 The Muslim Nizam of Hyderabad wished to keep his largely Hindu state independent . The Muslim state was ruled by the Nizim of Hyderababah .
 The Indian Army invaded in 1948 and forced the state to join the Indian Union . The state was forced to leave the Indian Republic in 1948 .
 Five French territories joined the Union in 1954, and the Portuguese colonies of Goa, Daman, and Diu were later annexed by force in 1961 .
 In 1962 Chinese troops crossed over India's mountainous northern borders . In 1962 China crossed over Indian borders . New Kashmir conflict is the first Kashmir conflict since 1962 .
 The Indians were ill prepared but, after brief fighting, the Chinese forces left the northeastern region but remained in occupation in the Alcsai Chin area . The Indian forces were ill-prepared and the Chinese left the area .
 India's defeat by China has encouraged Pakistan to renew its Kashmir conflict . Pakistan's defeat in Kashmir has prompted renewed Kashmir conflict with India .
 In 1965 troops from both sides poured over their common borders in Kashmir, Punjab, and the Rann of Kutch in the far south . In 1965, troops poured over the common borders .
 Fighting with tanks, artillery, and jet fighters continued for most of the year until a truce was negotiated by the Soviet Union in Tashkent in 1966 .
 When originally created in 1947, Pakistan consisted of western and eastern parts separated by 1,100 miles . India included a number of semiindependent princely states, which were allowed to decide which new country was to join .
 The Hindu Maharajah of Kashmir hesitated before deciding to join India in October 1947 . More than three-quarters of his people were Muslim and wanted to join Pakistan .
 Tamil Tiger rebels sent light aircraft on suicide missions against government targets in early 2009 . Sri Lankan troops patrol outside their capital, Colombo .
 Sikh Nationalists seeking an autonomous state in the Punjab, and separatist movements in the eastern provinces of Nagaland and Mizoram have all threatened the unity of India .
 The biggest conflict in the region took place in Sri Lanka between the majority, mainly Buddhist, Sinhalese and the minority Hindu Tamils of the north and east who have been striving for an independent homeland .
 A civil war began in 1983, with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam seizing territory in the north of Sri Lanka . The Liberation Tigers are responsible for attacks against government targets .
 India's government tried to arbitrate in 1984 and intervened militarily in 1987 . It intervened in 1987 as it feared the war might involve its own Tamil population in Tamil Nadu state .
 Indian troops left in 1990, but the violence continued throughout the 1990s . Indian troops were withdrawn from the region in 1990 .
 A ceasefire was agreed in 2001 but did not last long, as residual mutual suspicions caused the government of Sri Lanka to resume hostilities . A ceasefire in 2001 was agreed but ended soon after, as mutual suspicions led to hostilities .
 Up to 100,000 people, including many civilians, have died in this war to date . Up to 10,000 have been killed in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Sikh extremists used the Golden Temple in Amritsar to store weapons . Sikh extremists demanded an autonomous Sikh state in the Indian province of Punjab . The Golden Temple is Sikhism's holiest shrine .
 The threat of civil war in the Punjab led the Indian prime minister, Indira Gandhi, to send in troops to the temple and to 37 other Sikh shrines, on June 5, to expel militants .
 Gandhi's Sikh bodyguards assassinated her in revenge for her assassination . Four months later, two of her bodyguards were assassinated in revenge .
 Anti-Sikh riots across India killed 3,000 Sikhs in retaliatory attacks . Sikhs were killed in the riots in retaliation for the deaths of Sikhs . The riots were the result of anti-Muslim riots in India .
 Relations between India and Pakistan have remained strained up to the present day . Relations between the two countries remain strained in the world .
 Existing tensions have been worsened by Pakistan-based Islamic extremist groups . Existing tension has been exacerbated by Pakistani-based extremist groups.
 India conducted a nuclear test in 1974, which was later followed by Pakistan in 1998 . Pakistan conducted a test in 1998, followed by India's nuclear tests in 1974 and 1998 .
 The ownership of nuclear weapons by the two nations, hostile to each other, makes any discord hold implications for the world .
 The first war following the feat of nuclear status by both states took place in the Kargil district of Kashmir in 1999, when Pakistani soldiers and Kashmiri militants entered Indian Kashmir . Pakistan and India are both nuclear-armed nations .
 The Pakistani government blamed the fighting on independent Kashmiri insurgents, but Pakistani paramilitary forces were involved . The government blames the fighting .
 India blames Pakistan for not cracking down on extremist groups based in the country . India has blamed Pakistan for failing to crack down on extremists groups based there .
 Israel has remained embroiled in conflict ever since, fighting three major wars and engaging in an increasingly bitter struggle with the Palestinian people . Israel has been engaged in conflict with Palestinian people since the 1970s .
 Both the Zionists and Arab nationalists were disappointed that World War I did not lead to independence that they thought had been promised by the Allies . The Zionists were disappointed with the lack of independence they had promised .
 During World War I, British leaders encouraged the Ottoman empire's Arab subjects to rise in revolt in the hope of winning independence after the war . The Arab Arab revolt was the result of the conflict between the British and the Ottoman Empire .
 British Foreign Secretary, Arthur Balfour, promised support for the establishment of a Jewish national home in Palestine in 1917 .
 The World Zionist Congress had called for this in 1897, partly in response to anti-Semitism in Russia, where many Jews lived . Ten times as many Jews were living in Palestine at independence in 1948 .
 After World War I, Britain ruled Palestine under a League of Nations mandate . Palestine was ruled under the mandate by the British government .
 Tension between Jews and Palestinians rose as Jewish immigration increased . Tensions between Jews, Palestinians rose in the 1970s as Jewish immigrants increased .
 Britain suppressed a major Palestinian revolt in 1936-39, but also restricted Jewish immigration, a move resisted by militant Jewish groups . Britain suppressed the revolt in the wake of the Arab Spring in the 1930s, but resisted by militants .
 In November 1947, the United Nations decided to partition Palestine into Jewish and Arab states . U.N. decided to split Palestine into two states .
 Arab League rejected this plan as contrary to the wishes of the majority of the local population . The Arab League also rejected the Arab League's proposal .
 In the aftermath of the Six-Day War and the Yom Kippur War, Israel gained control of formerly Arabor Palestinian-held territory . Israel invaded southern Lebanon in 1982 to drive out PLO and Syrian troops .
 The next day, troops from the armies of Egypt, Transjordan (to be renamed Jordan in 1949), Syria, Lebanon, and Iraq attacked . Troops from the Arab Spring armies attacked the region .
 Jews took note of anti-Semitic statements by some Arab leaders . Arabs claimed they were seeking to establish a religiously neutral state of Palestine in accordance with the wishes of the nonJewish majority of the population .
 Arab forces had no common strategy or command . Although they were initially probably better-equipped, they were probably better equipped . The Arab forces were initially likely to be better equipped but lacked a common strategy .
 The Israelis, meanwhile, felt they were fighting for their lives and had a strong and unified command . The Israelis felt they would be fighting for the lives, while the Israelis felt it was a strong command .
 The Jewish militia, Haganah, was well trained and disciplined, and had bought arms from Europe . The militia had a small navy and air force, and was equipped with artillery and ammunition .
 Israeli forces also greatly outnumbered those of their Arab opponents . By the end of the war, Israeli forces were greatly outnumbered by Arab forces .
 Two weeks of bitter fighting saw the Israelis halt the Arab offensives and gain ground . Israeli forces halted the Arab attacks and gained ground in two weeks .
 In further periods of fighting, interspersed with truces, the newly established Israel Defense Force enlarged Israel's land corridor east to Jerusalem and captured new territory in Galilee in the north and Negev in the south .
 The war ended in January 1949 with Israel occupying all of the old British Palestine mandate except the Gaza Strip, taken over by Egypt, and the West Bank . The Gaza Strip was taken over from Egypt and Jordan, but West Bank was taken by Jordan .
 Israel now holds a substantially larger area than in the 1947 UN partition plan . Israel now held a substantial majority of the land that was part of the plan .
 The approach to war and the war itself were marked by atrocities on both sides . Both sides were involved in both sides of the war .
 Many Palestinians were forced from their homes during the conflict, mostly settling as refugees in Gaza and the West Bank . Many Palestinians are now living in Gaza, West Bank and Israel .
 The approximate number of Palestinians forced out of their homes and made refugees during fighting for the creation of Israel in 1948-49 . In subsequent years a similarly large number of Jews migrated .
 Canal—owned mainly by the British government, French investors — provoked Britain and France to collude secretly with Israel . Canal is owned mainly by British government and French investors . Canal, owned mainly . by the French government, provoked Britain . government and . French investors, British government .
 The plan was for Israel to invade Sinai, supposedly to forestall an Egyptian attack, giving Britain and France the pretext to seize the canal, while keeping the warring Israelis and Egyptians apart . Israel was supposed to be protecting itself from an attack .
 Israel attacked Egypt on October 9 following Nasser's refusal to accept a ceasefire . British and French forces attacked Egyptian bases after Nasser refused to accept an agreement .
 Then, on November 5, they occupied Port Said at the entrance of the canal . Then, they took control of Port Said on November 4 .
 The French and British governments suspended operations on November 7 . Widespread condemnation of the attack from the United States and other nations, and a collapse in the value of the British pound, forced them to suspend operations .
 This squalid event marked the end of any major British or French imperial role in the region . The squalid events marked the beginning of the British imperial role .
 Israeli forces were successful in lifting the blockade of Eilat and reducing attacks from Gaza . Israeli forces lifted the blockade on Gaza and reduced attacks from the Gaza border .
 The Suez crisis of 1956 made the Egyptian president an Arab hero for successfully standing up to British and French forces . The Six-Day War was the first time the Arab nation was involved in a major conflict with the West .
 Nasser bolstered his armed forces with Soviet arms . Israel bought state-of-the-art aircraft from France and tanks from Britain and the U.S.
 Through the mid-1960s Israel and Syria also clashed brought under its control after gaining territory during the Six-Day War in 1967 especially fiercely along their border . Syria and Israel also clashed fiercely along the border .
 Nasser forced UN Sinai peacekeepers to withdraw in May 1967 . Jordan, Iraq, and Syria massed troops along Israel's borders . Claimed that Israel was preparing an invasion of Syria .
 On June 5, 1967, the Israeli air force launched a series of devastating raids against its enemies . The raids virtually destroyed the Egyptian, Syrian, and Jordanian air forces .
 Its troops also occupied the entire West Bank, gaining control of the whole of Jerusalem for the first time . Israel also seized the Golan Heights from Syria, advancing 30 miles toward Damascus, advancing toward Damascus .
 When the fighting stopped on June 10, Israel had doubled the size of its territory . Israel had gained new defensible borders along the Suez Canal, the Jordan River, and the Golan Heights .
 Six-Day War brought Israel military success but no better security, as none of the neighboring states would trade peace in return for lost territory . Yom Kippur was Israel's first major war in the Middle East .
 Egypt was humiliated by the outcome of the war and its loss of Sinai . Egypt waged a three-year campaign of raids and artillery fire across the Suez Canal . Egypt, in particular, was humiliated .
 On October 6, 1973, Anwar Sadat planned a surprise attack against Israel in alliance with Syria to coincide with the Jewish holy day of Yom Kippur . Sadat's new leader planned the attack on Israel . The attack would coincide with Israel's annual Jewish holiday of Y
 Egyptian troops crossed the canal and headed into Sinai, supported by surface-toair missile batteries and portable anti-tank missiles . The Egyptian forces limited the traditional Israeli strengths of air and tank power . Sinai is a key ally of Israel in the Middle East .
 By October 9, the Egyptians had overstretched their lines of supply and outreached their defensive air cover and so ground to a halt . The Egyptians were overstretched by their supply lines and air cover .
 Israelis went on the offensive on October 16. Supplied with new U.S. equipment, they went on to the offensive . Israel says it has been given new equipment by the United States .
 The Israelis broke through between two Egyptian armies and crossed to the west bank of the Suez Canal . They encircled the Egyptian Third Army on the east bank . The Israeli army crossed the canal, encircling the Egyptian army on the other side .
 A UN ceasefire on October 24 ended the Yom Kippur War, the fourth and, to date, final attempt by the Arab states to invade and overthrow Israel . It was the fourth attempt to overthrow Israel willingly and unwillingly to do so .
 "All these events have left a legacy of bitterness that persists in the 21st century," says CNN's John Sutter . "The legacy of these events is a legacy that persists," he says .
 Border clashes and terrorist and counterterrorist operations continued following the 1948-49 war .
 The Egyptian government under President Gamal Abdel Nasser was also seeking to end the long-standing Anglo-French involvement in his country . The new Egyptian government also sought to end long-running Anglo-France involvement .
 In 1955 Egypt closed the Gulf of Aqaba, thereby blockading Eilat, Israel's only outlet to the Red Sea . In 1955, Egypt also shut down the Gulf, thereby blocking Israel's access to the Gulf .
 The Mirage INC supersonic fighter aircraft was manufactured by Dassault Aviation in France and sold to the Israelis . It played a major role in the Six-Day War of 1967 . The subsequent Egyptian nationalization, in 1956, of the Suez Technology Suez, Egypt, led to
 The single-seater, medium-weight interceptor was armed with twin 30mm cannon capable of firing air-to-air missiles . The single seater interceptor is a medium-sized interceptor capable of shooting air to air missiles .
 It proved particularly effective fighting against the Soviet-made Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-17s and MiG2 Is of the Syrian air force . It provided cover for attacks on Egyptian and Syrian aircraft .
 Later Mirage variants were designed both as multi-role fighters and as reconnaissance aircraft . Mirage variants are designed to be multi-purpose fighters and also as reconnaissance planes .
 Those in Israeli service included some aircraft bought from France and others designed and built in Israel . Israel bought some of the aircraft from France, others from Israel .
 Israel kept much of the land it had captured and Palestinians fought to create a nation of their own . Israel kept some of its land but Palestinians were able to create their own nations .
 President Anwar Sadat of Egypt visited Jerusalem in 1977, marking the first recognition of Israel by an Arab head of state . Sadat's visit marked the first Arab recognition of the state of Israel in 1977 .
 Palestinian exiles set up the Palestine Liberation Organization in Jordan in 1964 to bring together Palestinian political parties . They set up a Palestinian political party in 1964 .
 In 1970 the PLO moved its headquarters to Beirut, in Lebanon, which is home to more than 300,000 Palestinian refugees . The PLO had been based in Beirut, Lebanon, since 1970 . In 1970, the organization was based in Lebanon .
 PLO used the country as a base from which to fire rockets at northern Israel . The PLO was used to launch rockets at Israel in the 1970s .
 International outrage forced Israel to withdraw from the city, leaving a residual force in the buffer zone that eventually withdrew in 2000 . Israel withdrew from the area in 2000 after international outrage .
 From the 1980s Israel established Jewish settlements in the West Bank, and extended its control of Jerusalem . Israel has also extended control of the city .
 Palestinians living in Israeli-occupied territories launched an uprising, the first ""Intifada,"" against Israeli rule in 1987 . Palestinians live in Israel-occupied territory .
 Israel and the PLO recognized each other in the 1993 Oslo Accords . They began moves toward Palestinian self-rule in Gaza and the West Bank . Israel and PLO recognize each other .
 Arabic word literally meaning ""shaking off,"" but usually translated as ""rebellion"" or ""uprising"" and commonly used to refer to the Palestinian crisis that started in 1987 . continuing terrorist attacks and military clashes meant that progress was slow .
 The Falklands War was the biggest air-naval contest since World War II . The war went on to have an enormous impact on both countries, and on the Falklands .
 The ownership of the Falkland Islands in the South Atlantic Ocean has long been contested between Argentina and Britain . Britain was 7,440 miles away to the north and had only a detachment of 68 marines on the islands . Argentina was prompt to surrender, and the British had only an ice patrol
 The two countries' claims date back to the late 17th and early 18th centuries . The two nations have been at odds for centuries .
 Argentina sent a ship to the islands to proclaim its sovereignty in 1820 and established a settlement in 1828 . Argentina established its settlement in the islands in the early 1800s . Argentina is now the largest island in South America .
 The British expelled the Argentinians in 1831-32, establishing their own sovereignty in 1833 . The British objected to this and expelled them in 1832 .
 The Argentine army overthrew the elected government of Maria Peron in 1976 . It established a three-man military junta in Argentina .
 It brutally suppressed human rights, but inflation soon crippled the economy . Inflation also crippled the country's human rights system .
 In 1981 General Leopoldo Galtieri became president, but his economic policies met little success . In 1981 he became president and became president of Italy .
 British proposals for a negotiated settlement on the future of the islands were scrapped after parliamentary criticism in 1980 . Britain then announced the withdrawal of its only naval presence in the South Atlantic .
 Argentina saw the moves as signaling a lack of British interest in the Falklands . Argentina saw these moves as a signal of British lack of interest in Falkland Islands .
 In Britain the foray created a political crisis, as the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher was accused of having neglected the islands and of sending out the wrong signals to Argentina .
 The British government responded by organizing a task force of 30 warships plus auxiliary and transport vessels, including the converted cruise liner SS Canberra . 6,000 troops were deployed to recover the islands . The task force was organized by the British government, including 30 warships and 6,500 troops .
 Falklands, in which all Argentinian ships and planes would be attacked . Falklands would be invaded by Argentinian forces . Argentina would attack the Falklands in a similar way to the Soviet Union .
 Special Air Service and Special Boat Service troops recaptured South Georgia on April 25 . The task force headed south across the Atlantic, headed to South Georgia .
 British Westland Wasp helicopters attacked and hit an Argentinian submarine, ARA Santa Fe, with AS-12 anti-ship missiles, forcing it ashore . The submarine was forced ashore by the attack .
 RAF bombers had to be refueled mid-flight by RAF tanker planes . The 16-hour round trip from Ascension Island required the RAF to refuel them .
 Although a remarkable achievement, the attacks proved to be of limited effectiveness . The attacks on the U.S. military in Afghanistan were a success story .
 Closer-range sorties by Sea Harrier jets launched from HMS Hermes dropped cluster bombs on Stanley and the airstrip at Goose Green . Closer range sorties were launched by HMS Hermes .
 None of the Falkland airports could support jets, so the Argentinian fighters and attack aircraft had to operate from the mainland . They targeted the incoming task force with bombs and missiles .
 Missile weapons, anti-aircraft guns, and Sea Harrier fighters, were used in the 1980s . Missile weapons were used to shoot down Soviet Union aircraft .
 The missiles each carried a 3 lb (1. k k) warhead detonated by a contact fuse . Each missile carried a 1. k warhead detonating by a touch fuse . The missiles were launched in the 1980s .
 Later versions were fitted with a more effective laser-controlled proximity fuse .
 In service since 1971, the Rapier provided air defense for British forces at San Carlos Water . The Rapier surface-to-air missile launcher was launched in 1971 . It was used by British forces in the 1970s .
 The attack was later criticized as the ship was outside the exclusion zone and sailing away from the Falklands at the time of the attack .
 The losses convinced the Argentinian naval commanders to return their remaining vessels to port for the rest of the conflict . The Argentinian navy commanders returned their remaining ships to port .
 Argentinian Dassault Super Etendard aircraft sank HMS Sheffield with an Exocet missile . Two days later an Argentinian aircraft sank the ship with a missile from Argentina .
 The first British landings on the islands took place on May 14, when the SAS raided Pebble Island, and destroyed Argentinian ground-attack aircraft at the airstrip .
 A week later, 4,000 men of 3 Commando Brigade landed around San Carlos Water on the opposite side of East Falkland island from the main Argentinian base .
 British troops now vulnerable to nightly bombing raids, while air raids sank four British ships in the area . British troops were now vulnerable .
 British troops first headed south to attack the Argentinian Twelfth Infantry Regiment holding Goose Green . British troops were attacked by Argentinian soldiers .
 Two-day struggle ended in a British success on May 28, enabling troops to march on Stanley . The two-day battle ended in the British success .
 Argentinian air assaults hit two landing ships, RFA Sir Galahad and Sir Tristram, on June 8 . To the south, British forces moving toward Stanley came under Argentine air assaults, .
 British forces were in a position on the night of June 11 to launch an attack against the defended ring of high ground around Stanley . Despite this setback, British forces had been in position to launch a . attack on the defended high ground .
 Two days later they captured Mount Tumbledown, the last defense line around the town . Two days after they captured it, they captured the last remaining defense line .
 The Argentinian garrison surrendered on 14 June . Their poorly motivated conscripts were no match for the highly trained British troops .
 After the conflict, Argentina saw an end to military rule, while Britain's international reputation grew . The Falklands War saw the end of military rule and Britain's reputation grow . After the war, Argentina's relations with Britain grew .
 Failure in the Falklands caused Galtieri to resign in June 1982 . Failure in Falklands forced Galtier to resign as a result .
 Democratic elections ended eight years of military rule in 1983 and Argentina has been a democracy ever since . Argentina is now a democratic country .
 Margaret Thatcher's Conservatives had first been elected in 1979, but had lost popularity over economic issues . Thatcher's party lost popularity on economic issues in the 1980s .
 Victory in Falklands War helped her easily win re-election in 1983 and again in 1987 . Victory in the Falklands war helped her comfortably win her third election .
 The prestige of Britain rose around the world as a result of its recapture of the Falkland Islands . Britain's prestige of the world rose around a decade after the capture .
 Since the war, Britain has maintained a sizable military garrison on the islands . Britain has invested in their economy .
 Revenue from fishing licenses and tourism, as well as military expenditure, boosted local income .
 Britain and Argentina restored diplomatic relations in 1992 but continue to disagree about the islands' future . Britain supports islanders' wish to remain British while Argentina continues to claim the islands .
 The Exocet is a French-built anti-ship missile that can be fired from ships, submarines, or aircraft . The missile can also be fired by submarines, aircraft or ships .
 In 1982 the Argentinians had many ship-launched MM.38 Exocets but these were unsuited for aircraft operation . In 1982, the Argentinian government had a number of ship-launch Exocets .
 They only had five air-launched AM.39s, but used them effectively to sink the destroyer HMS Sheffield and the transport ship Atlantic Conveyor .
 Most warships of the period were not well equipped to fend off such attacks . Most warships were not equipped to fight such attacks.
 The Exocet did not actually detonate, but the energy of the missile on impact and its unused fuel that then exploded, caused enough damage to destroy the ship .
 The first versions employed multiple barrels that were pre-loaded with bullets and rotated into place by hand . The first version of the gun was used to rotate barrels by hand to load bullets .
 Later versions featured a single barrel and used the recoil force of each shot to expel the spent cartridge and insert a new one . Later versions used to eject spent cartridges from the barrel .
 The brass bullet cartridges dropped down into six barrels arranged around a cylindrical shaft that were revolved by handoperated crank . The bullet cartridges were dropped down in six barrels .
 During the Franco-Prussian War the French version of the gun became the first rapid-firing weapon to be deployed by an army in combat . The weapon was the first weapon to fire in combat during the war .
 Maxim machine-gun of 1884 was the first self-powered, single-barrelled machine gun . Browning Ml917 adopted a similar method to the Maxim for harnessing the gun's recoil to eject and reload bullets .
 The design for the Hotchkiss MLE was bought from Baron von Augezd in 1893 and modified many times to correct an overheating fault . The American GATLING GUN was modified to correct a fault in the design .
 US-designed 1912 Lewis gun was adopted by the British Army in 19 1 5 1 5 . The British Army adopted the Lewis gun from the US in 1912 .
 Air-cooled and gas-operated, this gun remained the main light-support weapon until superseded by the Bren . The gun was air cooled by air and gas .
 The Bren was developed in 1937 in Brno, Czechoslovakia, and modified at Enfield, London . It was named because it was developed by the same company in Enfield .
 It served as the British Army's principal light-support weapon until the 1970s . The weapon was used in the UK Army's main light support weapon .
 The M60 was the U.S. Army's replacement for the Brownings . It was a general-purpose, gas-operated machine-gun .
 FN Minimi was designed to accept both a fixed magazine or disintegrating-link belts . It was designed for both fixed magazines and disintegrating belts .
 The L86A1 light-support weapon was developed in the UK in 1986 . It used the same caliber ammunition as the L85A1 assault rifle . The weapon is now being used in Afghanistan .
 MG43 is a conventional light machine-gun with an action based on a rotating rather than a roller-locked bolt . It was developed in Germany in 2001 and has a rotating rotating action .
 In the mid-19th century, Afghanistan found itself caught up in the struggle between Britain and Russia for control of Central Asia and India . Afghanistan was the birthplace of the Taliban .
 Britain unsuccessfully invaded Afghanistan in 1839-42 and again in 1878-81 . It agreed with Russia in 1895 to make Afghanistan a neutral buffer state between them .
 The pro-Soviet Afghan force resisted this move, overthrowing the president in 1978, and setting up a Communist government . Pro-Soviet forces overthrew the Afghan president and overthrew him in 1978 .
 The U.S. supplied the FIM-92 Stinger infraredhoming surface-to-air missile . The mujahideen used the missile against the Soviets .
 The missile, which first entered service in 1981, is small enough to be fired from the shoulder of a single operator . It can hit helicopters and aircraft up to 15,750 ft away and is light enough to fire from a shoulder .
 The missiles proved highly effective against Soviet transport planes and helicopter gunships . They restricted the Soviets’ ability to move around the country or reinforce their troops . The missiles were highly effective .
 The Soviet occupation of Afghanistan in 1979 marked the start of war and insurgency in the country . 30 years later, the insurgency continues 30 years after the Soviet occupation .
 What was once a backwater has now become the focus of much international attention . The scene of a bitterly contested conventional conflict and anti-terrorist struggle is now the scene of an ongoing conflict .
 I n late 1979, the Communist Afghan government introduced reforms that brought turmoil to the country . The Communist government had introduced reforms .
 The USSR could not allow Communism to fail in Afghanistan nor could it risk civil war on its borders . The USSR would not risk a civil war in Afghanistan, nor would it risk another civil war there .
 It staged a coup to install a new leader, who ""invited"" Soviet help . The coup was staged by the West . It was a coup staged to install the new leader .
 Opposition to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan was led by the mujahideen . The Islamic group had been established in 1975 . It was the first group to oppose the Soviet invasion .
 After the Communist government was set up, in 1978, they had received weaponry and training from the U.S. They had received weapons and training .
 The mujahideen also had the advantage of a friendly local population and knowledge of the mountainous terrain . The local population was friendly and knowledgeable about the mountain terrain .
 They held the main towns but were unable to subdue the countryside despite their deployment of aerial bombardments and heavy artillery . Despite their efforts, they were not able to take over the countryside .
 By 1985 the mujahideen were waging successful guerrilla campaigns in every province . By 1985, they had won the majority of the country's most populous provinces .
 In 1988 the Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, concluded Soviet involvement in the war and withdrew his 175,000 troops the next year . President Mohammad Najibullah's Communist government was left to fend for itself .
 The mujahideen finally entered the capital, Kabul, in April 1992 and overthrew the Communists . To everyone's surprise, it managed to hold on until April 1992 . The Taliban is still fighting in Afghanistan .
 The mujahideen were united only by their opposition to the Soviets . The Taliban are the Taliban, the Taliban and the Taliban .
 Anxious about tribal conflict crossing its border, Pakistan began to support the Taliban . The Taliban wanted to see a return to the original teachings of the Koran . Pakistan began supporting the Taliban in 1996 .
 The Taliban swept through the country in 1994-95 before seizing power in Kabul in 1996 . Led by Mullah Mohammed Omar, the Taliban seized power in September 1996 . Mullah Omar led the Taliban in the late 1990s .
 Many Afghans welcomed the Taliban, because they brought peace and stability . But as the Taliban were mainly Pashtun, they were unsuccessful in uniting the country . Many areas remained controlled by the mujahideen Northern Alliance of Tajiks, Uzbeks, and Hazaras
 Afghanistan was home to a large number of foreignborn Muslim fighters under the Taliban . Afghanistan became home to many foreignborn Muslims under Taliban .
 Osama bin Laden set up al-Qaeda some time after 1988 . The most important of these groups was al Qaeda, set up by bin Laden .
 The group attracted volunteers from across the Arab world as well as Europe . The group set up training camps along the border with Pakistan .
 Its militants launched attacks against U.S. embassies in East Africa in 1998 and against the USS Cole in Aden in 2000 . Its militants also launched attacks on the United States embassies in both East Africa and Somalia .
 The United States demanded that the Afghan government close down all al-Qaeda training camps and hand over bin Laden and other Talibans for trial . The U.S. demanded that all al Qaeda training camps were closed and handed over .
 Special Forces linked up with Northern Alliance troops fighting in the north in October 2001 . U.S. and British aircraft launched bombing missions from air bases in Uzbekistan, Pakistan, and Tajikistan .
 B-52 bombers pounded caves and underground bunkers known to be in use by the Taliban and al-Qaeda . The areas they targeted most were in the Tora Bora Mountains east of Kabul .
 Soviet armored vehicles struggled in the rough and mountainous terrain of Afghanistan . Small numbers of United States Marines arrived in late November to help with the capture of Kandahar .
 The brief campaign was notable in U.S. military history for its use of special forces and air power without the need to deploy a large force of ground troops . Special forces were used in the brief campaign .
 In December 2001, an interim government led by Hamid Karzai, a moderate Pashtun, took power . In January 2004, a new constitution was agreed upon in January 2004 . Karzai is Afghanistan's first president .
 Karzai won the subsequent presidential election but his government failed to win control over the whole country . Karzai's government became increasingly ineffectual and corrupt . He won the election in 2008 but failed to take control of the country .
 Neither Mullah Omar nor Osama bin Laden were captured in the war . Neither were captured during the conflict .
 The Taliban regrouped and started a new campaign in 2003, funded with money from the annual opium harvest . The opium harvest is the raw material of heroin, which is used for heroin .
 After January 2006, NATO troops arrived to help United States forces in Afghanistan . Taliban continued to expand its control over most of the country outside Kabul and the north .
 Al-Qaeda and other militant Islamic groups consolidated in the mountainous border regions of Pakistan . The border region is from where they mounted terrorist attacks against regional and international targets .
 Obama administration announced plans to strengthen U.S. forces in the region in 2009 . The Obama administration said it would strengthen forces in Afghanistan .
 Afghan civilians sought refuge in Pakistan during the Soviet occupation . Thousands of Afghan civilians were forced to flee the country during the occupation .
 Iraqi government faced strong opposition from Shi'a Muslims and Kurds . Gulf Wars saw the Iraqi government face strong opposition to the government .
 Saddam Hussein decided to invade Iran in the throes of its Islamic revolution in order to unite his country behind him . Saddam Hussein invaded Iran in 1979 to unify his country against the Islamic revolution . Hussein's invasion of Iran was the first invasion of the Islamic republic .
 He expected a quick victory, but the Iran-lraq War and subsequent Gulf War severely weakened his power . He was expected to win quickly, but he was weakened by the Gulf War .
 T he pretext for Iraq's war against Iran, which began in 1980, was the disputed ownership of the Shatt al-Arab waterway between the two countries that leads into the Gulf .
 Iran and Iraq had clashed over the waterway in the early 1970s but reached an agreement in 1975 . The two countries agreed to share the shared waterway between 1975 and 1975 .
 The fall of the Shah, the new Islamic government's antagonism to the US, and its subsequent purges of Iran's armed forces all suggested that Iran might be weak . Now, the fall of Tehran's Shah and the purges suggest that Iran may be weak, says Iran's
 Rival territorial claims, differences between Islamic sects, and impact of outside influences created political tensions between the Gulf states . The result was an opportunistic attack on September 22, 1980, that Saddam hoped would topple E F O R E .
 When Kuwait received its independence from Britain in 1961, Iraq renewed its historic claim to the country as its 19th province . Britain sent troops to guard the border .
 Kuwait later sided with Iraq in its war with Iran, as it too feared Iranian intentions in the region . Kuwait was the last country to join Iraq in the war against Iran .
 Saddam Hussein overthrew a Ba'ath predecessor to become president in 1979 . He overthrew the predecessor to be president of the Ba'at regime .
 Saddam brutally ruled this mainly Shi'a country through its governing Sunni minority . Saddam's brutal rule was based on the fact that the majority of the country was Sunni Muslims .
 He viewed the Iranian revolution with concern, as he feared it might spread to Iraq . He feared the revolution might also spread to Iran .
 Border disputes with Iran and Iraqi support for Iranian separatist groups increased the tension between the two countries . Border disputes between Iraq and Iran have led to tensions .
 In 1979 the corrupt pro-Western Shah of Iran was overthrown in a popular Islamic uprising that brought Ayatollah Khomeini to power . In 1979, the pro-western Shah was ousted by a popular uprising .
 Iran became the world's largest theocracy and a leading center of Shi'a Islam . Iran is threatening not only Iraq, but the other Sunni kingdoms around the Gulf . The country is now home to Iran's biggest theocracy .
 Iranian government, enlarge Iraq's oil reserves, and establish his leadership in the Gulf and wider Arab world . The Iranian government is expected to expand its oil reserves in Iraq .
 The Iraqi air force attacked ten airfields but failed to destroy the Iranian air force on the ground . The Iraqi Air Force attacked 10 airfields, but did not destroy Iranian air forces on ground .
 Iranian response against selected Iraqi cities began the first of five ""wars of the cities'' that took place during the conflict . The Iranian response to the conflict began in the early 1980s .
 Offensives by both sides in 1985 and 1986 failed to break the stalemate . Neither side had sufficient artillery or air power to support large-scale ground battles . “The great duel, the mother of all battles has begun.”
 Iraqi divisions crossing Iran's southern border, to besiege Khorramshahr and Abadan . One division invading in the center to block a potential Iranian invasion route . Another division in the north to protect the Iraqi oil complex at Kirkuk .
 Iraqi invasion soon stalled in the face of vigorous, if disorganized, Iranian resistance . Stalemate soon became a stalemate .
 Iran retaliates with air strikes against targets in Iraq, including oil installations and the capital, Baghdad . Iran retaliated against air strikes, including targets in Baghdad .
 Its air force quickly gained air superiority, while the Iraqis did not have enough bombers to be effective against a country the size of Iran . The Iraqi air force was quickly overpowered by Iran's air force .
 Saddam's hopes that opponents of the Ayatollah's government would rise against it were dashed . Iranian nationalism led people to rally round their government and resist the Iraqis, not welcome them .
 Iraq withdrew its forces in June 1982, agreeing to a Saudi Arabian plan to end the war . An Iranian counterattack in March 1982 recovered lost territory, and Iraq withdrew .
 Iran refused to compromise, insisting on the removal of Saddam Hussein from power . Iran refused, however, insisting that Saddam Hussein be removed .
 They were met by a vastly increased Iraqi army—approaching one million strong—and repelled with coordinated small arms and artillery fire and by the use of gas .
 In 1984 Iraq launched an air bombardment of 11 Iranian cities to force the country's government into advances . In 1984, Iraq launched air strikes on Iran to force government forces to advance .
 The rest of the war consisted of both sides bombing each other's cities and exchanging Scud missile attacks . Both sides bombed cities and exchanged Scud missiles during the war .
 Iraqi chemical attacks in 1988 against Kurdish targets in both Iran and Iraq enraged the Iranians but they did not have the means to continue the war . The Iranians agreed a ceasefire on August 20 .
 The pre-war status quo was restored, although at the cost of perhaps a million lives and two much-weakened economies . The war was over for the first time since the Second World War .
 Operation Desert Storm was launched in 1991 by the Arab Spring . The coalition attacked Saddam Hussein's Iraq with a devastating ground advance mounted from Saudi Arabia . Iraq had received support from many Western and Arab countries .
 As in the First Gulf War, an air campaign was followed by a brief ground offensive . Air campaign followed by ground offensive in Iraq in 1991 .
 This time coalition forces went all the way to Baghdad to achieve ""regime change,"" Many aspects of the campaign were controversial . The United States had fewer coalition partners than in 1990-91 .
 Control of oil resources was a major factor in each war . Burning oil installations was a key factor in the outcome of each conflict .
 Both sides attacked oil refineries during the Iran-lraq War and in the Gulf War . Saddam's troops destroyed Kuwaiti installations when forced to retreat from oil-rich Kuwait, one of its biggest creditors .
 In its impoverished state, Iraq looked to Kuwait to solve its problems and cancel its debts . Iraq's impoverished state is looking to Kuwait for a solution .
 Saddam Hussein sent his troops to invade and occupy Kuwait on August 2, 1990 . Unwisely confident that the West would not intervene, Saddam Hussein invaded and occupied Kuwait .
 The UN imposed economic sanctions on Iraq, while the U.S. put together a coalition of 31 nations to liberate Kuwait . The Gulf War was the first Gulf War of the Cold War . The United States and Saudi Arabia were involved in the war, which ended in 1991 .
 The combined ground and air forces assembled in Saudi Arabia and naval units deployed in the Gulf . The combined forces were assembled in the country .
 A five-week aerial bombing campaign began on 17 January 1991 . Eight United States AH-64 Apache and two MH-53 Pave Low helicopters destroyed Iraqi radar sites near Saudi Arabian border .
 Some 88,500 tons of bombs were dropped, devastating the military and civilian infrastructure of Iraq . More than 100,000 sorties were flown over Iraq, with little loss, in which some 88,000 tons were dropped .
 Most of the bombs were of the traditional gravity type, but smart bombs and cruise missiles were also used effectively against selected targets . Smart bombs and smart bombs also used in the attacks .
 More than 2,000 tons of smart bombs were dropped on Baghdad and other targets by U.S. F-l 17 Stealth bombers .
 Iraq responded by launching a number of Scud missiles against Israel in the hope of provoking Israel to retaliate . Saddam trusted that the action would peel Arab support away from the Allied coalition .
 Israel did not respond to the attacks and the coalition remained intact . Armed with supplies of U.S. defensive missiles, however, Israel didn't respond to these attacks .
 The coalition's ground campaign began on February 24 . American troops from the 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment entered Iraq just to the west of Kuwait .
 To their north, the United States XVIII Airborne Corps thrust into the sparsely defended desert of southern Iraq . Their left flank protected by the French Sixth Light Armoured Division, their right by the British 1st Armoured .
 Iraqi troops began to leave Kuwait, setting fire to its oil fields as they left . Two days later Iraqi troops set fire to the oil fields in Kuwait .
 The number of coalition troops killed by friendly fire in the First Gulf War is the highest number of killed in the war .
 These attempts range from religious restrictions and codes of chivalry to the criminalization of certain acts in war . Attempts to criminalize certain acts of war have been made in the past .
 In an era that has seen global war and systematic genocide, ethics of war have never been more closely scrutinized . Today, in an era of global war, the ethics of killing has never been questioned more closely .
 T he he earliest known attempts to regulate warfare appear in religious texts .
 Abu Bakr, the first Muslim caliph, laid down ten rules for the conduct of his army on the battlefield . Not to kill children, women, or old men, nor the enemy's livestock unless for food .
 These rules were expanded from the 9th century onward to include the treatment of diplomats, hostages, and prisoners of war . The protection of women, children, and civilians, and the right of asylum, were expanded to include diplomats and hostages .
 Conduct in war was (and still is) much more a matter of custom than the result of adhering to written laws . Despite religious instructions, conduct in war still is a much more of custom .
 Saladin’s troops take Christians prisoner in the Holy Land during the Third Crusade . There was also no actual law among the ancient Greek city-states respect for prisoners .
 Saladin treated his prisoners humanely in accordance with Islamic law . Saladin said that all wars should be settled in a single battle, but that was how their wars tended to be fought .
 Use of children to fight wars, particularly widespread in Africa, was outlawed by a UN protocol of 2000 . Child soldiers were outlawed by the UN in 2000 .
 As many as 300,000 children are currently fighting in wars around the world . Nevertheless, perhaps as many as up to 300,00 children are fighting in the world's wars .
 In the Christian era, theologians, notably Augustine of Hippo and later Thomas Aquinas, developed the theory of the just war . A war that can be justified according to certain philosophical or religious criteria of justice is justified . Justification of war was developed by theologians such as Augustine
 A third law, jus post bellum, has been added concerning the end of a war . This includes the prosecution of war criminals .
 These laws seek to define, for example, a just cause for war, its military necessity, the probability of its success, and the proportionality of waging a war . These laws define just cause, military necessity and probability of war success .
 Such laws are highly contested, not least by pacifists who believe that no war can ever be just . Such laws would be highly contested .
 Attempts have also been made to control warfare through spiritual sanction . Attempts to control the world have been made in the past .
 The lack of medical attention given to the wounded at the battle of Solferino in 1859 inspired Henri Dunant to found the International Red Cross . Use of hollow-point bullets expanded on entering the human body .
 It also supported the peaceful settlement of international disputes through the use of international commissions of inquiry . The Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague was the world's first institution for resolving international disputes .
 The Kellogg-Briand Pact of 1928 was made by the United States secretary of state and the French foreign minister . The Paris Peace Pact was the first attempt to outlaw war .
 It failed in that aim, but was significant for later developments in international law . It was used against Nazi leaders charged with war crimes at Nuremberg in 1945 . It failed to achieve its aim but became significant for international developments .
 The horrors of World War II provided the impetus for the establishment of the United Nations in 1945 . The United Nations was established in 1945 after the horrors of the war .
 Its founding charter dedicated the organization to the maintenance of international peace and security . It has introduced a number of conventions and agreements that limit certain types of weapon, define war crimes, and seek to prevent acts of genocide .
 These agreements carry considerable weight and are, in theory, enforceable in national and international courts of law . They are, for example, an agreement that can be enforced in international courts . These agreements are very important in the world of business .
 Immunity from violence from violence was given to non-combatants who could not defend themselves . The immunity from violence is given to people who cannot defend themselves from violence . Immunity was also given to those who were unable to defend themselves in the war .
 This idea, and the later adoption of truce days, slowly spread across Western Europe and survived until the 13th century . This idea was adopted by the Crus Crusaders in the 12th century and spread across Europe .
 Christian values of right conduct and charity also informed European knights . Knights fought according to unwritten codes of chivalry that governed their conduct and behavior . Such codes were often abandoned in the heat of battle .
 The first work dedicated specifically to the justification of war appeared in Poland in the early 15th century .
 Stanislaw of Skarbimierz's sermons, De bellisjustis, put forward a theory to justify Poland's war against the Teutonic Knights .
 Spanish theologian Francisco de Vitoria justified the Spanish conquest of the Americas . In the early 1500s, the theologian said the conquest was justified by the Spanish .
 Hugo Grotius' three volumes on conduct of war are the first legal code of warfare and form the basis of modern international law . His views had a major influence on the 17th-century Dutch lawyer Hugo Grotius .
 The Geneva Convention of 1864 was the first of four such conventions covering the care of the wounded and the treatment of prisoners of war and civilians . Grotius claimed that wars are justifiable if based on self-defense, reparation of injury or punishment .
 The laws put forward by medieval and Renaissance thinkers were theoretical, and there was no effective means of enforcing them . The laws were theoretical and there were no effective ways to enforce them .
 Heavy casualties caused by increasingly mechanized warfare prompted tentative steps toward enforceable laws . That changed in the mid-19th century when heavy casualties led to tentative laws .
 Two peace conferences at The Hague, in 1899 and 1907, produced conventions that broke new ground in setting out some rules of war . The conventions set out some methods of resolution and enforcement . The Hague was the first peace conference to convene in the early 1900s .
 The St. Petersburg Convention renounces the use of fragmentary, explosive, or incendiary ammunition . The convention renounces use of fragments or explosive ammunition .
 Russian shelling of Grozny, the capital of Chechnya, reduced much of the city to rubble in 1994-95 and again in 1999-2000 .
 The collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and the break-up of the USSR and Yugoslavia released nationalist and ethnic rivalries in each country as age-old antagonisms and divisions re-emerged .
 Bloody wars broke out in the Caucasus and Yugoslavia that are still a source of trouble today . Bloody wars between Yugoslavia and the Caucasus are still an issue of trouble .
 Caucasus nations were incorporated into Russia's empire during the 19th century . They were never fully reconciled to, first Russian, and then Soviet, domination .
 Nagorno-Karabakh was officially part of, and totally surrounded by, Azerbaijan but was historically part of Armenia and was almost entirely Armenian in terms of population . The enclave of Nagorno Karabakh is located in the region of Azerbaijan .
 Azerbaijan's regional parliament voted to join Armenia in February 1988, prompting widespread ethnic violence . Ethnic violence erupted as Azeris were expelled from Armenia and Armenians forced out of Azerbaijan .
 In January 1990, the Azeri Popular Front won an election held in Azerbaijan and declared not only its independence from the USSR but also war on Armenia . Azerbaijan declared its independence in 1990 and declared war against Armenia .
 Armenia and Azerbaijan declared independence as the USSR broke up in 1991 . Armenia, Azerbaijan declared their independence from the Soviet Union in 1992 .
 In 1992 Armenian Nagorno-Karabakh irregulars occupied the narrow border region between Armenia and the province, linking the two together . In 1992 the region was linked by the borders of Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh .
 Despite peace talks being held in 2001, the future of the enclave remains unsettled today . Peace talks were held between the two sides in 2001 but the future remains uncertain today .
 Georgia declared independence in 1991 but faced ethnic separatist movements in three provinces . Georgia is one of the most populous countries in the world, Georgia .
 South Ossetians wishing to remain Russian by joining the republic of North Ossetia fought Georgian troops in November 1991 until a ceasefire was arranged in July 1992 .
 Russian peacekeeping forces occupied a buffer zone between Georgia and South Ossetia . Russian peacekeepers occupied the zone between the two regions .
 Georgians invaded but were driven out of the country in 1993 after savage fighting . The Georgians were eventually driven out in 1994 after a series of violent clashes .
 The present-day Russian Federation consists of 83 republics, districts, and other regions . Chechnya is one of the country's most populous regions .
 The Chechen republic in the northern Caucasus has always been fiercely independent . It has resented Russian rule since it was conquered in 1859 . Chechen has always resented the Russian rule .
 In the chaos surrounding the USSR's break-up, Chechnya declared its independence in 1994 . The region is now known as the Caucasus region .
 In 1994 fighting broke out when Both the USSR and Yugoslavia consisted of federations of partly autonomous republics with many peoples held together in a single state under Communist rule . In 1994, Yugoslavia was one of the most unstable states in the world .
 The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics consisted of 15 separate republics, the largest of which was the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation was the largest state of Soviet Russia .
 Yosip Broi Tito took power in Yugoslavia at the end of World War II . Tito was the leader of the Communist Party in Yugoslavia .
 Tito reorganized the multi-ethnic country into a federation of six republics held together by his strong leadership . Tito's strong leadership led the country to a federation held together .
 Slovenia and Croatia both elected non-Communist governments . Serbian government of Slobodan Milosevic became increasingly nationalist . Slovenian and Croatian governments were non-communist governments in the 1990s .
 In 1991 Milosevic refused to accept a Croat as federal president, causing Slovenia, Croatia, and Croatia, to declare their independence from Yugoslavia . In 1991, Slovenia and Croatia declared their independence after refusing to accept the Croatian president .
 Russia sent troops to intervene, who shelled the city and seized it in 1995 . The city was seized by the Russian government in 1995, but was never taken over .
 The Chechen rebels fighting for independence then took to the mountains and conducted guerrilla warfare against Russian targets . The rebels fought for independence in Chechnya in the late 1990s .
 The siege, one of the longest in modern times, killed 12,000 people and wounded 50,000 . 85 percent of them were civilians, 85 percent were civilians . The siege was one of modern times .
 Food, electricity, and water supplies were cut off, while Serb snipers picked off residents in the streets . Serbs cut off food and electricity supplies, while snipers picked up residents .
 The siege attracted worldwide humanitarian attention, and was only lifted when peace talks ended the Bosnian war . The siege was the first of its kind in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
 The conflicts in the former Soviet republics and Yugoslavia have yet to be resolved . After the conflict, the conflicts in former Yugoslavia and Yugoslavia are still unresolved . The conflicts have not been resolved .
 Ethnic rivalries remain intense and fears of Russian empire-building persist . Ethnic rivals remain intense, but fears of Russia's imperial ambitions persist .
 After the war, Kosovo came under United Nations administration . Kosovo was under U.N. administration after the war .
 Kosovo declared independent in 2008, but it is not recognized by Serbia or Russia . In 2008 the Assembly of Kosovo declared the province independent . Serbia and Russia do not recognize the province .
 Many Serbs have been indicted for war crimes, including Slobodan Milosevic, who died during his trial in 2006 . Radovan Karadzic, former president of Republika Srpska, was also indicted .
 In August 2008, fighting broke out again between Russia and Georgia over South Ossetia . Russian President Vladimir Putin is accused of trying to kill Russian troops in Georgia .
 Georgian troops attempted to retake the breakaway province, but Russia sent in tanks and bombed targets inside Georgia . Russian forces bombed targets in Georgia in an attempt to retake it .
 Russian troops stationed in Abkhazia invaded western Georgia . At the same time, Russian troops were stationed in the region . Russian troops also invaded Georgia .
 Serbs conducted widespread ethnic cleansing in the province of Albania . Hundreds of thousands of Albanians fled their homes as Serbs carried out ethnic cleansing . Serbs were responsible for ethnic cleansing of the province .
 NATO planes bombed the region in an 11-week campaign after Serbia refused to accept peace terms . Serbia was bombed by NATO planes during the campaign . Serbia's warplanes bombed Serbia in the 1990s after it refused peace terms with NATO .
 Serbia ended its attacks on Kosovo and began to withdraw its troops . It was only after this prolonged bombardment that Serbia stopped its attacks in Kosovo . Kosovo was bombed by Serbia in the 1990s .
 The Russian Army had been willing to accept defeat in Chechnya . Neither the Russian Army nor the Russian . nor the . Russian . Army were willing to . accept defeat .
 Russian troops invaded the republic again in October 1999 and heavily bombed Grozny, causing many casualties and forcing some 200,000 citizens to flee . Russian forces invaded Russia in 1999 and forced 200,00 people to flee the republic .
 In response, Chechens seized hostages in a Moscow theater and fought an increasingly bitter battle in the province itself with Russian troops . Chechens seize hostages in the theater and subsequently fought a bitter battle against Russian troops in the region .
 A new constitution was agreed in 2003 that gave Chechnya greater autonomy within Russia . A pro-Russian president was installed in what was widely seen as a rigged election . Chechenya was given greater autonomy in 2003 .
 The break-up of Yugoslavia in June 1991 was contested by Serbia, whose people were the dominant ethnic group in the country . Serbia was the country's most populous ethnic group . Yugoslavia was one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 Serb-controlled Yugoslav Army fought a one-week battle to stop Slovenia leaving the union . A ceasefire was declared before Slovenia was forced to leave the union in Slovenia .
 Fighting with Croatia lasted until January of the following year, when the Yugoslav Army withdrew . The Yugoslav Army's troops remained in Serb-majority areas of Croatia until they were evicted by the Croat army in 1998 .
 Serb and Croat leaders secretly agreed to divide Bosnia between them in March 1991 . Bosnia was divided between Croatia and Slovenia in Yugoslavia's Yugoslavia . Bosnia's future was threatened by the Serb-Croatian split .
 Serb-led Yugoslav Army fought during the 1990s to keep the former Yugoslavia united under Serb control . In March 1992, Bosnia Yugoslav Army declared independence, prompting its Serb population to set up their own Republika Srpska .
 The United Nations imposed sanctions against Serbia and established six safe havens for Muslims in Bosnia . The U.N. imposed sanctions on Serbia and set up six safe havens for Muslims .
 The UN failed to protect these areas, allowing Serbs to overrun them in 1995, killing some 8,000 Muslims at Srebrenica . The UN did not protect the areas, killing more than 80,000 people in 1995 . Serbs were able to overrun the area, killing
 NATO bombed Serb positions, forcing Serbia to agree a peace treaty with Bosnia and Croatia . The treaty divided the region between Serb and Muslim-Croat states . NATO then bombed Serbia, forcing the Serb to agree to a peace deal .
 In the former Yugoslavia, Kosovo was a southern Serbian province inhabited mainly by Kosovar Albanians . Kosovo was also known as a southern Serbia province .
 Albanian fighters in the Kosovo Liberation Army first confronted Serb forces in January 1998 . Around 600,000 Kosovans fled for safety in Macedonia and Albania after Serbia began a policy of murderous ""ethnic cleansing"" against them in 1999 .
 The US, UK, and France enforced ""no-fly zones"" in the north and south of the country to protect these minorities . The UK, US, France and UK enforced 'no fly zones' to protect minorities .
 The UN imposed a trade embargo on Iraq, leading to as many as 500,000 deaths from malnutrition and disease . The UN also imposed an international trade embargo, which led to up to 500,00 deaths .
 In 2002 President George W Bush identified Iraq, along with Iran and North Korea, as part of an ""axis of evil" that aided terrorism . President Bush identified the country along with North Korea and Iran as an 'axis of Evil'
 After 9/11 the U.S. government accused Iraq of hiding weapons of mass destruction (nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons) from UN inspectors . The United States says Iraq has no nuclear, biological, nuclear or nuclear weapons .
 The UN's own experts were unable to find any evidence of weapons of mass destruction . Iraq was complying with UN resolutions, according to the UN .
 The Talon is used to move and dispose of live grenades and bombs . The robot is also used to dispose of bombs and live grenades .
 A soldier uses a digital control unit to direct his movements from a safe distance . The device is controlled by a smartphone controlled by the soldier .
 United States troops have used the Talon since 2000, first in Afghanistan, then working for ground troops in Iraq . The Talon has been used in Afghanistan and Iraq .
 The invasion of Iraq by US, UK, and other forces in March 2003 to overthrow Saddam Hussein produced a quick military victory . TALON The Occupation of Iraq .
 The invasion itself was well planned and executed and its aims were clear . But the political and security implications of a lengthy occupation presented more complex problems .
 The insurgents were mainly Saddam loyalists and Iraqi nationalists upset at their loss of power . Dissent soon spread to Sunni clerics and their followers .
 In 2004 the insurgency spread to Sh'ia clerics and radicals who, inspired by neighboring Iran, saw U.S. troops in particular as an anti-Islamic force . In 2004, the insurgency in Iraq became an insurgency .
 As the security situation deteriorated, foreign fighters and the newly created al-Qaida group in Iraq contributed to the violence as a way of attacking the USA . The city of Nasiriyah is situated near bridges over the Euphrates River .
 A firefight with pro-Saddam elements broke out before U.S. troops took the city . The firefight was a firefight before United States troops took control .
 British troops fought their way into Iraq's second city, Basra, on April 6 . After two weeks of heavy fighting, British troops are finally able to enter the Iraqi city .
 In the north, special forces and United States airborne brigades supported the Kurdish capture of Kirkuk . Special forces and U.S. forces supported the Kurds capture of the city .
 On 5 April United States troops raided Baghdad airport to test the city's defenses . U.S. troops raided the airport in an attempt to test its defenses .
 The next day, troops entered the city itself, crushing resistance with attack helicopters and aerial bombardment . The city was declared a base of terror by the U.S. government .
 The city was occupied fully by Coalition forces on April 9, with statues of Saddam Hussein toppled throughout the city .
 Tikrit, birthplace of Saddam Hussein and main power base, was captured on April 15, the last major city to fall to Coalition forces . Tikrit was captured by Coalition forces in April .
 MILLION Iraqi refugees later fled to neighboring countries . increasing heat. increasing heat . Increasing number of Iraqi refugees .
 Little thought, however, had been given to Iraq's post-war administration . Little thought was given to the post-Iraqi administration .
 The country had no history of democratic politics and was split between a Muslim Sh'ia majority and Kurdish separatists in the north . The country was once ruled by Saddam Hussein, a Sunni minority he had used to control the country .
 The one institution that had united the country -- the pro-Saddam army -- was immediately dismantled . The pro-government army was also dismantled in the wake of the coup .
 The Coalition had to set up a provisional authority to govern the country until democratic elections could be held and a new government formed . The Coalition therefore had to establish the provisional authority .
 The shift from liberator to unwanted occupier was swift, as Iraqis turned against Coalition forces . The shift was swift as the Iraqi government turned against the coalition forces .
 The force assembled in Kuwait and the Gulf, was supported by at least 70,000 Kurds from the north of the country . The force, which assembled in the Gulf and the north, was assembled in Iraq and Kuwait .
 The war began on March 20, 2003, with explosions in Baghdad detonated by Coalition special forces already in the capital . The invasion began in 2003 with explosions detonated by coalition special forces .
 Troops invaded from the south, with amphibious forces seizing oil installations around Basra and the Al-Faw peninsula . Troops seized oil installations to prevent them being destroyed or used in environmental warfare .
 Saddam was captured on December 13 and later put on trial for crimes against humanity . The first major battle took place on March 31, 2003 .
 The invasion was declared over at the end of April, 2003 . Insurgency and sectarian killings occurred during the invasion .
 Widely used by the insurgents in Iraq, it fires a variety of warheads . The most powerful of which can easily penetrate the armour of a tank .
 The main areas of conflict were in the poor Sh'ia sections of Baghdad and other cities and around Fallujah . Fallujah in the center of the Sunni triangle was in the area .
 Two bitter battles for Fallujah took place in 2004, the second, in November, lasting 46 days . The Fallujah battle lasted 46 days, the longest lasting in November 2004 .
 The United States military described the battle as the heaviest urban combat it had been involved in since Vietnam . The U.S. military described it as a heavy urban combat operation .
 Sunni suicide and car bombers targeted Sh'ia mosques and other civilian meeting places in an attempt to stir up sectarian hatred . United States troops and installations were the main targets of the attacks . Sunni suicide bombers also targeted Sh’ia mosques, other meeting places . The U.S.
 By 2006, 33 people a day were being killed in Baghdad alone . 33 people were killed a day on average in Baghdad .
 The violence resulted in the ethnic cleansing of many cities . The Sh'ia majority drove Sunnis out of their homes and established control at their expense . Sunnis were driven from their homes by the Shia majority .
 20,000 additional U.S. troops were sent to Iraq in early 2007 to contain the situation . In order to suppress the rising violence, additional troops were deployed to Iraq to contain it .
 This ""troop surge"" appeared to work, reducing violence across the country . But Sh'ia dominance over their rival Sunnis probably contributed more to the reduction .
 The reduction in violence allowed the United States to start withdrawing troops . The U.S. slowly handing over security duties to the reconstituted Iraqi army and the government of Iraq's 18 provinces to locally elected politicians .
 The occupation of Iraq by Allied troops was scheduled to end in 2009 . The security situation in the country was far from secure and its future is uncertain .
 U.S. forces would leave Iraqi cities by June 30,2009 . Status of Forces agreement was reached in 2008 . All United States forces would be out of Iraq by the end of 2011 .
 On January 1,2009, the United States handed over the Green Zone security region in the center of Baghdad to Iraqi security forces . The U.S. handed control of the area over to Iraqi forces in 2009 .
 Britain announced that its troops would all withdraw by the end of July 2009 . Britain announced the withdrawal of its troops from the UK in 2009 .
 doubts remain that all U.S. troops would leave the country by the required date . Some may remain as a residual force, by agreement with the Iraqi government .
 A Royal Marine fires a Milan guided missile at an Iraqi position after British troops landed on the Al-Faw peninsula in southern Iraq on the night of March 20/21, 2003 . British troops, along with U.S. Marines, had landed on Al-faw peninsula on
 The death toll during the invasion and occupation of Iraq is hard to estimate, as many deaths went unreported . Many deaths were unreported during the war .
 The Iraqi death toll between March 2003 and 2009 may have been around 1. million people, almost five percent of the population . The death toll is believed to be around 1 million people .
 In Afghanistan, the Taliban regained strength as the U.S. concentrated its military efforts in Iraq . The Taliban gained strength in Afghanistan as the United States concentrated its efforts .
 Armor and weapons are of the 13th-14th centuries, the era of Mongol domination of the region . The event depicted is legendary, but the armor and weapons were of the Mongol era .
 This section gives a comprehensive chronological catalog of all the major wars fought between 3000 bce and the present . This section includes a comprehensive chronology of the wars fought in the past and present .
 Included are brief accounts of the most important individual battles with statistics of the forces involved and the casualties suffered, where known .
 Hammurabi increased the power of Babylon through cleverly making and breaking alliances . Hammabi made and broke alliances to increase Babylon's power .
 Having gained control of much of southern Mesopotamia, he turned on his former allies . He turned on former allies.
 Conflict with the Hyksos resumed in the early years of the 18th dynasty . Conflict between the Hykos and the Hyskos continued in the late 1800s .
 Repeated Theban campaigns drove the Hyksos from their capital at Avaris . Repeated campaigns drove them from Avaris, ending their rule of rule in the region .
 The first documented use of chariots by the Egyptians was recorded during this conflict . The Egyptians were recorded to have used chariots during the conflict .
 Our knowledge of the earliest battles of humanity is incomplete and reliant on the surviving accounts available . The first battles were likely to have taken place in the early days of the age of human history .
 Many conflicts between ancient peoples have gone unrecorded by history . Many conflicts have gone unseen by history, such as those between ancient people .
 In many cases, little more than the names of wars, battles, and generals have survived the passing of centuries . The names of many of the dead have survived their deaths .
 This was the era of such legendary commanders as Harnesses, Darius, Alexander, . Alexander, Constantine, Hannibal, Pompey, and . Pompey .
 Even today students of military history begin with the campaigns of their ancient forebears . Even today HAMMURABI students begin with campaigns from their famous ancient predecessors .
 They pioneered advanced military technology, such as horse-drawn chariots and composite bows . They were pioneers of horse drawn chariots, composite bows and horse drawn horses .
 Dispute between Thebes and Hyksos rulers of northern Egypt expanded into open conflict . Dispute began in the last years of the Egyptian 17th dynasty, when Thebes ruled Thebes .
 By the end of the 17th dynasty, the Hyksos were beginning to suffer their first real reverses .
 Senusret III campaigned against the Nubians and established Egypt's borders . He campaigned against them and established the borders of Egypt .
 He then went on to build a chain of fortresses to secure Egypt against raids and invasions . He then built the fortresses in Egypt to secure the country against raids .
 Eannatum, ruler of the city-state of Lagash, led his forces against the neighboring city of Umma to resolve a border dispute . The battle was fought to resolve the border dispute between the two cities .
 Chariots were used as transport but the battle was fought on foot by dense masses of spearmen . The battle was won by the Battle of Stonewall .
 He led an army over 5,000 strong, armed with bronze hand weapons and composite bows . He led the army over five,000 armed, with bronze weapons, composite bows and bronze weapons .
 War in the Ancient World 3000 BCE-500 CE MYCENAEAN RAIDS 1550-1150 BCE Forces Varied. MyCenaeans were involved in many of the world's most violent conflicts .
 The Mycenaeans were a warrior people who built fortress cities from which they launched trading and raiding expeditions . They raided Egyptian and Hittite cities (in modern Syria and Turkey) and conquered Crete .
 After the Exodus from Egypt (thought by some scholars to have been1450 bce), the surviving Israelites wandered into Canaan, seeking a home .
 They were repulsed, but drew out the defenders and defeated them in the field with light infantry . They were drawn out of the defenders, drawing them back into the field . The battle was repulsive, but they were able to repel it .
 An alliance of city-states in northern Canaan sent a force to halt the Israelite invasion . The Israelite invaders were defeated by the city-state forces .
 The Israelites counterattacked, catching their foes unaware and routing them with a fearsome head-on assault . Israelites were caught unaware and routed their foes with a fierce head on assault . The Israelite were defeated by the Egyptians in the battle .
 The battles detailed in the Sanskrit epic known as the Mahabharata are thought to represent the conflicts of the time rather than describe actual events . The epic is thought to have been written in ancient India .
 They do indicate how Indian wars were fought in the period, that being mainly on foot with some chariots for the nobility . They were fought on foot by the nobility with chariots .
 One of the largest chariot battles ever recorded, the outcome at Kadesh is unclear . Both sides claim victory, with both sides claiming victory .
 There is some archaeological evidence to suggest that the siege did, in fact, take place .
 The origin of the Sea Peoples remains unclear, but they raided the shores of Egypt's Mediterranean coast . The origin remains unclear . The Sea Peoples are believed to have raided the Egyptian coast .
 This led to the world's first recorded sea battle, between the Sea Peoples and an Egyptian fleet . The Sea Peoples led the Egyptian fleet in the first recorded battle .
 According to Egyptian accounts, the Sea Peoples were decisively defeated . The Sea People were defeated by the Egyptians .
 Many Shang dynasty troops refused to fight and 170,000 Shang slaves decided to fight for the Zhou dynasty instead . The Shang slaves had unwisely been armed and decided to join forces instead .
 The more disciplined Zhou overran their enemies and massacred loyal Shang troops afterward . Zhou's more disciplined troops overran enemies and overran them, killing loyal troops .
 Once the Israelites became established in their Promised Land, their fortunes fluctuated considerably . The Israelites' fortunes fluctuate considerably .
 After finally defeating the Canaanites, they were forced to defend their new lands against a succession of external threats . The Canaanites were finally defeated by the Egyptians .
 Vase shows Neoptolemos, Achilles' son, killing King Priam during the sack of Troy .
 The Egyptian pharaoh Thutmosis III led his forces through a narrow pass where they could easily have been trapped . He took a huge gamble to lead his forces though a narrow passage .
 This statue depicts Sekhmet, the war goddess of Upper Egypt . The goddess of the Egyptian war goddess is known for her role in the Egyptian culture .
 She has the head of a lioness, an animal admired by the ancient Egyptians as a fierce hunter . The attack caused panic among the Philistines, who were either massacred or forced to flee the battlefield .
 Israelites gained access to the city of Jebus (modern-day Jerusalem) by a surprise assault . The Israelites were defeated by the Israelites in the battle .
 Syrian forces advanced on Samaria and laid siege before an Israelite field force could be mustered . The Israelite forces were not able to muster a field force .
 The Israelites attacked the siege camp while the Syrian leaders were drunk and routed their army . Subsequently, the Israelite attacked the besieged camp . The Syrian leaders had been drunk and were drunk .
 No reliable estimates, but some sources put Syrian casualties as high as 127,000 . Some sources say some Syrian casualties could be as many as 100,000 people .
 As the Syrians prepared for a renewed invasion of Israel, the Israelites launched a pre-emptive campaign . The Israelites have launched a campaign against the Syrian regime .
 Canaanites were better equipped than the Israelites, but their chariots were bogged down . The Canaanites are better equipped, but the Israelite chariots are bogged up .
 Israelites sent a small elite force to startle the sleeping Midianite army in its camp . The Israelites had been invaded by the Midianites front the east .
 After a campaign against the Philistines, the Israelites were brought to battle at Mount Gilboa . The Israelite were brought into battle at the site of the battle .
 The Philistine army stormed Israelite positions, and Israelite King Saul committed suicide . King Saul's death was the result of a battle with the Philistine .
 The Israelite leader Jonathan discovered a secret path that outflanked the Philistine position . Jonathan discovered the secret path to outflank the position of the Israelite .
 Satellite navigation was developed for the U.S. Navy . Satellite navigation gave naval forces superb navigational accuracy . Eventually led to true precisionguided missile technologies .
 Self-propelled torpedo offered a largely silent and almost invisible anti-ship weapon . It later gave the submarine its principal firepower .
 Maritime radar revolutionized navigation and led to the development of radarcontrolled naval gunnery . The accuracy of fire over long ranges was dramatically improved .
 The United States Navy's development of the steam catapult was the breakthrough that enabled aircraft carriers to develop into the influential fighting systems they are today . The U.S. Navy developed the catapult system in the early 1900s .
 A bronze ram enabled a vessel to puncture an enemy ship below the waterline, providing the means to sink another ship in the days before naval firepower . Introduced by the ancient Greek and Roman navies, a bronze ram was used to sink a ship .
 Possibly first invented by medieval Chinese naval officers, naval mines became a great threat during the 20th century . Naval mines enabled a navy to control enemy shipping lanes .
 Korean Panokseon-class ""turtle ships"" had iron protection on the upper deck and hull . Armor plating was also used to protect the hull and upper deck .
 Its armies were well trained and often considered unbeatable in the field . It was often considered the best in the world .
 Assyrians had to become adept at siege warfare to overcome the defenses of enemies who would not come out to fight . Assyrians therefore had to be adept at sieging warfare . The Assyrian had to learn how to overcome enemies' defenses .
 As Assyria grew in power, an alliance of 12 states was formed to counter its expansion . Assyria was ruled by Assyria until the end of its reign .
 The two sides met in the largest battle of the world had yet seen, involving chariots, cavalry and infantry . The battle involved chariots and cavalry, including infantry, and chariots .
 This is a reproduction of the type of bow and arrow that may have been used by Assyrian warriors . The Assyrian arrow may have belonged to the Assyrian people .
 While the Assyrian forces under Shalmaneser III ravaged the countryside all around, the Syrians held out in their capital . The Syrian city was held by the Assyrians in the area .
 Damascus was not taken, but several other cities obliged to offer tribute to the Assyrian empire . Several other cities were obliged to pay tribute to Assyrian Empire .
 A coalition of states was formed to resist the expansion, including Israel and Damascus . Israel and Syria were the first Arab nations to oppose the expansion .
 Unwilling to fight in the field, the allies took refuge in their fortresses and cities, which were assaulted one by one . The allies were attacked by the Germans in the early years of the Second World War .
 Judaean mountains between Mediterranean Sea and Dead Sea, Israel, are Judaeans mountains . They are located between the Mediterranean Sea, Dead Sea and the Judaeas Sea .
 After all the other cities of Judah were taken, Jerusalem came under siege by the Assyrian army . The Assyrian forces captured the city of Jerusalem from Judah .
 Some accounts claim a plague weakened the Assyrian army . Others suggest the city was relieved by allies from Africa .
 A tower carrying archers and fitted with battering rams was transported to the wall up a specially built ramp . Archers and batter rams were transported up a special ramp .
 Assyrians were attacked by a coalition of Elamite and Chaldean forces . The Assyrian was attacked by the Elamites during the Assyrian war .
 The resulting battle at the Diyala River must have been very costly, as the Assyrians suspended offensive operations for a year . Assyrians have been fighting in the area for more than a decade .
 Assyrian armies utterly destroyed Susa, pulling down buildings, looting, and sowing the land with salt . The people of Susa joined an alliance against them, Ashurbanipa .
 This was standard practice, and induced many other cities to surrender without a fight . This was the standard practice for many of the world's most successful cities .
 After years of conflict with Assyria, the Elamites were weakened by an Assyrian attack on Babylon, which failed, and by civil war . The Elamite was weakened by a failed Babylon attack and civil war between the two sides .
 Assyrian army advanced into Elam and laid waste to the country, eliminating the Elamite threat for good . Assyrian forces destroyed Elam in Elam, killing all of its inhabitants .
 Egyptian forces finally captured Ashdod from Assyria after a 29-year siege . The Assyrian empire was in decline, and its forces were facing constant harassment from tribes .
 Medes and Babylonians tried unsuccessfully to attack the Assyrian capital, Nineveh . Medes took advantage of the weakness of Assyria, which was dealing with revolts as well as Egyptian incursions . Babylonians and Medes tried to attack Nineveh but failed .
 Most of the Assyrian force were defending Nineveh . Babylonian and Medean armies moved to quickly capture Assur, the original capital of the empire .
 As Assyrian military power waned, the allied forces of Babylon and the Medes moved against them . Babylon and Medes were able to defeat the Assyrian empire .
 Despite setbacks, the allies were able to capture the Assyrian capital, Nineveh, after a three-month siege . Nineveh was captured after three months of siege .
 Chu's left wing smashed opponents, forcing the Chu to make a hasty retreat . Meanwhile their left wing had smashed its opponents . Meanwhile, the Chu had smashed their opponents .
 Assyrians caught in the middle of the conflict and were gradually crushed into insignificance . Assyrians were caught in middle of conflict and gradually crushed . The Assyrians are now considered insignificant in the Middle East .
 The Egyptians were confronted at Megiddo by an army from Judah under King Josiah . They were trying to bring relief to their Assyrian allies . The Egyptian were confronted by the Judah army .
 After the fall of Nineveh, the Assyrian capital moved to Carchemish, which was taken by Babylonian forces . The Assyrian city moved to the Babylonian capital, but the city was later taken by the Babylonians .
 A joint Egyptian-Assyrian operation to recapture the city was totally defeated . The Egyptian and Assyrian operations were totally defeated in the city .
 No reliable estimates, but extremely high on the Egyptian side . Casualties No reliable estimate, but high .
 The Babylonians pursued the fleeing Egyptians after Carchemish victory . The Egyptians were fleeing .
 The resulting battle inflicted massive casualties on the disorganized Egyptians, ensuring total Babylonian victory . Babylonian forces suffered massive casualties in the battle .
 Jerusalem suffered a siege by its Egyptian allies for 18 months . The city was abandoned by Egyptian allies and suffered 18 months of siege . The siege lasted until the end of the year .
 Zedekiah, king of Judah, confronted the Babylonians near Jericho, but was utterly defeated . With his people starving, he confronted them near Jericho but was defeated .
 It assembled multi-ethnic forces composed of conscripts and mercenaries with varying skills . It welded them into effective and disciplined armies .
 After a long period of rule by Assyria and Media, the province of Persis revolted, starting a war that lasted two years . The province revolted and the war was a two-year war lasting two years.
 Cyrus the Great led the Persians to become independent and founded an empire . The Persians became independent and became an empire in ancient times . The Persian empire was founded by Cyrus the Persian king .
 After disrupting the Lydians with archery, the Persians successfully counterattacked . The Persians counterattack on Lydian territory . Persians were victorious in the battle .
 The native Babylonians revolted against their unpopular King Nabonidus, and Cyrus took Babylon without further fighting . Cyrus captured Babylon in Babylon in 466 BC .
 Taking advantage of the death of the pharaoh, Persian forces invaded Egypt . The death of Egypt's pharaoh led to the invasion of Egypt .
 The much weaker Egyptian army, bolstered by mercenaries, made a stand at Pelusium but was comprehensively defeated . The Egyptian army was bolstered with mercenaries, but was defeated by the Egyptians .
 Early in its existence, Rome used a military system heavily influenced by that of the Greek city-states . Rome fought against neighboring tribes for survival and against rival cities for dominance .
 This semi-legendary Roman battle cannot be precisely dated due to the lack of records from this time . The battle is said to have taken place in the early Roman times of the Roman era .
 Rome and Latin neighbors used Greek tactics, with a phalanx supported by lighter troops . Both Rome and its Latin neighbors use Greek tactics .
 Roman cavalry dismounted and joined the fighting on foot, resulting in victory . Roman cavalry dons their camaraderi to join the fight on foot . The Roman army was victorious in the battle .
 A force from the Aequi tribe was camped near Mons Algidus, threatening Roman territory . The Roman army was attacked by the tribe, but was not attacked by Roman troops .
 An army sent to remove the threat became surrounded, but after rescue by another Roman force they crushed the Aequi . An army was forced to withdraw, but the Roman forces were able to repel the threat .
 Persian fleet fled to the island of Samos after suffering heavy losses . Persian fleet suffered heavy losses and fled to Samos . Persian forces were defeated .
 The Persians would not fight at sea, so the Greeks came ashore and defeated them in a land battle, burning the Persian ships afterward . The Persian ships were burned after the battle .
 A Spartan-led Greek coalition defeated the Persians, depriving them of their last stronghold in Thrace . The Persians were defeated by a coalition of Spartan--led forces .
 The Spartan leader led the allies to realign themselves with Athens . However, tyrannical conduct by the Spartan leader left the allies with the city of Athens .
 The Delian League became the basis for the Athenian empire . Thus was formed an alliance known as the Delian league .
 Troops from Greece took part in the fighting, paving the way for the Greco-Persian wars, which began soon afterward . Troops came from Greece and helped set up the Persian Empire .
 An attempt by the Persian-backed tyrant of Miletus to capture Naxos led to a long siege . The siege was broken off when Persian supplies and money ran out .
 The Ionian rebels were assisted by ships from several islands, creating a large fleet under a weak command . The rebels were joined by several other islands in the battle .
 One of the allied factions accepted a Persian bribe not to fight, causing others to drop out as well . Others dropped out of the battle .
 Persian fleet won a decisive victory over those that elected to fight . Persian fleet defeated those who chose to fight in decisive victory . The Persian fleet was defeated by the majority of the Persian forces .
 Resistance by the Greek city-states was countered by the Persians in stages . The Persians were defeated by the city-state in stages of their invasion .
 Some city-states repelled the invaders while others allied themselves with Persia . Some of the invaders were allied with the Persian Empire .
 The result was a drawn-out struggle that resulted in the Greek city-states remaining outside the Persian empire . The result of the struggle was that the Greek cities-states remained outside the empire .
 Rather than resist, the Eretrians took refuge within their city walls and were besieged . The Eretrian city of Eretria was besieged .
 The outnumbered Greeks charged and forced the Persians to make a hurried re-embarkment . Rather than wait for their reinforcements, the outnumbered Greeks charge and forced them to re-enter the sea . The Persians were forced to make an urgent re-enthusiastic re-
 Spartans finally outflanked and surrounded, the heroic Spartans fought to the death . Finally outflanked and surrounded in the battle, they fought to death .
 Greek forces met the Persians on the coast at Hemp and linen body armor . This reproduction composite body armor is called a linothorax .
 Storms destroyed part of Persian fleet and gave the Greeks a fighting chance to hold the straits of Artemisium .
 After three days of piecemeal actions, the Greeks were forced to withdraw to Salamis . The Greek government was forced to retreat after three days and withdraw from Salamis.
 The Greeks lured the Persian fleet into a narrow channel between the island of Salamis and the mainland . The Greeks attacked and defeated the Persians in a seven-hour battle .
 Taking advantage of a bungled Greek withdrawal, the Persian army attacked the Spartans on the Greek right wing . The Persian army took advantage of the Greek withdrawal and attacked the Spartan army .
 The Spartans were able to hold out long enough for their allies to return to the field . The Spartans held out for more than a half an hour .
 In classic hoplite style, both armies began trying to envelop the left flank of the other .
 Although the Spartan line was broken, the Spartans defeated the enemy left flank before turning to attack their center, inflicting a general collapse and rout . The Spartans defeated their left flank and turned to attack the enemy center .
 Athenian forces besieging Syracuse were themselves blockaded by a Spartan fleet . The Spartan fleet responded to the Syracusans' request for help .
 The Athenians launched an ambush that resulted in the total destruction of the Spartan force . Drawing out the Spartan fleet, the Athenians attacked the Spartan forces .
 The powerful Athenian fleet was almost totally destroyed, and Athens was finally forced to sue for peace . Athens finally sued for peace after the defeat of its fleet .
 Roman phalanx broke and was massacred by Celtic warriors . Outnumbered and outfought by the more flexible Celtic warriors, the Roman army was outnumbered by the warriors .
 The rigid phalanx formation was abandoned in favor of the tactically more flexible legion . Subsequently, the formation was replaced with a more flexible form of formation .
 Egypt revolted against Persian rule and was granted Athenian assistance . Egypt was granted assistance by Athenian help by the Greeks .
 Persians were defeated on land at Pampremis and at sea near Memphis . The Persians defeated them both on land and sea at sea .
 A Spartan force was cut off on Sphacteria by land and sea . In an attempt to retake Pylos from , the Athenians, the Spartan forces were cut off by Sphacteria .
 Athenians were ambushed by a Boeotian army allied to Sparta . The Athenians gained the upper hand until cavalry appeared on the Athenian flank . The battle was fought between the two sides .
 The Austrian garrison prevented the Muslim army of Suleiman the Magnificent from capturing Vienna, halting the spread of the Ottoman empire into central Europe . The siege of Vienna ended the Ottoman invasion of Vienna .
 Francisco Pizarro defeated the Incas and opened the 1532 way for Spanish hegemony in South America . The Incas were defeated in 1532 .
 Waterloo Belgium June 18, 1815 . Napoleon's defeat brought the French domination of Europe to an end . Waterloo Belgium .
 Mao Zedong's Communists defeated the Nationalist January 1949 Army in a massive land engagment, enabling the final Communist takeover of China . Huai-Hai China November 1948 . Nationalist Nationalist Army defeated in massive land battle .
 William the Conqueror Norman 1027-1087 . Defeated the English army and became king of England in 1066 . William became king in 1087 .
 Napoleon Bonaparte revolutionized the nature of warfare itself, and inflicted major defeats on most opposing European powers and alliances for more than a decade .
 In 1939-42 he conquered most of western and southern Europe, parts of North Africa, and Soviet territories up to Moscow and deep into Ukraine . Although he led his nation to eventual ruin, he also conquered parts of the Soviet territories .
 Alexander the Great is often depicted wearing a lion skin as a symbol of his strength and royal lineage . Georgy Zhukov Russian 1896-1974 was a key figure in Germany's defeat in World Alexander the .
 Spartan policies led the city of Thebes to end its alliance with Sparta . Sparta was ruled by Thebes and Sparta in ancient times . Thebes ended its alliance to Sparta, but Sparta's policies led to the end .
 Theban opposition to Sparta led to a war between the two city-states and their allies . Sparta was defeated by Sparta and its city-state allies .
 A Spartan force attacking Haliartus was repulsed, then driven off by a Theban army marching to relieve the city . Theban forces were driven off, then attacked by a Spartan force .
 Spartan army counterattacked but eventually had to disband and return home . Spartan army had been defeated by Spartan army but eventually returned home .
 Zhukov helped stop the German capture of Moscow, crushed the Sixth Army at Stalingrad, and then drove the Soviet advance to Berlin itself . Zhukkov was a major Soviet commander during World War II .
 The Spartan phalanx then outfought those of the Thebans and allies, driving them from the field . Spartan forces then drove them out of the field, killing them .
 A Theban force penetrated the Spartan line and began to ransack their camp . A Spartan force ransacked their camp in Theban's first invasion of the year .
 The Thebans tried to break out to rejoin their allies but met the Spartan phalanx head-on and were defeated . The Theban were defeated in the battle of the Battle of the Hothoth .
 A force consisting of light Athenian troops harassed a much more heavily equipped force of Spartan hoplites with missile fire . The battle was fought between light and heavy-armed forces . The Athenian forces were attacked by a force of light troops .
 Unable to get close enough to use their weapons, the Spartans eventually broke and fled . The Spartans were eventually forced to abandon their weapons .
 Despite the inexperience of its crews, the Spartan fleet achieved some success at first, but was then rapidly overpowered by the Athenian-Persian force . The Spartan fleet was defeated by the Persian forces .
 Epaminondas reinforced his left flank and held back forces from his weak right . He broke Theban's Spartan right by massively reinforcing his left .
 Epaminondas used a powerful left-flank phalanx to break the right of the enemy line . The battle was fought in the first half of the second half .
 He was killed in the fighting and little was made of the victory . However, he was killed and little were made of his victory .
 Qi sent a force into Wei, forcing the Wei to break off the siege of Handan and march homeward in haste . Qi forces forced Wei to retreat from the siege and march home .
 This drew the Wei into an ambush, which resulted in their utter defeat . The Wei were attacked by the Chinese army, drawing them into a trap .
 Roman forces and their Samnite allies clashed with rebel Campanians and Latins . Roman forces clashed with rebels and Samnites and their allies in the early Roman era .
 The Macedonian army drew out the opposing hoplites and broke them with a counterattack . The battle broke out in a battle between the two sides of the battle .
 Alexander extended his father's conquests as far afield as Egypt and even India . Alexander was one of the most powerful men in the world . Alexander conquered Egypt, Egypt and India .
 Alexander opted for a reckfess head-on attack against a Persian army on the far bank of the Granicus River . The Persian army was defeated by Alexander Alexander in the Battle of Granicus .
 His cavalry forced a crossing, followed by his infantry, and surrounded the Persian forces . The Persian forces were surrounded by his cavalry .
 Alexander's conquests took him far into South Asia . The battle of Hydaspes was Alexander's first major victory in Asia . Alexander was victorious in the battle .
 Alexander attacked the main Persian army, which was holding a fortified position behind a river . Alexander's infantry was fought to a standstill, but his Companion cavalry broke through and put the Persian emperor Darius III to flight .
 Alexander's forces built a causeway out to the island city, allowing their siege engines to get into effective range . Alexander built the causeway to allow his forces to get in range of the siege engines .
 Battering rams mounted on galleys were used to attack the walls, and the city was stormed . The city was invaded by the Romans in 16th century .
 Alexander's troops were able to gain access to Tyre using siege engines . The siege engines were used to get access to the city of Tyre . Alexander was able to use the siege engines to access the city . Alexander's forces were eventually able to enter the city with the help of
 It took several assaults to finally overwhelm the defenders, but once the city was taken the way to Egypt lay open . Once the city had been taken, the Egyptian border lay open.
 Outnumbered four to one, the Macedonians staked all on a strike at the Persian emperor, Darius . Outnumbered 4-1, they staked out on strike at Darius .
 Light forces struggled to hold the flanks, the main body pushed forward and put Darius to flight . Darius was put to flight by light forces, but light forces struggled .
 Persian forces held a narrow pass against Alexander's army for a month, inflicting heavy losses . Persian forces fought for control of the narrow pass for months .
 Alexander's army then advanced on the city of Persepolis . Led to an alternative route through the mountains, Alexander led the army to the city .
 Macedonians advanced along the banks against the surprised Indian army . After a stealthy crossing of the Hydaspes river, the Macedonian army crossed the river . The battle was fought in the Hydasas river .
 Outflanked by cavalry, and under heavy attack, the Indian army broke and fled . The Indian army was forced to flee .
 Taught to handle sword and spear . Combat training: War games that often resulted in fatalities .
 The one-month selection phase involves extreme endurance marches, culminating in a 40-mile mountain trek carrying a 55-lb bergen rucksack . Learned poetry and song; read war theory; learned war theory .
 Mountain and wilderness survival training plus a six-week jungle survival course . Mountain and jungle survival training . Six-week survival course for jungle survival .
 Victory over Samnites was critical to the expansion of the Roman republic from a city-state to the dominant power in Italy . Victory over the Samnite was critical .
 The battle of Mons Gaurus was the most significant of these actions, though there was no long-term decisive outcome . The battle was most significant in the history of the Roman Empire .
 Samnites rained missiles on the trapped Romans from above until they surrendered . Sealed both ends of the pass with felled trees, the Samnite rained on them from above .
 In the Second Samnite War the Romans established the practice of taking territory after crushing their enemies . The Romans took control of Samnites after crushing enemies .
 Romans won decisive victory at Bovianum, forcing Samnites to seek peace on whatever terms they could get . Romans captured much of the Samnite's territory, forcing them to seek a truce .
 A third war broke out between the Romans and Samnites . After a few years of peace, a third war was fought between the two sides again .
 Samnites were seeking to retain territory near Naples and prevent total domination by Rome . The Samnite were trying to keep control of the area near Naples .
 By attacking one of two Roman forces, the Samnites hoped to defeat it before the other arrived . The Samnite attacked one of the Roman forces in the hope of defeating the other before the enemy arrived .
 A flanking Roman detachment was mistaken for the second Roman army . The battle was going well for the Samnites when the Roman army was mistaken .
 The Roman force's right was successful against the Samnites, but on the left the cavalry was broken by a chariot attack . On the left, the cavalry were broken by the attack by the chariot attacks .
 In the center, the Roman infantry fought on doggedly to ensure ultimate victory . In the middle of the battle, Roman soldiers fought on to ensure victory .
 As the Romans pushed into Aquilonia, the Samnites scraped together an army by conscripting every available man of fighting age . The Samnite army was conscripted by all available men of age .
 After a determined stand this force disintegrated, the survivors sought refuge in Aquilonia itself . The survivors were forced to flee the city .
 The city was stormed soon afterward, ending Samnite resistance in the region . It was the first city to be stormed by the Samnites .
 Chandragupta Maurya raised a powerful professional army which he used to carve out an empire in northern and central . The tribes of Samnium, a region of southern Italy, were opponents of Rome .
 4th-century fresco from Paestum illustrates the weapons and equipment used by Samnite warriors . The fresco is part of a 4th century fresco of the same name .
 Chandragupta had supposedly met Alexander the Great in India while in his 20s . Alexander was said to have met Chandraagupta in India in the way he met Alexander . Chandraugupta was believed to have died in India .
 Chandragupta attacked and conquered the Macedonian satrapies left behind by Alexander when he had returned westward . He conquered the satraps left behind in the satrapes left by Alexander left behind .
 Alexander's former generals Antigonus and Seleucus clashed at Ipsos . They were fighting for control of the former empire of Alexander the Great's former empire . The battle took place in the middle of the year .
 The wars are named after Pyrrhus, king of Epirus in Greece, who gave his name to a ""Pyrrhic victory,"" which is one gained at too great a cost . The wars have been named after the king of Pyrrhus in Epir
 Encountering war elephants for the first time, the Roman cavalry was driven off in panic . The Greek phalanx pushed the Roman infantry back across the Siris River with heavy losses .
 Romans clashed with a force of Greeks and their Italian allies under King Pyrrhus . The Romans devised anti-elephant tactics to avoid the threat of elephants .
 The Romans drove the beasts back into their own phalanx, forcing Pyrrhus's army to retreat . The Romans took advantage of the confusion and counterattacked . The battle was fought in the Roman capital, Rome .
 A Carthaginian army was sent to break the siege, bringing on a pitched battle, which the Romans won . The Romans won the battle, with Carthaginians winning .
 The Romans made up for their naval inexperience by the use of the corvus, a ramp that allowed legionaries to board enemy craft and fight a land action .
 A lorica segmentata is a type of armor made of fitted strips of iron . It was worn by Roman legionaries of the 1st century ce. Roman armor .
 Carthaginian wings attacked Roman transports in the Roman rear . Roman forces clashed with Carthaginians forces in the rear of the Roman army .
 The victorious Roman battle squadrons returned to drive off the attack . The victorious Romans returned to the battle .
 The main Roman force was fought to a standstill by elephants while the cavalry of the Carthaginians drove off its opposite numbers . The Carthaginian cavalry drove off the Roman forces .
 No further Roman expeditions were made into North Africa during the war . Roman forces were forced to withdraw from North Africa .
 Romans drew out the Carthaginian elephants with an advance force of light infantry . The Romans routed them with javelins, following up with an infantry charge in the ensuing confusion .
 The Roman fleet was ambushed by a Carthaginian force hidden behind a headland . The Carthaginians ambushed the Roman fleet in the Battle of the Nile .
 Most of the Roman ships were rammed and boarded, resulting in a heavy defeat . The Roman fleet was defeated by the Roman army in the Battle of the Danes .
 After the disaster at Drepana, the Romans rebuilt their fleet with better vessels . The Romans conducted extensive training and training .
 Romans used ramming tactics to draw out Carthaginian fleet by blockading Lilybaeum . The Romans shattered the opposing fleet by using ramming .
 Carthaginians agreed a peace settlement with Roman forces in Carthaginia . The Carthaginian was cut off from Sicily by Roman sea power . The settlement was part of a peace deal between the two sides .
 Attempt by Zhao forces to escape a two-month Qin siege ended in massacre . During a period of almost continuous conflict between China's feudal kingdoms, known as the Warring States period, the massacre was a massacre .
 Zhao troops who were not killed in the battle surrendered surrendered, and were executed in their thousands . Zhao troops not killed surrendered and executed in thousands of years later .
 Emperor Asoka launched a second campaign after failing to conquer the kingdom of Kalinga . He inflicted brutal reprisals, before renouncing war and converting to Buddhism .
 One of Alexander’s generals, also called Nicator, founded the Seleucid empire, which rivaled that of Rome . The empire rivaled the Roman empire of Rome, which was founded by Alexander .
 The Romans and the Greeks said to have used pigs coated in incendiary fuel and set alight to alarm and disrupt attacks by war elephants . The pigs were said to be used by the Greeks and the Romans .
 The Japanese neko-te consisted of claw-like metal fingernails attached to leather bands that were worn on the fingers or as a clawed glove . From 7th century bce
 The ""nails"" were sometimes dipped in poison for performing silent assassinations . The "nails" were dipped into poison for silent assassination .
 The Japanese tetsu-sen was configured like a standard hand fan but made of sharp-edged rigid iron blades . Iron fan from medieval period was made from sharp iron .
 U.S. government funded a plan to fit bats with tiny incendiary devices, then release them over Japan to start massive fires . Bat bombs 1942-45 were used in World War II .
 Japanese weapon consisted of a bomb fitted to a balloon, the whole device carried across the Pacific Ocean on prevailing winds . The whole device was carried by prevailing winds across the ocean .
 U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory at Wright-Patterson Air Base in Ohio attempted to develop a gas that would fill enemy soldiers with uncontrollable lust .
 Archimedes focused the sun's rays with mirrors and lenses to set Roman ships alight at the great sea battle of Syracuse . According to the 2nd-century writer Lucian, the sun was focused by Archimdes .
 This 17th-century illustration imagines Archimedes' solar reflection weapon would have looked in action . The illustration was published in the 17th century .
 At the end of the First Punic War, mercenary forces hired by Carthage could not be paid . Carthage's mercenary forces were unable to be paid after the war .
 The dispute escalated into a revolt, with the mercenaries capturing Tunis . Tunis was captured by the mercenaries, who captured Tunis .
 Those mercenaries who did not defect to the Carthaginian side were defeated . The war went badly for Carthage at first, but eventually those mercenaries did defect . Carthaginians were eventually defeated .
 Hannibal besieged Saguntum, a fortified city allied with Rome . Violating the treaty that ended the First Punic War, Hannibal besieged the city . Hannibal's siege was an act of war between Hannibal and Rome .
 The city asked Rome for help but none came by the time the walls were finally stormed . The walls were stormed by the Romans but Rome had no help .
 Saguntum provided a base for Hannibal's invasion of Italy via the Alps . Hannibal's Hannibal was Hannibal's first Roman general to conquer Italy . Hannibal was killed in battle with Hannibal in the Battle of the Alps in the Roman Roman Empire .
 A smaller but well-prepared Roman force met a Carthaginian fleet sent to attack Lilybaeum . Roman forces met a small but well prepared force in the battle .
 Carthaginian ramming tactics were countered by boarding actions by the Romans . Carthaginians rammed tactics were used by Romans in battle .
 Defeat means that Carthaginians were prevented from gaining a base in Sicily . Defeat meant that the Carthaginian had not been able to gain control of Sicily .
 Hannibal's Carthaginian army marched across Gaul and over the Alps into Italy, taking the Romans completely by surprise . Hannibal's Hannibal's army took the Romans by surprise, taking them by surprise. Hannibal's armies crossed the Alps and crossed Gaul and Italy .
 Carthaginian force lured the Romans into attacking across the Trebia River, placing them at a severe disadvantage . The Romans were ambushed by Carthaginians, who lured them across the river .
 Roman forces entered Iberia to engage the Carthaginians there, resulting in a straightforward clash near Cissa . Roman forces fought Carthaginian forces in Cissa, which is now known as the Battle of Cissa.
 The Roman force out-fought its opponents and defeated them with heavy losses . The Roman forces were defeated by heavy losses in the battle .
 Carthaginian fleet moored off the mouth of the Ebro River, unaware of Roman fleet nearby . Carthaginians were unaware of the presence of Roman forces nearby .
 While Carthaginian crews were foraging ashore, the Romans attacked, causing the Carthaginians to scramble to re-man their ships .
 Carthaginians beached their ships and fled to join their land forces . Defeated, the Carthaginian was forced to join the forces of the Roman Empire .
 Light forces and cavalry attacked Roman flanks and rear as the main body engaged . Light forces attacked the Roman flanking and rear of the Roman main body .
 Thousands of Romans were either killed or captured in what was a giant ambush . Thousands of Roman soldiers died or were captured .
 Fabius, better known for his tactic of avoiding battle, launched an attack to rescue the embattled legions .
 Carthaginians chose not to continue the engagement against the reinforced Romans . The Carthaginian chose to stay away from the reinforced Roman forces .
 Carthaginian center deliberately gave way as the flanking forces drove off their opposite numbers . Carthaginians drew Romans into a reckless frontal attack, drawing them into a frontal attack .
 The Roman infantry was then surrounded and killed, in this greatest of Carthaginian victories . The Roman army was surrounded by Carthaginians and killed .
 The siege of Syracuse was largely a competition between Roman ingenuity and the genius of the inventor Archimedes, who orchestrated the Syracusan defences . The siege took place in the Roman city of Syracuse .
 The outer walls were eventually stormed in a surprise attack, and eight months later the inner citadel fell to the Romans . Eight months later, the outer walls of the outer citadel were stormed by Romans .
 Poor scouting caused the Romans to blunder into an ambush, which forced their allies to flee the field . The Romans were ambushed by their allies at the time of the ambush .
 Unhappy with Roman rule, the people of Tarentum conspired to let the Carthaginian army into their city . The Carthaginians were victorious in their defeat of Roman rule .
 Much of Roman garrison was eliminated but some troops were able to hold out in the citadel . Much of the Roman army was eliminated in the battle .
 The result was two severe defeats for the Romans within days of each other . The Romans were defeated by the Romans in two days .
 The survivors were eventually reinforced and, if nothing else, they drew away Carthaginian forces that might have assisted Hannibal in his main campaign in Italy . Hannibal's main campaign might have been in Italy, but Hannibal was killed by Hannibal's forces .
 Hannibal Barca crossed the Alps to attack Rome, taking with him around 37 war elephants . Hannibal mounted on a war elephant in 21 8bce, the Carthaginian general . Hannibal took the elephants with him when he attacked Rome .
 On the first skirmishing, skirmishing escalated into an indecisive but bloody fight . On the second, skirmishes escalated into a bloody fight. The first, skirmish escalated into the first of its kind .
 On the second, the Romans were badly beaten and forced to take refuge in their camp . The Romans were forced to flee on the second and third day .
 Hannibal was forced onto the defensive on the third day of the battle . Hannibal was not defeated, but the battle itself was not decisive . Hannibal died in the battle, but Hannibal was able to hold on to victory .
 Cartagena, also called New Carthage, was blockaded by the Roman fleet . The Roman fleet blockaded the city while the army made preparations for an assault . The army was preparing for the assault .
 The city was successfully stormed from both the landward and seaward sides by a second assault . Beating off the first attempt, the first assault was successful .
 Carthaginians did not deploy for a full-scale battle until too late . Most of the Carthaginian got away as the Romans stopped for plunder . The Roman army was only engaging in skirmishing, but most got away .
 The battle of Grumentum was a prelude to the greater Roman victory at Metarus . The battle was fought in the Roman city of Grumum and was a Roman victory .
 Hannibal ensured an orderly retreat to conserve his troops . Hannibal was forced to retire from the battlefield after heavy casualties . The Carthaginians suffered heavy casualties and were forced to retreat . Hannibal ensured the retreat was orderly .
 Carthaginians were caught on the wrong side of the Metaurus River . They attempted to withdraw but were forced to fight after being caught on wrong side . The battle was fought in the middle of the river .
 The Romans used the Carthaginians' own enveloping tactics at Cannae against them . The Romans pulled the center of their line back while the legions on the wings crushed the enemy flanks .
 The Carthaginans collapsed under pressure from the Roman flanks and center . Carthaginanans were defeated by the Roman Romans in Rome .
 As the Romans advanced on Carthage, a hastily formed army made a stand near Utica . The Roman army was forced to withdraw from Utica in order to stop the advance .
 It was quickly put to rout, forcing the Carthaginians to sue for peace . Carthaginian forces were quickly put down, forcing them to sue peace .
 Hannibal's army was recalled from Italy, bringing about the battle of Zama . They then decided to recall Hannibal's troops from Italy . Hannibal's forces were defeated in Zama by Hannibal's men .
 Roman infantry became involved in a tough fight with Hannibal's veterans . After allowing Carthaginian elephants to pass between their units, the Roman infantry were involved in the fight . Hannibal's veteran soldiers died in the battle .
 Seleucus took control of Syria and Iran . Antigonus carved out a kingdom in Anatolia . Ptolemy founded a dynasty in Egypt . Seleucaus, founder of the Seleukid dynasty .
 Antiochus III set about pacifying his eastern possessions and then turned against Egypt . The Seleucid turned against an Egypt weakened by internal conflict .
 The Egyptian infantry, trained and led by Ptolemy IV, carried the day . Although both sides' elephants and cavalry were evenly matched, the Egyptian infantry won the battle .
 Victories in the field gave the Seleucids possession of the port of Sidon, but partly in response to Roman demands, there was no invasion of Egypt .
 The battle of Panium, part of the Fifth Syrian War, was decided primarily by cavalry action . The battle took place during the Second Syrian War .
 Seleucid heavy cavalry defeated the lighter Egyptian cavalry on the flanks and then fell on the enemy infantry rear . The Egyptian army was defeated by the Selemid heavy and heavy cavalry .
 The Seleucid empire took advantage of anti-Roman sentiment in Greece to launch a military expedition . Joined by Hannibal, the Carthaginian general Hannibal, they launched a military campaign in Greece .
 The Seleucids were, however, defeated on land and at sea . They were forced to relinquish their Greek interests . They remained in control of the region .
 Painted terracotta warriors were made for the funerary furnishings of a Han dynasty tomb . They illustrate the style and style of armor and weapons used by the warriors of ancient China .
 The Seleucid phalanx was disrupted by panicking elephants and flanked by cavalry . The Roman left was broken by a cavalry charge . Although the Roman left were broken by the cavalry charge, the Seleucaid phalalix was disrupted .
 After declaring war on the Seleucids, the Egyptians quickly ran into difficulties . The Egyptians declared war against the Selesucids in a bid to defeat them .
 Rome demanded that the Seleucids withdraw from their conquests, bringing the war to an end . They appealed to Rome for help, which led to the end of the war in the eastern Mediterranean .
 A challenge from Macedonia, siding with Carthage, prompted a change in this policy . The change was prompted by a challenge from the country's ruler .
 Macedonia gathered allies and launched a campaign to gain territory in Illyria and Greece . Taking advantage of Roman reverses during the Second Punic War, Macedonia took advantage of a Roman defeat in the war .
 From the Roman perspective the war was a sideshow to the struggle with Carthage, and ended without any major territorial changes . The war ended without major territorial change .
 The Macedonians possessed large and capable ships, forcing their opponents to use a cautious strategy . Macedonian ships were able to outpace their opponents, forcing them to play cautious .
 Despite losing their own flagship, the Macedonians captured that of Pergamum before heavy losses brought about their defeat . The Macedonian forces were defeated by heavy losses .
 The forces of Rhodes and Pergamum did not exploit their advantage, however, and the bulk of the Macedonian fleet survived the battle .
 Rome's intervention transformed the wars between Macedonia and other eastern European powers . Rome intervened in Macedonia's wars between the two countries in the past .
 The Romans advanced aggressively against Philip V of Macedonia, leading to the decisive encounter at Cynoscephalae . After some indecisive maneuvering, the Romans advanced . Philip V . of Macedonia .
 Romans held up for months by a vigorous defense . Despite breaching the walls, the Romans were held up by months . The Romans were not defeated by the defense .
 Disease and starvation weakened the defenders and the Romans could make a successfuf assault . The Romans were defeated by disease and starvation in their final battle .
 Carthage was razed to the ground by the Romans . The survivors were killed or sold into slavery . Carthage's survivors were sold or sold .
 Macedonian phalanx initially met with success but gradually lost cohesion as it drove forward . The Macedonian army lost cohesion and cohesion as they drove forward.
 Small units of Romans penetrated the phalanx where their short swords gave them a huge advantage over the Macedonian pikemen .
 Having recently been unified under Han rule, China came under attack by Xiongu nomads . Having recently come under attack, China was attacked by the nomads.
 The Han army was defeated by their skilled mounted archers . The Han archers defeated the Han army in the battle .
 Three wars were fought between 88 and 63 bce between the Roman republic and the kingdom of Pontus (a region running along the eastern Black Sea coast of modern Turkey) under King Mithridates . The Roman republic was defeated by the Pontus kingdom under the Roman king .
 Roman forces drew out the Macedonian phalanx and used the terrain to break it up . Roman forces closed to attack from the front and from both flanks in unexpected encounter with Macedonian army .
 Macedonian attempts to reduce Roman influence in Greece and to increase their own led to a renewed war . The war was fought in Macedonia between Macedonian and Romanians .
 The legionaries used their standard tactics, hurling javelins at close range before charging . As Rome's enemies labored uphill toward them, the legionaries hurled javelin missiles .
 Spartacus's army fought a successful guerrilla campaign and trounced two Roman armies . Spartacus was formed around a band of escaped slave gladiators . The Roman army was defeated by Spartacus after a series of defeats .
 The outnumbered Roman forces used the advantage of high ground to dominate the Mithridatic forces, who were routed and fled for the safety of their camp . They were denied entry and overrun with great loss .
 Some sources claim that only 12 Roman soldiers were lost in the battle . Some sources say only 12 of the soldiers were killed .
 Romans intervened in a dispute between Jewish princes, the Romans besieged Jerusalem . The Romans besieged the city of Jerusalem in the Roman-era era .
 Julius Caesar campaigned against the Gallic and Germanic tribes, and even raided Britain . Caesar even raided the British Isles . Julius Caesar was a Roman general . Caesar was the Roman leader of the Roman Empire .
 Romans built a double set of siege lines around the Gauls trapped in Alesia . The Romans built the double siege lines . The Gauls were trapped by the Romans in the Roman city .
 Caesar's crossing of the Rubicon triggered a civil war that changed all that . Caesar crossed Rubicon in the middle of the civil war in the Roman Empire . Caesar was killed in the Battle of the Bulgaria .
 By the time the upheaval was over the Roman republic had become an empire . The Roman republic became an empire by the time it was over .
 Lucius Sergius Catilina had conspired with others to overthrow the Roman senate . He conspired to oust the senate . The senate was overthrown by the Senate .
 When the conspiracy was revealed, Catiline assembled a poorly trained and ill-equipped army, which was destroyed by forces loyal to the senate . The senate defeated the army, and the senate died .
 Caesar defeated an army loyal to Pompey in Hispania . Caesar defeated Pompey's army in the battle . Caesar was victorious in the decisive victory .
 Pompey's army became besieged in its camp and surrendered to Caesar . Pompey was forced to surrender to Caesar after his retreat was blocked . Caesar captured Pompey on the eve of his defeat .
 Caesar sent by Caesar to secure Roman holdings in North Africa from the governor . Caesar's force was a force sent to secure the Roman holdings of North Africa .
 Caesar's forces were killed or captured in an ambush by Caesar's troops . Caesar's advance resulted in a reckless advance that led to an ambush . Caesar died or captured almost all of his forces .
 Caesar deployed a fourth line of battle rather than the usual three, enabling his force to drive off a flanking cavalry attack . Caesar deployed the move in 48 BCE . Caesar's force was able to drive away a cavalry attack by driving off the cavalry .
 Fourth line carried out a flanking action of its own, combined with a renewed frontal attack . The fourth line then carried out an attack on the fourth line, followed by a renewed attack .
 King Pharnaces of Pontus overran Roman and allied holdings in Lesser Armenia . Taking advantage of the civil war in Rome, he overran the Roman holdings . The Pontus was defeated by the King of Armenia in less than two centuries .
 These could be interlocked to protect groups of soldiers from arrows or other missiles . Soldiers could be protected from arrows and missiles by interlocking arms .
 Caesar advanced toward Rome despite being outnumbered by loyal forces under Pompey . Pompey's forces were outnumbered by the loyalist forces under their commander Pompey, Caesar advanced to Rome . Caesar died in a battle for the Roman capital .
 Pompey eventually fled Italy, landing in Greece . Pompey was convinced that Rome could not be defended, fleeing to Greece .
 Pompey continued his opposition to Caesar, who pursued Pompey after eliminating his allies . Pompey was killed by Caesar in a battle in Rome .
 Caesar made a daring crossing of the Adriatic and besieged Pompey in his camp . Pompey was besieged by Caesar's forces . Caesar crossed the Adratic and captured Pompey . Caesar made the daring crossing .
 Caesar besieged Thapsus, forcing his V Republican enemies under Metellus Scipio to attempt a relief . Caesar besieged the city, forcing the V. Republican enemies to try to relieve him .
 Caesar's archers drove off the Republican elephants, after which the Republican army was outfought and put to flight . Caesar was victorious in the battle, but his archers were unable to stop the Republican troops .
 After the battle of Thapsus, the only significant Republican threat to Caesar was in Hispania . Caesar was Caesar's only significant threat to him was from the south of Italy .
 Caesar's army marched to confront the Republicans, bringing about a head-on battle . Caesar's soldiers were killed by the Republicans . Caesar died in the battle .
 After a hard fight the Republican force collapsed, suffering very heavy casualties . The Republican forces suffered heavy casualties in the battle .
 Forces under Mark Antony, an ally of the murdered Caesar, clashed with Republican troops under Brutus, Octavian, and Hirtius . Forces under Antony clashed with the Republican troops .
 Antony's force was defeated and Octavian distinguished himself as a commander . Antony and his forces were defeated in the battle .
 Battle led to a truce between Octavian and Antony and their alliance against the assassins of Caesar . The battle led to the truce between the two men .
 With their supply chain blocked by Antony and Octavian’s forces, the Republicans under Brutus launched an attack . The Republicans attacked the Roman forces in Rome in the Roman capital .
 While they were occupied to the front they were flanked by troops under Antony and routed . They were routed by Antony .
 Antony's alliance with Cleopatra of Egypt led to a clash with Octavian, which saw Mark Anthony's defeat . Antony was defeated by the Roman general in the Battle of Nov. Mark Anthony in the Roman Wars .
 Afterward the senate named Octavian ""Augustus,"" and he became the first emperor of Rome . Afterward he was named "Augustus" by the senate .
 Allied with Cleopatra of Egypt, he was defeated at Actium and Alexandria . He was also allied with the queen of Egypt .
 Antony's ships forced passage through Octavian's fleet through which Cleopatra's force escaped . Antony forced passage of the Actium by the Roman army . Cleopatatra's forces escaped at Actium .
 Antony lost his flagship in the defeat, but escaped aboard another vessel with what remained of his fleet . Antony was forced to abandon his fleet in the battle .
 Roman domination of Europe and the lands around the Mediterranean created stability and relative peace for many years . Early Wars of the Roman Empire were fought in the early years of Roman rule .
 Troubles on the border were often dealt with by conquest and annexation, pushing the frontiers of Rome ever further out . The Roman Empire was founded by the Roman Empire in 13th century .
 Lured into the Teutoburg forest and abandoned by their allies, three Roman legions were harassed for several days . The scattered and weakened Roman survivors were overrun by assault . The Roman legions suffered several days of siege before being overrun .
 Attempts to establish a Roman frontier resulted in a long series of skirmishes with Germanic tribes, with few decisive victories . The Roman frontier was a series of bloody skirmishes between Roman soldiers and tribes .
 There were no further serious efforts to push the frontier beyond the Rhine . No further serious attempts were made to push beyond the border .
 The Druidic holy island of Anglesey fell in 60 and fortifications were built on the Tay river in 80 . The Druids lost control of the island in the early 1400s .
 Although the fierce Amazons of classical times are almost certainly mythical, a number of remarkable and fearsome female warriors have won their place in military history . A number of famous female warriors include the legendary Amazon and the British poet of 1859 .
 The Romans built an enormous ramp up to the walls, and breached them using rams . In an attempt to remove Jewish rebels from the formidable mountain-top fortress of Masada, the Romans built a ramp to breach them .
 Tribal forces attacked the Roman bridgeheads repeatedly but without success . Tribal forces tried to prevent a Roman crossing of the Medway River . The tribes attacked the bridgeheads but failed to stop the Roman crossing .
 Eventually enough Roman troops crossed the river to break out of the bridgeheads and repel the Britons . Eventually enough . Roman troops broke out the . bridgeheads .
 Iceni, under the leadership of Queen Boudicca, sacked several Roman towns before being overwhelmed by the might of two Roman legions . The Iceni were overwhelmed by Roman legions before being destroyed by two legions .
 Agricola initially employed his auxiliaries as part of his army against the Caledonian army . The Roman commander Agricola employed them as his troops . Agricola's troops were eventually defeated by Caledonia .
 The Caledonian chariots were dispersed by Roman cavalry, which then fell on the enemy rear . The Roman cavalry then attacked the enemy's rear .
 Raids by the Dacians prompted a Roman punitive expedition that resulted in a peace settlement with the Roman Empire . Raids in the Roman Roman city of Daculululium led to a Roman invasion of the Roman city .
 When the Dacians resumed raiding, a new expedition was launched and the region was conquered . The region was finally conquered by the Romanians in the 13th century .
 The decisive battle of the campaign occurred at Tapae, site of an earlier action against the Dacians . The battle took place in the same place as the Battle of the same year .
 The Dacians interpreted a storm as an omen and withdrew, conceding victory to the Romans . The Romans were defeated by the Romans in a battle in the Roman city of Dacululium .
 The politics of the Roman empire resulted in internal conflicts . Location of Roman empire: Roman empire . Roman empire was ruled by the Roman Empire .
 The Praetorian Guard and the army became the arbiters of power, both in battle and due to their ability to do away with a candidate who did not live up to his promises . The army was the arbiter of power in the end of the war .
 The conflict ended when Vespasian ascended the throne, beginning a new period of stability . The conflict between the Roman Empire and the Kingdom of Rome ended in a coup duchess .
 The rebels were initially successful, but were soon pushed back . They were pushed back from strongholds such as Jerusalem and Masada . The rebels are now in control of Israel and Syria .
 Roman army conducted a methodical siege of Jerusalem, storming a series of defensive positions before taking the Old City . The Roman army stormed the city before taking it over in a single battle .
 Queen of the Iceni tribe, Boudicca led a revolt against the Romans in Britain in 60 . She destroyed several Roman cities and crushed the Ninth legion before being defeated .
 Joan of Arcl 412 was a peasant girl who eventually led the French army against May 30, the English . Joan of Arc won notable victories before being captured and burned at the stake at the age of 19 .
 Isabella I 1451-1504 led her soldiers into battle of Castile against the Moors . She fought alongside Ferdinand of Aragon, fighting alongside him .
 This piratical Irish princess attacked English ships and shores until she was granted her territorial demands by the English queen Elizabeth I in 1593 .
 Hannah Snell was a British woman who disguised herself as a man . Snell joined the Royal Marines and fought in many foreign battles, being wounded 12 times . She served in the British Royal Marines .
 Margaret Corbin fought alongside her husband John in the American Revolutionary War . She crewed cannon at the battle of Fort Washington in 1776 even after John had been killed at her side .
 She herself was wounded, and received a disabled soldier pension from Congress .
 In the process she won the Croix de Guerre twice and the British Military Medal and Royal Red Cross, and the Legion d'honneur .
 Boudicca was the warrior queen of the British Iceni tribe who rose against Rome during the 1st century ce. The Iceni were the first tribe to rise against Rome .
 Her forces burned the Roman settlement of Londinium to the ground in60 ce. ce. Her forces destroyed it in 60 years .
 Rome dealt with the Sasanids as equals, though this did not prevent a number of wars between the two empires . Rome and Sasanid empires were at the beginning of the Roman Empire .
 Tension between Rome and Persia over Roman ambitions in the region led to a renewal of conflict in 253 . Tension led to the death of the Persian king in 253.
 A large Roman force was defeated at Barbalissos, which permitted the Persians to take the key cities of Antioch and Dura Europos . The Persians took control of the cities of DuraEuropos and Antioch . The Roman army was defeated by a large force .
 Cao Cao's forces chained their ships together for greater stability at the cost of maneuverability . Cao Cao was drawn into a naval engagement on the Yangtze River, the forces of Cao Cao chained ships together .
 This made them an easy target for the arrows and fireships of their opponents and they retreated in disarray . They retreated from the scene of the battle and retreated into disarray.
 The decisive battle of the campaign took place at Misiche the following year, where the Romans were heavily defeated and the emperor was killed .
 Sasanid incursions into Roman territory resulted in a Roman campaign to redress the situation . The Roman army was defeated by Sasanids in the Roman capital .
 The Roman army was completely defeated at Edessa, with the capture and death of the emperor Valerian . Initially successful, the Roman army had been completely defeated .
 Sasanid emperor Shapur II attempted to regain lands lost to Rome . He initially met with success in his first attempt to regain control of the empire .
 While besieging Singara he received word of nomadic raids on his provinces and a robust Roman response, and so abandoned the campaign . The Roman king was forced to abandon the campaign in favour of a strong Roman response .
 Shapur II received the surrender of several Roman cities . Renewed hostilities with Rome, Shapur I received the capture of several of the Roman cities of Rome .
 Amida withstood siege for 73 days before finally succumbing to Sasanid army . The Sasanids used siege towers and flaming arrows to overcome the defenders . Amida died in childbirth in childbirth .
 In response to the loss of territory to the Sasanid Persians, the Roman army advanced more or less unopposed to the capital at Ctesiphon . The Roman forces advanced to the city unoppested .
 The Romans were unable to take the fortified city before Persian reinforcements arrived and the Romans had to retire . Despite a total victory, the Sasanid army was defeated .
 Roman army retreated from Persian capital, harassed by Persian skirmishers . The Roman army was forced to retreat from the Persian capital . Roman soldiers were attacked by skirmishers in the battle .
 At Samarra a major attack on the Roman rearguard resulted in the death of the Roman emperor Julian . Julian died at Samarra in the Roman city .
 Rival emperors Maxentius and Licinius challenged his rule, bringing about a civil war . The two emperors were involved in the death of the Roman Empire .
 As Constantine's army advanced on Rome it was attacked by a cavalry force loyal to Maxentius . The cavalry force was loyal to the Romanian king .
 Several major cities made demonstrations of loyalty to Constantine soon after . Constantine died in the wake of his death in August .
 Maxentius, ruler of Rome, advanced across a pontoon bridge to confront Constantine . He demolished the stone Milvian bridge over the Tiber River .
 He retreated by the same route and was drowned when the bridge collapsed . Defeated, he retreated and died in the same way .
 Licinius attempted to contest control of the Hellespont . A fleet loyal to the Roman Roman Emperor attempted to take control . The fleet was defeated by Constantine's forces at the time .
 Licinius's fleet was outmaneuvered in the narrow waters . The battle was fought in the early days of the Roman warship .
 As reinforcements arrived, the Licinian fleet was shattered by a storm, granting victory to Constantine . Constantine's victory was secured by the fall of a storm .
 The Gupta dynasty rulers attempted to recreate the Mauryan empire . Chandragupta I and his son Samudraguptpta I were ruled by the Gupta dynasty . They were the last two of the Gupta rulers to attempt to recreate their empire .
 The Alemanni came close to achieving victory over the outnumbered Romans . The Alemenni were outnumbered by the Romans .
 The Roman infantry were eventually able to rout their foes after a hard fight . Assisted by heavy missile support, the Roman troops were able to defeat their foes .
 Samudragupta ; Kumaragupta I ; and the great general, Chandraguptpta I . attacked their infantry from the rear . The great general then attacked them with his troops .
 The battle is often seen as the first step in the fall of the Roman empire to the barbarians . The battle was fought in the Roman city of Rome in 466 .
 Frankish king Arbogast found himself under attack from eastern Roman emperor Theodosius I's forces . Having killed the western Roman emperor Valentinian II, he was attacked by eastern Roman forces . Theodusius I was the first Roman to attack the Frankish ruler Ar
 The Romans managed to defeat the Franks with the help of gale-force winds along the Frigidus River Valley . The Franks were defeated by the Romans .
 The White Huns carved out a kingdom in Persia and India, expanding it in the early 6th century . They were defeated and faded into obscurity before fading into obscurity .
 A diversionary Constantinian force drew some of the Maxentian troops out of the city, and a siege began . A siege began after the Constantinian forces withdrew from the city . The Constantinian troops were eventually forced to retreat .
 Constantine's army beat off an attempt to raise the siege in a close-fought battle . Constantine's troops beat off a close battle in a battle in which Constantine's forces fought off a siege attempt .
 During an attempt at negotiations with Ostrogothic and Visigothic armies, fighting broke out with the forces of Valens, the Roman emperor in the east . Valens was trying to negotiate with the Ostrogoths, Visigoths and Ostrogasic armies .
 Hun invasions of the Roman empire struck terror into its settled populations . Huns invasions were the first to strike terror into settled populations in the Roman Empire .
 Throughout the period, infantry demonstrated its ability to fight off even elite cavalry, for example, at the battle of Poitiers in 732 . In 732, infantry fought off elite cavalry in a battle against elite cavalry .
 The period also produced a number of innovative commanders, including William the Conqueror and Ian Zizka, who brought together infantry and cavalry in battle-winning combinations .
 Clovis slew King Alaric II of the the Visigoths in battle and added most of southwest Gaul to his territory . The Gaul was ruled by the Roman Empire of Gaul .
 This era of Muslim expansion ended with the Frankish victory at Poitiers in 732 . Frankish forces defeated the Muslim Muslims in 731 . The Frankish defeat of the Muslim movement ended with a victory over the Muslim religion .
 Persians drove back Byzantine heavy cavalry, but were then flanked by Hun horse archers and driven off . After a lengthy archery duel, the Persians were driven off by Huns . The Persians fought back, but the Huns were forced to retreat .
 Byzantine heavy cavalry charged as soon as the Vandals came into sight . Although the Byzantines' allied light cavalry was unreliable, the Byzantine cavalry charged . The Vandals were defeated by the Byzantine army in 14th century .
 The allied cavalry then joined the fight . Seeing that victory was likely, the allied cavalry joined the battle . The allied forces then joined in .
 An aggressive defense using cavalry raids forced the Goths to withdraw, forcing them to withdraw . The Byzantines counterattacked, counterattacking . The Goths were eventually forced to withdraw and died in the Battle of St. Louis .
 Byzantine crews outmaneuvered their inexperienced opponents . The veteran Byzantine crews were victorious in the first round .
 As the Ostrogoths launched a head-on cavalry attack, they ran into flanking crossfire from archers and fell back in disorder . The Ostrogoth fell back into disorder after being attacked by flanking archers .
 In 553, an army of 75,000 Franks and Alemanni tribesmen invaded Italy in support of the Ostrogoth campaign for control of the area . The Ostrogoths were defeated in 553 by the Romans .
 Much of this force dispersed, and the remainder suffered an epidemic of dysentery, leaving barely 20,000 men to face the Byzantines . Much of the force dispersed and the rest suffered from an epidemic .
 The Franks attacked fiercely, but were defeated by repeated cavalry charges into the flanks and rear of their unwieldy infantry . The Franks were defeated in the Battle of Gen. Gen. Henry VII .
 In 601, the Byzantines fought a series of actions against the Avars, who had been raiding the Balkan provinces for 20 years . The Avars were raiding the Balkans for more than a decade .
 Byzantine infantry withstood repeated charges from Avar cavalry, who were beaten off with heavy losses . In each case, Byzantine infantry fought off repeated charges, but were eventually beaten off .
 Byzantine and Persian forces clashed near the ruins of Nineveh, fighting for 11 hours . Byzantine forces clashed with Persian forces in the area . Byzantine, Persian forces fought near the remains of Ninevah . The battle lasted 11 hours.
 Byzantine emperor killed the Persian leader in personal combat . Persian army was then routed . Byzantine emperor was killed by the Persian army .
 After a period of skirmishing, the Arabs took advantage of a sandstorm to charge the enemy camp . After a long battle, the Arab forces were able to defeat the British army .
 The Byzantines were unable to fight effectively and were slaughtered . Blinded by sand, the Byzantine army was unable to defend itself . The sand was the only factor in the battle against the Byzantine forces .
 Although outnumbered, the Arab force attacked aggressively and broke the Persian army . The Arab forces attacked aggressively, breaking Persian forces .
 The battles listed below are remarkable for the sheer scale of the casualties . While almost all battles incur some loss of life on each side, these are remarkable .
 A large but ill-trained Persian army was defeated by the Arabs in a three-day battle . The battle led to the Arab conquest of virtually the entire Persian empire . The defeat of the Persian empire was the first Persian invasion of the Arab empire .
 This naval battle saw the first major use of ""Greek Fire,"" an extremely effective incendiary weapon that was catapulted at the Arab warships . This was the first use of the incendiary weapon .
 Arab vessels that survived the battle were destroyed in a storm . Few Arab vessels survived in the battle . The few Arab ships that survived were destroyed .
 Husain ibn Ali was cornered by Umayyad forces at Karbala and killed along with his small retinue . Traveling to Kufah to join a rising against the Umayyaad caliphate, Husain was killed . Husain  was cornered
 As battle began, much of his army, weakened by feuds within the royal family, deserted, leading to a Berber victory . The rapid Muslim conquest of most of Spain was the result of the battle .
 The Arab force finally gave siege on the Byzantine capital . The Byzantine army's vigorous defense of the city walls kept the Arab forces at bay . The Arab forces were finally forced to give siege .
 Arabs were not able to gain entry or to cut off supplies entirely . But the Arabs were able to get access to the area .
 After a standoff that lasted six days, a force of Muslim cavalry attacked an army of Franks . The Franks were under the command of their ruler Charles Martel . After a six-day standoff, the Franks were attacked by Muslim cavalry .
 The Franks fought dismounted, arranging themselves in a defensive square formation . They were eventually successful in driving back the Muslim troops, forcing them to retire .
 The reliquary bust of Charlemagne, the first Holy Roman Emperor, was made in the 14th century .
 Emperor's skull is housed in the treasury at Aachen Cathedral, western Germany . It contains the emperor's skull and is housed at the cathedral in western Germany.
 The Chinese force, composed largely of infantry, was abandoned by its allied cavalry, which defected to the other side . The allied cavalry defected .
 Arab horsemen were able to encircle the Chinese force . As a result of the action, the Arab horsesmen were freed .
 Bulgars posed the greatest threat to the Balkan provinces of the Byzantine empire throughout the 8th century . The Bulgars were the most powerful enemies of the empire's Byzantine empire .
 In 756, the emperor Constantine V invaded Bulgar territory, supported by a fleet operating in the Black Sea and Danube delta, and won a decisive victory at Marcellae . Constantine V's victory in 756 was a decisive defeat for the Bulgarians .
 In 800, the pope formally crowned him as ""Emperor of the Romans" 12 years later, his status was formally recognized by the Byzantine emperor . In 800 he was formally crowned by the pope .
 Charlemagne's attempts to subdue Saxon rebellions against his rule were met with fierce resistance . The Saxon king was forced to defeat the Saxon rebellion .
 By 840, Charlemagne's grandsons were quarrelling over the future of the empire he founded . By 840 the empire had become unstable and unstable . The king's grandson was the son of one of the most powerful men in Europe .
 Lothair I attempted to impose his authority on his brothers, Louis the German and Charles the Bald, who rebelled . The eldest son of the two rebelled against his brothers . The king's eldest son died in the wake of the revolt .
 Their army defeated Lothair's forces at Fontenoy, leading to the fragmentation of the empire . They defeated him in the defeat of the king's army .
 Border disputes between Brittany and the Franks erupted into open warfare in 845, when the Franks were defeated at Ballon . Border disputes erupted in open warfare between the Franks and Brittany .
 In 851, the Bretons Muslim power in Spain quelled Charlemagne's campaign in Spain . The Franks besiege Barcelona and reconquer Catalonia, checking the Umayyad caliphate at the Ebro River . strength, and skills of Charlemagna's forces eventually prevailed .
 Charlemagne's army was attacked by lightly armed Basque troops in the Pyrenees . He was returning from an expedition against the Muslims in Spain .
 The rearguard action was the inspiration for the Old French epic poem ""The Song of Roland"". It was instrumental in securing virtual independence for Brittany throughout most of the medieval period .
 Lindisfarne was sited on an island off the coast of Northumbria . The monastery proved to be vulnerable to Viking raiders . Up until 793, the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of England enjoyed a comfortable sense of security .
 The monastery's considerable treasures were plundered by the Vikings, who also murdered the monks . The monks were murdered in the attack .
 Emperor Nicephorus captured the stronghold of the Bulgar leader Khan Krum . Attempting to reassert the power of Byzantium, he captured Krum's stronghold . The Emperor was trying to reclaim the throne .
 Nicephorus was slain soon after, when his forces were ambushed on a mountain pass . He was killed by his forces in a battle with the Romans .
 Arab forces launched a full-scale invasion of Sicify in 831 . Arab forces had raided Sicify for decades before the invasion .
 Palermo became the capital of an Arab emirate for more than a century . Initially repulsed, the invaders received reinforcements from Spain and besieged and eventually captured the city . The invaders were eventually repuffed, but the invaders were able to hold on to victory .
 The Vikings sailed down the Bosphorus, burning and pillaging every town and monastery in their way, before besieging the Byzantine city of Constantinople . The Vikings burned and pillaged every town, monastery and town in the way .
 They did not take control of the city, however, but simply plundered it and left . They didn't take control, but left . The city is now a tourist destination .
 Michael III assembled three large forces to trap the Arab army at the Lalakaon River . The emperor assembled the forces to end years of damaging Arab raids .
 The outnumbered Arabs attempted to escape, but the vast majority were annihilated . The vast majority of the Arab population was annihilated, according to the historian .
 This victory enabled the Byzantine empire to re-establish control of Anatolia . The Byzantine empire was re-established in Anatolia by this victory .
 Viking leader Guthrum led forces against the remaining Anglo-Saxon stronghold of Wessex . Guthrum's forces led his forces against Wessex, the last of the last vestiges of the Saxon kingdom of England. Guthrum died in the Battle of the Wessex at the
 Alfred, king of Wessex, summoned a substantial army to fight the Vikings at Edington, defeating Guthrum and forcing his withdrawal . Alfred's army defeated Guthrum in the battle .
 When the Viking assault on Paris failed to seize the city, the Vikings settled in to besiege it . When the attack failed to take Paris, the city was besiege by the Vikings .
 Frankish emperor Charles the Fat arrived with a larger army, paid the Vikings a large indemnity, and gave them permission to ravage Burgundy . Burgundy was refusing to acknowledge his imperial authority . Ultimately, the Frankish empire paid an indemnity to the Vikings .
 From their newly created homeland, the Magyars launched a series of raids deep into western Europe . The Magyar raids included raids from their newly-created homeland to western Europe.
 A Lombard force under King Berengar of Italy pursued a Magyar army . The army had been raiding the Po Valley, as far as the Brenta River . The Lombard forces pursued the army .
 The Magyars initially attempted to negotiate with Berengar and his troops, but the talks eventually broke down . They launched a surprise attack on the Lombard camp and routed Berengars' army . The Lombard army was routed in the battle .
 King Ludwig divided his German army into three separate detachments in an attempt to entrap the Magyar raiders . The raiders had been devastating large parts of southern Germany . The German army was divided into three detachments .
 The first two detachments to be sent out were themselves trapped and destroyed by the Magyars . The first 2 detachments were themselves themselves trapped . The Magyarans destroyed the first two of the detachments .
 The Magyars then turned on the third force, commanded by Ludwig himself, and completely routed it in a seven-hour battle . Ludwig himself was the only person in the Magyar's army to defeat the enemy .
 Magyars invaded Germany when King Henry I ceased to pay them tribute . The Magyarans invaded Germany again in 17th century . King Henry II died in 18th century and died in death of his son .
 Henry then deployed a weak decoy force in order to lure the Magyars into attacking . His hidden Bavarian and Franconian cavalry ambushed them . Henry's hidden force lured them into attacking, before ambushing them .
 The German troops pursued the Magyar army as far as the Unstrut River, where they effectively destroyed it . The German forces were able to effectively destroy it .
 France and Britain, two other major combatants, also fought in their overseas colonies . Actions in India, North America, Africa, and the Caribbean resulted in actions .
 Revolutionary and 1791-1815 The French, Russian, British, and Ottoman Napoleonic Wars empires, plus most other European states from Denmark-Norway in the north to Spain in the south . France, Russia, British and Ottoman empires .
 World War I 1914-18 Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, with fighting also spreading out to China and the Pacific Islands .
 Combatant nations included the United States, Canada, India, Australia, and Brazil . The U.S. and Canada were involved in the fight .
 Mongol ruler Genghis Khan was unlikely to be shown any mercy for captured soldiers or civilians . Genghi Khan was a ruthless and merciless ruler of the Mongol Empire .
 Constantine III of Scotland organized an invasion of England in alliance with Welsh, Norse, Norse/Irish, and Viking chieftains . Constantine III invaded England in an alliance with the Welsh, Viking and Norse .
 King Athelstan depioyed the Anglo-Saxon army in a strong defensive position . He beat off several assaults, before counterattacking and breaking the allied army . Athelst then counterattacked and broke the allied forces .
 The battle resulted in England becoming the dominant power in the British Isles . The battle ended in 16th century England becoming a dominant power .
 The Vietnamese sent out shallow-draft vessels to lure the seagoing Chinese fleet onto them . After driving iron-tipped stakes into the bed of the tidal Bach Dang River, the Vietnamese sent them out shallow draft vessels .
 The Chinese took the bait, and the trapped ships were then successfully assaulted . The Chinese were then able to take the bait .
 Magyar horsemen dismounted to loot the German camp during an attempt to relieve Augsburg, then under siege by the Magyars . The outnumbered Germans were presented with a golden opportunity when the horses dismounted and dismounted .
 The horseless Magyars were routed and, as a consequence, their power was permanently diminished . The war ended in a defeat for the Magyarars .
 Byzantine army commanded by the emperor John I Tzimisces forced the Rus to withdraw to their fortress of Silistria on the Danube, and began a 65-day siege . The Rusians were forced to withdraw from their fortress, and the siege lasted 65 days . The
 A number of sorties were defeated before the Rus surrendered and agreed to evacuate Bulgaria . Bulgaria became a province of the Byzantine empire, becoming a province .
 Otto II's forces intercepted the Arab army in Calabria and killed the Emir of Sicily, Abu al-Qasim . The Holy Roman emperor Otto II was killed by his forces .
 Imperial forces defeated when a hidden Arab reserve charged into their flank . However, the imperial forces were defeated .
 The Anglo-Saxons unwisely agreed to allow the invading Vikings to come inland from their island camp for a formal battle . The Vikings came inland from the island camp to fight for the first time . The battle was fought on the island of Saxon land .
 Viking leader was beheaded and the army was defeated in the ensuing fight . Vikings lost many men in the battle, but it was a defeat for the Anglo-Saxons .
 Ghaznavid troops managed to panic the elephants causing them to stampede through their own side . Facing an Indian army that relied heavily on the shock effect of massed elephants, they managed to turn this to their advantage .
 A Bulgar army commanded by Tsar Samuil invaded the Byzantine Balkan provinces and besieged Thessalonika . A Bulgarian army invaded the area and besieged the Byzantine city of Thessalika .
 The tsar concealed most of the army in a carefully selected ambush site that was protected by ditches and traps . Instead of carrying out conventional siege operations, the tsar hid his army in an ambush site protected by traps .
 He then ordered a feint assault on the city by a small force, which provoked a counterattack . The attack was counter-attempted by the small force .
 The Bulgars staged a fake retreat to draw the garrison into the ambush, where it was annihilated . The Bulgar staged the fake retreat . The garrison was ambushed by the Bulgars .
 Tsar Samuil failed to follow up his victory at Thessalonika by taking the city, preferring to loot southern Greece . He failed to take the city and instead looted southern Greece's southern Greek coast .
 Returning from raiding as far south as Corinth, he was intercepted by another Byzantine army at the Spercheios River . The Byzantine army intercepted him .
 The two armies were camped on opposite banks of the river, which was in full flood . Even after several days, it seemed unlikely that either side could cross .
 Byzantine scouts eventually found a usable ford, however, and the entire army crossed to launch a surprise attack on the Bulgar camp . The attack was a devastating surprise attack that left the Bulgar army dead .
 Forces Irish7,000; Viking and Leinstermen: 7,000 . Viking, Leinstersmen: 8,000.
 An alliance of Vikings and native Leinstermen was defeated in battie by Brian Boru's Irish forces .
 The Vikings were unable to return to their boats or retire across the Liffey River, the Vikings were slaughtered . Unable to return or retire from their boats, they were slaughtered.
 Lured from their fortifications by a diversionary force in the rear, the Bulgars were surrounded and trapped . The Bulgarians were trapped and trapped in the Russian city of Crimea .
 A reproduction of an Anglo-Saxon sword found near Abingdon, England, in 1874 .
 Danish and Anglo-Saxons clashed at Ashingdon . It has with a silver-inlaid pommel with silver inlayed pommel .
 King Edmund's Mercian contingent fled, causing the Anglo-Saxon army to collapse . King Edmund’s Mercian contingents fled . The Mercian army collapsed .
 After the death of Tsar Samuil in 1014, the Bulgarian empire became increasingly unstable . The death of the Tsar in 1013, the empire became unstable .
 His successor, Ivan Vladislav, continued the war against the Byzantine empire with an attack on Durrachium, but was killed when the garrison made a sudden sortie . His successor was killed by the garrison in a sudden attack .
 The Byzantines took advantage of the chaos following his death to annex most of the Bulgarian empire . The Byzantine empire was overrun by the Byzantine Empire .
 Seljuk Turks wore down their opponents by using mounted archers, before closing to a decisive range . The Seljuku Turks were eventually defeated by the Turks in their final battle .
 Despite the heroic example of their emperor Masud, the Ghaznavids were defeated after a three-day battle lasting three days . Despite the heroics of Masud they were defeated in the battle .
 Normans went on to increase their power in southern Italy and the Mediterranean . The pope was taken prisoner, and the Normans took over the city .
 Two French armies invade Normandy, advancing on Rouen along both banks of the Seine River . Two armies invaded Normandy in the early 1900s . The French invasion was part of the French invasion of Normandy .
 One of the forces occupied Mortemer-en-Braye was in the midst of looting the town when it was caught by a surprise attack . The Norman army had been shadowing its advance in the area .
 Second French army hastily withdraws from Normandy after hearing of the disaster .
 A French army invading Normandy attempted to cross the Dives River at the Varaville ford . But barely half the force succeeded before the rising tide made the ford impassable .
 The shadowing Norman army then attacked, defeating the remaining French troops who had failed to cross the river . The remaining Norman troops were defeated .
 The battle was the last serious French attempt to overrun Normandy in the lifetime of William, Duke of Normandy . William's last serious attempt to invade Normandy was the Battle of Normandy in his lifetime .
 One of the largest naval battles of the period was fought between a Danish fleet commanded by Svein Ulfsson and the Norwegian fleet under Flarald Flardrada .
 The Danish flagship and its escorting vessels were roped together to form a large fighting platform . The Danish vessel and escorting vessel were deployed in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Despite being outnumbered, the Norwegians won a major victory, taking more than 70 Danish ships . The Norweigians took over 70 ships in total .
 Edward the Confessor's death without a dear successor at the beginning of 1066 signalled a power struggle for the English throne . Edward died in 1066 without a close successor to him at the start of the year .
 His rivals were King Harald Hardrada of Norway and William, Duke of Normandy, William, who became known as William the Conqueror . The king was known as the King of England .
 Norwegian king Harald Hardrada's invasion of England was initially opposed by a force commanded by earls Edwin of Mercia and Morkere of Northumbria . The Norwegian king's invasion was initially led by the two earls .
 Anglo-Saxons took up a strong defensive position near the Ouse River in Yorkshire, but were defeated by the more experienced Viking army . The Viking army defeated the Anglo Saxon in the area .
 He introduced tying of severed arteries to military medicine, moving away from cauterization as the favored surgical technique .
 By this time chloroform was another major anaesthethic . 19th century American Jonathan Letterman introduced three-stage system of battlefield triage and treatment .
 World War 1 blood transfusion developed as a form of treatment, with intravenous rehydration . Blood transfusion was used in the aftermath of World War One .
 Pioneering developments in plastic surgery and reductions in limb amputations . The world's first limb amputation surgery was pioneered in the 1950s .
 Major improvements in anaesthesia, and the treatment of wounds using antibiotics, were made during the First World War . World War II saw major improvements in the use of antibiotics and anaesthesia .
 Post-World War II New forms of antibiotics to counter penicillin-resistant strains of bacteria . New antibiotics could be used to combat strains of penicill-resistant bacteria .
 King Harold made an exceptionally rapid forced march from London to Stamford Bridge . The Viking invasion by Harald Hardrada led to the death of King Harold .
 Viking army was encamped along both banks of the Derwent River . He surprised the Viking army, which were encamped in the area . The Viking army had been encamped on both banks .
 The Anglo-Saxons exploited their numerical superiority and quickly destroyed the Viking troops on the river's west bank . They fought their way across a bridge and a nearby ford before fighting their way through a ford .
 Harald Hardrada formed his remaining men into a circular shield wall . He hoped to hold out until he could be reinforced by the troops that had been detached to guard his ships at Riccall .
 Repeated Anglo-Saxon charges finally broke the shield wall, and Harald Hardrada was killed just as reinforcements arrived . Repeated attempts to break the wall failed to do so .
 William, Duke of Normandy, invaded England to claim the English throne . William invaded England in the 13th century to claim his country's throne . He invaded England and claimed the throne .
 King Harold deployed the Saxon forces in a strong defensive position on Caldbec Hill, to block the Norman army's route to London . King Harold's forces were deployed in a defensive position to prevent the invasion .
 The Saxon shield wall beat off a succession of attacks launched by Norman cavalry and infantry . The late 10th-century Bayeux Tapestry commemorates the Norman victory at Hastings in 1066 .
 King Harold Codwinson's Anglo-Saxon infantry confront a cavalry charge by Duke William of Normandy's troops . The use of two-handed axes proving highly effective even against wellarmored knights .
 After several futile attacks, part of the Norman force collapsed, and the panic threatened to affect the army . The panic was triggered by the failure of several attacks .
 The crisis was worsened by a rumor that William had been killed, but he rode through the ranks to rally his troops . The crisis worsened by the rumors that William was killed . William rode through his troops to rally them .
 He destroyed the Saxon army with a series of feigned retreats, cavalry charges, and archery . He destroyed Saxon forces with feigning retreats .
 1071 Forces Byzantine:50,000; Seljuk:40,000 . 1071 forces Byzantine: 50,000 troops; Selijuk: 40,000. 1071 Russian troops were involved in the battle .
 The Byzantine center managed to advance as far as the enemy camp, but the flanks collapsed under pressure . The reserves withdrew, abandoning the main body to its fate .
 This defeat marked the beginning of the decline of the Byzantine empire .
 The Reconquista of the Muslim states of the Iberian Peninsula was a slow process with many setbacks . The Spanish conquista of 1084-94 was the first of the Spanish conquests .
 The capture of Toledo and Valencia marked key stages in an exceptionally long campaign . It was only finally completed in 1492 after the capture of Valencia .
 King Alfonso VI of Leon and Castile laid siege to the Islamic city of Toledo . Taking advantage of disunity among the Muslims, Alfonso VII laid siege there .
 Eventually, the city was starved into surrender, giving Alfonso an important strategic base in central Spain . Alfonso was able to starve the city into surrender .
 A Castilian surprise attack inflicted heavy casualties, but the larger Muslim army rallied and routed much of the Castilian force . The battle took place in the Middle Ages in 14th century .
 King Alfonso VI of Leon and Castile was wounded and only just managed to escape . Alfonso was wounded when he was killed in the Battle of the Algargarle .
 Valencia was taken from a Muslim faction after a long and bitter siege . Even after Christian forces razed the suburbs, the inner city held out until starvation forced a surrender .
 In 1095, the Byzantine emperor Alexius I Comnenus appealed to the pope for aid against the Seljuk Turks, who had overrun much of Anatolia following the disastrous Byzantine defeat at Manzikert in 1071 . The First Crusade and the defense of the Crusades
 Instead of raising mercenaries, the pope proclaimed a crusade, with the objective of taking Jerusalem . The pope proclaimed the crusade to take Jerusalem in order to take the city .
 The crusaders' heavy cavalry was unable to come to grips with the elusive mounted archers it faced . Ambushed on the march, the crusaders were forced to retreat .
 The arrival of an additional crusader force forced the Turks to retreat . The Turks were forced to retreat after the arrival of a new force of troops .
 After a long siege, the crusaders captured Antioch, only to be besieged themselves . The crusaders capture Antioch, but were besieged themselves by the city itself .
 The discovery of a holy relic (the Holy Lance) inspired the crusaders to launch a sortie that drove off the Turkish army . The discovery led the Crusaders to attack the Turkish forces .
 Although worn down on the march, the crusader army was able to undertake a successful assault on the city . The siege was successful .
 Siege towers, catapults, and ""Greek Fire"" were employed to support the assault troops . Siege towers were employed in support of the assault .
 The city was sacked and its Muslim and Jewish inhabitants massacred . The city then sacked and the city was then sacked .
 An Egyptian army attempting to raise the siege of Jerusalem halted at the port of Ascalon, on hearing of the fall of the city .
 A far smaller force commanded by King Baldwin I of Jerusalem attacked a 10,000-strong Egyptian army . The Egyptian army invaded the newly established crusader states . The battle took place in the Middle Ages .
 The veteran crusader cavalry launched four successive charges, which finally broke the Egyptian force . The veteran cavalry launched . Four successive charges were launched by the veteran .
 Both sides attempted to lure the other into an ambush, but it was the reckless crusaders who took the bait . Both sides were caught in the trap of the ambush .
 They charged into the hands of the main Muslim force and were decisively defeated . The main Muslim forces were defeated in the battle .
 The Norman cavalry achieved some initial success, but was held by the second Anglo-Norman line . The Norman line was reinforced with a contingent of dismounted knights .
 A hidden detachment of Anglo-Norman cavalry then charged, and the Norman army broke . The Norman army was defeated by the hidden forces .
 The campaign of Alfonso I, the ""Battler"" of Aragon, to capture Zaragoza from the Muslims benefited from siege expertise gained in the Eloly Land .
 40 archers in a concealed flanking position, whose fire broke up the rebels' charge . After a relief attempt failed, the city surrendered . The city was attacked by the rebels, but was eventually defeated .
 Jurchen captured the city of Kaifeng in a four-month siege and went on to establish the Jin dynasty . Despite opposition from a standing army half a million strong, it was assisted by local militias and explosive weapons .
 Scots invaded England early in 1138, taking advantage of increasing unrest after Henry I's death in 1135 . The invasion was the result of unrest after the death of Henry I, who died in 1136 .
 The English army drew up on a ridge, with a line of dismounted knights supported by archers . The battle was the first of its kind in the English-speaking kingdom .
 They shot down most of the unarmored Scots, who then broke after several attacks and took heavy losses . The Scotsmen then broke up after several attacking and took losses .
 Henry I intercepted a French force under Louis VI that had invaded Normandy . Henry I intercepted the French force in Normandy . He intercepted the French forces .
 First French charge was broken by the first French charge, which plunged on into the dismounted knights, who easily repulsed the attack . This screening force was broken .
 The royalist commander Ralph de Bayeux dismounted some of his men-at-arms to block the road along which the rebels under Waleran, Comte de Mellent, were advancing . The rebels were advancing, but kept a mounted reserve .
 These three types of medieval mace were all designed to effectively bludgeon an opponent to death . Medieval mace heads were also deployed by the Crusaders .
 The warriors wear lamellar armor, made of iron strips bound with rawhide and silk cords . The armor is made from iron strips made of rawhide, silk and iron .
 A Muslim army out of Aleppo arrived with engines for a siege, but found neglected defenses . The Muslim army arrived in Aleppo with engines to attack the city . The city's defenses were neglected by the Muslim army .
 A significant achievement was the capture of the Moorish city of Lisbon by a mixed force of English, German, and Flemish crusaders . The city was captured after storms drove their ships into Portuguese harbors .
 Siege tower became stuck in waterlogged ground and several large catapults destroyed . Despite early setbacks, renewed efforts breached the walls .
 The garrison was massacred, despite promises made in surrender negotiations . It was the first time the British troops had been able to leave the British capital .
 Stalled in the face of a stout defense, the commanders of the largest crusader army in history fell to bickering and were forced to retreat by a relief force . The battle was the largest of the crusader armies in history .
 A section of the wall collapsed when a siege tower fell against it . Christian troops were unable to breach the defenses, but a section of wall collapsed .
 A Welsh army resisting Henry H's invasion of Gwynedd prepared an elaborate earthwork roadblock in a thickly wooded pass at Basingwerk . The Welsh army resisted the invasion of the Welsh capital .
 Henry ordered feint attacks against the defenses, while he led a detachment to outflank the position . Henry led the attack against the defenders, while a detachment of troops were able to get out .
 Both sides made use of atrocities to reduce enemy morale . Both sides undertook extensive engineering works, leading to a campaign of tunneling and countertunneling .
 A Byzantine army under Andronikos Kontostepephanos intercepted a large Hungarian army near Sirmium . The nephew of Emperor Manuel I, the nephew of Manuel I .
 Anglo-Norman army supported Dermot MacMurrough, the deposed King of Leinster, defeated the Irish after fighting its way through a succession of woodland barricades . The Irish defeated the Norman army after fighting their way through the woodland .
 The battle marked the beginning of the Anglo-Norman conquest of Ireland . The battle was fought in the middle of the 16th century .
 The last Norse king of Dublin, Haskulf Thorgilsson, returned from exile with a largely mercenary army in an attempt to recapture the city . But the garrison made a sudden sortie and broke his forces .
 The rebel army was caught and destroyed by the royalists while fording the Lark River . The rebels were largely made up of French and Flemish mercenaries .
 After driving the enemy cavalry from the field, the imperial forces, which included no infantry, were unable to penetrate the pikewall of the Lombard foot soldiers . The Lombard forces were unable .
 The returning Lombard cavalry then launched a successful counterattack . The Lombard Cavalry were defeated by the return of Lombard troops .
 The samurai naginata is a typical Japanese pole-arm with a wooden handle and a long, curved saber-like blade .
 Angkor was sacked by the kingdom of Cham in 1177, but by 1181 it was once again a powerful state . The city was once a powerful and powerful state until 1181 .
 The Gempei Wars for control of Japan were fought between the powerful Minamoto and Taira families . The Minamoto/Taira Wars were fought in Japan between 1180-85 .
 The conflicts did much to form samurai culture and allowed the Minamoto to establish the office of shogun, or military dictator, which existed until 1867 . The office of the shogun was established in 1867 and existed until the death of the Shogun .
 Minamoto forces and their warrior-monk allies attempted to hold a broken bridge over the Uji River . Defeated by the Taira clan, the Minamoto were forced to abandon the bridge . The Minamoto lost the bridge in the battle .
 The Minamoto army included a contingent from the Miura clan . Minamoto Yorimoto was to become shogun about ten years later .
 The Taira general, Oba Kagechika, won a decisive victory through a night attack . The battle was fought in a night-long attack . Oba's victory was the first of its kind .
 Minamoto forces forded the Sunamoto River to make a night attack against the Taira army deployed on the far bank . They were defeated and pursued back across the river .
 The Minamoto attempted to check the Taira pursuit at the Yahagi River by destroying the bridge and forming a shield wall . Shortly after they were defeated at Sunomatagawa, the Minamoto tried to check their pursuit . The bridge was destroyed by destroying it .
 Despite this, the Taira were able to force a crossing and continued to attack the retreating Minamoto army . The Minamoto were forced to withdraw from the battle .
 The Minamoto clan stalled its enemies for hours with clever ruses and archery duel, buying time for a detachment to circle into the Taira rear and attack . A detachment circleed into the rear and attacked, forcing the Minamoto to retreat .
 A Minamoto army was being ferried across the Inland Sea to attack the Taira stronghold of Yashima when it was defeated by a Tairi fleet . The Minamoto were being transported across the sea to attack Yashama when they were defeated .
 Many of the Taira ships were lashed together to form large ""fighting platforms"" from which their archers laid down a heavy bombardment, before boarding the Minamoto vessels . The Minamoto ships were also lashed together as large "fighting platforms" from which they laid down heavy bombardment .
 The aim of this World War II project, conducted mainly by the United States, was to facilitate the production of atomic weaponry . Minamioto NO YOSHITSUNE in ""THE TALE OF THE HEIKE" is a 12th-century POEM .
 It was the largest military engineering project in history, employing 130,000 people and costing the modern equivalent of more than US$24 billion . The project was built in the 1970s and is the largest in history .
 North Vietnamese soldiers and laborers created and maintained an elaborate road system . Ho Chi Minh Trail stretches from North Vietnam through the jungles of Laos and Cambodia .
 They used these roads to supply the war effort against South Vietnam and infiltrate troops . The roads were used by the South Vietnamese government in the 1960s and 1960s .
 Up to 20,000 Vietnamese troops a month moved along the trail, which featured supply hubs, barracks, and medical facilities . Despite massive bombing of the trail by the U.S. Air Force, the trail was still popular .
 Great Wall is a series of fortifications that were erected to protect the northern border of the Chinese empire from invasion . The Great Wall was built in order to protect China's northern border from invasion by the Chinese Empire .
 Most of what still stands today was constructed under the Ming dynasty . Around 1 million men were stationed as guards along the entire length of the wall . The wall was built during the Ming Dynasty .
 Roman military roads, essential for suppyling outlying garrisons, eventually laced the Roman world . Roman roads were essential to supply outlying outlying military posts . The Roman roads are still visible today .
 The total road network measured 53,819 miles and extended from the coasts of northern Europe to the plains of Central Asia . It was the largest road network of its kind in the world .
 The Great Wall was not a single piece of construction, but a series of fortifications that were built and improved from the 5th century bce up to the 16th century ce. It was not only the Great Wall, but the fortifications were built from 5th to 16th
 The Taira fortress of Fukuryuji was stormed by Imai Kanehira's Minamoto forces in a daring assault across rice paddies . The Minamoto were under heavy fire from the garrison's archers .
 Minamoto Yoshinaka's rule was so vicious that his own clan was forced to take up arms against him . His own clan took up arms in order to oppose him .
 Yoshinaka met defeat after a hard fight at Awazu, and was killed in the battle . He met defeat in a battle with the Japanese army in the early years of his career .
 The cunning Minamoto stalled their opponents with traditional challenges to single combat, while a detachment attacked from the rear . The Minamoto defeated their opponents in the first round .
 The small Minamoto force panicked the Taira into abandoning their fortress at Yashima by lighting large numbers of fires . Minamoto forces panicked the small force into abandoning the fortress by lighting fires .
 The treachery of a Taira admiral and an opportune turn of the tide sealed the fate of the clan . The Minamoto gained control of the country with the Minamoto gaining control .
 After the failure of the Second Crusade, the crusader states came under increasing pressure from their newly unified Muslim neighbors . The Maginot Line was built on France's borders with Italy and Germany .
 Saladin's overconfident Muslim army spread out to loot and forage, while advancing on Jerusalem . Saladin was captured in the city of Jerusalem in 12th century AD .
 A sudden crusader attack smashed the disorganized Muslim force and inflicted heavy casualties during a long pursuit . The crusader attacked the Muslim force with heavy casualties and heavy casualties .
 The crusaders launched an attack on the Muslim camp and were successful in annihilating several groups of raiders . The Crusaders were victorious in the battle .
 They were surprised and defeated by the main Muslim force . However, they were, in turn, surprised and comprehensively defeated .
 A Muslim army invaded the Kingdom of Jerusalem, advancing toward Al-Fule and raiding the surrounding areas . The invasion of Jerusalem was the result of a Muslim invasion of the Kingdom .
 The sizeable crusader force drove off the raiders and repelled repeated attacks before the Muslims withdrew . The Muslims withdrew from the scene .
 The crusaders became encircled on the twin hills known as the Horns of Hattin . Rashly advancing across waterless terrain, the crusaders were surrounded by waterless land .
 The Muslim recapture of Jerusalem in 1187 prompted the Holy Roman emperor Frederick I ""Barbarossa"", Richard I of England of England, and Philip II of France of France to launch a new crusade .
 While it failed to retake Jerusalem, it ensured the temporary survival of the small crusader states . The battle ensured the survival of Israel and the West .
 A small force of crusaders led by Guy de Lusignan managed to breach the walls of Acre . Beating off relief attempts, the crusaders managed to break the walls .
 In 1191, the crusaders led by Guy de Lusignan retook control of the city of Acre . Acre was the capital of the kingdom of Jerusalem .
 Richard 1 of England led the crusader army from Acre to Arsuf . Richard 1 led the army to victory in a decisive, decisive charge . The Crusaders defeated the Muslims in the battle .
 Following the Battle of Arsuf, the crusaders took Jaffa to act as a base for an attack on Jerusalem . The city was used as a military base for the attack on the city .
 In July 1192, a Muslim army stormed the city, but the citadel held out until a crusader relief force arrived . The city was attacked by Muslims in 1192 but held out for more than a century .
 It was expanded as the headquarters of the Knights Hospitaller, until April 1271 . The hospital was expanded in 1271 as a result of its expansion .
 Muhammad of Ghur returned for a second attempt on the same battlefield . After being defeated at Tarain in 1191, he fought again in the same battle . Muhammad was defeated in the battle of Tarain .
 The Hindu Raiput army was routed by Turkish skirmishing mounted archers . This time, the Turkish skirmishers proved decisive in the battle .
 This battle was a first stage in the expansion of Muslim rule into northern India . The battle was the first stage of the expansion into the north of India . It was also the first time Muslim rule was established in northern India.
 Castilian knights broke through the center of the Muslim army, but were surrounded and annihilated when their supporting infantry failed to keep up with them . The Castilian knight were surrounded by the Muslim troops .
 The Fourth Crusade was intended to take Egypt, before launching an attack on Jerusalem . The Crusades were intended to attack Egypt and then attack Jerusalem . It was the first Crusade to attack Jerusalem in 1212 .
 The ill-led campaign was hijacked, however, by the Venetians . It became an operation against the Byzantine empire against the empire .
 The crusader army was bribed into joining a Byzantine power struggle . The army was stopped from its mission to the Holy Land . It was forced to join a power struggle with the Byzantine Empire .
 The situation dissolved into chaos, and led to Constantinople being sacked and occupied by the crusaders . The crusaders captured the city and took it over the city .
 After the sack of Constantinople, the Byzantine successor state of Nicaea was formed in western Anatolia . Nicaea is the name of a successor state to the Byzantine state of the Nicaea .
 The lightly equipped Muslim force tried to wear down the crusaders, but was broken by their cavalry reserve . The crusaders were surprised by the surprise appearance from an unexpected direction .
 The jaws of the trap closed, and only 10,000 of the Roman force survived . Only 10,500 Roman soldiers survived the trap . The trap was a Roman trap, and the trap was never discovered .
 King Guy of Jerusalem ordered 20,000 crusader infantry and 1,200 cavalrymen to attack the Muslim forces of Saladin besieging Tiberias . Hattin Hattin was Hattin .
 He did so against the recommendations of one of his commanders, Raymond III of Tripoli, who argued that the Muslims fought best in the open terrain around the city .
 The dehydrated crusader force was virtually massacred around the Horns of Hattin . Raymond was right, and the dehydrated Crusaders were massacred .
 European sword, 14th century sword, similar to those used by crusaders, has disc-shaped pommel, gently curved quillons and a diamond cross-section blade that tapers acutely to a thrusting point .
 The 20-year-long campaign was initiated by the papacy to suppress the Cathar heresy in the Languedoc region of southern France . The campaign began in 1209-29 .
 The crusaders besieged Beziers and demanded that the Cathars surrender . The Cathars were defeated by the French crusaders in 17th century .
 The entire city was burned to the ground 1 and the population slaughtered . The population was slaughtered in the city .
 Besieged by superior forces, the crusaders staked all on a sortie, crushing the enemy cavalry before using infantry to break the siege . The crusaders were forced to abandon their siege in order to get out of the battle .
 John de Warenne, 7th Earl of Surrey, led an English expedition to crush the rebellious Scots . Stirling Bridge was the site of an English invasion of Scotland .
 He chose Stirling Bridge, the worst possible place to cross the Forth river, despite many of his experienced soldiers recommending a wider ford 1 mile away . He chose the wrong choice, choosing a bridge 1 mile from the nearest ford .
 Crammed onto the narrow bridge, the English soldiers lost all advantage of numerical superiority . When only half the English army had crossed, William Wallace's Scots attacked .
 Zhengtong emperor Zhu Zhen ordered a half-million-strong army to go out and destroy invading Mongol forces . Tumu was a Mongol invasion of China in the early 1400s .
 The Chinese army marched for two weeks, while the Mongols retreated . The Mongols made a tactical withdrawal from the battlefield .
 At Datong, Chen decided to turn around and march his army back along an exposed northern route, rather than taking a longer but more protected one . Chen decided instead of taking a more protected route, Chen turned around and marched his army .
 As they did so, the Mongols turned and went on the attack, which resulted in up to 250,000 Chinese soldiers being killed or captured . The Mongols attacked the Chinese in the early 1800s, killing or capturing tens of thousands of soldiers .
 Lieutenant Colonel George Custer attacked a large Indian encampment in Little Bighorn valley on June 25, 1876 . Custer's attack was the first Custer attack on an Indian camp in the valley .
 General Henri Navarre deployed French airborne forces to the outpost of Dien Bien Phu in an attempt to interdict Viet Minh operations . The French commander in chief in . Indochina, was the French commander .
 Dien Bien Phu, is completely isolated and ringed by jungle-covered mountains . The industrious Viet Minh soon had the base encircled and under siege . The base is surrounded by mountains .
 The French held out from November 1953 until May 7, 1954, when they were forced to surrender . In an epic defense, the French held their forces out of control until May 1954 .
 After a long siege, the defenders of Toulouse sortied to destroy a massive siege tower . The siege tower was destroyed in 1187 after a long battle with the French city .
 A counterattack drove the sortie off, but the crusader leader, Simon IV de Montfort was killed, effectively ending the campaign . The campaign was effectively ended by the death of Simon IV of Montfort . A counter-attack drove off, and a counterattack was successful .
 Duke Henry of Brabant was returning from raiding the bishopric of Liege when he was intercepted by a force led by the bishop himself . Hugh of Pierrepoint led the force to intercept the Duke .
 Duke Henry's initial attacks were successful, but the bishop's forces rallied and won a decisive victory . Duke Henry died at the hands of the bishop in his first battle .
 One flank of the battle was dominated by cavalry, while the infantry fought their own savage action elsewhere . In this battle over English possessions in modern-day northern France, cavalry dominated the battle .
 The First Barones' war began with a rebellion by a group of English barons against the chaotic rule of King John . They invited Prince Louis of France to invade, in an unsuccessful attempt to replace John as king of England .
 The death of King John and the accession of his nine-year-old son to the throne, as Henry III, undermined support for the French-backed rebellion known as the First Barons' War .
 A rebel force besieging Lincoln castle was trapped, and eventually destroyed in fierce street fighting by a royalist relief force . A royalist rescue force was eventually destroyed by the royal forces .
 The French fleet was intercepted by a royalist squadron off Dover in the First Barons' War . The fleet was carrying reinforcements for the rebel forces during the war .
 The royalists attacked from windward, defeating the French with a barrage of crossbow fire and powdered quicklime . The French were defeated by the royalists in the battle . The battle was the first of its kind in France .
 Genghis Khan finally obtained one, along with Chinese experts in its use . After failing to capture cities for lack of a siege train, Gen. Khan obtained one from China . The siege train is now used by Chinese forces .
 It took a year of siege to take Zhongdu, which was burned to the ground . Despite this, it took the Chinese army a year to take the city .
 Samarkand was the capital of the Kwarezmian empire . Genghis Khan's forces captured the city and massacred most of its inhabitants and its garrison .
 This provoked Genghis Khan into launching the campaign that led to the Mongol victory at the Indus . This provoked him to launch a campaign against the Mongolian empire .
 After the Mongol defeat near Ghazni, Genghis Khan led a punitive expedition into the Punjab against the Kwarezmians . N After the Mongols were defeated in the Battle of the Punjab, Khan led an expedition into Punjab .
 Mongols destroyed the Kwarezmian army and thoroughly looted the region . Mongols looted the area and destroyed the army .
 Mongols sent peace envoys to the joint Russian-Cuman army, but they were murdered . The Mongols were killed by the Russians and the Cuman army in the Crimean War .
 Mongols then proceeded to drive off the Cuman force and all but annihilated the Russians . The Mongols were able to drive them off and drive them away .
 Genghis Khan personally led the Mongol army, which ruthlessly suppressed the revolt and destroyed the Xi Xia empire . Khan's death was the result of a revolt against the Chinese empire .
 After sacking Ryazan and Moscow, the Mongols encountered an army led by Yuri n, the grand prince of Vladimir . The Mongols were led to the death of Yuri n in the battle .
 This force was overwhelmed and annihilated, and Vladimir sacked, before the Mongols headed south into the Ukraine . The Mongols were overwhelmed, annihilated and destroyed .
 The Mongol horsemen lured the Christian knights into charging deep into the Mongol force, where they were surrounded and killed . After chasing off part of the Christian German-Polish army with a hail of arrows, they lured them into charging . The Christian knights were surrounded by the Mongol forces and
 The Mongols attacked a fortified bridge across the Sajo River, drawing the Hungarians into defending the crossing . The Hungarians defended the crossing from the Mongols, drawing them into defending it .
 Under cover of this attack, a strong force forded the river and broke the Hungarians with flank and rear charges . The Hungarians broke the Germans with flank charges and flank charges .
 The province of Drenthe was in revolt against its ruler, Otto II of Lippe, the Bishop of Utrecht . Otto II was the ruler of the province, and the bishop was the king of the city .
 Otto raised an army to crush the uprising, but allowed his force to be drawn into a marshy area near the village of Ane, where his cavalry could not operate effectively . Otto allowed his cavalry to be dragged into the area, where it could not be used effectively .
 This was ideal terrain for the armed peasants who made up most of the rebel force, which attacked and destroyed the bishop's army . This was the perfect terrain for armed peasants to attack .
 The disparate Mongol tribes were unified by Genghis Khan in the early 13th century . The Mongols began to establish an enormous empire in 1214-41 . The expansion of the empire continued well after Genghi Khan's death in 1227 .
 Short-sleeved mail shirts were worn by infantry from ancient Rome through to the Renaissance in Europe and Africa .
 Livonian Brethren of the Sword encountered Lithuanian light cavalry equipped with javelins . The Livonian warriors encountered the light cavalry in pagan territory . They encountered a Lithuanian army of light cavalry armed with a spear .
 These proved extremely effective against the unwieldy Livonian horsemen . They were used in the battle of the Livonian War .
 Swedish army camped before the city of Novgorod . The Swedish army was attempting to gain control of an important trade route .
 A Russian army approached the camp under cover of thick fog and launched a successful surprise assault . Before the attack could begin, a Russian army attacked the camp .
 As the Teutonic Knights advanced on Pskov, they encountered a Russian force under Alexander Nevski, victor at the Neva . Alexander Nevski was victorious in the battle at the end of the war .
 Nevski's lighter force used its superior numbers and a flanking attack to defeat the heavily armored knights . Nevski used his lighter force to win the battle against the heavy armored knights in the battle .
 The English army commanded by Henry III was attempting to recapture the province of Poitou, which had been seized by France . They had taken up position covering the bridge across the Charente River .
 The army was outflanked and defeated by a French attack launched from a flotilla of small river craft . However, the army was defeated by the small river boats .
 An equally unsuccessful Fifth Crusade followed the disastrous Fourth Crusade . The Fifth Crusade was followed by the disastrous Fifth Crusade .
 In 1229, Emperor Frederick II used the Sixth Crusade as a threat to negotiate the recovery of Jerusalem . Frederick II's use of the threat was used to negotiate a return to Jerusalem in 1229 .
 Muslim forces retook the city in 1244, provoking the final major crusade in the region . Muslim forces took control of the city after it was retaken by Muslims .
 A joint crusader-Muslim army engaged a force of Khwarezmian cavalry and Egyptian Mamelukes . A joint force engaged a joint Crusader and Egyptian army engaged .
 The Muslim contingent was driven off, and the crusaders were surrounded . The crusaders had been surrounded by the Muslim contingent .
 After a successful surprise attack on the Egyptian camp, the crusaders unwisely pursued the survivors into the town of Mansurah, where they were ambushed, suffering heavy losses . The crusaders suffered heavy losses in the attack .
 After Mansurah, the crusaders retreated to their fortified camp, which was soon besieged by Egyptian forces . The crusaders were forced to retreat from the fortified camp .
 The crusaders attempted to retreat to their main base at Damietta, but were decisively defeated . They were defeated by the Romans .
 Only Granada in southeastern Spain would remain under Muslim rule, until 1492 . Granada was the last city to be ruled by Muslims in Spain until 1491 .
 In September 1229, James I of Aragon invaded Majorca and quickly drove the local Muslim forces into Palma . Palma was stormed after a three-month siege by the Aragon king .
 Civil unrest in the petty states of al-Andalus provided opportunities for the expansion of Castile . Castile is one of the most powerful Spanish states in Spain .
 In 1235, a faction in Cordoba opened the gates to a Castilian force that took control of the city but was unable to take the citadel . The Castilian forces were able to take control of Cordoba, but were unable to capture the city .
 King Ferdinand III brought up the main Castilian field army, but the citadel surrendered only on June 29, after a bitter six-month siege .
 King James I of Aragon opened his campaign against Valencia by capturing a hill near the city Pueyo de la Cebolla, in 1237 .
 This was fortified to act as a base for future siege operations . Despite repeated attacks by the city's garrison, the city was never attacked .
 Valencia's defenses held out for almost six months . Not until April 1238 was the king able to assemble a force strong enough to begin assaults on Valencia .
 Castilian army supported by a fleet on the Guadalquivir River began siege operations against Seville in the summer of 1247 . Seville was defeated by Castilian forces in 1247 after a year of siege .
 The city was one of the great strongholds of Muslim Spain . It was finally starved into surrender on November 23, 1248, after a 15-month siege .
 Polish mural shows three leaders of the Teutonic Knights from the 14th and early 15th centuries . Polish mural was created in 14th century .
 At the height of it power, the order fought pagan tribes in the Baltic lands of Prussia and Lithuania . At the time of the order's power, it was in the midst of paganism .
 Mongols surrounded Baghdad using bridges of boats to block access via the Tigris River . After destroying an army sent to intercept them, the Mongols, led by Hulegu Khan, a grandson of Genghis Khan, surrounded Baghdad .
 Nicaea established itself as a powerful Greek successor state to the former Byzantine empire . The empire of Nicaea was established in the 13th century .
 It had the ability to challenge the Latin empire of Constantinople that had been established after the Fourth crusade saw the sacking of the city in 1204 . The city was the birthplace of the Roman Empire, which was established in 1203 .
 The Nicaean commander Theodore Dukas gathered all the local peasants and their flocks on hillsides behind his forces to give the impression of a huge army . Part of the Epirote contingent deserted to join the Nicaeans .
 Nicaean archers concentrated their fire on the horses of the Achaean knights . The Nicaeans concentrated fire on their enemies' horses . The battle took place in the middle of the battle .
 Once most of their horses were killed, the knights were almost defenseless and surrendered . The Achaean infantry broke and fled, leaving the knights defying .
 Sienese Ghibellines launched a surprise attack that routed the Florentine Guelph cavalry . The Florentines re-formed and held out until a hidden Siensese detachment broke cover and charged into their rear, ensuring victory .
 The defeat at Pelagonia had weakened the shaky Latin empire of Constantinople . The defeat of the Byzantine empire had weakened it .
 In July 1261, Nicaean emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos sent a scouting force to reconnoitre the city's defenses . The force was sent by the emperor to reconmine the city .
 Locals reported that the Latin army and its Venetian fleet were raiding the Nicaean island of Daphnousia . The Latin army was reported to have been raiding the island .
 Leader of scouts infiltrated a small detachment into the city, who opened one of the gates to let in the rest of the force . Seizing his chance, the leader of the scouts infiltrated the city and opened the gates .
 The surprise attack thoroughly demoralized the Latin emperor Baldwin II, who fled to the harbor . Baldwin II fled with the remnants of the weak garrison . The attack demoralized Baldwin II .
 Michael VIII entered the city August 15 to be crowned as emperor of the restored Byzantine empire . Michael VIII was crowned emperor of Byzantine empire August 15 .
 The battle was very closely fought, but ended in a decisive Egyptian victory . Despite this ploy, the Egyptian victory was decisive .
 The kings of Scotland had tried to buy Kintyre, the Hebrides, and the Isle of Man from Norway .
 Norwegians believed Scottish raids in 1262 were a prelude to an invasion . Norweigians mobilized a large fleet and army to protect the islands from Scottish raids .
 They were attacked by a larger Scottish army, which almost prevailed before reinforcements arrived . Landing on the mainland, they landed on mainland .
 The classic two-wheel fighting chariot was manned by a driver and an archer . The chariot combined battlefield mobility with firepower .
 Cannon Cannon transformed both warfare and society, making once impregnable castles vulnerable to destruction . Cannon Cannon gave the means to inflict casualties at extended ranges . Once impregnated castles were the center of feudal power .
 The flintlock mechanism did away with the matchlock's smoldering match . It provided a faster lock time (the time from when the trigger is pulled to the moment the main charge detonates) which in turn made the gun more accurate .
 Flintlocks paved the way for the mass production of firearms . Flintlocks were also cheaper than expensive wheel locks, paving the way . Flintlock locks were cheaper than costly wheel locks .
 The bayonet enabled the soldier to transform his musket or rifle into a form of short pike, through a simple muzzle-fitted blade . Bayonet was used by the British Army during the Second World War .
 Breech-loading artillery mechanisms were first seen as early as the 15th century . It was not until the 19th century that they replaced muzzle-loading mechanisms in both artillery and firearms .
 They offered faster reloading rates, greater dependability, and safer firing processes, as well as the ability to achieve higher firing pressures, and hence greater range and accuracy .
 Swiss gunsmith Jean Samuel Pauly and French gunsmith Frangois Prelat invented the unitary cartridge in 1808 . Unitary cartridge was not introduced in the military until the mid-19th century .
 Unitary cartridges made efficient breech-loading mechanisms possible . They were essential for future innovations, such as boltand auto-loading firearms .
 Maxim machine-gun used the force of recoil to load a cartridge and eject the spent shell . Machine-gun fired a spent shell as long as the trigger was held down . Maxim gun was first machine gun to fire a machine gun in the early 1900s .
 The world's first combat tank, the British Mk I, demonstrated the combination of heavy firepower, mobility, and armored protection in one vehicle . The first tank tank was built from scratch and shipped to Europe in 1903 .
 By the 1940s, the tank, alongside artillery, had become the most influential tool of land warfare . The tank, along with artillery, was the most important weapon of the war .
 Rebellious landowners led by Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester, attempted to force King Henry III of England to surrender more power to a parliament of barons . The Second Barones' War was fought in 1264-65 .
 Despite early successes, the barons eventually failed, and de Montfort was killed at Evesham . The barons failed to capture the king, and the king was eventually killed .
 The royalist army commanded by Henry III and Prince Edward was attacked by Simon de Montfort's rebels . The rebels attacked the royalist forces commanded by the king and Edward .
 The king and Prince Edward were captured in Lewes, where they were captured . Although the rebel's left wing was defeated, the bulk of the royalist force was driven into Lewes .
 In May 1265, Prince Edward escaped from Hereford Castle, where he had been imprisoned after the battle of Lewes . He escaped from the castle in 1265 . Prince Edward was captured in 1266 .
 A royalist detachment blocked Bengeworth bridge, preventing escape across the Avon river, forcing de Montfort into a frontal attack on Prince Edward's main army .
 Most of the remaining rebels fled when the royalists counterattacked, killing de Montfort and annihilating his army . The royalists were able to repel the rebels' retreat . The rebels were killed in the battle .
 Guelph and Ghibelline factions clashed in the battle . The battle degenerated into a huge melee . The Guelsph battle was continuing the conflict between the two factions .
 The Angevins, allied with the Guelphs, won, capturing the Kingdom of Sicily . The Angevinins captured the kingdom .
 The pivotal struggle in the Mongol conquest of the Song took place around Fancheng and Xiangyang . The pivotal battle took place in the region of Fancheang and Xiangang .
 Mongols fielded a riverine fleet as well as a powerful siege train for the campaign . The Mongols were known for their adaptability to the battlefields .
 The Japanese were unprepared for the savage and effective fighting style of the Mongols, and all opposition crumbled . The Mongols were able to defeat the Japanese .
 Mongol emperor Kublai Khan attempted to invade Japan in 1274 and 1281 . Samurai warriors rode into battle in Japan .
 In both campaigns, his armies were driven back with the help of violent weather . Violent weather was the main factor in both campaigns .
 The Mongols soon re-embarked on the Crimean Peninsula in Crimea . However, this first invasion was simply a reconnaissance in force and the Mongols re-entered .
 Mongols dismounted and chased the elephants back into their ranks with archery . The Mongols' horses shied away from the Burmese war elephants .
 Bohemian army's formation under King Premysl Ottokar II was disorganized by fire from Hungarian mounted archers and then charged by imperial heavy cavalry .
 After a fierce fight, the Bohemian reserves broke, followed by the rest of the army . The Czech Republic was defeated by the Czech Republic in 1944 .
 Attempting to invade Japan, the Mongols encountered well-prepared and determined defenders . The Mongols faced a strong resistance from the defenders of Japan .
 Llywelyn ap Gruffydd deployed the Welsh army in a strong defensive position commanding a bridge . The position was outflanked by an English detachment upstream . The Welsh army was defeated by the English .
 The English archers inflicted heavy casualties, allowing their cavalry to break the Welsh army . The Welsh army was defeated by the English cavalry .
 A helmet and armor such as this would have been worn by a Mongol warrior . Mongol warrior armor .
 Leather or metal plates stitched to silk coat provided lightweight protection for mounted combat . Made of leather or metal plate stitched with silk coat, silk coat .
 Welsh army prevented from retreating into nearby woods by English cavalry . English cavalry prevented the Welsh army from retreating from nearby woods .
 An ""arrow storm"" from the English archers disordered the Welsh formation, which was then broken by cavalry charges . The Welsh formation was broken up by the cavalry charges of the Welshmen .
 The battle played an important role in breaking Welsh resistance to English rule . The battle took place in 17th century during the Welsh resistance .
 Luring the Angevin fleet away from its safe port, the Aragonese turned to fight and were joined by reinforcements . The Aragones turned to fighting and joined reinforcements .
 This battle was the culmination of a war of succession for the Duchy of Limburg . The battle took place in the 17th century during the reign of the Limburg duchy .
 Duke John I of Brabant was opposed by Count Henry of Luxembourg and the Archbishop of Cologne . Count Henry was opposed to the Duke by Count John of Luxembourg . Duke John was the son of Count Henry, Count Henry and Archbishop Cologne .
 Count's cavalry nearly won the battle with its first charge, but the count was killed . After eight hours of fighting, his men broke after eight hours .
 The archbishop's division was also routed when it was attacked by a force that included rebels from Cologne . The archdiocese was also attacked by the rebels .
 The last crusader stronghold in the Holy Land was besieged by a huge Muslim army . It was besieged in the last crusade stronghold in Holy Land .
 Siege engines and mining prepared the way for a massive assault, and the garrison could not prevent the walls being breached . The siege was successful .
 Scottish struggles for independence pitted the pikemen against the more diverse forces of England, which included spearmen and bowmen from England and Wales . The Scottish struggles pitted the courageous but lightly equipped Scottish pike men against the English forces .
 Scots attacked and caught many English knights trapped in a marsh . The far larger English army tried to cross the Forth River, the Scots attacked .
 These were bombarded by fire from English archers, until they were weakened to be broken by cavalry charges . These were eventually weakened to the strength of the cavalry .
 During the formation of the Swiss Confederacy, soldiers of Duke Leopold 1 of Austria were ambushed on a mountain pass by Swiss infantry, who hurled boulders and tree trunks down the slope, before charging in with their halberds .
 Robert the Bruce deployed his small Scottish force on a hillside blocking the road . He blocked the road at a point where it ran between marshes and marshes .
 The Black Prince Edward earned his reputation for valor at the battle of Crecy in 1346 . The Scots also dug triple lines of trenches from the edges of the road to the marshes, to prevent any attempts to outflank their troops .
 Four dense formations of Scottish spearmen advanced uphill into an ""arrow storm" from English longbows . Four dense formation of Scottish Spearmen advance into an 'arrow storm' from English Longbows .
 During the French invasion of Flanders, the French knights advanced through their own infantry and charged at the emplaced pikes of the Flemish infantry . The French knights rashly advanced through the French knight's own own infantry .
 The English army was unable to exploit its numerical superiority and was forced into frontal attacks along the road . It was forced to use frontal attacks against the English army .
 At least two cavalry charges were bloodily repulsed by the Scottish spearmen . The English army hastily retreated from the Scottish army .
 English men-at-arms labored to cross the marshy terrain around the Bannockburn stream . The Scots charged down at them in massed pike formations .
 This was the decisive battle of the First War of Scottish Independence . The battle took place during the First Scottish Independence War . It was a decisive battle for Scottish independence .
 In 1817-24 more than 10,000 British soldiers in India died during the first cholera pandemic, along with hundreds of thousands of Indian civilians .
 Malaria Parasite spread through mosquito bite . Chronic fever and fatigue, vomiting and diarrhea, coma, paralysis, organ failure . In 1895, French campaign in Madagascar resulted in 13 combat deaths and 4,000 deaths .
 In 1914, one in six people in Serbia contracted typhus, which also killed 70,000 Serbian soldiers . Bubonic plague spread via flea bites or contact with infected tissue .
 The plague eventually killed over 75 million people worldwide and destroyed entire armies . The plague was the first plague to strike in the early 1900s and spread throughout Europe .
 During an amphibious operation against the pro-French garrison of Cadsand, the Flemish forces formed up on the beach to oppose the landing, but were decimated by longbow fire from the ships and broke .
 The city was taken by the Turks in 1337, a defeat from which the Byzantine empire did not recover . Despite an attempt to buy off the Turks with tribute, the city was never recovered from the defeat .
 Attempting to halt the advance of the Ashikaga clan against the capital, the imperial army was outflanked by naval maneuvers . Other forces engaged it to the front of the front .
 Burgundian army besieging Laupen was attacked by a Swiss relief force . The relief force was largely composed of pikemen and halberdiers . Burgundians were attacked by Swiss relief forces .
 Two of the three Swiss divisions quickly defeated the opposing infantry, while the third held off the Burgundian cavalry, which was then broken by charges against its flanks and rear .
 Charles IV of France with no direct male heir provoked a succession crisis . Charles III of France died in 1337-1453 . The death of Charles IV led to the death of the French king .
 The French-Genoese fleet unwisely took up defensive positions with its ships chained together . The French and Genoese ships were chained together in a joint battle .
 The more maneuverable English fleet was able to bring intense archery to bear to assist the men-at-arms in their boarding actions, resulting in the destruction of most of France's fleet .
 French launched several uphill charges at the English lines . Arriving tired and disorganized at the battlefield, the French were disorganized and tired . The battle was fought in 17th century .
 Flaving already suffered heavily from longbow attacks, the French knights were repulsed in hand-to-hand fighting .
 Although he was an exceptional military leader he died a year before his father . He was a leader of the British Army .
 In 1297,15,000 Scots under William Wallace defeated a huge English army led by John, Earl of Warenne and Surrey . Stirling Bridge was the site of the Battle of Stirling .
 The Scottish attacked when the English force was most vulnerable, halfway across the narrow bridge on the Forth River . The attack took place in the early hours of Sunday morning on the bridge .
 The English deployed 20 primitive cannon against the walls of Calais, but these proved ineffective . The English used 20 primitive cannons against the wall, but they were ineffective .
 The city eventually starved into submission and became an English possession . The city was eventually starved .
 King David II invaded England to support France following Crecy and the fall of Calais . The invasion was the result of a French invasion of England . David II was King of England from France .
 Scottish army stung into attacking by longbow fire . Scottish army took up a defensive position, but was attacked by longbows .
 The English archery and the broken ground resulted in a decisive defeat for the Scottish army . The Scottish army was defeated by the English army .
 A French army that had invaded Poitou was besieging Saintes when it was confronted by a small English relief force . Sir John Beauchamp, the governor of Calais, was in charge of a small relief force.
 The English took up a defensive formation similar to that used at Crecy . The English used to play in Crecy's defence .
 The bulk of the French army formed up on foot, with cavalry detachments on each flank, but as it deployed it was routed by a flank and-rear attack that was launched by a detachment from the English garrison of Taillebourg . French troops were routed by an attack launched
 Lead or iron balls contained within a metal Anti-personnel fire case . Case ruptured when the gun was fired, creating a shotgun effect . During the 14th century, European artillery fired hand-carved stone shot .
 Sir Walter Bentley's Anglo-Breton force intercepted a French army marching on Brest . Dismounted men-at-arms deployed along a ridge with dismounted men at the center of the line .
 Most French knights dismounted, apart from a detachment tasked with attacking the Anglo-Breton right flank . Most of the French knights also dismounted .
 This detachment scattered the archers facing them, but failed to attack the rest of Bentley's force . Bentley's forces were scattered by a detachment of archers, but did not attack .
 The main French advance was slowed by bramble thickets in front of the Anglo-Breton position and took heavy casualties from the English archers, before breaking when Bentley counterattacked . Bentley counter-attacked when the French were forced to retreat .
 The English charged and routed the French force after savage fighting . After barely managing to repulse French attacks, the English charge and rout the French .
 This battle was one of the three great English victories of the war, the other two being Crecy and Agincourt . The battle was fought in 17th century in France and France .
 In 1358, the chaos and devastation of the Hundred Years War sparked off a series of French peasant revolts, known as the Jacquerie . The Jacqueries were the French peasants who revolted in the aftermath of the war .
 The main peasant army drew up in a strong position on a hillside near Mello, but its commander, Guillaume Cale, was tricked into negotiations and killed by the nobles' commander, Charles of Navarre . The peasants were killed by Charles, the son of the nobles
 The nobles' forces then attacked and routed the leaderless peasants, after which the rebellion was ruthlessly crushed in several months of bloody reprisals . The peasants' revolt was brutally wiped out by the nobles, who then attacked the peasants .
 The English force drew up on a hillside overlooking the Loch River to await the French army commanded by Charles de Blois . The English army drew up in front of the Loch, Loch and waited for the French .
 The French crossed the river and attacked in four divisions, which charged into the English men-at-arms . Despite heavy losses, the French took heavy losses from the English supporting archers .
 English longbow archery dominated the battle, causing the Castilian cavalry to retreat and abandon their allies . The Castilian forces retreated and abandoned their allies in the battle . The battle took place in the 13th century .
 The French mercenaries fought on, but without support their defeat was inevitable . Without support, the French mercenaries were doomed to defeat .
 John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, launched a five-month raid into France . He launched the raid in France during the 13th century . The raid took place in France and lasted five years .
 A French force besieging the town of Mercq was surprised by an English relief force from Calais . English relief forces from Calais surprised the French town .
 At the battle of Agincourt, Henry V defeated a French army led by Constable Charles d'Albret . The French French defeat was the French defeat of Henry V .
 15 crossbowmen were almost out of ammunition after their earlier attacks on the town . They were quickly shot down by the English archers, whose fire then routed the remaining French troops . French troops were routed .
 Led by King Henry V, the English army deployed between two woods with archers on the flanks and dismounted men-at-arms .
 The French suffered heavy casualties from archery, before the English counterattacked and drove the French from the battlefield . Struggling over wet ground, the English fought back and won .
 An English raiding party commanded by Thomas Beaufort, Earl of Dorset, was intercepted by a French army at Valmont . The French army intercepted the English raid .
 The heavily outnumbered English were forced to overextend their line to protect their flanks . Repeated French charges finally broke through after repeated French charges broke through .
 Beaufort rallied his men in a thickly hedged garden before slipping away after dark . The attackers then began looting the English baggage train, giving time for Beaufort to rally his men . Beaufort then slipped off after dark in a garden .
 The English force then headed along the coast for Harfleur, but were again attacked by the French . The French were routed after a fierce battle on the beach . The English were then routed after the French were defeated in a battle .
 Sir John Stuart's Franco-Scottish army besieging Cravant redeployed along the line of the Yonne River, to block the advance of an Anglo-Burgundian relief force .
 The English men-at-arms attacked across the river under covering fire from their supporting archers, while a further attack was made across a narrow bridge .
 Stuart's men were fully committed, the garrison of Cravant broke out and charged into the rear of his force, which was routed with heavy casualties . Stuart's force was routed by the garrison, which suffered heavy casualties.
 French cavalry were repulsed when they attacked the baggage train . After a successful charge against the English right flank, they were repulseed by the French cavalry .
 On the other flank, the English broke the opposing cavalry, before surrounding and destroying the Scottish contingent . The Scottish contingent was destroyed .
 The convoy's wagons formed into a defensive circle that was bombarded by the French artillery . The French artillery bombarded the convoy in a circle of wagons .
 Before the gunfire could take effect, the Scottish contingent attacked and was repulsed with heavy losses . The Scottish contingent was repuffed of their attack .
 French defenders began capturing strong points by sortie . Inspired by the arrival of Joan of Arc, the French defenders were able to capture strong points with sortie.
 The English tried to draw the defenders out into open battle, and abandoned the siege when this failed . The siege was abandoned when the English failed .
 A French army intercepted an English force attempting to raise the siege of Caen . The siege was stopped by the French army in Caen, France .
 French artillery fire provoked an English attack that captured the cannon . The cannon was captured by the English in 1777 .
 The attackers were charged by French men-at-arms, who recaptured the guns, at which point a flank charge by French reinforcements broke the English army . The battle was fought between the English and the French .
 Duke Leopold III dismounted his men-at-arms in order to counter the Swiss halberdiers . Attempting to relieve the besieged city of Castillon, the English advanced into the fire of archers .
 The French use of cannon was key to the English defeat in this final battle of the Hundred Years War . The final battle was the final battle between the English and French .
 The group known as the Red Turbans were part of a revolt against the Mongol Yuan rulers . The revolt gradually expanded into a formal military campaign against the rulers of the Yuan .
 As an invading Mongol army marched on Moscow to punish the city's cessation of tribute, it was intercepted at Kulikovo . The city was attacked by the Mongols to punish an earlier cessation of its tribute .
 After hard fighting, the day was won by a Russian flanking counterattack . The battle was fought in front of Russian troops in northern Syria .
 By the 15th century, plate armor provided total protection and was surprisingly well articulated and easy to wear . Plate armor, called ""white harness,"" provided total . protection .
 This German ""Gothic"" style armor shows the supreme skill of late-medieval European metalworkers. and pikemen. The armor was created by German metalworkers .
 They pushed back the Swiss vanguard, but were attacked at the flank and overwhelmed . The Swiss army was overwhelmed by the onslaught of the Swiss .
 The Swiss initially defended ""Ietzinen" -- barricades of loose stones blocking the Austrian advance along an alpine valley . The Swiss army initially defended the area along a narrow valley in the Swiss Alps .
 When these were breached, the Swiss withdrew up the mountainside and sent avalanches of boulders rolling down into the enemy lines . They counterattacked and routed the Austrians, routing them into the Swiss mountains .
 Timur claimed that Genghis Khan was his direct ancestor and led a ferocious Central Asian people who were the descendants of the Mongols . The Mongols were the people Timur said to be his direct ancestors .
 His campaigns in Arabia, India, Persia, and against his rivals were characterized by great brutality, as well as clever planning and sound strategy . His campaigns were characterized as great brutality and clever planning .
 Timur made good use of spies and agents, as well as terror tactics, to persuade his enemies to submit without a fight . Timur used terror tactics to convince his enemies of submitting without fight .
 When the people of Isfahan revolted rather than pay tribute to Timur, Timur ordered his army to storm the city and required each soldier to bring him the severed head of one of its citizens . Timur's army was forced to storm Isfahahahistan and
 Timur's forces fought the Mongol Golden Horde under Batu under Timur . Four years after they had met in an inconclusive clash at Kondurcha, Timur fought the Golden Horde . Timur and Batu fought in a bloody but inconclusive battle .
 This time Timur was victorious, and merciless in the subsequent pursuit . This time he was victorious and mercilessly pursued by Timur .
 Timur advanced against Syria and shattered the Mameluk army at Aleppo . Timur had been putting down rebellions in western Asia, putting down rebellion .
 The city was then sacked, opening the way for him to advance on Damascus . The city then fell into disarray, allowing the advance to Damascus .
 Timur's army became overencumbered with plunder that all Hindu captives, perhaps 100,000, were slaughtered . Timur became so hungry that his army became so over-confused with plunder, he slaughtered all the Hindus .
 Timur founded an empire that stretched from the Caucasus to India . From his capital, Samarkand, Timur built an empire from his capital . Timur's empire stretched from Caucasus to the Indian Ocean .
 After failing to contact Timur, tired and thirsty Ottomans found their enemies besieging Ankara . Timur's forces were defeated by the Turkish army in the city .
 Ottomans had to attack, and were also assaulted from the rear . Desperate for water, they attacked from the back of the rear of the Ottoman army .
 Serbian-led army met the enemy at Kosovo and a confused battle ensued . The Serbian-backed army was defeated by the enemy in a confusion of battle . The Serbic-led Serbian army was victorious in Kosovo .
 Initial charge by the Christians was defeated by sharpened stakes and archery . Attempting to repel the Ottoman invaders, the Christians were defeated . The initial charge was defeated in a battle by sharpening stakes and shooting .
 The Christians came close to victory before the Ottomans' Serbian allies joined the fight and tipped the balance . Nevertheless, the Christians came near to victory, but the battle was not over .
 Welsh were able to drive out the English in a protracted guerrilla war . Led by Owain Glyndwr, the Welsh drove the English out of the Welsh .
 A sortie into England, with French assistance, failed, and the rebellion was eventually defeated . The rebellion was gradually defeated by the French and British forces .
 A rebellion against the English king Henry IV, led by Harry ""Hotspur"" Percy, almost succeeded, but collapsed when he was killed . The rebellion collapsed when Percy was killed in 17th century .
 Rebel archers inflicted heavy casualties on the Royalists . Nevertheless, the rebel archers suffered heavy casualties . Royalists suffered heavy losses in the battle .
 The Kingdom of Poland and Duchy of Lithuania took on the expansionist Teutonic Order . The Order was established in the 13th century .
 The Polish-Lithuanians attacked first and drove off the enemy infantry . The Poles attacked first, drove off enemy infantry. The Poles were victorious in the Battle of St. Louis .
 The Teutonic Knights counterattacked with some success, until flanked by a reserve enemy force . The Teutsonic Knights were forced to retreat from the battle .
 The Hussites were a sect inspired by the teachings of Jan Huss, a Czech religious reformer executed for heresy in 1415 . The Hussite War was the first of its kind in 1419-34 .
 Hussite general, Jan Zizka, developed battle-winning combination of light field artillery, warwagons, and light cavalry in order to fight off a crusade against them . The Hussite was a military pioneer .
 The French Chauchat entered service in 1916 and was plagued by jamming problems, shocking recoil, poor layout, terrible build quality, misaligned sights and erratic spent-cartridge ejection .
 The build quality was terrible, but the worst ""feature"" of all was the exposed workings along the side of the gun frame, which meant that the gun could go off if the frame was accidentally squeezed . The gun could also go off accidentally .
 The Liberator was an unbelievably cheap pressed-steel single-shot handgun . Manufactured in the United States between 1942 and 1945, the Liberator .
 Poking around in the mechanism with a stick was the only way to extract a spent cartridge . Poking into the mechanism is the only method of extracting the spent cartridge from the gun .
 SA80A1 has been made into a decent assault rifle . Initial production batch suffered from parts falling off, constant jamming, an easily knocked magazine-release catch, and awkward arrangement of features . Initial modifications have turned the SA80 assault rifle into an effective weapon .
 The rondel dagger was popular with the aristocracy and gentry in 15th-century England . It was used to ward off a frontal attack on its heavily defended wagons . The dagger was used by the gentry and aristocracy in England .
 The surrounded Hussites formed their wagons into a coiumn that advanced, hand guns and artillery firing, through the enemy line . The Hussites were surrounded by the enemy, surrounded by a wall of snow .
 Hussites then counterattacked and drove the crusader forces out of Bohemia . Having escaped encirclement, the Hussites escaped . The Hussites fought back and drove out of the kingdom .
 The crusader cavalry unsuccessfully charged the wagenburg and were routed when Hussite cavalry counterattacked . The crusaders were routed by the Hussite Hussites .
 It seems likely the crusaders mistook the withdrawal of their baggage train for the start of a general retreat and panicked when the Hussites attacked . The Hussites attack was the first time the Crusaders were attacked .
 In the Ottoman-Hungarian War, the Christians used wagons to form a defensive line, offsetting the superior Ottoman numbers . The Christians lost when their leader was killed when the Christians lost their leader .
 After battering the walls with cannon and making several assaults, the Ottomans had stretched the defenders thinly . The Ottomanans had made several assaults on the walls, but the defenders were exhausted .
 Teutonic Knights broke out of the besieged city and attacked their rear . Initial cavalry charge by the Poles was successful, until a force of Teutons broke out and attacked them .
 The conflict was known as the Wars of the Roses from the badges used by each side . It was known by the badge used by both sides during the conflict .
 Even after the defeat of Richard at the battle of Bosworth in 1485, Yorkist revolts went on until the end of the century . Yorkist rebels went on for more than a century .
 Location South of Towton village, between Pontefract and Tadcaster, north Yorkshire, England .
 Much of the battle, the bloodiest of the War of the Roses, was fought in a snowstorm . The battle was the bloodyest of the 16th century and bloodiest in England .
 The Yorkist archers' fire was so effective that the Lancastrians were provoked into a charge leading to an extended melee . Lancastrian archers provoked a charge which led to the end of the battle .
 The arrival of Yorkist reinforcements finally broke the Lancastrian army . Yorkist forces finally broke Lancastrians' army .
 During the battle, elements of King Richard's Yorkist army remained unengaged or even switched sides .
 The king led a charge at Henry Tudor, hoping to kill him and thereby end the campaign, but became surrounded and was himself slain . The king was himself killed in the battle .
 The rebels rejected Henry VII as king of England . East Stoke, near Newark, Nottinghamshire, England, was the site of the rebellion .
 Persian forces numbering more than two million men fought in the Battle of Thermopylae . The rebel army was largely Persian .
 Liu Bei and Sun Quan pitted their forces against those of Cao Cao . Cao Cao's forces were led by Liu Bei against Sun Quan and Cao Bei . Liu Bei was killed in the Battle of Red Cliffs .
 The latter was defeated in a battle involving more than half a million men . More than half-a-million men fought in the Battle of the Somalian Peninsula .
 More than 315,000 Korean and Chinese troops clashed around the Salsu River in Korea . Sui Emperor Yangdi invaded Goguryeo with a million men with a one million men . More than 300,000 Chinese and Korean troops clashed in Korea after the invasion .
 Spanish commander of up to 80,000 troops defeated up to 300,000 warriors to take the Aztec capital . Spanish commander Hernan Cortes, commander of . up to 30,000 Spanish troops, defeated up . to take Tenochtitlan . Cortes defeated up
 The biggest European land battle before World War I pitted Napoleon's forces against nine states or nations . The battle involved more than half a million men . composed of Irish and German mercenaries .
 This charge pushed the Royalist vanguard back but the rebels broke after three hours of hard fighting . The rebels were pushed back by the vanguard but the battle was not over for three hours .
 The Ottomans had broken into the city the previous day, but were pushed back in fierce fighting . The fighting lasted throughout the night, lasting throughout the day .
 At dawn, scattered Hungarian units pursued the retreating Ottoman forces and began attacking the besiegers' camp . The Hungarians attacked the Ottoman camp at dawn of the morning .
 As more Hungarians joined in, the demoralized Ottoman army broke up . The demoralized army broke down and ran .
 More than 3 million troops fought on the Western Front between July and November 1916, with 1 million casualties . More than 1 million troops were killed in the Somme, France .
 This was the largest battle of World War I and one of the bloodiest of all time . The Battle of the Somalian Somalian War was the deadliest battle of the war . The battle was one of most bloodiest in the war's history .
 Combined German-Soviet forces included over 6,000 tanks, 2. million soldiers, and 5,000 aircraft . Kursk was the largest tank battle in history .
 More than 400,000 Japanese troops launched an offensive into southern China in World War II . The offensive was resisted by equal numbers of Chinese soldiers . Operation Ichi-Go took place in southern China .
 A three-week battle between Israel and surrounding Arab armies pits more than 400,000 Israeli troops and 2,300 tanks against combined Arab forces of about 200,000 men and more than 3,000 tanks .
 A million Coalition soldiers took on a similar number of Iraqi troops in the battle to eject Saddam's invasion force from Kuwait . Operation Desert Storm was the first major U.S. invasion of Kuwait in the war .
 Burgundians were surprised and overrun by the sudden attack of the Swiss . Burgundian had constructed extensive field fortifications, but were surprised by the attack .
 Spanish army besieged the city of Granada until it was forced to surrender . Granada was one of the Moorish strongholds in the region . Spanish army had a systematic campaign to eliminate Moorish .
 The availability of firearms that were easily portable, as well as field artillery, changed the nature of warfare considerably in the early 16th century . Early Modern Warfare 1500-1750 .
 The change was slow, and it took many years for the weapons to achieve their full potential . The new weapons were developed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Muskets were the primary weapon for infantry in the early 1900s . The move from hand weaponry to firearms was as inevitable as it was gradual .
 This was the first in a series of conflicts known as the Italian Wars, taking place between 1494 and 1559 . The Italian Wars were the first of a series known as 'The Italian Wars'
 The wars arose out of disputes over the Duchy of Milan and the Kingdom of Naples . The wars drew in a number of states, including Italy and Italy .
 In 1494, a French force invaded Italy in 1494 deploying siege cannon for what was probably the first time, and took possession of Naples in 1495 . In 1495, the French force took control of Naples and took over Naples .
 The ""League of Venice"—formed mainly from Italian states, was also an historical first . The League of Venice was also a historical first.
 Aztec warrior is shown wearing a feathered battledress, holding a tasselled shield and carrying an obsidian-bladed wooden sword on his back .
 The action was bloody but indecisive . The French cannon had little effect due to damp powder, and the action was inconclusive . The battle was bloody and bloody .
 Continued French claims to the thrones of Naples and Milan led to a joint French-Spanish expedition to take the cities by force . French and Spanish forces were involved in the Italian war of 1499-1505 .
 Disputes over the division of spoils then led to war between France and Spain, in which the Italian states played a lesser role on each side . Disputes led to the war between Spain and France, which led to Italian states playing a smaller role .
 After a preliminary bombardment that breached the walls, the Spanish assaulted the town of Ruvo . Ruvo was the first town to be attacked by the Spanish in the 18th century .
 Street fighting went on for several hours even after the walls were taken, but eventually the French force was overwhelmed . Eventually the French forces were overwhelmed .
 Spanish forces were deployed in a new way, as mixed units of swordsmen, pikemen, and arquebusiers . The Spanish forces beat off attacks by the French heavy cavalry .
 Cerignola was the first major battle to be won primarily by infantry firearms . The battle was fought in Italy in 1841 . It was won by infantry, the first battle won by using infantry weapons .
 After maneuvering on either side of the Garigliano River, the Spanish crossed by means of an improvised bridge, catching the French by surprise . The Spanish captured the French on the backside of the river, capturing them by surprise.
 League of Cambrai was formed to counter the growing power of the Republic of Venice . League was formed in 1508-16 to counter Venice's power .
 Shifting alliances and conflicting interests drew virtually every major power in Europe into a complex conflict . The conflict formed the next phase of the wider Italian Wars .
 Venice and France ended the war as allies despite starting on opposite sides . The eventual result was gains for Venice, France and Venice, which ended up as allies .
 French heavy cavalry attacked the Spanish positions from the flank . Pikemen assaulted the front of the Spanish line .
 Such shields provided light-weight protection for a swordsman's free hand, as well as helping him parry during fencing . Such shields were made of iron, brass or wood and provided light weight protection for the swordsman .
 After a night march, the Swiss were in position to attack the French camp at dawn . The Swiss were attacked at dawn by the French at the end of the night .
 Swiss pikemen overran the French camp, killing infantry and chasing off cavalry . Catching the French totally unprepared, the Swiss were able to defeat the French army .
 The Swiss had expected the shock of their pike charge to overwhelm the enemy . But unexpectedly tough resistance resulted in a long and indecisive battle .
 The arrival of French reinforcements forced the Swiss forces to withdraw . Swiss forces were forced to withdraw after the arrival of reinforcements .
 The Ottoman army defeated the Safavids' cavalry army using a combination of janissaries and artillery . The army suffered hardship as a result of a ""scorched-earth"" policy implemented by the retreating Safavid .
 The Mameluks attempted to halt the Ottoman advance using a fortified position equipped with cannon . The fortress was set up in order to stop the advance of the Ottoman army .
 Dutch navy, Various ""Keelhauling"", which involved fixing blocks to yardarms on 16th-19th either side of the ship . The punishment was punishment by the Dutch navy .
 The offender was bound to a line centuries passing through the blocks and beneath the ship . He was bound in a line bound to the ship's walls and under the ship in the 19th century .
 Lead weights were attached to his feet and he was dropped into the water, hauled under the keel, and raised on the other side, where the process was repeated . He was then hauled under a keel and raised to the other end of the process .
 A basic form of punishment in many armies was flogging, or 17th-19th breaches of the the judicial whipping of a man who had committed an centuries code of conduct offense against the regiment's rules and regulations . Various armies, Misdemeanor; Flogging .
 Often flogging was administered by non-commissioned officers, with the offender paraded before the formed company, to serve as a lesson to others .
 In 1858, after the Sepoy Mutiny had been crushed, the India Company revived a punishment for high treason from the time of army, the Mogul emperors . British East Mutiny .
 When gunners fired their guns, the mutineers were literally blown apart . Mutineers are blown apart when the gunners fire their guns . The mutineer was blown apart by the gunfire .
 As part of the punishment of a soldier found guilty of felony 20th century offences (e.g., crimes by court martial, the convict would often be given a . assault, murder) dishonorable discharge .
 This form of discharge could impact on the felon's right to own firearms, his eligibility to vote, and his ability to find employment . In addition to a prison sentence and other penalties, this could also impact his right to vote and own firearms .
 A small number of European troops, assisted by local allies, carried out the Spanish conquest of what is now Mexico . The conquest took place in 1519-21 .
 The Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan, was initially occupied without a fight . Aztec warriors were able to capture the capital without bloodshed .
 Ousted by a revolt, the Spanish had to fight a campaign in the field before retaking the city by siege . The Spanish were forced to fight back by siege after a revolt in the Spanish city .
 Spanish were caught on one of the causeways and unable to use their horses or artillery . Intercepted as they tried to escape a revolt in Tenochtitlan by breaking out of the city in the night .
 Only a few of the Spanish and their allies were able to make their way over the causeway and escape . Spanish and allies were only a few able to escape .
 The Spanish ground down resistance in Tenochtitlan by razing each street as they captured it . The Spanish destroyed each street in the capture of Tenochitlan .
 Every night they retired out of the city, pushing in again the next day . Every night, they retired from the city and pushed in again, pushing out again, they say .
 The election in 1519 of Charles I of Spain as Holy Roman emperor triggered another round of fighting in the Italian Wars of 1521-26 . Charles I was the Holy Roman Emperor of the Roman Empire of 1519 .
 This time fighting took place all over Europe, although the decisive action was fought at Pavia in northern Italy, south of Milan . This time the fighting was fought in the Battle of Pavia .
 Swiss mercenaries in French service in Lombardy were disgruntled because they had received no pay . They threatened to return home unless the French commander Lautrec attacked them at once . The Swiss mercenaries were unhappy because they were not paid .
 The Swiss used a head-on advance with their pikes leveled, their standard tactic . The Swiss are known for their use of the pikes in the battle .
 They were halted by obstacles and artillery fire, and then driven off by arquebusiers . Ffowowever, they were stopped by obstacles, and driven off .
 Bicocca is sometimes considered the first engagement in which firearms were decisive . The battle was fought in the Battle of Bicoca, Italy, in 1881 .
 At the battle of Pavia on February 24 1525, the pikemen and arquebusiers of the Spanish Holy Roman emperor Charles V destroyed the army of Francis I, king of France . The battle took place in the Italian city of the Pavia .
 In autumn 1524 the French king, Francis I, had marched an army over the Alps and occupied Milan . The French king had marched a large army into the city and occupied it .
 His troops then besieged Pavia, but an imperial force was sent to relieve the garrison there . His forces then besieged the city, but the garrison was eventually relieved .
 The imperial forces used a night march to get on the French flank, resulting in a confused battle . The French were outfought in a series of small local actions .
 The following year he signed the Treaty of Madrid, renouncing his territorial claims in Italy . The treaty was signed by the King of Italy in 1910 .
 League of Cognac was formed to attempt to remove Spanish and Holy Roman empire interests from Italy . League was led by France and the Papal States .
 Musical instruments have for centuries formed part of the basic equipment of an army going to war . Musical instruments are among the most important pieces of the army's equipment .
 In the confusion after a battle began, loud notes from horns or pipes, or drumbeats could communicate commands more clearly than other kinds of signaling, like flags .
 Aboard naval warships, drums and specialized whistles, known as boatswain's pipes, were traditionally used to indicate the arrival of visitors or senior officers, to signal the arrival .
 Soldiers were trained to respond to certain notes or combinations of notes blown loudly on copper or iron trumpets . Soldiers would respond to different notes or combination of notes blowing loudly on trumpets.
 Notes would indicate attacks, retreats, and other maneuvers around the battlefield . The notes would indicate attacking, retreating, or other maneuvers .
 In the 19th century, a small horn called a bugle became one of the most important signaling devices on American and many European battlefields . The horn was used to command the movements of infantry and cavalry alike .
 Drums may be among the most ancient of martial musical instruments, appearing in combat almost everywhere, from tribal warfare in Mesoamerica and Africa to Asia and Europe .
 In naval service, the phrase ""beat to quarters" indicated a particular kind of drum roll that ordered sailors to their posts for a fight . Some would load and prepare to fire the ship's guns and others would arm with muskets and ascend the rigging as sharpshooters .
 On land, drums were used to command maneuvers in most European-style armies throughout the 19th century . drums were also used on land, in Europe, to command maneuver maneuvers on land and sea .
 For several centuries armies relied on musket-armed infantry, the drum was essential . Drum was essential to ensure that very large formations of men moved accurately and held ranks as they closed with the enemy .
 Small high-pitched flutes played an important role in signaling infantry maneuvers . Fifes were developed from medieval folk instruments .
 The shrill notes of the fife, coupled with various drumbeats, could deliver complex commands to infantry units that were engaged in combat and were otherwise unreachable through the smoke and terrible noise .
 Fifes usually had just six finger holes and typically played in the key of B flat . Fifes were played in B flat and played in a key of the B flat key .
 Various cultures around the world have developed and still play forms of bagpipes in their folk music . Bagpipes are used in folk music and folk music in various cultures .
 In some cultures, bagpipes were pressed into military service in much the same way that the medieval flute became the martial fife .
 The bagpipes evolved into a sophisticated signaling device in Scotland in particular, where the instrument became almost a national symbol . Bagpipes are a symbol of Scotland's national unity .
 Developed from the 15th century, the fife became an important battlefield musical instrument . Wooden fife, such as this wooden example below, was developed from 15th Century .
 Mercenaries in imperial service mutinied due to lack of pay and forced their commanders to lead a march on Rome .
 Florence became an independent republic after the sack of Rome, fighting against the imperial faction . Florence is now an independent Republic of Italy .
 Imperial army besieged the city for ten months . Florence finally surrendered when it became apparent that outside assistance would not be arriving .
 The death of the Duke of Milan triggered another round of conflict over the duchy . It was the first time the death of Milan's death triggered a new conflict in Italy . The death prompted a further conflict in the area .
 French troops captured Turin, but were unable to take Milan, while an imperial incursion into France ended inconclusively .
 Ottoman expansion into Europe via the Balkans also met with vigorous resistance, primarily from Austria . Ottoman expansion in the Balkans met with resistance from Austria, Austria and other countries .
 The walls had been breached with mining, cannon, and explosive charges, yet the defenders were able to repel many assaults . The walls were breached by mining and cannon, but the walls had survived .
 They eventually agreed to surrender the fortress in return for safe conduct . The fortress was eventually surrendered by the Russians .
 The Hungarian cavalry came up against a line of cannon chained together to make a barricade . The battle was the first of its kind in Hungary and Hungary in 17th century .
 This highly decorated dagger, called a khanjar, comes from Mogul-era Rajasthan, India .
 Its pommel is shaped like a ram's head and, like the sheath, it is decorated with semiprecious stones . The pommel has been shaped like the head of a ram .
 Spanish conquistadores arrived as the Inca empire was divided by civil war . They were able to capitalize on the situation .
 European horses and advanced European weapons to help intimidate the Inca, many of whom joined forces with the newcomers . The Inca were defeated by the Incas in the Incahahayayay .
 A small band of Spanish troops marched across Peru and confronted the Incan emperor . The Incan empire was defeated by the Spanish in 18th century .
 The Incan leadership was eliminated during a formal meeting by the Spanish . The Incans were killed by the Incans during the Incan war .
 Manqo Qapac led an initially successful revolt . Installed as a puppet emperor by the Spanish, he led a revolt against the Spanish .
 He fought a guerrilla war against the conquistadors until his death in 1544 . Eventually driven away from the capital, he fought a guerilla war .
 Further disputes over Milan brought about war between France, now allied with the Ottoman empire, and Spain . Spain, the Holy Roman empire and various allies also fought over Milan .
 The final round of the Italian Wars saw fighting in several corners of Europe . France and Spain were forced to accept a settlement after years of fighting .
 Spain remained the dominant power in Italy at the end of the wars . Despite this, Spain remained dominant in the country .
 Ottoman sultan Suleiman the Magnificent was a priority for the Ottomans on Rhodes . The Ottoman Empire ruled over the island of Rhodes until the end of the Ottoman rule .
 After a failed attempt in 1480, the Ottomans besieged the island again in 1522 . The island was invaded by the Ottoman Empire in 1422 .
 Appeals from Rhodes for help from other European states went largely unheeded . The situation in Italy has led to the crisis in the island nation .
 Sultan Ibrahim Lodi's forces ran into heavy fire from Babur's Mogul army . Goaded into attacking on a narrow front against well-prepared positions, the forces were attacked by Babur forces .
 Genoese fleet had already defeated the Ottomans at sea . The imperial army landed in Tunisia, protected by Genosya fleet .
 After taking the port of La Goleta, the imperial forces then advanced on the city of Tunis . The imperial forces took control of the Tunisian port .
 Niccolo Machiavelli's The Art of War is a series of dialogs discussing how an army should be trained and deployed . MachiaVElli's Art of the War was published in Italy in 1519-20 CE .
 Machiavelli suggests to his Florentine rulers that Roman practices should be emulated . Machiavellani suggests Florentines should emulate the Roman practice .
 Uber die Fechtkunst und den Ringkampf (On Fighting Arts and Tournament ) by Hans Czynner German 1538 . This was one of many 15thand 16th-century manuals that helped codify Renaissance European fighting styles and schools of fencing .
 In this article, we share some of the most recent developments in the world of science fiction and science fiction . We present a list of scientific facts, facts and facts about science fiction fiction and fantasy .
 This was a standard drill book for English King George Ill's forces during the American Revolution . The book was published in 1764 and 1764 .
 The manual included musket practice and maneuver exercises to train large groups of men how to move and fight as a cohesive unit . The manual was published in 1903 .
 On War by Carl von Clausewitz . Prussian 1816-30 . Von Clausewitz's treatise . explained the organization, equipment and use of armies and fortifications .
 Short land pattern musket,1750 as carried into battle during the Seven Years War and subsequent conflicts . Less time needed in training to master compared with longbow; industrial production outfitted large regiments . Costly to produce; the musket required maintenance to reduce the effects of carbon
 Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent of the Ottoman empire continued to push into the Balkans and to seek naval supremacy in the Mediterranean . In his last years, Sultan Suluiman the Sultan continued his efforts to expand his empire .
 The Christian forces enjoyed a considerable advantage in terms of the number and power of their cannon and firearms, which proved decisive in a hard-fought action . John set up a new fortified fortress after the battle .
 Despite being massively outnumbered, the defenders of Eger put up a determined defense against the Ottoman army . Eger was defeated by a weary Ottoman army in the Battle of the Eger .
 After 39 days, the siege base on Malta, which Ottoman forces attacked in 1565, was finally abandoned . The siege base was abandoned after 39 days of fighting .
 The battle for Malta was an epic of siegecraft and courage on both sides . The fort of St. St. Mary's in Malta was the focus of the battle for the Maltese .
 At first the war elephants of the combined Afghan/Hindu force were highly successful . At first, the war elephant was highly successful in Afghanistan . The war elephants were very successful .
 The balance tipped in the favor of the Moguls when a lucky arrow struck and wounded the Hindu general Hemu, was abandoned . Hemu was a Hindu general and was abandoned by the Mogul .
 Grandmaster of the Knights Hospitallers, Jean de la Valette successfully resisted Turkish forces during the siege of Malta in 1565 . Jean de La Valette's tomb is located in Malta .
 A massive assault that day overran the defenders; almost all were killed . Almost all of the defenders were killed in the assault .
 Seven men managed to break out and escape, and four more were captured and later released . Four more men were captured, four more later released, police say .
 Selim II, successor to Suleiman, launched a campaign to take Cyprus in 1570-73 . Selim I launched a war on Cyprus .
 The naval battle at Lepanto resulted in a major Ottoman defeat, but this did not change the course of the war . The battle was not a major loss to the Ottoman Empire, but it was a major setback .
 Oda Nobunaga used woods to cover his approach and attacked from an unexpected direction . The battle was fought in Japan in the early 1600s .
 The battle was fought largely in a shallow river, with a force of arquebusiers taking part on the side of Nobunaga . The battle took place in the shallow river in the middle of the year .
 The Tokugawa force defeated its opponents, then flanked those facing Nobunaga . Nobuaga was defeated by his forces, but was killed by Nobuwa .
 The Tokugawa clan hoped to win by use of arquebusiers, but it was overrun by a cavalry charge . The battle was fought by the Japanese army in Japan in the 18th century .
 The Tokugawa were able to retreat, however, in reasonable order, reducing the severity of the defeat . They were forced to retreat in order .
 Protestantism in France led to a period of conflict known as the French Wars of Religion . The rise of Protestantism led to conflict between Protestants and Catholics .
 The Protestant Huguenot cavalry achieved initial success, throwing the Catholic Royalists into confusion . The Huguensot cavalry was the first Protestant cavalry to defeat the Royalists .
 The majority of Huguenot force was able to retire from the field, resulting in a Royalist victory . Royalist reserves tipped the balance, although the majority of the Huguensot force retired from the battle .
 This event led to outbreaks of violence in which Catholic priests were massacred . This led to the deaths of Catholic priests in the early 1900s .
 The Huguenot force was defeated as a result of a surprise cavalry attack from an unexpected direction . Huguensot forces were defeated by surprise cavalry .
 Huguenot attack initially went well, but the royalist force was caught out by surprise . Huguensot attack was the first of its kind in France in 17th century .
 A determined stand by royalist infantry redressed the balance for a time, until a flanking movement forced a royalist withdrawal . The battle was between royalist and royalist forces in 17th century .
 The predominantly Protestant city of La Rochelle refused to accept a royal governor and came under siege . It was the first time the city was under siege by a royal king .
 Babur leads his cavalry in a charge against a Rajput coalition army . Babur was the Mogul emperor of the 16th-century India .
 Babur and his grandson Akbar won decisive victories at Panipat near Delhi, India . costly assaults were made before a settlement permitting Protestantism in La Rochelle was signed .
 Hindu king Rama Raja was overwhelmed by rival sultans . The Hindu king was defeated by the forces of his enemies . He was killed by the sultan forces . His forces were allied with several sultants .
 The Dutch Revolt began as an uprising against Spanish rule in the Low Countries, resulting in the formation of the Dutch Republic . The Dutch Republic was formed in 1609 .
 The first stages of the war ended with a 12-year truce beginning in 1609 . The first stage of the conflict ended with the 12 years of a truce .
 The Dutch rebel army was outmatched in terms of firepower and discipline . Caught on the peninsula of Jemmingen with the river at their backs, the Dutch rebels were outmatched by the army .
 So-called ""Sea-Beggars" defeated Spanish naval forces in coastal waters . As their numbers grew, these so-called 'Sea-beggars' defeated Spanish navy forces . They were known as the 'Sea Beggars', or the 'sea-begr
 The city of Haarlem declared for the rebels and was subsequently besieged by the Spanish army . After much deliberation, the city declared itself to the rebels . The Spanish army besieged the city after declaring it a victory .
 A relief army was defeated in July 1573, and with supplies exhausted, the city surrendered on July 13, 1573 . The city was defeated by a relief army and was defeated .
 The rebel Dutch force tried to board the Spanish ships . Unable to survive a conventional gunnery engagement against the heavier Spanish ships, the rebels tried to take them off .
 A Dutch attack on October 5 was beaten off with heavy losses, but six days later favorable winds helped the Dutch to gain a victory . An English commander led to a costly defeat and the loss of the city to the Spanish .
 The city of Breda was held by a strong Spanish force . The city was taken by stratagem in the Dutch city of Amsterdam .
 A force of 70 Dutch troops hid in a peat boat, which they had been told was never searched, thus gaining entry to the city and taking the garrison by surprise . The Dutch had been informed that the boat had never been searched by the garrison .
 The Dutch were attacked by a Spanish force during the siege of Nieuwpoort . The Spanish were preparing to besiege the Dutch .
 The Dutch launched a cavalry charge which drove off part of the Spanish army . After the initial Spanish attack had been repulsed from their strong position, the Dutch attacked .
 Spanish successes elsewhere on the field were also countered by the cavalry, resulting in a Spanish collapse . The cavalry was used to counter Spanish successes in the battle .
 Oda Nobunaga used arquebusiers in front of his main force to break up the Takeda charge . Arquebesiers used their fire to repel the attack .
 Nobunaga's force counterattacked and broke the Takeda force . Once the attack had stalled, Nobuaga's forces counterattacked and fought back .
 At the battle of Nagashino, future shogun Tokugawa leyasu’s arquebusiers defeated the rival samurai Takeda dan . The battle took place at the end of the war .
 Tokugawa’s ally Katsutaka Torii tries to break out from the besieged castle . The battle was captured in Japan in 17th century .
 After two years of bloody but indecisive fighting, new Spanish leadership undertook the gradual reduction of the outer defenses . After the fall of the Spanish capital, the Spanish government began to reduce its defenses .
 Once Spanish artillery was established close to the remaining defenses, the Dutch surrendered . The Dutch surrendered after the battle .
 Dutch rebels opened the dykes to flood the Spanish siege lines around Antwerp . The dykes were used to flood Spanish lines around the city . The city was besieged by the Spanish army in the 16th century .
 Spanish responded by building a bridge across the flooded area and establishing strongpoints on the dyke tops . The Spanish responded to the flooding by building bridges across the area .
 Caught by surprise in an unfinished defensive position, the rebel army was quickly routed . The rebels were quickly routed in a surprise offensive .
 The spring thaw made many roads impassable because of mud, which forced the Spanish to abandon some of their artillery as they withdrew . The Spanish had to abandon their artillery because of the mud .
 The Spanish swept-hilt sword has an unsharpened section of blade called the ricasso (below the hilt), for precise handling .
 A force of Spanish cavalry launched a charge that triggered a general panic . Catching the demoralized rebel Dutch army in retreat, the Spanish cavalry caught the Dutch army .
 Spanish attacked a Dutch force composed mainly of foreign mercenaries, who were awaiting reinforcements and had entrenched themselves . The Spanish attacked the Dutch force, mainly foreign mercenaries .
 After some skirmishing, a general Spanish assault was launched, which was beaten off, although the Dutch were not able to exploit the victory . The Spanish were able to defeat the Dutch .
 A campaign of mining and countermining under the walls gradually wore down the defenders, although the cost to the Spanish was heavy .
 Moguls launched a campaign against Mewar . Seeking to subjugate the last of the Rajputs . The Moguls fought Mewar for centuries .
 King Sebastian of Portugal was met by an Ottoman-style army as he pushed inland . He was led by a mixed force of Portuguese troops and European mercenaries .
 Toytomi Hideyoshi faced the army of Akechi Mitsuhide, a self-appointed shogun, in the Battle of the Gen. Gen. Hideyoshu . The battle was fought in Japan in the early years of the year .
 Hideyoshi’s arquebusiers drove off attempts to storm their position . Hideyoshu's forces enveloped the enemy's flanks . Arquebesiers drove the enemy off from their position in the battle of the day .
 Hideyoshi's army arrived much sooner than expected . Marching rapidly to the relief of Shizugatake, Hideyoshoyoshi's forces were then under siege by forces loyal to Shibata Katsuie . The siege lasted for three months .
 From 1587 to 1604, England and Spain were involved in an undeclared war . The war was fought largely at sea .
 The conflict was a heavy drain on both treasuries, forcing a negotiated settlement . The conflict forced a settlement with the U.S. Treasury .
 Sir Francis Drake led an English fleet into Cadiz harbor and attacked the ships there . Drake led a fleet of ships to attack the ships in Cadiz, Spain .
 Their goals were diplomatic and naval, securing tribute for the emperor, while suppressing piracy and otherwise showing force . They were successful in securing tribute and securing the emperor's support for him .
 It resulted in Bismarck being sunk in deep water off the Atlantic coast of France . It was the first time the ship was sunk .
 Route of the Armada shows the route traveled by Spain's ""Invincible"" Armada during its ill-fated 16th-century expedition .
 The damage inflicted on Spain was not great, but the exploit was an impressive feat of seamanship and daring . It was a brave move for the Spanish side to win the World Cup .
 After a running engagement in the English Channel, the Spanish fleet has anchored off Calais .
 An attack by fireships forced the Spanish to sea in disarray and allowed the English fleet to make a decisive attack . The Spanish fleet was forced to go into disarray .
 An English expedition was launched against Corunna and Lisbon . Hoping to take advantage of heavy losses sustained by the Spanish fleet, an English expedition launched .
 Bad weather and stubborn Spanish resistance caused the operation to fail, with heavy losses . Bad weather, stubborn resistance and heavy losses were also to blame .
 This was initially conceived as part of a larger campaign of conquest, but came to an end in 1593 . This was part of an attempt to conquer the world, but ended in 1693 .
 A second invasion was launched the following year, resulting in a war that continued until 1598 . A war was launched in 1598, and a second invasion in 1597 .
 The Japanese launched an assault covered by arquebus fire . Simultaneously attacking the castle at Busan and the harbor forts, the Japanese launched the assault .
 After the collapse of the defense, all surviving troops and civilians were massacred . The survivors of the collapse were killed by the Soviets in 1991 .
 With no effective counter to the fire of Japanese arquebuses, the Korean garrison could not prevent an assault . The Korean garrison was unable to prevent a Japanese assault .
 A vigorous Korean counterattack failed, despite heavy hand-to-hand fighting . The Korean government failed to defeat the U.S. President Barack Obama . The U.N. mission to North Korea failed to reach the Korean Peninsula .
 Once the fort was taken, the garrison and civilian population were massacred . The garrison and civilians were also massacred in the attack .
 The fortress of Dongnae threatened the Japanese bridgehead in Korea and was attacked quickly after their initial landings . The fortress was attacked by the Japanese after the invasion .
 The outmatched garrison put up a stout defense, but lacked the equipment and training to withstand the Japanese assault . The Japanese assault was the first Japanese invasion of Japan in the area .
 The French Wars of Religion continued as attempts at finding a settlement collapsed into more violence . Seeking to halt the Japanese advance on Seoul, the Koreans offered battle . The French wars of religion continued in France .
 Henry IV instead tried to end the conflict by force, but eventually realized that conversion to Catholicism represented his only real chance to rule a united country . Henry IV was eventually converted to Catholicism and became king of the Roman Catholic kingdom .
 The wars of religion ended with the Edict of Nantes in 1598, which granted tolerance to Protestants . The Edict ended the wars with tolerance for Protestants .
 The charge fell apart on contact with the Huguenot cavalry . Weakened by arquebus fire from the infantry, the charge fell together on contact .
 Huguenot army included many mercenaries funded with English and Danish money . Huguensot army was funded by many mercenaries from England and Denmark . The Huguennot army also included mercenaries funded by the English .
 Some mercenaries entered into negotiations with the Catholics . A Catholic force defeated part of the army, and some mercenaries entered negotiations with Catholics .
 Badly outnumbered, the Royalist army retired into Arques and fortified itself . Yl SUN-SIN, KOREAN ADMIRAL, ON the BATTLE OF HANSANDO, 1592 .
 Royalists were relieved by a force sent from Britain, forcing a Catholic retreat . After beating off several assaults in very bloody fighting, the Royalists won the battle .
 Small Royalist army caught its opponents by surprise and inflicted a temporary defeat . Rushing to counter a Spanish incursion into France, the small army was forced to retreat . The Spanish army suffered a temporary loss to the Royalists in France .
 Local peasants simulated reinforcements moving up . This was exploited by a deception, where local peasants simulated moving up.
 Moroccan force was met by a much larger Songhai army . Moroccan forces were advancing on the city of Gao . Songhai forces were also met by Moroccan forces .
 Moroccans' muskets proved decisive; most of the Songhai fled when fired upon . Songhai were defeated by the Morocans in the Battle of the Nile .
 Matsumoto-Jo is a well-preserved castle located at Hagano Prefecture, in Japan . Edo period castle, Japan, is located in Hagano, Hagano .
 Kato Kiyomasa was one of Japan's most famous samurai . His accomplishments included the capture of Seoul during Japan's 16th-century invasions of Korea . He captured Seoul during the invasion of Korea on an open plain .
 Their cavalry charge was halted by arquebus fire, which stopped the Japanese counterattacking . The Japanese counterattack was counterattacked by their cavalry charge .
 The Koreans captured the Japanese fleet in the harbor at Okpo, Korea . They launched an attack and sank several ships . The Japanese fleet was captured and sunk .
 They then drew off, but attacked again the next day to inflict further crippling losses on Japanese shipping . The Japanese attacked again, drawing off and drawing off again to inflict more crippling losses .
 The Korean fleet drew part of the opposing fleet out of harbor by feigning a retreat . Deploying a type of large armored warship called a ""turtle ship” for the first time, the Korean fleet used a type .
 The Japanese broke their charge with concentrated arquebus fire . Drawing out the Korean cavalry with a feigned retreat, the Japanese broke out their charge .
 Infantry dashed out from concealed positions to complete the victory . Infantry then dashed out and completed the victory.
 Catching another Japanese fleet in harbor, the Koreans launched an attack . The Koreans attacked the Japanese fleet . The Japanese fleet was captured by the Koreans .
 The turtle ship proved impervious to Japanese fire and quickly sank the enemy flagship . The enemy flagship was sunk by the turtle ship .
 After their armies were beaten in the field, the Koreans fought a guerrilla war against the Japanese invaders . The Koreans fought the Japanese invasion of Korea .
 At Chonju a Korean force defeated a Japanese army, gaining additional support for the guerrillas' cause . The victory gained additional support from the Korean government .
 After luring the Japanese fleet out into open water, the Korean force turned and attacked . The Korean force attacked the Japanese in the Korean waters .
 The garrison and citizens of Chinju beat off a Japanese attempt to storm the fortress . A large force of Korean guerrillas attacked the besiegers .
 Desperately short of supplies, the Japanese launched a hasty, ill-prepared assault up steep slopes with the Koreans' fortified positions above them . The Japanese were forced to abandon their supplies and launch an attack on Korea .
 After suffering massive casualties in the disorganized attack, the Japanese withdrew . The Japanese withdrew after massive casualties .
 Korean admiral Yi refused to act on information obtained about the Japanese fleet's movements . Rightly suspecting a trap, Yi believed it to be a trap .
 His replacement blundered into a massive Japanese fleet, resulting in the only Japanese naval victory of the war . He was relieved, and his replacement was relieved of him .
 Despite being reduced to a dozen ships by the disaster at Chilcheollyang, Korean admiral Yi attacked the Japanese fleet at Myeongyang, destroying the flagship and inflicting serious losses before breaking off .
 Korean forces, assisted by troops from China, were able to drive the Japanese into a number of coastal forces .
 At Ulsan, the Japanese withstood siege and repeated assaults until an army arrived to relieve them . The Japanese are believed to have held on for more than 100 years .
 Noryang Strait, off Namhae Island, off the south coast of Korea, is one of the world's most dangerous waters . It is also known as the Noreang Strait .
 When ordered to withdraw from Korea, Japanese forces were unable to do so because of the Korean naval blockade . The Japanese were forced to withdraw because of a naval blockade by the Korean navy .
 An attempted breakout resulted in the Japanese fleet being overwhelmed by Korean and Chinese cannon fire . The Japanese fleet was overwhelmed by Chinese and Korean cannon fire during the invasion .
 Ishida Mitsunari positioned one of his allies, Kobayakawa Hideaki, on the flank, not realizing that Hideaki had arranged to betray his ally . Hideaki arranged to hide Hideaki from Ishida's ally, not knowing he was betraying him .
 Mistunari's force collapsed in front by leyasu and on the flank by Hideyaki, Hideyaku .
 Toyotomi Hideyori's bold plan went awry when part of his army attacked too soon and his flanking force was intercepted before it could attack . Toyotomo Hideyuri's bold attack went awery when part his army was intercepted too soon . Hideyari's
 Tokugawa's forces broke through into Osaka Castle, forcing Hideyori into the keep, which they fired on with cannon . Hideiori's forces forced him to hide in the keep .
 Although clothing and equipment have become increasingly lighter in weight, the burden on the modern soldier has increased . The weight of the soldier's clothing has also increased .
 Combat Load refers to the total minimum amount of equipment required for a soldier to fight and survive in immediate combat . The Combat Load is a minimum of the equipment required to be able to survive in combat .
 Approach Load can total up to 45 percent of a soldier's body weight . The Approach Load is a weapon that can be used to carry an approach load .
 The samurai's weapons included a sword and, often, a lance or other pole-arm . The samurai was known for his sword and pole-arms .
 Some troopers would carry parts of crew-served weapons as well, such as a Browning .30 caliber machine gun or a 60mm light mortar . Some troopers also carried parts of the crew-servic weapons as also .
 The Crusades were a key front in the millennium-long medieval confrontation between militant Christianity and militant Islam . A legacy of European colonialism in the Levant was established that has cultural and political reverberations into the 21st century .
 Henry of Guise, Henry of Navarre and the Huguenots fought in the so-called French Wars of Religion . Navarre later renounced his Protestant faith and converted to Catholicism to take the crown .
 Protestants and Catholics were granted rights under law with the Treaty of Westphalia . Each state had sovereignty over its religious self-determination .
 Thirty Years War gradually drew in most of the states of Europe . Religious disputes between Catholic and Protestant powers within the Holy Roman empire .
 Not all the religious motives were religious; territorial and political issues also influenced a number of states to take sides .
 The war eventually ended with the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, which also ended the Dutch Revolt .
 Western Bohemia is 56 miles west of Prague, modern Czech Republic . Czech Republic is part of the Czech Republic and part of Europe's largest city .
 The small force of defenders was able to withstand siege and bombardment until November 21, when the walls were breached and the city was stormed . The city was finally stormed by the end of the siege .
 Forces depend upon a logistics network, which may become vulnerable as the army advances . Forces depend on a supply chain, which could become vulnerable if they advance .
 Soldiers attack supply column in Thirty Years War . Soldiers attacked supply column during battle of the Great War .
 Deployed on high ground, the Bohemian army was not expecting a frontal attack . The Czech army was deployed on high-ground, but did not expect a full-scale attack .
 The center of their line was quickly overrun and the rest of the army disintegrated . The rest of their troops disintegrated and the center was overrun .
 The outnumbered Protestant force deployed on a hill and fought a stubborn defensive battle . It was the first time the Protestant force had been deployed on the hill . The British army was defeated by the French army in 17th century .
 A lucky hit on the Protestant powder store caused an enormous explosion, permitting an assault to take the hill . The Protestant army pursued the Protestant army to destruction .
 Protestant force was brought to action at Hochst on the Main River . Protestant forces were attempting to rendezvous with their allies . Protestant troops were killed in action .
 The Protestants forced a crossing of the river and linked up with their allies, though at significant cost . Cornered and outnumbered, the Protestants forced to cross the river .
 The Protestant force launched a frontal attack that exposed deficiencies in training and became disordered . The Protestant forces launched a full-frontal attack on the Protestant force .
 Repeated Protestant cavalry charges achieved some success but were eventually driven off . Repeated Protestants cavalry charges were successful but were driven off.
 Protestant infantry was largely overrun by cavalry while retreating the following day . The Protestant infantry retreated the next day and were attacked by cavalry .
 The Imperial army laid an ambush by covering the Dessau Bridge with concealed artillery, which turned it into a death trap for the Protestant forces . The Protestant army crossed into Silesia at the bridge, but was unable to cross .
 A Protestant advance placed the army deep in hostile territory and without support . The Protestant army was forced to retreat into hostile territory . The army was defeated by a Protestant advance .
 On retreating, it was caught and attempted to fight a defensive battle . It was caught on retreating and tried to fight back, but was caught again .
 When the cavalry wings were broken, the Protestant infantry attempted to fall back but were overrun . The Protestant infantry were overrun by the Protestant troops .
 The Danish were brought to action at Lutter . After advancing to assist Protestant forces defeated at Dessau, the Danish were taken to action .
 The Danish were forced to abandon their artillery and retreat . Repeatedly battered by infantry attack, the Danish were eventually forced to retreat .
 The Protestant stronghold of Magdeburg fell to Imperial forces after artillery breached the walls in two places . Imperial forces captured the Protestant stronghold in 1883 .
 The city was so thoroughly sacked that ""Magdeburg Quarter" became a slang term for atrocity . Magdeburg was so badly sacked that the city was nicknamed "Magdeburger Quarter"
 Swedish army under Gustavus Adolphus drove off initial assault in front of Werben . Swedish cavalry and artillery proved decisive .
 Swedish forces drove off several cavalry attacks, but Saxon allies were overrun . The Saxon ally was overrun by the Swedish forces, but the Saxon forces held off .
 At this desperate juncture the Swedish reserves attacked the Imperial flank in conjunction with artillery fire and delivered a decisive victory . The victory was a decisive defeat for the Imperial Empire .
 Catching the Imperial army marching as two columns, the Swedish fell on one but were then attacked by the other . The Swedish were attacked by Imperial forces in the Battle of the Red Cross .
 Swedish king, Gustavus Adolphus, was killed leading a cavalry charge to restore the situation . The Swedish king was killed by a cavalry attack on the Swedish capital .
 Swedish army crossed the Lech River on a bridge of boats . The Swedish army stormed Catholic positions on the riverbank . The army stormed the Catholic positions .
 Imperial general Count Tilly was mortally wounded, causing his army to lose heart and fall back . His army was forced to fall back after he was wounded . Count Till died in the battle .
 This saved the Catholics from being trapped by Swedish cavalry sent on a flanking movement . The Catholics were saved by the movement of Swedish cavalry .
 The Swedish launched repeated attacks on the well-positioned Imperial army . Rough terrain prevented them from making the best use of their artillery and cavalry . The Swedish were unable to use their artillery or cavalry .
 Unable to break through and desperately short of supplies, the Swedish withdrew their forces to the north . The Swedish withdraws their forces from the north of the border .
 The Protestant Swedish army planned a coordinated attack against the Spanish, which became disorganized due to the terrain . The Spanish army was disorganized because of the terrain, and the terrain was difficult .
 As the battle degenerated into a series of isolated engagements the Swedish forces were overwhelmed . The battle was one of the most intense in the history of the First World War .
 The Imperial force was flanked by the Swedish and had to make a hurried redeployment . Having set up a fortified position, the Imperial force had to be re-deployed .
 Sweden had to abandon its artillery as it retreated after being attacked by a detached Swedish force . It was then attacked from another direction by a Swedish force and had to retreat .
 After inconclusive action on February 28, the French pulled back to regroup their forces . After an inconclusive battle, French forces pulled back from the battlefield .
 The complacent Imperials were caught by surprise when the French attacked on March 3, inflicting a major defeat . The French defeated the Imperials in a major battle .
 The outnumbered Swedish forces regrouped at Breitenfeld and launched a sudden attack on the unprepared Imperials . Falling back after a failed attempt to take Vienna, the outnumbered Swedish troops launched a surprise attack .
 A cavalry charge broke the Imperial left wing before it was properly deployed, permitting the center to be defeated . The center in turn in turn was defeated by the center of the battle .
 The cavalry of each side attacked successfully on their respective right wings . The cavalry were able to defeat each other in a single battle .
 The French cavalry then charged through the center and chased off the Spanish cavalry, who abandoned their infantry to encirclement . The Spanish cavalry then attacked the French cavalry, which was chased off by French cavalry .
 The Swedish easily overpowered the Imperial infantry in a series of skirmishes in hilly and wooded terrain . The Swedish defeated the Imperial troops in the Battle of Mannheim .
 Imperial cavalry put up more resistance but suffered heavily as a result . The Imperial cavalry suffered heavily from the loss of the battle .
 After pursuing the Bavarian army into Wiirttemburg, the French concluded that they were no longer a threat and entered their camp . The French entered the camp of the Bavarians and declared the end of the conflict .
 The Bavarian attack caught the French unprepared and shattered their force . The subsequent Bavarian assault caught the . French forces unprepared .
 Repeated frontal attacks by the French eventually broke the Imperial positions, though at high cost on both sides . Repeated French frontal attacks eventually broke Imperial positions .
 Strategically the battle was indecisive as the French were unable to follow up . The battle was inconclusive and the French failed to follow suit .
 The Imperial army attempted to fight a rearguard action with cavalry while the infantry and artillery disengaged . Badly outnumbered, the Imperial army tried to fight with cavalry .
 Imperials were eventually forced to seek shelter in Landsberg . This was successful for a time but the Imperials eventually sought shelter . Landsberg was a popular destination for Imperials during their time .
 A Swedish independent unit attempted to take Prague but was fought to a standstill before entering the Old Town . A Swedish army unit tried to take the capital but was defeated in the battle .
 The siege of Breda, a key Dutch border fortress, was carried out using a chain of defended strongpoints rather than trench lines . The siege was used by the Dutch army to protect the Dutch border from German invasion .
 Dutch naval force laid an ambush in Matanzas Bay in the Caribbean . It was sent to intercept Spanish ""treasure fleets" bringing silver from the Americas .
 After a period of truce, the Dutch Revolt against Spanish rule flared up again . 1607-48 was the start of the Dutch revolt against Spain's rule .
 Dutch force doubled up on their opponents, attacking from both sides at once . Catching the Spanish fleet in Gibraltar Bay, the Dutch force double up their opponents . The Spanish fleet was captured by the Dutch in Gibraltar .
 The Dutch smashed the fleet and massacred many survivors in the water . Many survivors were killed by the Dutch in the sea .
 Colonial musketeers and swordsmen confront Native American warriors armed with bows and lances, in the Pequot War in New England . Colonial muskettes and swordsman confront Native Americans armed with lances .
 As the Spanish fleet approached Dunkirk in France it was ferociously attacked by the Dutch and driven into neutral English waters . The Spanish fleet was driven to neutral waters by Dutch forces .
 Most of the Spanish ships, trapped close to the English coast, were destroyed or captured . The Dutch then brought up more vessels and most of them were destroyed .
 The Sedanese, assisted by allied forces from Spain, the Papacy, and the Holy Roman empire, were able to resist a frontal attack by the French . In a battle that was part of the Thirty Years War, the Sedans fought back .
 Imperials fought a defensive battle in an attempt to prevent the French from reducing Imperial fortresses along the Rhine . The battle was part of the Thirty Years War conflict .
 An initial Dutch attack on the eastern side of the city went well despite a Spanish counterattack . The Dutch attack was successful despite a counterattack by the Spanish army .
 The Dutch sent a number of ships to attack Spanish possessions in the Philippines . The Dutch were involved in a series of small-scale naval actions against Spain .
 The Spanish inflicted heavy losses on the Dutch, making an invasion of the Philippines impracticable . The Spanish suffered heavy losses to the Dutch .
 The Dutch attempt to blockade the Spanish in their port came under artillery fire from shore batteries . The Dutch force was attacked by shore batteries from the Spanish coast .
 The Dutch continued to harass shipping until the end of the war . As a result, the blockade was lifted although the Dutch continued harassing shipping .
 Upon becoming leader of the powerful Powhatan Confederacy of Native American tribes, he became a leader of his tribe .
 Chief Opechancanough decided to eliminate Jamestown, a small English settlement in Virginia, which had previously been ignored . Jamestow was the first English settlement to be eliminated from Virginia in 17th century .
 Continued religious conflict in France resulted in the renewed siege of La Rochelle . The city was a city that tolerated Protestantism . The siege occurred on the Bay of Biscay .
 Royalist siege of the city tightened until most of the population starved to death . English troops sent to assist the Huguenot rebels were forced to retreat . After English troops forced to . retreat, the siege of . the city was tightened .
 Connecticut Militia with Native American allies from Narragansett and Mohican tribes attacked the Pequot village of Mystic, massacring the population . After a series of raids and punitive expeditions, the Connecticut Militia attacked the village .
 The Iroquois expanded their campaign to include attacks against French settlers . The attacks began with attacks on Huron settlements, and included attacks on French settlements .
 Punitive action brought a few years of peace, but fighting flared up again in 1693 . Punitive actions brought a number of years' peace, with the exception of 1693.
 With rebels in control of several provinces and the Ming dynasty under attack by the Manchu from the north, the dynasty fell and the rebels took Beijing unopposed . The rebels were able to take Beijing from the city unoppopposed.
 The British Civil Wars can be split into three English civil wars, all of which were fought between supporters of Parliament and those of the king . Scottish and Irish rebellions also took place in 1642-51 .
 Royalist forces in the First Civil War, 1642-46 and the Second, 1648-51, were led by King Charles I, who was executed in 1649; his son led the Royalist Forces in the Third Civil War .
 After Parliamentary victory in 1651, Britain had no king until 1661, when Charles II returned from exile . Charles II came back from exile from exile in 1661 .
 Royaiist force launched cavalry attack under cover of morning mist, surprising Parliamentarians . Parliamentarians put much of their cavalry to flight, putting them on the run .
 The resulting close-quarters action went on for eight hours before Royalist cavalry finally broke the opposition . The resulting battle was fought between the two sides of the border .
 A rapid Royalist approach and cavalry attack forced the Parliamentarian force besieging this important garrison to retire into an untenable position . The Parliamentarian forces were forced to retreat into a position .
 Parliamentarian force decided to attack, bringing about a fight for Cheriton Wood . Outmaneuvered, Parliamentarian forces decided to go on the attack .
 A disorganized Royalist cavalry attack was beaten off by a disorganized cavalry attack . The Royalist force retreated after the attack was defeated .
 The Royalists were caught by surprise when Parliamentarians attacked very late in the day . The Parliamentarians were captured by the Royalists during the siege .
 Parliamentarian cavalry attacked the enemy rear and won a decisive victory . Breaking the Royalist right flank, the Parliamentarians broke into the enemy's right flank .
 The Royalist cavalry smashed through the Parliamentarian left, but did not return to contribute further to the battle . The Royalists were defeated by the Parliamentarians in the Battle of Mannheim .
 Parliamentarian cavalry broke the opposite flank and then fell on the Royalist center, destroying the king's main army . Parliamentarians broke the opposing flank and attacked the center of the army .
 Parliamentary and Royalist cavalry unexpectedly came across each other in the early stages of the First Civil War near Worcester .
 The Royalists routed their opponents, establishing a superiority that lasted for some time . The royalists established their superiority over their opponents .
 Royaiist forces marching to relief of troops besieged in Devizes confronted by Parliamentarian force on Roundway Down near the town . Parliamentarian forces were confronted by Royaiists marching to the relief .
 The Parliamentarian center fought on until it was attacked in the rear by a force coming out of Devizes . The Royalist cavalry swiftly broke the Parliamentarian wings, but their center fought for the day .
 Parliamentarians pushed the defenders back to the medieval walls . Parliamentarians tightened the siege with the help of the Parliamentarians .
 After a failed relief attempt, which resulted in the battle of Marston Moor, the situation became hopeless and the city was surrendered . The city surrendered after a failed attempt to save it .
 Forced to stand and fight, the Royalist infantry won some initial successes, but its cavalry was broken . The Royalist cavalry won some early successes but was broken by its cavalry .
 The infantry fought a rearguard action as it retired from this, the last major action of the First Civil War .
 The first major battle of the First Civil War took place at Edgehill, Edgehill . It was between poorly trained, recently raised forces that lacked proper arms and equipment .
 As darkness fell, Parliamentarians broke off the inconclusive encounter . Parliamentarians break off the encounter in the dark .
 Parliamentarians crossed the Cherwell River at Cropredy Bridge and attacked . Learning that the Royalist army was strung out on the march, the Parliamentarians attacked .
 Parliamentarians were pushed back and broke contact that evening . After the Royalists fought to gain control of the bridge, the Parliamentarians broke contact .
 Unpaid Parliamentarian troops in Wales defected to the Royalist cause . They fought against a force sent to deal with them . Parliamentarian forces fought against the force in Wales .
 The Royalist flank was broken by Parliamentarian cavalry, causing the Royalist ranks to panic and collapse . Parliamentarian forces broke the flank of the Royalists, causing them to panic .
 Mutinies have influenced significant changes in the course of history . Mutinees have led to the deaths of some of the world's most famous mutinies .
 The laws of most of the world's navies and armies state that those found to have conspired or taken part in an armed rebellion must be severely punished . Being put to death was a frequent punishment for those found guilty of conspiracy .
 In 1842, a midshipman and two sailors aboard the brig USS Somers were hanged in the rigging for plotting to murder their officers and hijack their ship for piracy .
 Some soldiers mutinied in the early phase of the Second English Civil War . Oliver Cromwell's New Model Army was formed during the early period of the Civil War.
 Cromwell's men tried and convicted nine conspirators at Corkbush Field, Hertfordshire in 1647 . One of the conspirators was shot as an example .
 At Bishopsgate, London in April 1649, after the regicide of Charles I, the army quelled another revolt and hanged its leader . The army killed the leader of the revolt in 1649 .
 19 members of HMS Bounty's crew mutinied during an expedition to Tahiti . HMS Bounty was the first ship to arrive in Tahiti in 1842 .
 Acting Lieutenant Fletcher Christian put Captain William Bligh and 18 loyal crewmen adrift in one of Bounty's open boats . They were led by acting Fletcher Christian, who put them adrift on one of the open boat .
 Bligh captained his small craft 3,618 nautical miles to the Dutch colonial harbor at Timor . Bligh's ordeal became one of the great feats of navigation in British naval history .
 Of the mutineers, many were put ashore in Tahiti and later faced courts martial . Many were later found guilty of mutilations .
 Fletcher Christian and eight other mutineers, along with 17 Tahitian men and women, escaped to settle the Pitcairn Islands, where some of their descendants live today .
 In 1857, a series of mutinies in regiments of the British East India Company military service pitted some native Sepoys (from a Persian word for soldier) against their European officers . The Sepoy mutiny in India was the first of its kind in 1857 .
 The mutinies were primarily caused by native Indian dissatisfaction with British social policies . Native Indian dissatisfaction was caused by dissatisfaction with social policies of the British government .
 When order was restored in 1858, the uprising had effectively ruined the East India Company . It marked the beginning of the British Raj, direct imperial rule in India . The uprising was effectively ruined by the British Empire .
 The crew of the Black Sea Fleet battleship Potemkin rose against the Russian Imperial Navy's harsh discipline . The crew used their ship's guns to support a rebellion in the Ukrainian city, Odessa .
 The mutiny foreshadowed and became a model for the uprisings of the Russian Revolution in 1917, which overthrew the tsar and laid the foundation for the Soviet Union . The mutineine was a model of the revolution that led to the overthrow of the Tsar .
 In February 2009, the Bangladesh Rifles rebelled demanding greater pay and more autonomy from the army . The police force that guards that nation's borders rebelled against army .
 The mutineers murdered many of the army officers appointed to lead them . Others held others hostage at their headquarters in Dhaka, and at bases in other towns .
 Parliamentarians then began a pursuit of the disorganized Scottish army . The Parliamentarians captured the Scottish army in 1777 .
 Despite the Royalist defenders' confidence in their defenses, the walls were breached by artillery . The walls were broken by artillery in the Battle of the Warthenburg .
 Two assaults on the small breach were repelled, but the third was successful . Two assaults were also repelled by the attackers .
 Parliamentarians launched surprise attack across ravine . Parliamentarians met determined resistance until reserve cavalry drove in Scottish flank . Reserve cavalry drove into Scottish flank.
 Parliamentarians outflanked Scottish forts around Stirling with landing in Fife . Parliamentarians beat off an attack on their bridgehead and advanced against the Scots army .
 Victory at Inverkeithing tipped the strategic balance in Scotland in favor of the Parliamentarians . Parliamentarians defeated the Scottish Parliamentarians in the 17th century .
 Oliver Cromwell and his New Model Army ride to battle at Marston Moor . Cromwell rode to battle on July 2, 1644 at Marst Moor .
 The final battle of the Civil War was fought on both banks of the Severn River . The battle took place on both sides of the river .
 Parliamentarians were able to shift troops using pontoon bridges . The Parliamentarians eventually gained the upper hand .
 The Royalist army was almost completely destroyed, but Charles II managed to escape and make his way to France . Charles II escaped and made his way back to France after the battle .
 Surviving members of the Ming dynasty resisted the Manchu invaders, proclaiming an emperor in Nanjing . Surviving descendants of the invaders proclaimed an emperor .
 Shivaji Maharaj fought a successful guerrilla campaign against the weakening Mogul empire, increasing his power and influence . Maharaj was defeated by the weakened Mogul Empire .
 His religious tolerance meant that both Flindus and Muslims were willing to serve in his forces . He was tolerant of both his religious tolerance .
 Spanish forces attempted to break the Anglo-French siege of Dunkirk . Spanish forces, including a contingent of English Royalists, attempted to capture the city .
 He conducted a campaign of raids against the settlers until British troops arrived . British troops gradually wore down his power .
 During his reign, England's King Charles II imposed ever tighter controls over religious non-conformists in his kingdom . Charles II was known for his tight control of the religious community .
 This led to open revolt by the Presbyterian Covenanters of southwest Scotland . It led to an open revolt against the Church of Stirling .
 Government forces attacked and defeated the Covenanters at Bothwell Bridge . This put an end to the rising in Scotland . A government force attacked bothwell Bridge in response .
 The Pueblo forced the Spanish settlers to seek safety in Santa Fe, which was then besieged . The Spanish settlers were forced to flee to Santa Fe in order to survive .
 Ottoman Grand Vizier Kara-Mustapha Pasha's janissaries dash disastrously with the combined Austrian, Polish, and German armies at the siege of Vienna .
 Conflict over the Balkans was unremitting between Austria and the Ottoman empire for decades . 1683-87 conflict was the most intense in Austria and Ottoman history . The Austrians and the Ottomans were involved in the Balkans for decades.
 Austria was supported by various Christian states acting as a buffer to prevent further Ottoman advances into Europe . Austria was a buffer against the Ottoman invasion of Europe .
 Warriors of the Indian Mogul empire carried round shields called dahl, such as this finely etched and gilded steel example, left .
 The Ottoman infantry, cut off and unsupported, were then crushed by the Holy League . The Holy League crushed the Ottoman infantry and cut them off .
 The siege made slow progress, relying on mining rather than cannon to breach the walls . The siege relied on mining instead of cannon to break the walls.
 At the eleventh hour a PolishLithuanian force arrived and routed the Ottoman army . At the 11th hour, a Polish force arrived to defeat the Ottoman forces .
 Ottoman army was decisively defeated at Mohacs . Attempting to halt Christian expansion into the Balkans, the Ottomans were defeated in Mohacs.
 Austria gained control over Hungary and the Ottoman Sultan was deposed . The Ottomans were deposed from Hungary . Austria took over Hungary .
 The Chinese drove the Russians out of Albazin in 1685 . Seeking to remove foreign settlers from their territory, the Chinese drove them out of their territory .
 The next year the Russians returned but were once again defeated, establishing a border more to China liking . The Chinese-Russian border was established in 1953 .
 The rebels launched a night attack on the camp of government troops sent to suppress the rebels . The attack was the first attempt to seize the throne by King Henry II II .
 The initial Jacobite risings were aimed at restoring Catholic James VII of Scotland and II of England to the throne . The initial risings in 1689-90 were intended to restore Catholic James VIII of Scotland .
 Fighting took place in Scotland and Ireland, with Irish troops also sent to assist the Scots . Fighting was also fought in Scotland, Ireland and Scotland .
 Defeat at the battle of the Boyne ended any realistic chance of success . First rising failed and the first rising failed . Defeat at battle of Boyne was defeat for the first time .
 Jacobites advanced downhill from their defensive position, reaching the enemy line before many government soldiers fixed their plug bayonets . After a lengthy exchange of musketry, the Jacobites advance downhill from the defensive position .
 Substitution replaces the letters according to a preselected pattern within the words of a message . Military and Navy CODES are known as Military Codes . Military CODes are used in military cryptography .
 The simplest alphabet uses a single alphabet, but some very complex systems use a substitution grid of 26 x 26 letters . The simplest system uses a grid of letters and letters .
 One such system dates to the 15th century and was developed by the French diplomat Blaise de Vigenere . The French diplomat developed the system in France .
 The weakness of substitution systems is that longer messages allow cryptanalysts more opportunities to see patterns in the substitutions . Longer messages give cryptologists more opportunity to identify patterns .
 The American writer Edgar Allen Poe, a talented amateur cryptanalyst, wrote about such a cipher and its unraveling in the story The Cold Bug . Poe wrote about the cipher in his short story, The ColdBug .
 Transposition involves jumbling the letters of a message according to a mathematical key or algorithm . Only the intended recipient possesses the key . Transposition cipher is known as a cipher cipher .
 Variations of transposition ciphers have often been used in military history . Transpositions have been used by military forces in the past .
 U.S. Army during the United States Civil War, and by the Imperial German Army during World War 1.
 Enigma/Ultra Enigma was developed for the military, naval, and special police forces of the German Third Reich in World War II . Enigma used electrical and mechanical means to encrypt text typed into the machine's keyboard .
 These intercepts helped the Allies plan and carry out major operations, including the invasion of Normandy in 1944 . Intercepts helped them plan and carried out major military operations, such as the Normandy invasion .
 Imperial Japanese Navy used JN25, which comprised a number of mathematical keys, to encode or decipher encrypted text . The Imperial Navy used the key tables, which had to be selected from a book of key tables .
 Allied naval and military intelligence units broke some versions of JN25 before World War II . The UN continued to update the code in the 1930s and 1940s, but the code was broken .
 A version of this code, which was broken in 1942, helped the Americans anticipate the Japanese attack at Midway Island, where the U.S. Navy caught the UN in a devastating ambush .
 The length of the key or algorithm Security Agency used to decipher a coded message is one measure of its Suite B strength . United States National is a member of the U.S. National Security Council .
 NSA Suite B is a published standard for the types of algorithms that are used to secure classified information in U.S. government computer systems . The algorithms are designed to protect classified information .
 Another set of algorithms, not published, is set aside for essential national security systems . It could include launch communications for strategic nuclear deterrent forces .
 Jacobite forces were lured into an ambush by Williamite irregulars . Jacobite force was lured into ambush and attempted to give battle . The Jacobite army was ambushed by the Williamite forces .
 Jacobite forces attempted to storm Dunkeld, which was held by government troops . Government troops held the town, held by Jacobite troops .
 After hours of heavy fighting in the streets the Jacobites withdrew when their ammunition ran out . The Jacobite forces withdrew when they ran out of ammunition . After hours heavy fighting, the Jacobite withdrew when ammunition was exhausted .
 A depleted Jacobite force on the march encountered a government detachment at Cromdale . The Jacobite forces encountered a departure of government forces .
 The Jacobites slipped away in the fog . Severely pressed by government cavalry, they slipped away .
 The Jacobites were forced to retire when the opposing cavalry crossed the Boyne River . The Williamite infantry had forced the Jacobites to withdraw from the battle .
 Expansionism on the part of Louis XIV of France led to the formation of the Grand Alliance . The Grand Alliance was an opposition coalition consisting primarily of England, the Dutch Republic, the Holy Roman empire, and the Duchy of Savoy .
 The English fleet sought to prevent French transports from offloading arms destined for Jacobite forces in Ireland . The English wanted to prevent the French offloading weapons destined for the Jacobite army .
 The resulting action was not conclusive and the transports were able to offload . However, they were not able to find out what had happened .
 The Dutch squadron closed with their opponents before the English were ready, and were mauled by the French in the subsequent one-sided fight . During this battle for control of the English Channel, the Dutch squadron were attacked by the English .
 The allied fleet fell back in disorder, fleeing to the Thames River . The channel temporarily fell into French hands, and the allied fleet was forced to flee .
 The French occupied the allies' interest with a frontal infantry attack, then hidden by the terrain, divided their forces to carry out a double envelopment with cavalry . The French attacked the allies with an attack of frontal infantry then hidden in the terrain .
 The battle was a clear tactical success for France but was not followed up to create a strategic benefit . France won the battle but failed to follow up a strategic advantage in the battle .
 Chinese sent large forces across the Gobi desert to stop the rise of the Zhungar tribes in Mongolia . Pre-empting the rise, the Chinese sent troops across the desert .
 The Great Northern War was fought over control of the Baltic, though combat took place as far away as the Ukraine .
 Sweden fought an alliance of Denmark, Poland, Lithuania, Russia, and Saxony . Sweden fought the alliance against Denmark and Poland, Poland and Lithuania . Sweden was defeated in the battle .
 A small Swedish force sent to relieve the besieged garrison at Narva attacked the Russian camp under cover of a snowstorm . The Russian camp was attacked by a small Swedish army .
 After a long hand-to-hand struggle the Russians were finally driven off . The Russians were driven off by the British troops .
 A frontal attack by Savoyard forces was repulsed with heavy casualties . Savoyards forces repulseed by heavy casualties in a frontal attack . The battle was fought in 17th century .
 French troops crossed the Ter River unobserved, catching the Spanish force by surprise . Spanish troops were surprised by the surprise crossing of the river .
 Namur was the site of one of 90 fortresses designed by the Marquis de Vauban . The fortresses were based on mathematical principles . Namur is one of the world's most famous fortresses .
 Namur held out for three months . Besieged by an army from England, Bavaria, and Brandenburg . Namur was defeated by a German army .
 French demands forced Savoy to join the Grand Alliance, which resulted in a punitive campaign by French forces . Savoy was forced to join Grand Alliance in order to be part of the French-backed alliance .
 Savoyards with Spanish allies were defeated in Staffarda . Savoyardards with their Spanish allies defeated and their lands devastated . Savoysards were defeated and devastated .
 A force of Allied cavalry attacked the French rearguard, also composed entirely of cavalry . Allied cavalry was also attacked by Allied cavalry . The battle was fought between the French and Allied forces .
 The French relied on shock action with the sword rather than firearms, and won a decisive victory despite being heavily outnumbered . The French used the sword to win the battle with shock action instead of firearms .
 Allied force launched an attack on their camp in France . Catching the French by surprise, the Allied force attacked their camp .
 The outnumbered Dutch army benefited from better artillery than their opponents and resisted attack for some time . After initial success, the Allied force struggled to repel attack .
 French cavalry eventually broke through and the Dutch suffered heavy losses . The French cavalry broke through the Dutch and suffered heavy casualties .
 The threat of Turkish invasion inspired popular themes in central and southern European art in the 15th century .
 This Italian dish depicts a mounted Ottoman warrior bordered by Islamic-style designs . The French created a solid line, allowing the design to be disorganized . The dish was designed by the Italian company .
 Anglo-Dutch convoy scattered when the French approached . Intercepted en route to the Mediterranean, the convoy scattered en route . The convoy was intercepted by the French in the early 1950s .
 Despite the best efforts of the vastly outnumbered escort, large numbers of Anglo-Dutch merchant ships were lost . Many of the ships were destroyed in the Battle of the Word .
 The assumption is that as weapon even on today's high-tech battlefields, technology has improved over time . Modern infantryman must often close with combat range has increased .
 Shaolin masters may have influenced some other martial arts styles, such as some forms of karate . Some Buddhist monks in Japan chose to follow both a martial and religious lifestyle .
 Warrior monks had a role in some of the most turbulent periods in Japanese military history, including the Gempei War in the 12th century . Warrior monks played a key role in Japan's most turbulent period in military history .
 Some Sohei orders grew very powerful, and were able to field armies, especially during the Japanese civil wars of the 16th century . Some of these orders were very powerful .
 The Knights Templar were among the first military monastic orders founded during the crusades in Palestine . They were among first military orders founded in the Middle Ages .
 Templars, having taken their name from the Temple Mount in Jerusalem where they were billeted, swore to protect Christian pilgrims to the Holy Land .
 Templars gradually grew more powerful, eventually becoming bankers to many of Europe's kingdoms . Order gained favor with the papacy, becoming more powerful . Order eventually became a powerful force in Europe's most powerful kingdom .
 In 1300s, the order's status as moneylenders led to a dispute with the French crown . In the 1300s it was involved in a dispute between the French and the Order .
 In 1314, the French arrested the order's grandmaster, Jacques de Molay, and burned him at the stake for heresy . The French tried and burned the grandmaster of the Order for heresy in 1314 .
 The Khalsa began as an elite religious order, with male and female disciples within Sikhism . Sikh Khalsa, Punjab province, India 1699, was founded in 1699 .
 Members of the Khalsa were expected to follow a strict code of conduct . The Khalsa was expected to be the most successful Khalsa in India .
 The ft Khalsa also trained as warriors to defend their brethren against oppression . In addition to their religious devotion and adherence to the principles of the Sikh gurus, they also trained to be warriors .
 Muslim Moguls of India persecuted Sikhs and Hindus who did not convert to Islam . At that time, Sikhs were persecuted for not converting to Islam and not converting . At the time, the Muslim leaders of India were persecuting Sikhs, Hindus .
 Swedish forces made a crossing of the Duna River in boats, surprising Allied forces . Allied forces were on the far bank of the river .
 Despite a vigorous counterattack, the Swedish held their bridgehead as additional forces were ferried across to reinforce them . The Swedish held on to a bridgehead despite a strong counterattack .
 The Swedish army is tired from a forced march, but has launched a series of attacks on the Russians . Although tired, the Swedish army has launched several attacks on Russia .
 Swedish troops drove off Russian cavalry and overran the infantry . In the ensuing melee the Swedish outfought their opponents, driving off the Russian cavalry . The Russian cavalry was driven from the Swedish troops .
 Although outnumbered, the Swedish launched an aggressive cavalry attack, achieving some success . The Swedes were outnumbered by their outnumbered enemy .
 A counterattack was derailed by the fire of a small detachment of Swedish infantry that had stayed concealed until that point, and the Swedish gradually defeated their remaining opponents . The Swedish eventually defeated their opponents .
 The Allied force took up a defensive position because the Swedish side had more cavalry . The Swedish side took up the position because of the number of cavalry they had .
 The Allied flanks were defeated by Swedish cavalry, which then fell on the Allied rear . The Swedish cavalry was defeated by the Allied forces in the Battle of Stadental .
 Combined with a frontal attack by infantry, this caused a disintegration of the Allied line . The Allied line was disintegrated by the Allied attack .
 Charles XII of Sweden ordered an assault on Poltava . Ignoring his advisors, Charles XII ordered the assault . The assault was the first to take place in the Russian capital .
 Poor reconnaissance and communications resulted in a badly coordinated and ultimately unsuccessful assault . The U.S. was attacked by the Taliban in 2009 .
 Osel: 6 Russian warships; Grengam: 61 Russian ships, 4 Swedish frigates, 1 warship . Osel may 24, 1719, 1720, Grengams: 61 Russians, 4 Swedes, 1 Swedish warships .
 Russian navy, established in 1700, won its first major victory in 1719 at Osel . Osel was the first major naval victory for Russian navy .
 A year later the Russian fleet lured Swedish warships into shallow water, where they were overwhelmed . A year after the attack, Swedish warships were overwhelmed in shallow water . The Russian fleet captured the Swedish ships .
 The death of Charles II of Spain created a situation in which Spain and France might be united under a single monarch . The death in 1701-14 created the possibility of a united Spanish-French union .
 The resulting dispute expanded into a general war as various states pursued their own agendas, not all of them directly connected to the fate of the Spanish throne . The resulting conflict became a war between Spain and Spain .
 After several weeks of manoeuvring, the Austrians crossed the Adige river and drove off the French cavalry encountered at Carpi . The Austrians won the battle in Italy in 1883 .
 Both sides spent some time concentrating their forces and re-establishing supply lines . Both sides then spent time concentrating forces and fighting back .
 Prince Eugene of Savoy fought in the War of the Spanish Succession in partnership with England's Duke of Malborough . A brilliant commander in the service of the Austrian Habsburgs, Prince Eugene fought in Spain .
 Early in the war, Anglo-Dutch forces attempted to capture the port of Cadiz in order to obtain a Spanish base and trigger uprisings .
 The expedition failed, largely due to looting by the Anglo-Dutch troops, which reduced the force's ability to fight effectively . The expedition was largely destroyed by looting .
 The Anglo-Dutch fleet was able to attack a treasure fleet en route to Spain from the Americas . Retiring from the failed expedition at Cadiz, the British fleet retired from the expedition .
 Realizing that the French army was overextended, the English set about defeating isolated sections of it . The English were able to defeat some of the French forces .
 In some cases still short of ammunition from the capture of Gibraltar, the AngloDutch force confronted a Franco-Spanish fleet off Malaga . Some of the troops were still short on ammunition .
 Despite heavy damage and casualties, the action was inconclusive, benefiting the Anglo-Dutch strategic position . The action was fought in the Battle of the Boer War, which ended in a defeat .
 Allied forces under Eugene of Savoy broke the FrancoSpanish siege of Turin . It was the beginning of the withdrawal of French forces from northern Italy . In a decisive victory for the Allied forces, the French forces were able to break the siege .
 Catching the French forces overextended and in vulnerable, swampy positions, the Anglo-Dutch army first attacked the flanks . The French forces were caught in vulnerable positions in the swampy area .
 Despite a tough rearguard action the Anglo-Dutch forces soundly defeated the French army . The French army was defeated by the British army in 1777 .
 The most basic form was a blade that attached to the muzzle of a long-arm . The weapon was a weapon that functioned as a pike, spear, or similar pole weapon in close-quarters battle .
 The musketeer combined with the heavy infantry tactics of the pikeman and grenadier, within the same troop formation . This innovation allowed the light infantry tactics to be combined with . the heavy . infantry tactics . of the musketeers and pikemen .
 The European bayonet may have originated in Spain at the end of the 16th century, with the introduction of daggerlike plug bayonets, which fitted into the muzzle .
 These enabled a combatant to load and fire the weapon without having to remove the blade . The weapon was designed to allow combatants to fire and load weapons without removing the blade from the weapon .
 Despite its antique origin, the bayonet continues to be issued to soldiers of many of the world's most advanced armies . The bayonet is still issued by the most advanced army in the world .
 This was the simplest form of bayonet; as its name implies, it fitted into the muzzle and blocked the barrel, so that the gun could be fired only with the bayonet removed . The bayonet was the smallest form of a bayonet .
 One form of saber bayonet popular with rifle-armed troops during the 19th century was the yataghan blade . The blade was used by rifle-armoured troops in the British Army .
 This had a shallow double curve, which improved the weapon's cutting properties on the muzzle, or as a sidearm . The weapon was developed in the 1960s and 1970s .
 The 19th-century bayonet is fitted with a ring latch that locks it securely onto the muzzle of a musket's barrel . The socket bayonet has been fitted with ring latch to lock it onto the barrel of a gun .
 The remainder marched to attack a Hessian army, which was besieging Castiglione dellele Stiviere .
 Franco-Spanish cavalry counterattacked and broke the Portuguese cavalry, which led to a general collapse . The Portuguese cavalry broke up and led to the collapse of the Portuguese army .
 Allied forces were able to cross the Schelde River before they were detected . Considerable Allied forces crossed Schelde river before detection was detected .
 Allied forces then executed a flank attack, which routed the French army . The Allied forces executed the flank attack . The French army was routed .
 Allied army sustained heavy casualties in making attacks on the well-positioned French flanks . The Allied army suffered heavy casualties during the battle .
 A powerful frontal attack resulted in a huge melee, from which the French were able to retire in good order . The battle was fought in front of the French, with the French being able to withdraw from the battle .
 progress was made until the summer of 1714, after which a series of assaults gradually regained control of Zaragoza .
 After an artillery exchange that lasted the entire morning, the Spanish launched a frontal assault on the Allied force . The Allied force resolutely withstood the assault .
 The Allied force then launched a counterattack, shattering the Spanish army . The Spanish army was shattered by the Allied force .
 Five thousand French troops were besieged inside the fortress of Bouchain, with the remainder of the force camped close by .
 Allies drove a force between the two and constructed field fortifications to hold the position . The Allies drove the force between them and constructed a field fortification .
 Repeated attempts were made to restore the Stuart dynasty to the thrones of Scotland and England, backed by foreign powers . French troops were sent in 1708 and a Spanish force the following year . Attempts to restore Stuart dynasty were made by French troops and Spanish forces .
 Charles Edward Stuart led a doomed uprising of Scottish chieftains in 1745 . He led a failed uprising in 1715, and an aborted French invasion of England in 1744 .
 A planned large-scale Spanish invasion did not occur, and the small force landed in Scotland was abandoned, along with its Jacobite allies . The planned invasion was abandoned along with the Jacobite alliance .
 Government forces engaged the rebels at Glen Shiel, driving in the flanks and forcing the Spanish to surrender . The Spanish were forced to surrender by the government forces .
 The Allied army was attacked by the French, who were initially repulsed . Deprived of its English component by an independent peace treaty, the French attacked the Allied army .
 After Allied counterattacks failed, the French again advanced, breaking the Allied army . The French army was defeated by the Allied forces .
 Musketry was the most important part of infantry training in the 17th and 18th centuries . Lack of artillery meant that little Musket drill was used to train soldiers . Musket drills were used to prepare soldiers for battle .
 By 1700 these crude matchlocks had been superseded by more efficient flintlocks . The matchlocks were superseded in favour of more efficient and efficient flints .
 Battle of Malplaquet was one of the main battles of the War of the Spanish Succession . Prince Eugene of Savoy's imperial troops and the Duke of Marlborough's troops rout the French in the battle .
 The Jacobites attacked from an unexpected direction, causing the inexperienced government army to become disordered . The Jacobite attacked from the unexpected direction of the government army .
 Government troops became surrounded, with most of the force taken prisoner . Most of the government troops were taken prisoner by the rebels .
 Government forces advance to occupy Inverurie, placing themselves in an exposed position . Government forces advanced to occupy the area, placing them in a position .
 Jacobites attacked from two directions, catching the government force by surprise and driving them out of the town . The Jacobites were driven out of town by the government forces .
 The Jacobite force advanced to attack the complacent and unprepared government troops . Jacobite forces advanced on the government troops.
 The government force was routed, but the Jacobites were scattered and unable to pursue . The Jacobite army was routed but was unable to follow .
 Jacobite army made a head-on attack against the well-trained government force . Against the advice of the Highland chieftains, the army attacked .
 The assault was beaten off by intense fire, and the Jacobites were driven from the field . The Jacobite were driven out of the field in 1777 .
 Nadir Shah of Persia brushed aside Indian resistance at Karnal and entered Delhi unopposed . He entered Delhi at the age of 12 and entered the city unoppened .
 Indians attacked Persian troops on hearing false rumor that Nadir Shah had been killed, the city was sacked and more than 20,000 citizens massacred in one day .
 War of the Austrian Succession started out of a dispute over whether Maria Theresa of Austria was, as a woman, eligible to succeed to the throne . War gave various states an opportunity for expansion and territorial gain .
 The conflict drew in most of the major states of Europe, but was largely inconclusive . The conflict was mostly inconclusive, drawing in the most of Europe's major states .
 The standing army of Prussia was able to make rapid gains in Silesia before Austria could assemble an army to oppose the invasion . Austria was unable to assemble a large army to fight the Prussian invasion .
 An Austrian attempt to relieve Neisse resulted in a confused action at Mollwitz, which was won by the better-drilled Prussians . The battle was fought in the Battle of Neisse .
 Allied forces managed to drive off and rout a French attack . Cut off and hemmed in, the Allied force managed to defeat the French . The Allied force drove off and routed the French attack.
 This was the last occasion when a British king commanded directly in battle . The last occasion was when he commanded directly during the Battle of Stonewall .
 Despite a vigorous defense, the French and their allies were ejected from the town of Pfaffenhofen . The French were ejected by the town's residents .
 A second position outside the town held for a time but the French were forced to retreat to avoid becoming surrounded . The French retreated to avoid being surrounded by the enemy .
 The French army occupied excellent positions, with many units hidden by undulating terrain . The French Army occupied excellent strategic positions .
 Allied forces were forced to withdraw in the face of fire from these concealed positions . Despite some successes, the Allied forces had to withdraw . The Allied forces suffered some casualties in the battle .
 The Prussians achieved at least partial surprise and were able to overrun the Saxony wing of the enemy force . The Prussian army was able to achieve a partial surprise in the battle .
 The Austrian contingent was more resilient, but was eventually broken by a cavalry charge . The battle was eventually won by the Austrian contingent .
 Austrian, British, Dutch, and Hanoverian troops were attempting to prevent the French, who had invaded Flanders, from advancing into the Dutch Republic . French troops were trying to stop the invasion of Flanders .
 Poor cooperation between different nationalities allowed the French to break the line and drive the Allies into retreat . Poor cooperation led to poor cooperation between nationalities .
 French warships tried to keep shipping lanes open and to protect its merchant ships . British admiral signaled for a ""general chase," bringing about a number of successful small actions, rather than a line of battle engagement .
 Although the British ships were individually less powerful than the French, they were able to overwhelm them by taking on one enemy ship at a time .
 Several French warships were lost in the battle . The battle put an end to French naval operations for the rest of the war . Several French ships were also lost .
 The classic combined-arms doctrine of ""horse, foot, and guns"" quickly came to dominate the battlefields of the world . It was brought to a pinnacle during the Napoleonic Wars, in which European states took the field with unprecedented numbers of men, horses and guns . The
 Montcalm's superior numbers and siege train train for a week before surrendering . The siege train was the last of its kind in Spain .
 Montcalm's Indians butchered many of the survivors after the surrender . The survivors were killed by the Indians after their surrender . Many of them were killed in the battle .
 British forces laid siege to the fortress of Louisbourg on the St. Lawrence River . British forces lay siege to Louisbourg in 1842 .
 A French naval squadron in the harbor was eliminated by the bombardment and by boarding parties in small boats . The bombardment and boarding parties were also eliminated .
 The fall of Louisbourg gave the British a base for an attack on Quebec . Louisbourg was the first French city to fall in 1842 .
 The French and Indian War was a series of conflicts in North America . The war was fought in 1754-62 .
 Britain ultimately took control of Canada from the French, and also captured Guadeloupe in the Caribbean .
 George Washington's party of Virginia militia and Iroquois warriors attacked a French scouting party under Joseph Coulon de Villiers de Jumonville near modern Uniontown, Pennsylvania, in 17th century .
 The Iroquois leader Tanacharison killed the captured de Jumonville after the battle .
 Captain Louis Coulon de Villiers led a punitive expedition to avenge Jumonville, his brother . The expedition was led by Captain Coulon du Villiers, who was killed in the fall of the fall .
 The colonials surrendered, but they were allowed to withdraw into their own territory with their weapons . They were able to withdraw with their arms from their territory .
 The British advance guard retreated, colliding with the main British force. River . River, the British advance guards retreated, and the British forces clashed with each other .
 The British fled, with the French and Indians inflicting heavy casualties on them . The British were forced to flee .
 Under Baron Ludwig Dieskau, the French ambushed Colonel William Johnson along the road, and drove the colonials back into their semi-fortified camp . The French captured Johnson and drove him back into the camp . Johnson died at the hands of the French in the Battle of
 The colonials rallied and drove the French off in disorder, causing heavy French casualties . The French suffered heavy casualties in the battle .
 British Major General James Abercromby decided to rush the fort, before French reinforcements could arrive . British troops rushed the fort in order to prevent French reinforcements arriving .
 The British charged into General Montcalm's intricate defenses, but withdrew after severe losses . The British withdrew after suffering severe losses, abandoning a land invasion of Canada .
 A decoy British force attempted to draw out the defenders of the fort in order to ambush them . Decoy British forces attempted to lure the defenders into the fort . The fort was attacked by the British forces in 1777 .
 The defenders were far more numerous than expected and overwhelmed the British . The victory was a crushing victory for the English .
 The Canadian city of Quebec was captured by the British in 1759 . A British fort on the shores of Lake George withstood General Louis-Joseph The Battle of Quebec .
 This colored engraving is based on a drawing made by Hervey Smyth, one of the British officers .
 Brigadier General John Prideaux conducted a formal siege of this isolated French garrison, which blocked the British route to Montreal . The siege was the first of its kind in France in the 18th century .
 The French surrendered after William Johnson and his Iroquois ambushed and destroyed a relief column at the island of La Belle Famille . The French surrender after Johnson's forces ambushed the relief column and destroyed it .
 A British effort to land forces for an assault on Quebec was only partially successful . A British invasion of Quebec was unsuccessful .
 After attempting to fight uphill against well-fortified French, troops the British force pulled back . The British force was forced to withdraw from the French capital .
 Plains of Abraham outside the walls of Quebec City, Quebec, Canada, is named after Abraham Abraham . Location of Abraham is located in the area surrounding the city's walls .
 Needing to find an alternative to a long siege, the British were able to achieve surprise . Needed to find alternative to finding a way to get around the British, they achieved surprise .
 The British received Quebec's surrender a few days later . Winning a pitched battle near the city, the British won the battle near Quebec .
 Faced with a French attempt to regain Quebec City by siege, the British garrison elected to come out and offer battle . The British garrison in Quebec City offered battle against the French attempt .
 A French convoy tried to evade the British blockade by anchoring in the Restigouche River and positioning cannon on the banks of the river . The French convoy was the last to arrive in the French capital .
 French withdrew upriver, but were forced to scuttle their ships . After the first position was broken the French withdrew . The French withdrew, but the French had to scutttle the ships .
 Governor Pierre de Rigaud de Vaudreuuil de Cavagnial's surrender . Three British and colonial armies converged in overwhelming force, forcing Governor to surrender .
 Without adequate supplies of food, water, clothing, weapons, ammunition, and other equipment, those on the battle front could not hope for victory . It is certainly true that without adequate supplies, those in need of food and water, they could not have victory .
 Modern transport aircraft and helicopters, as well as specialized naval cargo vessels, are essential to military logistics . Today, modern transport aircraft, helicopters and specialized naval ships are essential for military logistics.
 Railroads soon became an important form of military transport . Developed at the beginning of the 19th century, railroads became important military transportation .
 Generals realized that large tonnages of supplies, horses, artillery, and even whole regiments of infantry and cavalry troops could be moved efficiently by steam locomotive .
 In the Crimean War, rail supply was crucial for British troops at the battle of Balaclava .
 In the U.S. Civil War, the military railroad system supplied tens of thousands of federal troops and their horses with hundreds of tons of food, fodder, ammunition, and other stores .
 Some historians have pointed out that by 1914, the military strategies of the European powers had become completely dependent on railroad timetables for the mobilization of their armies . Some historians say this is because of the importance of the railroad schedules .
 Use of transport planes and airships became commonplace in civilian and military service in the interwar years . Building on the rapid development of both airships and load-carrying bombers during World War I, the use of both became commonplace .
 During World War II, Allied and Axis nations used air transport to deliver troops and supplies forward . Allies and Axis countries used air transportation to transport troops, supplies and retrieve wounded soldiers .
 More than 300,000 soldiers of the German Sixth Army were encircled and defeated in the battle of Stalingrad in the former Soviet Union . Despite heroic but inadequate attempts by the Luftwaffe to resupply the army by air by air, it was defeated .
 Horses and British artillerymen toil to roll a bronze 9-pounder cannon into firing position during Napoleonic Wars .
 Horsepower from its first appearance in ancient warfare , the horse has been used in service to carry warriors and haul their equipment into battle . Horses must be provided with stables and fodder while on campaign, generating a major logistics burden .
 During World War II, both Allied and Axis armies used animal power to draw wagonloads of ammunition and supplies when motor fuel rations proved inadequate . Animal power was used by both sides of the war to draw supplies .
 Even in the 21st century, horses and donkeys have served as transports for soldiers fighting in the remote and rugged highlands of Afghanistan .
 Ships and boats have served as troop transports and supply vessels for thousands of years . They have also been used as naval fighting platforms .
 Medieval chroniclers, such as Jean de Joinville, frequently mention the dependence of military expeditions upon naval supply .
 Sometimes the difference between warships and noncombatant transports was blurred . Sometimes the distinction was blurred between the ships and ships .
 During the Napoleonic Wars, armed merchant vessels fought alongside the Royal Navy against French warships and pirates . Armed merchant vessels belonging to the British East India Company sometimes fought alongside Royal Navy .
 Modern armies sent to fight far from their home countries still depend upon the sea for most of their supplies . Modern armies rely on the sea to supply most of the supplies they need .
 Ships can carry enough materiel to supply 20,000 troops of a heavy armored brigade for 15 days . Large Medium Speed Roll-on, Roll-Off ships of the U.S. Military Sealift Command can also carry materiel .
 The outnumbered British beat off a cavalry charge and infantry attacks . Flaving bribed some of the Bengali commanders, the British beat them off with a cavalry attack .
 The Bengali artillery was useless due to damp powder, and resistance crumbled before the British counterattack . The British counter-attack was a success .
 Pontiac, an Ottawa chief, led an uprising against the British that began near Detroit and spread to other regions . Pontiac led the uprising near Detroit .
 Several British forts were captured before superior numbers forced the Native Americans to negotiate peace terms . Several British fortresses were captured by Native Americans .
 Prussia joined Britain and several small German states against France, Spain, Russia, and Austria . In a complex imperial struggle, Prussia became a major factor in the British-German war . Prussia was defeated in the war of 1756-63 .
 Initial French and Austrian success faded against the brilliance of Prussia's Frederick the Great and the might of Britain's Royal Navy . Prussia the Great was the most powerful in the world, with Prussia and Prussia .
 The British garrison on the island of Minorca was overrun by the French in the 17th century . The French occupied Minorca in 1783 .
 A British naval relief force commanded by Admiral Byng engaged a French fleet, but after an inconclusive naval action the British withdrew . The British withdrew after the inconclusive battle .
 Byng was later court-martialled and executed for ""failure to do his utmost"" to relieve the garrison . He was later found guilty of failing to relieve a garrison .
 Parallel innovations in military and civilian firearm technologies continued throughout their development . Parallel innovations continued throughout the development .
 During the 17th and 18th centuries, a great variety of long arms were developed for hunting . Long arms were used for hunting purposes in Europe .
 Many weapons, such as the French fusil de chasse and the American long rifle, were precisely made and highly prized by the settlers of North America, as well as the Native Americans .
 During the French and Indian War and later conflicts, the use of civilian long rifles by military scouts, sharpshooters, and militia units was crucial .
 Remington hunting rifles are used by military and police snipers . Remington model 700 is a Remington version of the Remington 700 .
 Napoleon offered 12,000 francs for the invention of a better way to preserve and store military rations . Napoleon wanted to solve the logistical problem of transporting, storing, and distributing food to a large army .
 Nicolas Appert used glass bottles and boiling to cook and preserve contents . Appert won the prize in 1809, using glass bottles to preserve the contents .
 In Britain, another inventor, Peter Durand, proposed a method for preserving food in a variety of containers, including tins . In the UK, food can be preserved in tins, tins or containers .
 Durand's method was being used to prepare food for the British Army in 1813 . By 1813, it had been used by the British army to make food .
 The process of ""canning"" quickly became a major industry in many nations . Canning is a popular form of food production .
 Several nations and commercial companies were experimenting with rangeand direction-finding devices based on the physics of radio frequency transmission and reception technology .
 Scottish inventor Sir Robert Watson-Watt was among the first to propose using reflected radio waves to detect thunderstorms as well as aircraft in flight .
 Others considered how the technology might be used to detect ships at sea and even direct naval gunfire . The technology might also be used for direct gunfire .
 During World War II, military and naval radar developed quickly and proved decisive . Radar developed quickly during the war, proving decisive in the Battle of the Atlantic War .
 During the battle of Britain, the Luftwaffe used radar to help navigate bombing missions . Radar was used to help guide bombing missions during the Battle of Britain .
 The Royal Air Force used a sophisticated network to detect and range incoming enemy planes . Building on the successful Home Chain radar system of the 1930s, the system was built on a network of radar .
 Radar systems are essential for safe commercial air and sea travel, space travel, and vehicle law enforcement . radar systems are now essential to safe commercial and space travel . Radar systems can be used in space travel and law enforcement purposes .
 The U.S. military sought to build a new communications system that would enable a large number of users to share information . The system was designed to be less vulnerable to attack . The Internet and the World Wide Web were created in the 1960s and 1970s .
 The basic concept was of a computer network that exchanged standardized blocks, or ""packets,"" of information . The network would exchange standardized blocks of information, or "packets"
 The process of ""packet switching"" allowed many computers to communicate simultaneously, creating a large network . The process was used to communicate with computers .
 GPS began in the 1960s as a naval timekeeping and navigation system . GPS was developed as a timekeeping system for the Navy . GPS began as a navigation system in the 1970s .
 Orbiting the Earth every 12 hours, a constellation of 24 satellites emits radio signals . GPS receivers on the surface can interpret the signals .
 In war, the system enables some ""smart" weapons to locate targets with precision . However, civilian users worldwide now far outnumber military users .
 Austrian forces marching to the assistance of their Saxon allies were attacked by the Prussian army at Lobositz . Austrian forces marched to the aid of the Saxon .
 The situation was confused by fog, resulting in reverses for the Prussians before a bayonet charge drove off the Austrians . The Prussianians were defeated by the Germans in the battle .
 Prussian forces advancing on Prague were intercepted by part of the Austrian army . The Austrian army intercepted the Prussian advance on Prague .
 Additional Austrian forces were too far away from the battle site to take part in the action . Additional Austrian troops were also too far from the action to participate .
 The Prussians pushed their opponents aside, capturing much of their supplies . The Prussianians captured much of the world's supplies .
 French flank attack drew in Allies' reserves and permitted main attack in the center to succeed . Attempting to draw Prussian attention away from Bohemia, the attack drew Allied reserves and allowed the main attack to succeed.
 Both sides thought, they had lost the battle; both commanders had actually ordered a withdrawal, before the French reafized that they had won . The French re-thinked that they won, before they re-evaluated their victory .
 Attempting to march one flank around the Prussian left, the Franco-Austrian force was completely unprepared for the ferocity of the . Prussian attack . Attempts to march around the left flank of the Franco .
 The Prussian infantry followed up with a devastastating cavalry assault, leading to total victory for Prussia. cavalry and managed to defeat it. Prussian. cavalry . cavalry .
 Artillery pushed rapidly forward in support and forced the French to withdraw . The French were forced to withdraw from the battle . The battle was over 100 years long .
 The .625 caliber Baker rifle was issued to the British Army's elite sharpshooters, the 95th Rifles, and other units . The rifle was used by the British army's elite .
 After a feint attack on the Austrian right, the Prussians rapidly redeployed and attacked on the other flank . The battle was the first of its kind in Austria since the Second World War .
 Austrians could not react quickly enough and were soundly defeated . The Austrians were defeated soundly by the Austrians .
 A large Prussian-Flanoverian army surprised the French, drawing up along a canal near the banks of the Rhine .
 Feint attacks against the French center and right allowed a successful flank attack on the French left . The French left was attacked on the right flank by the French right .
 Frederick the Great's Prussian army disintegrated with heavy casualties when he attacked an Austrian-Russian army threatening Berlin . Frederick attacked the Austrians and Russians in the Battle of Berlin .
 Frederick was only barely able to regroup while the Austrians faced delays waiting for supplies . Frederick was forced to wait for supplies to arrive at the end of the battle . Frederick's troops were forced to retreat from the battlefield .
 The British attacked in bad weather and poor light . Boldly following the French fleet into Quiberon Bay, the British attacked .
 Several French ships escaped into the Vilaine River, where they were penned up for some time . Several ships escaped from the river . Several of the ships were kept penned up in a pen at the riverbank .
 A Prussian cavalry charge routed part of the Russian army, but the remainder fought on stubbomfy . A Russian army was defeated by the Prussian army in the Battle of the Crimean War .
 By nightfall, it was not clear who had won, but the Russian army later retreated . The Russian army retreated, satisfying the Prussian strategic objective of keeping the Russians and Austrians apart .
 The Austrian force achieved surprise by the use of a night march, and attacked the Prussian right flank . The Prussian army was attacked by the Austrian force in a surprise attack .
 A determined stand by the rearguard enabled the Prussian army to retire in good order . The Prussian Army was forced to retreat after the battle .
 The Allies sought to stop a detached French corps marching to Hanover . Acting on a mistaken order, a British infantry brigade attacked the French .
 In the morning, the French counterattacked and drove the Allied forces back . In the next day, Allied forces were driven back by the French .
 The Prussians attempted to storm Austrian positions on high ground, but were bloodily repulsed . After an artillery duel, the Prussian attempt to storm high ground was bloodily repelled .
 A renewed assault later in the day took the artillery position, turning the Austrian guns on their own army . The Austrian guns were turned on the Austrian army, turning their guns on themselves .
 Austrian assaults to retake their positions were beaten off . to avenge losses in the Seven Years War by aiding the Americans in their successful revolt against British rule . Austrian forces were defeated by the Americans .
 After a brief engagement at Lexington, the British marched on Concord, where the rebels ambushed them . The British marched to Concord where they were ambushed by rebels .
 The British then fell back to Charlestown, fighting constant skirmishes along the way . The British eventually fell back and fought to the end of the conflict .
 The battle of Bunker Hill was actually fought on Breed's Hill, which had been fortified instead by mistake by mistake . The battle was fought in the early 1900s .
 The American invasion of Canada fell apart when its leader Richard Montgomery died attacking the walls of the city . Richard Montgomery was killed in the attack on the walls .
 Abandoned captured Montreal, Colonel Benedict Arnold led the surviving Americans back below the St. Charles River .
 General John Thomas agreed to evacuate British and loyalist forces from Dorchester Heights . Fort Ticonderoga was captured by British forces and was evacuated by General Thomas .
 Fort Sullivan, built of shot-repelling palmetto logs, proved resistant to British landing party and bombardment by conventional ships . Fort Sullivan was built of wooded logs and was resistant to a landing party .
 The British retreated, setting fire to HMS Actaeon, aground near the fort . The British retreated and set fire to the ship aground . The ship was set aground aground and set ablaze .
 The British army, Hessians, and the Royal Navy repeatedly flanked Washington's army as it tried to defend the colonies' largest city . Washington's troops were surrounded by the British and Hessians .
 American resistance crumbled, leaving the British in control of Manhattan until 1783 . American resistance finally crumbled .
 The British broke contact after American resistance, which gave Washington time to withdraw . The British finally broke contact with the U.S. after a series of resistance .
 Washington ordered a retreat to White Plains after realizing their positions had been bypassed by the British using amphibious capability . The British used amphibious capabilities to bypass Washington's position .
 The British captured a strategic hill on the American right, forcing the Americans to retreat further . The Americans retreated further, with the British capturing the strategic hill .
 Crossing the Delaware River, American forces seized Trenton, New Jersey, in 18th century . Crossing Delaware River was the first time the city was taken over by American forces .
 Using supplies captured there, the rebels then routed another British force at Princeton . The rebels used supplies captured at Princeton to defeat the British forces .
 On the first day of the battle the French made some gains, but were eventually halted . The battle took place in Hamm, western Germany .
 Both sides were reinforced during the night, and the French attacked again on the Allied left flank . The French attack was the first time the French had attacked Allied troops .
 The arrival of more Allied reinforcements allowed a successful attack, which forced the French into retreat . The French were forced into retreat by Allied reinforcements .
 The Prussians failed to make much headway against determined Austrian opposition . But a fight for a strategic hill drew in Prussian reserves and weakened the Austrian flank .
 A renewed Prussian assault broke the Austrian flanks and forced a retreat . The Austrian retreat was forced to be forced to stop .
 Peace treaty was signed in February 1763 . States on both sides faced financial ruin . Peace treaty signed in 1763.
 The British Parliament's reluctance to grant distant colonists the ""Rights of Englishmen" led to uproar, antagonism, and finally war . The American Revolution was founded in 1775-83 in New England .
 France and Spain moved “Lay down your arms, rebels, or you are all dead men’s dead men.” Spain and France said: ‘Lay down, rebels or you’ll all be dead men .’
 In the largest battle of the Revolution, Washington and the reformed Continental army failed to defend Philadelphia from the British advance, due to British flanking maneuvers .
 Soldiers of the British 4th and 10th infantry yield the North Bridge, over the Concord River, over Concord River .
 Washington sent four converging columns against an isolated part of Howe's army . Howe's British army achieved surprise with the help of Washington's four columns .
 British resistance, fog, and a lack of ammunition resulted in the Americans' withdrawal . British resistance and fog led the Americans to withdraw from the battle .
 Loyalists and Iroquois ambushed General Herkimer's column while he was en route to relieve a fort under British attack . The ambush took place in 17th century .
 The Americans held a perimeter on a nearby hill while skirmishers destroyed the British supply train . Suffering heavy casualties, the Americans suffered heavy casualties . The Americans were forced to hold a perimeter around a hill .
 A Hessian column veered off toward New Hampshire in the vanguard of British General Burgoyne's invasion . The British invasion was part of the British invasion of New Hampshire .
 The British initially repelled an attack and then counterattacked, suffering heavy losses . The British suffered heavy losses on both occasions, losing both times .
 When reinforcements failed to arrive the British tried to withdraw and were surrounded, which forced them to surrender . The British were surrounded and surrounded by a large group of troops .
 She was Vice Admiral Lord Horatio Nelson's flagship at the battle of Trafalgar, which took place on October 21,1805 . She was the flagship of Vice Admiral Nelson's fleet .
 British Major General William Howe moved to open the Delaware river to Philadelphia . In need of supplies, he opened the river to help the city .
 The garrisons of the two forts below the city resisted for four weeks, inflicting heavy losses . The city was besieged by the Germans in the summer of 1944 .
 Monmouth Court House held until relief arrived . Washington attacked the British rear guard at Monmouth .
 American General ""Mad Anthony"" Wayne suddenly turned the tables on the British advancing up the Hudson River and overwhelmed and captured an entire British garrison . General Wayne captured a British garrison in New York City .
 The Americans bypassed strong British defenses with a night march along the river . The U.S. defeated the British in the Battle of St. Louis in 1842 . The Battle of Gettysburg was the first major battle of the Great War .
 The British failed to coordinate properly and the attack failed, leaving the British in charge . The British were left in charge of the attack .
 Benjamin Lincoln defended the city from March to May 1780 before surrendering his entire command, as well as ships and a large number of cannon, to British forces . Lincoln surrendered his command, ships and cannon to surrounding British forces, to the British .
 A combined British and Loyalist column caught an American force attempting to retreat after the fall of Charleston was brought to action by the combined forces .
 Inexperienced troops on the American left flank broke when the British advanced against them, leaving the stouter right exposed to the flanking maneuver that followed .
 Despite having no overall commander, the various groups of American Patriots cooperated well . They regrouped when repulsed and attacked again .
 With casualties mounting and their leader dead, the Loyalists surrendered . The Loyalists surrender to British troops .
 British regulars and a scattering of Loyalists attacked American prepared defenses of militia and Continentals . The Battle of Gettysburg was the first major battle of the Civil War .
 Continental cavalry forestalled British attacks on their flanks . British were defeated by Continental cavalry . Continental cavalry prevented British attacks . British forces were defeated .
 The British attacked the concentrated American forces and drove them from the battlefield with so many casualties that Nathaniel Greene retreated back into Virginia . Greene's army was destroyed by the British attack .
 Pressed by the American armies, the British fortified their position and waited in vain for evacuation by sea . The British were forced to abandon their position in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 The British surrendered after an American attack forced their outer defensive line . The British surrender was captured by the U.S. troops .
 The British navy that had proved so decisive in the Seven Years War found itself challenged by the French . The French, still smarting from their defeat in the same war, were at their highest level of ship construction .
 Benedict Arnold's American ""motley crew"" of schooners and gunboats sank under overwhelming British firepower . After the retreat from Canada, Benedict Arnold’s Americans retreated under British fire .
 The battle nonetheless delayed the British invasion down the Hudson River valley . The battle was delayed by the battle .
 First hostile landing on British shores since 1667 in 1667 . John Paul Jones set fire to ship and sabotaged fort's guns . Jones escaped unscathed .
 After four days of maneuvering, French Admiral d'Orvilliers forced British Admiral Keppel's squadron back into port, leaving the French free in the Atlantic .
 The result was indecisive, but British control of the sea was shaken badly . The result of the battle was inconclusive, and British control was shaken .
 A joint US-French fleet attacked two British escort vessels protecting a large merchant convoy sailing from the Baltic . A joint U.S. and French fleet attacked a British escort vessel in the attack .
 John Paul Jones in Bonhomme Richard took Serapis, and Pallas captured Scarborough . In a four-hour battle John Paul . Paul Jones captured Scarborough in the Battle of the Bloodlands . In the battle, Paul Jones won the battle in four hours .
 The convoy escaped, and Jones sailed in Serapis after Bonhomme Richard sank . The convoy was eventually rescued by the French shipboat .
 French Admiral Bailli de Suffren encountered a British squadron under Commodore George Johnstone en route to seize the Cape of Good Hope from the Dutch .
 Isoroku Yamamoto (18841943) was Fleet Admiral of the Imperial Japanese Navy . Yamamoto: "In the first six to twelve months of a war with the United States and Great Britain 1 will run wild and win victory upon victory"
 The British 17th Lancers are famous for their participation in the tragic Charge of the Light Brigade in October 1854 . They are known as the 'Death or Glory Boys' because of the insignia on their cap badge .
 Turkish anger over Catherine the Great's annexation of the Crimea in 1786 boiled up in a war in which the Russian empress executed yet another drive upon the Bosporus .
 Fighting Russia and Austria simultaneously, the Turkish were saved only by Prussian intervention . The Turkish were only saved by the intervention of Prussian forces .
 The Russian heavy squadron was commanded by American naval hero John Paul Jones, now in the service of Catherine the Great . The heavy squadron commanded by John Paul .
 His ships mauled a Turkish squadron in shallow waters as it attempted to resist the Russian advance on Constantinople . The Turkish squadron was attacked by the Russian forces in the shallow waters .
 The Turkish brought up their heavier vessels and found John Paul Jones's large warships anchored and ready to receive them . The Turkish were able to bring up heavier vessels .
 The smaller ships of the Russians wrought havoc on the damaged or grounded Turkish vessels . Meanwhile, the smaller ships wrought havoc with the Turkish ships .
 Russian Prince Grigori Potemkin used artillery and patience to reduce Ochakov, a major Turkish fortress . Prince Potomkin used his patience and artillery to reduce the Turkish fortress in the battle . The battle took place in the early 1900s .
 The French fleet blocked a British relief fleet as it moved to rescue besieged British forces from Yorktown . French forces blocked the British relief from the British forces .
 Napoleon led a charge across a warships inflicted considerable damage as the British engaged in an uncoordinated fashion and withdrew . This somewhat fanciful illustration shows Napoleon bearing a tri-color flag .
 The British fleet's brilliant maneuvering forced the stronger French fleet from its anchorage . But the French forces that had already landed forced the surrender of St. Louis .
 Calm winds and coppered hulls allowed the British to sail through the line of the French fleet, with devastating results . The French fleet was defeated by the British in the Battle of the Medespina .
 Strait of Gibraltar, Mediterranean Sea, and neighboring Spain . Location Strait Gibraltar is located on the Mediterranean Sea .
 Gibraltar's British garrison resisted scurvy, starvation, and floating gun batteries with the help of supply fleets and red-hot shot . Gibraltar's supply fleets were used to repel the enemy .
 French Admiral Suffren fought four battles with the British fleet in the Indian Ocean . Suffren attacked British shipping in the area, attacking British shipping and fighting .
 The last battle saved the French post at Cuddalore from capture by the British .
 Canadian Forces 48th Highlanders of Canada were part of the Ottoman Empire . Ottoman empire. Ottoman Empire. Ottoman empire . Ottoman Empire was one of Canada's most successful empires .
 The great Russian admiral encountered a powerful Turkish fleet already in line of battle . He encountered a strong Turkish fleet in a battle with the Turkish forces .
 Ushakov maneuvered from three lines into one, keeping the faster Turks from heading him off . The faster Turks were unable to head him off, Ushkov said .
 Russian firepower settled the issue, leaving Russia now in control of the Black Sea . Russia now controls the region of Russia-controlled territory .
 The monarchical powers of Europe joined forces to restore the authority of the French monarchy . Presumed that the French revolution was a contagion that would spread, the monarchs joined forces with the help of France .
 The French, through their levee en masse (mass mobilization), successfully resisted . Despite dissension and disorganization, the revolutionary French successfully resisted. The French were victorious in the battle .
 The coalition army tried artillery bombardment and then began an assault . Attempting to dislodge French revolutionary forces from the heights of Valmy, the coalition army attempted artillery bombardment . The assault was the first time the French army had attempted to attack Valmy .
 Seeing that French were not going to break, the coalition force withdrew . Seeing that the French were . not going . to break the French forces withdrew . The French force withdrew after it was found not to break .
 French launched a series of frontal assaults on the Austrians, which they drove off . After an ineffective artillery barrage, the French launched an ineffective barrage . The Austrians drove off the French, but the French were eventually driven off .
 Eventually the weight of French numbers began to tell, and the Austrians were forced to withdraw . The Austrians had to withdraw from the battle .
 Napoleon Bonaparte's force seized high ground from which artillery could command the port . They were driven out by the enterprise of the young Napoleon Bonparte, whose force seized .
 French commander used reconnaissance data from a hydrogen balloon to coordinate his response . Although his flanks were both driven back, the French commander was able to use the data from the balloon to direct his response.
 The coalition forces pulled back, though the French were not in a position to pursue . The French were unable to pursue the French forces .
 Napoleon's attempts to cross the Alpone River by a bridge at Arcole were repulsed . Napoleon tried to do so by crossing the river by bridge . Napoleon was killed in 1803 by the French Revolution .
 French flanking movements convinced the Austrians that they were in danger of encirclement, so they withdrew . The Austrians withdrew from the battle .
 Spain had now entered an alliance with France and declared war on Britain . Spain had entered a pact with France, declaring war against Britain .
 The outnumbered British attacked and split the Spanish line of battle in two, inflicting a serious defeat and reinforcing British naval superiority . Intercepting the Spanish fleet on its way to join with French forces, the British attacked .
 The French seized American shipping in the 1790s . A deterioration in Franco-American relations led the French to seize American shipping .
 The dispute erupted into military conflict that included a fight between the Constellation and the Insurgente . The Constellation is the largest submarine in the world . The Insurgentente is the most powerful submarine in Latin America .
 After a short, brutal battle, the American Constellation took the French frigate Insurgente, which had attacked an American flotilla . The battle was a battle between the Constellation and the French .
 Britain's ban on colonial expansion west of the Appalachians faltered . American settlers crossed the mountains and encountered powerful confederations of native peoples .
 For 10 days a Shawnee war party under Chief Blackfish attempted to capture or burn Daniel Boone's settlement at Boonesborough . The Shawnee War Party attempted to burn or capture or capture the settlement at Boone's Settlement . The party was led by the Shawnee chief chief Chief Black
 French-directed attempts failed in a heavy rain, and the Shawnee were forced to withdraw . The Shawnee died in 1881 .
 General George Rogers Clark led an American force against Shawnee settlements, including the largest at Old Chillicothe in southwestern Ohio . Clark led the American force to the largest Shawnee settlement in Ohio .
 The Indians evacuated the town, but retreated after offering battle behind it . The Indians retreated after the town was evacuated . The town was the last town in the area to survive .
 The British had surrendered at Yorktown 10 months earlier ending the Revolutionary War . British rangers withdrawing from an attack on a Shawnee war party ambushed and destroyed a smaller force of Kentuckians .
 A dawn attack by the Miami tribe on the camp of an American column inflicted the worst defeat ever suffered by the U.S. in combat against Indians .
 General Wayne's ""Legion of the United States"" brought vengeance on the confederated tribes of the Northwest . General Wayne’s "Legion" of the U.S. brought vengeance against confederations of the West .
 Wayne's powerful frontal assault at the battle of Fallen Timbers crushed Indian resistance and forced a peace settlement that lasted 15 years . Wayne's assault at Fallen Timbers, flanked by cavalry, crushed Indians resistance . Wayne: "The battle was a victory for the American people, and for the Indian people
 Napoleon turned against the decrepit Ottoman empire and took a fleet and army into the eastern Mediterranean . Napoleon wanted to sever Britain's link with India, severing the link with the Ottoman empire .
 Napoleon's prospects in the east withered after Nelson annihilated his fleet, however, and, despite a victory over the Ottomans at Aboukir, Napoleon was forced to abandon his army . Despite a victory, Napoleon's fortunes in the East waned after the defeat .
 French formation consisted of squares whose fire interlocked, augmented by artillery positioned at the corners . The French formation was formed during the Second World War .
 The Mameluk cavalry could not penetrate the squares and was eventually driven off . The cavalry was driven off by the soldiers and was driven away .
 Surprising the French fleet in harbor, British ships opened fire . British ships anchored alongside their French counterparts and opened fire on the French .
 The fighting continued through the night, and only two French ships escaped . Only two of the French ships survived .
 The French cavalry delivered a charge that broke the Ottoman force . The French infantry applied pressure, the cavalry delivered the charge . The charge was the first to break the Ottoman forces .
 While Napoleon was on expedition in Egypt, European powers united for the second time in an attempt to curtail revolutionary France . The European Union was formed in 1802 .
 Napoleon proved up to the challenge . Great Britain, Austria, Russia, and Turkey launched attacks on Napoleon . Napoleon died in 1881 .
 Napoleon defeated Murad Bey's Mameluk army at the battle of the Pyramids on July 21,1798 . At the battle, Napoleon captured Egypt and conquered Egypt . Napoleon's victory in Egypt was a victory for the Egyptians .
 As this image shows, the pyramids were actually barely visible on the horizon . This image was taken in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 The French commander was killed by skirmisher fire early in the battle . The French army repulsed several Austro-Russian attacks . The battle was the first of its kind .
 Late in the day, the Austro-Russians finally managed to break through and forced the French into retreat . The French were forced to retreat .
 The Anglo-Russian force launched a confused attack delayed by bad roads and deficiencies in command . It was delayed by a lack of command .
 The Russians found themselves unsupported by the British, and their attack was repulsed with considerable losses . As a result of the British's failure, the Russians were forced to withdraw .
 In the early afternoon French reinforcements arrived, after which the Austrian position began to crumble, causing them to retreat . The Austrian position collapsed after the arrival of reinforcements .
 Austrians caught the French army dispersed and unready for battle . Austrians' initial attacks prevailed .
 Napoleon defeated Napoleon in a hard-fought battle in the French Revolution . The arrival of detached French forces turned the tide, resulting in a victory for Napoleon .
 The French force invited an Austrian attack, which became disordered because of the close terrain . The Austrian attack was disordered due to the close nature of the terrain .
 French were able to concentrate fire against each of the dispersed Austrian forces in turn, inflicting a decisive defeat . The French were then able to focus fire on each other in a decisive victory .
 The Royal Navy was sent to prevent the Danish fleet from enforcing free trade with France . The Danish fleet was trying to enforce free trade between Denmark and France .
 British fleet was ordered to withdraw at the height of the battle . Negotiating natural hazards while engaging enemy warships, armed hulks, and floating gun batteries .
 Admiral Fforatio Nelson chose not to see the signal and the British prevailed . The British prevailed in the battle of the Great War .
 The British squadron attempted to attack a French force protected by Spanish coastal forts, but failed . The squadron was attacked by the French, but was unable to get past the Spanish coast .
 Four days later, reinforced by Spanish ships, the French squadron left port . The French squadron was reinforced with Spanish ships .
 The war of the second coalition was ended by the Treaty of Amiens the following March . The war ended in a treaty ending the war in France .
 The uniform of a French voltigeur (a French military skirmish unit) of the 21st Regiment of the Line includes a dark blue jacket and white trousers .
 British force met coalition of Maratha princes during the Second AngloMaratha War . British forces met coalition earlier than anticipated .
 Although outnumbered, the British made an immediate attack, capturing the enemy cannon and their defensive position in the village of Assaye . The British captured the cannon and its defensive position .
 Britain had stood alone against Napoleon since 1803, until Austria, Prussia, Portugal, and Russia resumed hostilities against him in 1805 . The Third Coalition was formed in 1803-06 .
 The Franco-Spanish force intended to enter the English Channel to invade England and Ireland . The force was intended to invade the English and Irish border .
 It was intercepted by a British squadron in a chaotic battle fought in poor visibility . It was successfully intercepted by British squadron .
 The rapid French advance caught the Austrians unaware, and only 5,500 men out of a much larger force took the field . Only 5,000 men were on the field at the time .
 As the Austrian army waited at Ulm for its Russian allies to appear, the French army encircled it . The French army had arrived much faster than the Austrians had anticipated .
 Bucephalus, Alexander's beloved warhorse, died after the battle of the Hydaspes River in India . Alexander the Great, Macedonian empire Bucephus, died in the battle .
 United States Army General Scott, a mule, is the mascot of the United States Military Academy . General Scott is a former mule of General Scott .
 Nils Olav II, a king penguin living at the Edinburgh Zoo, Scotland, currently holds the honorary rank of colonel in chief of the regiment .
 Fergal, an Irish wolfhound, is the latest in a long line of wolfhound mascots of the Irish Guards . The Irish Guards, British Army, have a long history of wolfhounds mascots .
 Admiral Horatio Nelson led the British fleet through the Franco-Spanish line of battle . Their superior gunnery and seamanship overwhelmed the enemy .
 The Austro-Russian force counterattacked but were defeated by artillery fire . After an attack by French cavalry the Austro-. Russian forces were defeated in the battle . French cavalry were also defeated .
 As French reinforcements came up the allies were slowly pushed out of their positions . French reinforcements pushed the allies out of positions .
 After capturing an important bridge, the French attacked the next evening . The French captured a bridge in the Battle of St. Louis .
 The Russians withdrew, but delayed the French long enough for the Austrian and Russian armies to make a junction at Brunn. The French and Austrian armies made a junction .
 The main French attack advanced through morning fog and took the high ground in the allied center . The Austrians and Russians attacked the deliberately weakened French right .
 A British force landed in support of guerrillas fighting against French rule . British forces were involved in the fight against the French government .
 This was the first time the British line and French column met in direct combat . The battle was fought in front of the French and British lines .
 As individual members of the Third Coalition made peace with France, the rest of the alliance collapsed . War of the Fourth Coalition 1806-07 saw the end of the coalition .
 Fourth Coalition was replaced by a Fourth Coalition consisting of Prussia, Russia, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and their allies . However, it was replaced with the Fourth Coalition of the Cold War .
 Napoleon's main French army under Napoleon engaged the Prussians at Jena, Germany . A flanking force encountered a larger Prussian formation . The battle was fought in Jena .
 After a defensive battle the French counterattacked at Auerstadt and routed their opponents . The French defeated their opponents in the first half of the tournament .
 Most Prussian field forces and fortresses surrendered in the panic following the defeat at Jena-Auerstadt . Most of the Prussian army and fortress forces surrendered .
 One that had not was pursued to Liibeck, where it was forced to fight a superior French force . One that hadn't been pursued, the French force had to fight it back .
 Having run out of food and ammunition, the Prussian force surrendered the next day . The Prussian forces surrendered the following day .
 Admiral Horatio Nelson observes the cannonade at the battle of Trafalgar from HMS Victory's weather deck .
 Retreating Russian forces were brought to action at Golymin by the French . The French could not bring their artillery up along the muddy roads . French artillery was unable to bring up their artillery along the roads .
 An inconclusive battle ensued, after which the Russian force continued to pull back . The Russian force pulled back, but the battle was inconclusive .
 French attacks met with initial success, but Russian counterattacks restored the situation in most areas . The French attacks were met with early success but were eventually reversed .
 By the afternoon the French were starting to lose, but were reinforced and renewed the attack . The French began to lose the battle, but continued to fight back .
 The action was inconclusive but the Russian force pulled back, some elements joining up with units retiring from Golymin . The action is inconclusive .
 The French launched a frontal assault that was repulsed with huge losses . Colliding with the Russian army in a snowstorm, the French were unable to defeat them .
 A huge French cavalry charge restored the situation and French reinforcements prompted a Russian withdrawal . The Russian withdrawal prompted a huge Russian cavalry charge .
 French forces encircled the city of Danzig and beat off a Russian attempt to reinforce the garrison . French forces beat off an attempt to re-invite the city to Danzig .
 After a bombardment and mining, the garrison surrendered on generous terms . After a period of bombardment and . mining, . the . garrison surrender on generous . terms .
 Russian army crossed the Alle River and attacked what it thought was an isolated French corps . The Russian army thought it was a French corps and crossed the river .
 Additional French forces joined the fighting, inflicting a severe defeat on the Russians . Additional French troops joined the fight, inflicting the defeat on Russia .
 The tide turned against Napoleon when he thrust his brother onto the vacant throne of Spain . Napoleon was overthrown by his brother in 1808-14 .
 Arthur Wellesley emerged as an adversary capable of meeting Napoleon on his own terms . During the war, he emerged as a rival to the British leader .
 French corps surrendered in return for safe conduct to France . Isolated by a Spanish rising against French rule, the French corps surrendered in return .
 Many of the prisoners were massacred by Spanish irregulars, and the remainder were mostly confined in prison hulks . Instead of massacring them, many prisoners were confined to prison hosks . The rest of the Spanish prisoners died in the Spanish-occupied prison .
 The British took up a position on a ridge between the village of Vimeiro and the sea . The British moved to a position between the town and the coast of Portugal .
 From there, they beat back French infantry columns attacking up the slope . The British soldiers beat back the French troops .
 French attacks overwhelmed the heavily outnumbered SpanishSpanish, but they were able to retreat thanks to a determined stand by their rearguard . The SpanishSpanish were almost entirely wiped out by repeated cavalry charges .
 At the battle of Jena, on October 14,1806, a priest at Hassenhausen, Germany, used a church ledger to splint a soldier's injuries . A church ledger was used to record the soldier's injury .
 The book, displayed here with a collection of lead musket balls, is still stained with blood . The book is displayed with a display of musket ball collection .
 More than 1,000 warships of the Song dynasty's navy versus approximately 50 vessels in the service of Kublai Khan's Yuan dynasty . Although outnumbered more than 10 to 1, the Mongol force used superior tactics to defeat and destroy the Song's naval power .
 By crossing the French line with his own line, Viscount Nelson effectively cut his opponent's forces in half . By crossing his line, he effectively cut the French army in half.
 After a couple of hours' fighting, the French and Spanish withdrew, having lost 21 ships and suffered more than 5,000 men killed and wounded . After a few hours of fighting the French, Spanish and French withdrew, suffering more than five,000 casualties .
 The 16 battleships of the German High Seas Fleet had drawn the British into an epic duel . Although outnumbered, the British were able to defeat the Germans in the Battle of the Atlantic .
 The German fleet inflicted heavy casualties on the British battlecruiser squadron, but it was forced to retreat to harbor, where it remained for the rest of World War 1 .
 Wellington's force occupied a steep 10-mile long ridge on the heights of Bussaco . Wellington's Anglo-Portuguese force occupied the heights on the ridge .
 As the French columns advanced, the Allies were able to shift reinforcements along a road built by their engineers right behind British-Portuguese positions . The Allies shifted reinforcements along the road built right behind their engineers .
 Several French assaults were defeated by firepower and bayonet counterattacks . Several French attacks were defeated in the French capital .
 The French made a flanking attack on the right, driving the Spanish troops there out of position . Feinting at the center of their force, the French made the attack . The Spanish troops were driven from the Spanish position .
 First British units to respond were overrun, but the arrival of more reinforcements stabilized the situation . The first British units were overrun by British troops .
 After digging in around the city, the British launched a night assault, which became confused and disjointed . The British launched an assault on the city in the early hours of the morning .
 The British eventually fought their way into the town of Badajoz using scaling ladders . The British used the ladders to get into the Spanish town .
 British and Portuguese soldiers commanded by Wellington captured the town of Badajoz in Spain . It was one of the bloodiest battles of the Napoleonic Wars, with the death toll of more than 100,000 .
 The defenses of the city had already been damaged from having to withstand repeated storming in an earlier siege, it held out for several weeks . Even though the defenses were already damaged, the city held out in several weeks.
 The walls were breached, savage street fighting went on for some time . The French were forced to lift the siege and withdraw from the city .
 The rearguard took up defensive positions and beat off French attacks until the force could be evacuated by sea by sea . After protecting the rest of the British army during its retreat, they protected themselves from French attacks .
 The French force marched to the relief of Almeida, which was under siege . The French army arrived at the end of the siege of the city .
 Repeated assaults by the French almost succeeded in breaking through the Anglo-Portguese position . The French failed to succeed in the battle against the Portuguese .
 The British right flank was turned, but close cooperation between cavalry and infantry units permitted the situation to be restored . The British left flank of the British army was turned .
 Shaka united several tribal groups into a Zulu nation of more than 250,000 people who dominated southern Africa . Shaka 41 when he was Zulu empire assassinated Shaka .
 During his 10-year reign as a warrior king, Shaka presided over a number of military innovations for his people . He presided over the use of new weapons and tactics in warfare . Shaka was the first African king to lead his people to the throne .
 Historians believe Shaka introduced methods for drilling and manoeuvering large, regiment-sized formations of troops called ibutho, and smaller, company-sized groups called iviyo .
 Shaka may have been the first to introduce new close-quarters fighting tactics . He may have introduced the short Zulu spear called an iklwa, or assegai, and the small war shield called umbhumbluzo .
 Zulu warrior King Shaka founded a powerful military empire in the late 19th century . Shaka was born in Zulu, South Africa .
 David, 1st Earl Beatty was the youngest man to be made captain in the Royal Navy at that time . He was awarded for his gallantry as a member of the naval expedition to China during the Boxer Rebellion . Beatty died at the age of 29 .
 2nd Lieutenant von Friedeburg had command of U-l 55, a Type IXC submarine . He was appointed U-boat commander Germany in August 1944 .
 Lucius D Clay 42, the youngest man to be made a brigadier general in the United States Army during World War II . Clay was decorated for combat service in the Normandy campaign of 1944 . He was one of only four such young men to command U-boats .
 Later, in June 1948, he ordered the start of the famous airlift to resupply isolated West Berliners during the Soviet blockade . The airlift was the first of many airlifts from Berlin to West Berlin in 1948 .
 Attempting to block a British withdrawal, the French became overextended . Attempted to block the French withdrawal, they became overexxtended.
 Under Wellington, the British attacked in four columns, turning the French flanks and breaking through the center of the French army .
 The victors were sidetracked from pursuit by the volume of loot and supplies left behind by the French . The French left behind many of their supplies and supplies .
 As the Anglo-Spanish army advanced into France, the French Army of Spain made a stand at Toulouse . The French army of Spain fought the Spanish invasion of France .
 Neither i commander nor i commander was aware that the war was effectively over and that Napoleon had agreed to surrender . Napoleon agreed to Napoleon's surrender in 1877 .
 The French were defeated and pulled r baclc from the city, and shortly afterward a local armistice began . Shortly afterward, the French were pulled out of the city .
 For the fifth time, a coalition rose up to oppose Napoleonic France . In 1809, the coalition rose to oppose the French monarchy .
 It consisted primarily of the United Kingdom and the Austrian empire, with assistance from Sicily, Sardinia, and Brunswick . It was formed from the British Empire to the Austrian Empire .
 The French concentrated their forces and inflicted a defeat, which broke the Austrian army in two, then pushed the halves apart . The Austrian army was broken in two by the French, who broke up the army .
 Austrian forces captured Ratisbon on April 20, and their presence in the city protected the Austrian retreat after the defeat at Abensberg . The Austrian retreat was protected by their presence .
 The French decided to storm Ratisbon, making two failed attempts before Marshal Lannes rallied his troops for a final, successful, attempt . The French made a final attempt to storm the city after two attempts .
 Part of the Austrian army was cornered by a much larger French force . Retiring from the defeat at Abensberg, part of the Austrians were cornered .
 Additional French forces under the command of Napoleon himself arrived to ensure a decisive French victory . Additional French troops under Napoleon himself ensured a decisive victory .
 Austrian army had been broken in two during the battle of Abensburg . Austrian army remained a potent force in Bavaria, Germany .
 The northern segment launched an attack which was countered by the arrival of French reinforcements . The northern part of the French army was defeated by the northern part .
 Lobau is 5 miles east of Vienna on the north side of the Danube River . It is located in Lobau, 5 miles west of Vienna .
 The French crossed the Danube River using pontoon bridges via the island of Lobau . The French used the bridge to destroy the Austrian army .
 Austrians attacked again, seriously threatening the French left flank . After a day of fierce but indecisive fighting, the Austrians attack again . The battle was fought on the left flank of the French army .
 Once this attack was repelled, the French began to advance, winning a costly victory . The French won't advance again until the end of the battle .
 Ffoping to destroy the French fleet at Flushing and create a second front against France, the British landed in the notoriously disease-ridden Walcheren region .
 Casualties from disease were higher than those sustained in combat for both . Casualties were higher from disease than sustained combat for either side of war .
 Napoleon's greatest desire at the pinnacle of his success and strength was to destroy Russia, the largest of his enemies . 1812 invasion of Russia was Napoleon's first invasion of the Russian Empire . Napoleon's great desire was the destruction of Russia .
 Half a million French and their allies perished as the Russians used scorched-earth policies, as well as taking advantage of the winter cold to undermine French military expertise .
 The Russians were unable to push their opponents back until the next day . Although their initial cavalry attack was successful, the Russians were able to push back .
 It was not the Roman army which reduced Gaul, but Caesar, who blocked the French advance for a time . Caesar’s army was not responsible for the loss of Gaul, it was the Roman Army .
 The French reached the walls of the city, but lacked any scaling apparatus to climb them . The French were unable to reach the walls, but had no means of climbing them .
 The Russians abandoned the city in order to save their army, giving the French the victory . Eventually they breached the walls, but the Russians abandoned their army . The French were able to breach the walls .
 Napoleon launched a series of costly frontal assaults on well-fortified positions . Ignoring advice recommending that he make a flanking attack, he launched a costly frontal assault . Napoleon launched his first major offensive in the 18th century .
 Both sides took heavy casualties but, because the Russians withdrew, the French claimed victory . Both sides were casualties, but because of the Russian withdrawal, they won't claim victory .
 French hoped to retreat from Moscow along a different route, avoiding areas stripped bare of fodder and supplies during their advance . The French wanted to avoid areas they had stripped bare-of-food and supplies .
 French vanguard was turned aside at Maloyaroslavets and instead had to march west via Smolensk, suffering terribly as a result . The French were turned aside by the Russians and suffered terribly . The Russian army was forced to march through the city of Smol
 Napoleon had originally intended to retreat across the frozen Berezina River, but he found it thawed . Napoleon had planned to retreat from the frozen river, but it was thawed by the time he arrived . Napoleon was killed in the Battle of the Crimea .
 French fought a defensive action while engineers built two wooden bridges . Trapped between a pursuing Russian army and the icy river, the French were forced to retreat .
 The French destroyed these after the remnants of their army had passed over them . The remnants of the French destroyed them after they passed over .
 marble bust of Napoleon by Italian sculptor Antonio Canova portrays the emperor as a Roman god . Napoleon, Roman god, is an exemplary of neoclassical style .
 Napoleon's Grand Armee faced a major challenge provisioning such a large force . Napoleon's invasion of Russia was one of the biggest logistical challenges of his time .
 Napoleon had developed a sophisticated logistics infrastructure . Napoleon's logistics infrastructure was a key factor in his success . Napoleon had to rely heavily on the help of the French army .
 This included 17 battalions of 6,000 vehicles each, which would supply his troops for 40 days . The vehicles would be enough to supply the British troops for that period .
 Magazine stores set up in several towns along the march in Poland and Prussia . Also, magazine stores were set up .
 In the event, the preparations proved inadequate for the long journey to Moscow . In the end, the Russian capital is set to host a series of events .
 At the beginning of World War II, the German navy was able to inflict heavy losses on Allied merchant shipping almost with impunity . Battle of the Atlantic was the first battle of the war .
 By the end of the war, this longest battle had cost the lives of 30,248 Allied merchant sailors and 28,000 Kriegsmarine sailors . The longest battle in the history of the Second World War cost 30,000 lives .
 U.S. shipbuilding effort more than able to replace vessels lost . Shipbuilding effort in the United States was more successful than ever .
 After World War II, the Soviet Union occupied the eastern area of Germany, which included the capital, Berlin . The Berlin Airlift was the largest operation in the world since the fall of WWII .
 In June 1948, a dispute arose between the Soviets and the other Allied armies that occupied the western half of Berlin . The Soviets and Allied armies occupied the eastern part of Berlin in June 1948 .
 The Soviets blockaded the city, effectively isolating it from communication with the Americans and British, and also cutting supplies of food and water . The Soviets cut supplies and cut supplies of water and food .
 The 15-month campaign involved 278,228 sorties (individual flights) of American and British transport aircraft . More than 2. million tons of supplies were delivered at a cost of US$224 million .
 The People's Army of Vietnam developed a network of about 10,000 miles of tracks and trails . The Viet Cong and North Vietnamese moved more than 60 tons of materiel every day to support their war effort .
 A significant portion of the trail network passed through Laos and Cambodia, which American policy initially forbade as targets for fear of widening the war . U.S. and South Vietnamese were unable to halt its traffic decisively .
 A tribal confederation threatened the progress of white settlement of the area, by undermining concessions made by other Indian leaders . The confederation was formed in 1881 .
 The Indian confederation attacked United States troops before dawn, but was repulsed with a series of charges . The U.S. troops were attacked by the confederation before dawn .
 The War of 1812 was the child of the Napoleonic Wars . Both the British and the French seized American ships and cargoes in their struggles .
 British support of allied Indians on the frontier pushed the United States to declare war . The British navy's forcible recruitment of American seamen pushed the U.S. to war .
 After an abortive invasion of Canada, a British force and an Indian force led by the Shawnee leader Tecumseh convinced the Americans that they were facing greater numbers and likely atrocities .
 The British defeated the uncoordinated and ill-prepared American efforts to cross the Niagara River and invade Canada, even though their commander General Brock was killed in the conflict . The British decisively defeated the American efforts .
 The British took 9,935 American prisoners in the largest battle of the war so far . The battle took place in the Battle of Gettysburg, which was the largest in the war .
 British forces intercepted the invading American column, which collapsed after some resistance . British forces intercepted the American column .
 A British force and an Indian force, led by Tecumseh, attacked the largest American post left after the Detroit debacle, only to find the Americans well defended and within range of reinforcements . The Americans were well defended .
 Tecumseh’s warriors launch an unsuccessful attack on American troops in Indiana Territory . In this illustration of the battle of Tippecanoe, fought on November 7,1811, the Shawnee attack . The battle took place in the Indiana Territory of 1811 .
 British and Indian forces made a stand on some high ground near Moraviantown . Retreating back into Canada, British, Indian forces retreated back into the country .
 A force of mostly French-Canadian militia and Mohawk Indians blocked another U.S. column of inexperienced troops from invading Canada . The force was mostly French Canadian militia .
 The Americans gave up after failing to turn the FrenchCanadian position . The U.S. failed to win the game in France .
 The powerful Creek tribe rose in answer to the urgings of Tecumseh, who had spent much of his life rallying various tribes to defend their lands . The Creek tribe is one of the most powerful tribes in the world .
 Andrew Jackson crushed the Creeks' defended camp with artillery and the assistance of allied Indian tribes . General Andrew Jackson wanted to clear Alabama for white settlement . The battle took place in 1877 .
 Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada, is located on the west bank of the Niagara River . Niagara Falls is located west of Niagara Falls on the Niagara Falls .
 Fort McHenry, Maryland, is an example of Vauban-style fortification . The star-shaped layout of its walls and redoubts is a sign of the U.S. Army presence in the area .
 American forces took Fort Erie from the British, who counterattacked, only to be bloodily repulsed by American artillery . U.S. forces captured Fort Erie in 1777 .
 A British force moving toward the border of the U.S. and Canada encountered an American advance force . The incident took place in the early 1900s .
 A stand by U.S. sailors and marines allowed most of the American defenders to escape . Most of the Americans were able to escape with the help of the U.N. troops .
 British Captain Thomas Hardy informed the citizens that he would destroy Stonington . Captain Hardy told the citizens he was going to destroy the town . The town was destroyed by the destruction of the surrounding area . Hardy was killed by the explosion of a bomb .
 The townspeople responded with cannon fire, inflicting many casualties on the British and forcing them to withdraw . The British were forced to withdraw from the town after many casualties .
 Retreat or military withdrawal, is an orderly, armed maneuver under fire . Retreat is a retreat or military retreat, is a military withdrawal . Retreating is a form of retreat or withdrawal .
 Retreat is necessary for a weaker or damaged force to escape capture or destruction by a stronger one . Sometimes retreat is a wise tactical decision, even when on the offensive . Retreating is a good tactical decision .
 20,000 soldiers of the League of Venice drove King Charles VIII and his army of 12,000 French troops out of Italy in the opening battle of the Italian Charles Vlll's bloody campaign to conquer Wars .
 Naples failed, and he was forced to retreat from the Italian peninsula . Naples failed to defeat him and he had to retreat .
 Napoleon's massive invasion force was outmatched several times by Russian armies . Napoleon was defeated by Russia several times during his invasion .
 Napoleon endured some of his worst defeats, including at the battle of Berezina, where 50,000 of his men were killed or captured . During the retreat west, Napoleon endured a series of defeats .
 Of the approximately 600,000 soldiers of the Grande Armee that began the invasion of Russia in 1812, fewer than 10,000 returned to France .
 Most of these terrible losses were caused by the extreme cold weather and shortages in supplies of winter clothing, food, and fodder for the army's horses .
 During the First Anglo-Afghan War, a force of approximately 11,000 British and Punjabi troops withdrew back to India . Following an uprising of native Afghans, a British punitive expedition laid waste to many Afghan towns, British troops withdrew .
 The Duke of Wellington famously said, ""It is easy to get into Afghanistan. It is easy for the British to get in Afghanistan," he said .
 As they retreated, the British and Indian force lost at least 4,500 soldiers . They were harried by Afghan guerrillas along the mountainous route to India . Afghan guerillas were responsible for the retreat of the British forces .
 Russian Grand Duke Nicholas withdrew his armies to the Pripet Marshes after being outmaneuvered by a numerically superior German force . The retreat prevented the nation's industry to improve its soldiers' equipment .
 A large German armored and infantry force became encircled by the advancing British, Canadian, and American armies during the Allied invasion of Normandy in August . In August, a large German force became surrounded by advancing British and Canadian armies .
 Eight panzer divisions and 150,000 infantrymen attempted to break out of the ""Falaise Pocket" and retreat south across the Seine . The Pocket was one of the largest pockets of the Second World War II .
 The battle ended Operation Overlord and put the Germans on the defensive until December 1944 . The battle was one of the biggest in the history of the Allied World War II .
 U.S. strike aircraft attacked the 1,500 vehicles on the highway . United States strike aircraft struck the vehicles in the attack . The US strike aircraft hit the vehicles .
 Photographs of the aftermath show many burned-out cars, trucks, and tanks . Photographs show the aftermath of the attack .
 Napoleon and his beleaguered army retreated from Moscow in mid-November 1812 . Napoleon retreated from Russia in November 1812, 1812.
 Handwritten messages were for many centuries an important method of reporting on the outcome of battles and communicating orders . Carried by messenger on horseback, on foot, or by ship, handwritten messages were important .
 One long-standing method of carrying written messages over long distances was by carrier pigeon . Carrier pigeons were used to carry messages from long-distance carriers .
 Julius Caesar used pigeons to deliver messages during his expedition to Gaul . Caesar used the pigeons as a way to communicate with Gaul .
 In World War I, messenger pigeons, and dogs, played an important role in battlefield communication . Messenger pigeons and dogs were used to communicate during the war .
 In the early 20th century, experiments in practical wireless telegraphy helped to revolutionize field communications . Radio experiments in the early 1900s revolutionized field communications.
 Freed from wires, lines of communication were limited only by line of sight . Lines of communication only limited by line-of-sight .
 Field radio technology allowed frontline units to penetrate even further behind enemy lines while remaining in contact with their commanders .
 Later in the 20th century, satellite radio communications broadened the scale of tactical communication globally . Satellite radio enabled the development of satellite communications in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Electric telegraph was a defining feature of 19th-century battlefield communication . Developed in the 1830s, the electric telegraph became a key feature of battlefield communications .
 One of the tasks regularly assigned to an army's engineer corps was the laying and maintenance of telegraph wires to ensure that command posts in the rear could instantly communicate with their soldiers at the front .
 Early telegraphy receivers translated electrical impulses into coded messages, which could then be read by trained operators . Telegraph receivers such as the 19th-century model shown above .
 The British attacked with Guerriere immediately upon sighting Constitution . The British launched the attack on the Constitution .
 Guerriere left without a mast after being attacked by the Americans . The Americans used the ship's heavier construction and armament to devastating effect . The ship was destroyed in the battle .
 Mistaking United States for a smaller ship, the British ship sought a long-range engagement, in which she was outmaneuvered and outgunned by the Americans' heavier vessel . Mistaking U.S. ship for smaller vessel, British ship tried to engage in long-
 Andrew Jackson forced the surrender of Pensacola, Florida, in 1841 . The British pressured their Spanish allies to allow them the use of Florida to threaten the southern United States .
 The British blew up Fort Barrancas, which they had been occupying, and evacuated by sea . The fort was blown up by the British, and the British were forced to leave .
 While the British assembled their forces, the Americans, led by General Andrew Jackson, fortified their position . The Americans were led by Jackson, who led the U.S. to the battlefield .
 The British had to advance across open terrain and were shot down in large numbers, including their commander . The British commander was shot down, including his commander .
 After Trafalgar, Britain found only a few challengers, among them superb American ships specifically developed to outfight what they could not .
 British force was overwhelming, yet still suffered defeats on the Great Lakes and in ship-to-ship duels . British forces were overwhelming, but still suffered losses on Great Lakes .
 British guns on Shannon did more damage, causing crippling casualties on Chesapeake's quarterdeck and mortally wounding the U.S. commander . The ships opened fire, both hitting, but the British guns caused serious casualties .
 Only 15 minutes after the battle had begun, Chesapeake was under British control . Chesapeake, Virginia, was taken over by the British .
 With the American flagship disabled early in the action, the American commodore transferred under fire to another ship and led a bold attack, forcing a British surrender . With the British surrender, the U.S. commodore led the attack .
 The British attack on the anchored American fleet disintegrated when the Americans winched their ships around to present fresh broadsides to the enemy . The British enjoyed a great advantage in heavier guns and ships, but their attack disintegrated .
 American privateer, the General Armstrong, was provisioning in a neutral port when a British fleet carrying troops to New Orleans demanded its surrender .
 The Americans resisted for three days, which delayed the British from reaching New Orleans for three weeks . The British were forced to retreat from New Orleans, Louisiana .
 The damage allowed the British HMS Endymion to overhaul and damage the President further . British ships Pomone, Majestic, and Tenedos caught up with the battle and received the Americans' surrender .
 Constitution, defeated two British ships despite efforts to fight it in concert . Constitution defeated two ships in concert, defeating two British vessels . Constitution was the first ship to defeat the British in the war .
 Stewart took in his sails to rake Cyane twice, bringing her in as a prize . Cyane was brought in to be a prize prize by Stewart's crew .
 Napoleon's allies were weakened and disaffected after his disastrous attempt to invade Russia in 1812-14 . Napoleon's enemies were disaffected following his disastrous invasion of Russia . Napoleon was defeated by the French Revolution in France in 1815 .
 Austria, Prussia, Sweden, Britain, Spain, Portugal, and the German states joined forces in the hope of finally destroying him . Austria and Prussia joined forces to destroy him .
 The Allies succeeded in subduing France and sending Napoleon into exile on Elba . Napoleon was sent into exile in France . The Allies remodeled their armies along Napoleonic lines . Napoleon died in 18th Century .
 Battle of Quatre-Bras, June 16,1815, saw heavy fighting, which the Allies eventually won . The French 2nd Cavalry Division piles into the British lines, which included the 42nd Highlanders, also known as the ""Black Watch""".
 A segment of the French force arranged to be captured and soon after the remainder of the garrison agreed to surrender . The French troops were captured and the rest of the British troops agreed to accept surrendering .
 The equestrian statue commemorates the American victory over the British at the battle of New Orleans on January 8, 1815 . General Andrew Jackson was later the seventh United States President .
 A large concentration of artillery was brought to bear on the Allied center, while the Imperial Guard attacked the flank . The Imperial Guard also attacked the Allied flank .
 The Allied force was able to break off, mainly due to the exhaustion of the French troops . The Allied forces were able to pull out of the battle .
 The main French army launched a successful frontal assault . Detaching a large force to make a flank march, the French army made a successful flank march . The French army was able to defeat the Germans in a frontal assault.
 The flank attack was less well handled, allowing the Allied army to retire in good order . The Allied army was able to repel the flank attack with a well-planned retreat .
 The French and Allied armies made unexpected contact during a heavy thunderstorm, and a confused battle ensued . The battle took place during a thunderstorm in France and England .
 Allied counterattack in the center forced the French to withdraw . A French flanking attempt failed, and the French were forced to withdraw.
 Allies believed Dresden to be held by a single corps, the Allies attacked and were halted by the main French army . Believing Dresden was held by only one corps, they attacked .
 On the second day, the French launched an attack on the Allied flank and forced them to retreat . The French launched a second day of the Second World War, forcing the Allied forces to retreat.
 Vastly outnumbered by a coalition of nations, the French army made a stand at Leipzig . The French army was forced to take a stand in front of a coalition-dominated German city .
 The French were forced to withdraw, leaving about 15,000 men trapped on the wrong side of the Elster River . The French eventually had to withdraw and the French were eventually forced to leave .
 Napoleon attempted to defeat each of the allies advancing into France along three separate routes . Napoleon was defeated by the allies in three separate battles .
 Despite some brilliant successes, the weight of the numbers inevitably resulted in his defeat . The weight of numbers inevitably led to his defeat in the polls .
 The French army inflicted a series of defeats on the Prussians at Champaubert, Montmirail, ChateauThierry, and Vauchamps .
 The Prussians took heavy casualties, but this was not enough to derail their advance on Paris . The Prussian army was heavily outnumbered by the French army .
 The Allies gradually reduced French defensive positions, despite a counterattack by elements of the Imperial Guard . The Allies continued to reduce French positions in the Battle of the Bastille .
 Napoleon spent 10 months in exile in exile on the island of Elba . Napoleon escaped after less than 10 months on Elba island . Napoleon died in 1877 .
 Napoleon was declared an outlaw seven days before he returned to Paris . However, the veterans of his Grande Armee had rallied to him . Napoleon returned to France, but was declared outlaw by Napoleon .
 He was defeated at the battle of Waterloo and Louis XVIII was restored to the throne . Louis XVII was defeated in Waterloo and the throne was restored .
 Napoleon threw his main strength at the Prussians before they joined up with the British . Napoleon was hoping to defeat the Prussianians before joining the British forces .
 The Prussians, while defeated, were not crushed and were able to continue the campaign . The Prussian army was defeated by the Prussussians in 1881 .
 French delays in launching their attack allowed reinforcements to reach the weak Dutch force struggling to hold the crossroads at Quatre-Bras . The French delays allowed the Dutch to reach their weak Dutch forces . The Dutch were forced to withdraw from the battle after the battle .
 The defense was successful, and the following day the Anglo-Dutch force withdrew . The next day, the British troops withdrew .
 The right wing of the French army attempted to prevent the Prussians front regaining contact with their AngloDutch allies via the city of Wavre, which was held by the Prussian rearguard . The Prussian front attempted to regain contact with the AngloDutch .
 The Prussians held off the French long enough for the majority of the Prussian army to march to Waterloo and contribute to the decisive victory there . Although the French eventually retreated, the Prussian army contributed to the victory .
 The French attacked throughout the day to break the Anglo-Dutch before the Prussians could assist them . The Prussianians were unable to assist the French .
 Napoleon was defeated by the Prussians on the French flank . Napoleon's defeat was inevitable after the Prussian invasion of Prussian forces .
 The V Corps of the French Army was deployed against the Austrians, and so was not involved in the Waterloo campaign . The French Army did not participate in the campaign, and did not take part .
 V Corps engaged an Austrian army and inflicted a defeat . Although the Napoleonic cause was lost by that time, V Corps suffered a defeat in the battle .
 In the early 19th century, soldiers of many nations wore headgear called shakos, such as this light infantry example . French headgear was also worn by the French and British .
 Note the red feather plume, tricolor cockade, and brass imperial eagle plate . The imperial eagle was the first imperial eagle to carry out a full imperial eagle .
 The last action of the Napoleonic Wars was fought at Issy, close to Paris . Napoleon's last action was fought in Issy .
 A strong French force, with artillery in support, launched an attack against an inferior Prussian force, but was beaten off . The Prussian army was defeated in the Battle of the Second Round .
 Simon Bolivar swore to liberate South America after Napoleon's overthrow of Spain's government in 1810-24 . A witness to Napoleon's campaigns, he was also a witness to the Spanish revolution .
 Other rebels like Jose de San Martin and Antonio Jose de Sucre joined him in the struggle to bring an end to Spanish control .
 General Manuel Belgrano disobeyed orders to retreat and made a stand against greater numbers and artillery . The Royalist army was advancing on Buenos Aires, Argentina, when he made the stand .
 Bolivar's worst defeat came at the hands of Royalist Jose Tomas Boves, whose llanero light cavalry overwhelmed the Rebel army . Boves was a Royalist Royalist .
 Boves destroyed Bolivar's first Venezuelan Republic by killing all wounded and prisoners, and a great many civilians . Boves killed all wounded, prisoners and prisoners .
 Rebel Jose San Martin hid his elite cavalry in a monastery, erupting out to defeat a detachment of Royalist cavalry . Rebel San Martin's elite cavalry hid in the monastery .
 A Rebel sergeant took a fatal thrust and saved his commander, who had become trapped under his slain horse . The incident occurred during the Second Battle of the Red Cross .
 Rebels made a difficult crossing of the Andes to surprise the Spanish garrison in Chile . Rebels were able to surprise Spanish forces in Chile with a surprise landing .
 Rebels attacked again on the flank, this time successfully . Initially repelled by cavalry, the Rebels attack again successfully . The Rebels attacked the flank of the enemy, successfully .
 General Simon Bolivar accepted the surrender of General Rodil after the defeat of the Spanish army at Boyaca, 1815 .
 This pivotal battle ended Spanish rule in northern Latin America and made Bolivar a hero . The battle ended Spain's rule of the region and made him a hero in the process .
 The British demanded compensation for opium seized by the Qing authorities . The Qing authorities seized opium from the British in China .
 Lord Palmerston demanded compensation for trade losses . He ordered British troops and warships to China . Palmerston ordered British ships and ships to China in response .
 In the ensuing conflict, a numerically superior Chinese naval and military force was defeated . The Qing emperor was forced to continue the opium trade with Britain and other Western powers .
 Captain Alfred Dreyfus was falsely convicted of espionage and sentenced to life imprisonment on Devil's Island, Guiana, in 1894 . He was a French artillery officer of Jewish descent .
 Evidence emerged that implicated another man, but the French military command suppressed this . Two years later, evidence emerged that incriminating another man was suppressed by the French .
 Newspaper reports of the affair resulted in a public outcry and allegations of anti-Semitism . Newspaper reports led to an outcry against the affair . The affair was investigated by the Jewish community .
 Somali Canadian soldiers captured, tortured, and murdered teenage civilian civilian Shidane Arone . Arone was caught stealing supplies from the Canadian base in Somalia .
 An inquiry led to the resignation of the Minister of National Defence and two senior generals . An inquiry into the deaths of the defence minister and two generals led to an inquiry .
 The Airborne Regiment was disbanded due to public revulsion and outcry . It was disbanded after public outcry .
 Army filed charges against six soldiers for dereliction of duty and other crimes . Six soldiers were accused of abusing prisoners in Abu Ghraib Prison, Iraq, 2003 .
 In 2005, the prison's former commanding officer, Brigadier General Janice Karpinsky, was punished with suspension from duty and demotion to the rank of colonel . She was punished for her role in the prison .
 A Royalist force under Mariano Osorio moved up into the Chilean Highlands, and was shattered by Jose de San Martin's elite Argentine cavalry and artillery train . The Royalist forces were shattered by the Argentine forces .
 The Spanish attempted to make a cavalry attack, which was repelled by the Rebels . Struck in the flank and by a frontal assault at the same time, the Spanish attempted a cavalry assault . The Rebels repelled the cavalry attack .
 The Royalist force was demoralized and suffering badly from desertion when it met the Rebel army at Carabobo . Royalist forces were demoralized by desertion .
 The Rebels attacked on the flank with infantry, and frontally with cavalry, winning a destructive victory . The Rebels won the battle with infantry and cavalry .
 Tndependist rebels led by Antonio Jose de Sucre launched an attack against the Royalist forces . Despite being outnumbered and heavily outgunned, the rebels launched a cavalry charge . The cavalry charge was spearheaded by a cavalry attack .
 The Royalist surrender secured the independence of Peru, and removed the last remaining Spanish force front South America . The surrender secured Peru's independence .
 After the assassination of the Zulu chief Dingiswayo, Shaka fought for supremacy with the king's assassin, Zwide . Zwide was Shaka's assassin and Shaka was the chief's assassin .
 Shaka added defeated enemies to his army, slowly gaining control of all of Natal . A brutal and innovative leader, Shaka was a brutal leader, adding defeated enemies .
 At the time of his assassination, Shaka could command more than 50,000 Zulu fighters . Shaka was assassinated at the age of his death .
 By the early decades of the 19th century, small arms were accurate to several hundred yards, and artillery pieces available were effective at much greater ranges . The Dawn of Mechanized Warfare 1830-1914 is The Dawn .
 Massed ranks no longer practical for armies arrayed in massed ranks, as they would present an easy target for enemy fire . These innovations meant that it was no longer possible for armies to fight in the traditional fashion .
 It was not until several decades later, however, that the potential of these new technologies were fully realized . The potential of the new technologies was not realized until decades later .
 Abd el-Qadir, emir of Mascara, proclaimed a holy war against French rule in Algeria . The emir proclaimed the holy war in Algeria against the French government .
 His forces were defeated in a brutal campaign that included the destruction of crops and livestock . His troops were defeated by the brutal campaign .
 Muhammad Ali effectively ruled an independent Egypt . Supposedly a vassal of the weak Turkish government, Muhammad Ali ruled Egypt . Muhammad Ali was a ruler of Egypt .
 His army easily defeated Turkish forces at Konya, but was unable to fully capitalize on its victory because of European intervention . In an attempt to occupy Syria, his army was defeated by Turkish forces .
 The expansion of settlers into the west of North America inevitably resulted in conflict with the native population . Native population were forced from their ancestral lands . The expansion led to conflict between settlers and natives .
 The war, named for the Native American war chief, took the form of many minor skirmishes . The war was named after the war chief and lasted for more than a century .
 Black Hawk and his followers achieved early victories using ambush tactics and surprise attacks, drawing in the United States troops . Black Hawk used ambush tactics to draw in the U.S. troops .
 Black Hawk's band was brought to action and shattered by overwhelming force . Black Hawk was eventually brought to life and shattered in the battle .
 United States attempts to remove the Seminole from Florida resulted in a long and bloody guerrilla war, also known as the Florida War . The Florida War was fought in Florida by the U.S. against the Seminoles .
 It was not until the Seminole leader Osceola had been taken hostage that Seminole were ejected from their lands . The Seminole have been removed from their land since the 18th century .
 In the largest-ever raid on white settlements by Native American forces, a large war party raided Victoria and sacked Linville . Linville, whose population took refuge on boats in the harbor, was the town of the town .
 Intervention by Texas Rangers resulted in a running fight as the native force retreated . The native force was eventually forced to retreat .
 After a Navajo attack on Fort Defiance in 1860, U.S. forces conducted a scorched-earth policy against the Navajo . They finally penned them in the Canyon de Chelly . The canyon was the site of a massacre .
 A human scalp was removed, complete with hair, as a trophy of prowess in war by Native American warriors . It was removed from the scalp of a human scalp as part of a trophy in war .
 Scalping was a common wartime practice among many Native American tribes . Scalping is a common war practice among Native Americans . Scalps were a common practice among tribes .
 When the starving Navajo surrendered, they were marched to Fort Sumner in New Mexico . The starving Navajo was marched to the fort . They were taken to the New Mexico fort .
 Captain Fetterman was lured into following an Indian decoy . The U.S. column was sent to the assistance of a wagon train . The wagon train was lured by a decoy from an Indian .
 Native Americans fought many large engagements and even pitched battles . Native Americans were involved in many of the largest battles of their time .
 They were armed with ex-US Civil War rifles, but were ultimately defeated . The British Army was defeated by the British Army in the Battle of Stonewall .
 Overconfident United States cavalry troops were caught in a surprise attack . The U.S. cavalry was caught in the surprise attack by the enemy .
 After several hours of fighting, the Native American force broke off and withdrew . The Native American forces withdrew .
 The cavalry also withdrew rather than joining up with Custer's command, a decision that might have altered the outcome at Little Bighorn . Custer withdrew from the battle, but the outcome might have been different .
 The remaining two columns fought a desperate battle for two days until the arrival of reinforcements forced the Native Americans to retire . The battle lasted two days before reinforcements forced them to retreat .
 Superior United States firepower thwarted Native American attacks before a counterattack forced them to retreat . Superior U.S. firepower and the movement of reserves thwarted Native Americans attacks .
 Nez Perce Indians decided to relocate to Canada after a period of mutual raiding . After mutual raiding, a band of Nezperce Indians relocated to Canada . NezPerce Indians are now living in Canada .
 Modenan soldiers stole a bucket from the civic well in Bologna in 1325 . They were pursued by troops after they stole the booty from a civic well .
 The authorities of Bologna began what turned out to be a 12-year conflict that resulted in thousands of deaths . Thousands of people died in the conflict between the authorities and the city's residents .
 In 1859, a pig owned by British settler Charles Griffin of the Hudson Bay Company wandered onto the land of American Lyman Cutler and was shot dead . The war of the pig occurred on the disputed British-American boundary between Oregon and Columbia .
 British marines were ordered to engage the Americans, but refused to escalate the incident any further . British marines refused to engage in the incident .
 The War of the Stray Dog In 1925, a Greek soldier on the MacedonianBulgarian border chased after his dog . In doing so inadvertently crossed over to the Bulgarian side . The war was fought in 1925 .
 He was shot by an enthusiastic Bulgarian sentry, precipitating a Greek invasion of Bulgaria that resulted in 50 deaths . The League of Nations negotiated a ceasefire before the war .
 Honduras and El Salvador played a series of acrimonious soccer matches in the 1970 World Cup qualifiers . El Salvador and Honduras were both sides of the fence at the time of the match . The two nations were involved in a political and social war between the two countries .
 After two disputed matches, a third match in Mexico resulted in a 3-2 win for El Salvador . The level of feeling that this provoked ran so high that it sparked a four-day war, resulting in more than 2,000 casualties .
 They were despatched to a reservation in Oklahoma . Forced to surrender, they were sent to the reservation .
 A band of Sioux Indians had left their reservation, but surrendered quietly to U.S. cavalry . The Sioux Indians were captured by the United States in 1877 .
 While they were being disarmed, a scuffle broke out that rapidly turned into a massacre . The massacre was a massacre that quickly turned into gunfire .
 The .45-70-caliber, model 1873, Springfield ""trapdoor"" rifle was a breech-loading firearm used by the United States Army during the Indian Wars of the late 19th century .
 The converted muzzle-loader used a metallic unitary cartridge . It was faster to load than its predecessors, giving the infantryman more firepower . The muzzle-loaders were easier to load and more powerful .
 This led to further conflict, this time between the USA and Mexico, in the mid-19th century . Mexico and the U.S. were at the center of the conflict between the two countries .
 French intervention in Mexico followed and, in the second decade of the 20th century, the country was torn apart by revolution . France intervened in Mexico in the 1930s and 1940s, and the country fell into disarray .
 After initial successes, the ""Texians"" suffered several defeats at the hands of superior Mexican forces . The "Texians" suffered many defeats, including several defeats .
 Texan volunteers ignore advice to pull back and try to hold on to their gains . Having driven a Mexican force from San Antonio, volunteers ignored advice to hold back and hold on .
 The Alamo fortress became a symbol of heroic resistance in Texas . They were overwhelmed by weight of numbers, however for Texans, they were overwhelmed .
 After a long retreat, the Texan force turned and inflicted a spectacular defeat on a column of the Mexican army . The Texan army suffered a humiliating defeat in the battle . The Mexican army was forced to retreat after a long battle .
 Mexican president Santa Anna was captured, and signed a treaty that effectively granted independence to Texas . Santa Anna signed the treaty in Texas .
 U.S. forces attacked Veracruz by sea during the US-Mexican War . US forces attacked by sea .
 The drive on Mexico City began, leading to eventual victory and ending the war . This was accomplished without difficulty, and the drive began in Mexico City .
 French troops encountered well-prepared positions at Puebla and unwisely launched a frontal assault . French troops, intervening in a civil war in Mexico, encountered well .
 This was driven off, although the city was taken by the French the following year . The French were driven off by the city, but it was taken back by the next year .
 Monument features the figures of Davy Crockett and other slain defenders of the Alamo fortress . At San Antonio, Texas, a monument was built in 18th century .
 Various armies, including government troops, Zapata's peasant guerrillas, and Villa's guerrilla cavalry . The Mexican Revolution was first organized by the Mexican government in 1910 .
 The existence of many political factions ensured that any revolutionary leader who successfully assumed power was opposed by a new or existing rebellion . During a bloody decade of political turmoil, in which the United States intervened in 1916-17, the U.S. intervened .
 The rebel leaders could count on huge support from the peasant population . Pancho Villa and Emiliano Zapata were among those who supported the rebels .
 Migrating towards the northeast, away from the Cape Colony in South Africa, the pioneering Boers (known as Voortrekkers) came into conflict with the powerful Zulus . They claimed possession of the lands that the Boers had entered .
 Voortrekker commandos fought an inconclusive series of skirmishes against a large Zulu force . In a confused action, two Voortrerekkers fought a series of inconclusive skirmishes with Zulu forces .
 Lessons learned at Italeni, such as using ox wagons for shelter, proved useful at Blood River . Blood River is the first time Blood River has been on the site .
 The Zulu host found their enemies' wagons in a defensive circle, or laager . Advancing to remove the Voortrekkers from their lands, the Zulu hosts found the enemy's wagons . The battle was fought in Zulu territory .
 Zulus suffered heavy casualties from rifle fire, and under attack by horsemen, the Zulus withdrew . After suffering heavy casualties, Zulus retreated .
 Opium Wars were fought over the British right to import goods, which included the banned opium, into China . Arising out of a trade dispute between British merchants and the Chinese government, the Opium War was fought in China .
 With little means to counter the gunboats of the British fleet, the Chinese were repeatedly defeated . The Chinese were forced to cease trying to restrict British trade, including the sale of opium .
 The ""Arrow War"" was a one-sided conflict in which the Chinese were unable to match the superior firepower of the European forces .
 In the conflict's aftermath, the Europeans extended their trading influence throughout China . Europe extended its trade influence throughout the country .
 British troops undertook several major campaigns in order to maintain their supremacy in these territories . British troops took control of India and the surrounding regions in 1839-1842 .
 British forces annexed the region under the pretext of assisting Shah Shuja in regaining his throne . Intending to keep Russian influence out of Afghanistan, British forces invaded the region in order to keep it from Russia .
 British suffered one of the worst setbacks they had known since taking power in the area in the mid-18th century . Resistance proved to be much more fierce than expected and the British suffered a serious setback .
 After occupying Kandahar, the British advanced on the fortress of Ghazni . The British advance on the Kandahar fortress in Kandahar . The fortress was captured by the British in 1941 .
 British stormed the city through a gate that reconnaissance had indicated was lightly held . Having driven off a relief attempt, the British stormed it through the gate .
 They fled to Jellalabad, where they held out for several months . They finally counterattacked, driving off the besiegers . They held out several months and drove off the attackers .
 British civilians forced to make a long march through harsh country back to India . British civilians were forced to leave their position in Kabuf as a result of the war in Afghanistan .
 Few of the 16,000 individuals in the column survived . Despite having been granted safe conduct, they were harassed by Afghan irregulars . Few of them survived .
 During the retreat from Kabul, the last remnants of the British force were cornered near Gandamak and overrun by a massively superior force . The British force was cornered by a massive superior force during the retreat .
 The Sikh empire was created in the early 1800s and grew to considerable power before internal conflict erupted . The first Sikh war was fought in 1845-1846 in India .
 Rebellious elements within the empire began to threaten British interests in India, namely the British East India Company . Conflict between what were, at the time, the greatest powers in India .
 Eventually, a costly British victory at Sobraon forced the Sikhs to accept the Treaty of Lahore, which granted considerable territory to Britain .
 First Sikh War took place in the evening and through the night . This battle at the beginning of the First Sikh war, took place at the end of the first Sikh War .
 After repulsing a flank attack by Sikh cavalry, the British advanced, becoming disorganized in the process . The British advanced but became disorganized .
 After confused fighting in the darkness, they eventually drove off the Sikh army . They eventually drove them off .
 The British attacked a fortified Sikh encampment, bringing about a two-day action . The action began to turn in the Sikhs' favor, turning the British into a victory .
 Misinterprepreprecepted a cavalry movement as a flank attack, the Sikhs withdrew, granting a costly victory to the British . The Sikhs retreated, allowing the British to win the battle .
 British forces attacked and captured the village of Aliwal as the key to the battle . It triggered a general Sikh retreat that was hindered by the need to cross the river . The battle was fought in the early 1900s .
 The battle is regarded as the turning point of the First Anglo-Sikh War . The battle has been regarded as a turning point in the war's history .
 After an ineffective bombardment, the British made a series of attacks that were initially repulsed by counterattacks . The British made an unsuccessful bombardment, but were able to repulse the counterattack .
 Once the Sikh position was finally penetrated, a general collapse resulted, with heavy casualties as the Sikh army was routed . The Sikh army suffered heavy casualties in the defeat .
 The Sikhs were displeased by the outcome of the recent war and, in 1848, violence flared up . Violence flared up, which led to renewed general conflict .
 Despite setbacks in the field, the British won a decisive victory at Chillianwala . After also defeating the Sikhs at Gujarat, they annexed the Punjab . The British won the Punjab in 1841 .
 British attempted a surprise crossing of the Chenab River, but found the ford to be strongly held . The British attempted to cross the river but found it to be strong held .
 Sikh cavalry crossed the river and attacked the British force, inflicting a sharp defeat and forcing a retreat . Sikh cavalry cross the river to attack the British forces . The British force was forced to retreat .
 Sikh morale lifted, although the Sikhs later withdrew from the banks of the Chenab . Sikh morale was lifted . Sikhs withdrew from banks of Chenab, but were later forced to withdraw .
 No animal has been used and abused in warfare more than the horse . Horses have been used in warfare for more than a century .
 Of course, horses were used in combat, racing into hails of arrows, bolts, or shot with cavalrymen on their backs, and suffered accordingly .
 Horse power was used to transport food, bulk ammunition, and major weapons to the battlefront . Horse power helped transport food and bulk ammunition to the warfront .
 Napoleon took with him some 200,000 horses with him when he marched on Moscow in 1812 . Almost all of the horses perished in the battle, almost all of which perished .
 During Operation Barbarossa in 1941, the German armies took 750,000 horses to draw the bulk of their supplies . The United States and British armies used mules and horses to carry loads through difficult terrains in Southeast Asia, North Africa and Italy .
 Camels, elephants, and oxen are among the animals pressed into service as four-legged supply trucks .
 There was even a U.S. Army Camel Corps in the mid-19th-century West .
 Attack dogs were used by the ancient Greeks, and remain in service today as guard animals on military bases and installations . Attack dogs are still used as guard dogs on military installations .
 Dogs carried messages in World War I and were used as ""guided weapons" during World War II . Russian soldiers strapped explosives to their backs and trained them to run under German tanks . Dogs carried messengers in WWI and used as 'guided weapons' during WWII .
 War elephants were used as battering rams and as shooting platforms throughout the ancient Hellenistic and Persian world, and across into India . Elephants were used to batter rams, shooting platforms and shooting platforms .
 Carrier pigeons have been used for more than 3,000 years to carry messages with unerring accuracy across miles of battlefields .
 In the present day, bees, pigs and rats are used to perform mine detection in countries such as The Congo and Israel .
 Dolphins trained by the United States Navy to perform security duties . Dolphins are trained to perform anti-diver patrols beneath U.S. warships . Dolphins also trained to detect and prevent underwater attacks .
 Guerrilla leader Pancho Villa aimed to supply a horse to each of his infantrymen, as well as the cavalrymen, to increase his army's speed . Villa commanded the Division del Norte during the Mexican Revolution, .
 All the troops involved were drawn from the army of the Habsburg empire . Loyalties were conflicted on both sides, as all the troops were from the empire's army .
 The battle was indecisive, but this suited the Hungarian strategic position better than that of Austria, as the Hungarians only had to avoid defeat to remain independent . The Hungarians were victorious in the battle .
 The far larger Hungarian force was composed of inexperienced fighters and was less well equipped than the Austrians, leading to an Austrian victory . The Hungarian forces were less equipped and were less well-equipped .
 The Italian kingdoms and their French allies fought for independence from Austria, eventually resulting in the unification of Italy . The conflict began as a series of riots against Austrian rule in northern Italy .
 A disorganized British advance was successful in some areas, although in other parts of the field British troops were routed . The British forces were routed in other areas of the battlefield .
 Following a lengthy bombardment, the British delivered an infantry attack that broke the Sikh line and resulted in a decisive victory . The Sikh line was broken by the British and the Sikh army .
 The Hungarian Uprising was a revolution against Habsburg rule in Hungary in 1848-49 . It began as a series of demonstrations in the capital, the capital of Budapest, Hungary .
 An independent Hungary was initially accepted by Austria, but the rising was put down by Austrian and Russian troops . The rising was eventually put down in Hungary .
 The Hungarian force launched an attack against the Russian right flank, gradually gaining the upper hand, but the Russians enveloped the Hungarian right flank . The Hungarians retreated, forcing a hurried retreat .
 Sardinian forces assaulted an Austrian army entrenched around Verona, forcing them from their positions . The Austrian army was entrenched in the city .
 The victory was not followed up and thus failed to have a decisive effect on the campaign . The victory failed to be followed up, thus failing to have an impact on the election campaign .
 The battle of Solferino resulted in almost 40,000 casualties, inspiring the creation of the International Red Cross in 1863 . The Austrian army was defeated by an alliance between France and Sardinia .
 They defeated the outnumbered Piedmontese at Custoza and reoccupied Milan . They then defeated the Piesmontese and re-occupied the city .
 French and Neapolitan troops were repelled by the ill-armed but enthusiastic rebels . They had been sent to put down a revolt that had deposed the pope .
 After a month-long siege, the French launched a final assault and took the city . The city was taken by the French after a month of siege .
 A force of Sardinian cavalry and French infantry was confronted by a much larger Austrian army . Its subsequent defeat convinced the Austrians that their forces were qualitatively inferior .
 Magenta was a ""soldier's battle" arising from an unplanned encounter in which French troops fought their way to victory with little help from their commanders . The battle took place in France in 1842 .
 French rifled artillery played an important part in defeating the Austrians . After accidentally colliding with the Austrian army they were pursuing, the French/Piedmontese force fought a confused but savage action .
 Giuseppe Garibaldi and his followers, known as ""Redshirts,"" were able to take Palermo in Sicily before advancing on Naples . Giuseppppe Garbaldi's followers were known as "Redshirts"
 Further victories led to the establishment of the united kingdom of Italy . Further victories in Italy led to a series of victories in the kingdom .
 In this confused engagement, Austrian cavalry unnerved the Italians, who fell back in disorder . Austrian cavalry attacked the Italians in a spirited attack .
 Austrian victories at Custoza and at Lissa were rendered largely irrelevant . Defeat by Prussia in the Seven Weeks War forced Austria to cede Venetia to Italy .
 During this major sea battle the Austrian fleet caught the Italians by surprise . The Austrian fleet used ramming and short-range gunfire to achieve a decisive result .
 For several decades afterward, ramming was considered to be an effective tactic, greatly influencing ship design . Ramming is considered to have greatly influenced ship design in the 1970s .
 During this religiously inspired large-scale revolt against the Qing regime in China, the Taiping rebels fielded more than a million soldiers . The Taiping rebellion lasted between 1850-64 and 1864 .
 Western-trained Chinese forces eventually suppressed it, with enormous bloodshed . Western- trained Chinese forces ultimately suppressed it .
 More than 20 million people lost their lives during the conflict, including many civilians, in Afghanistan .
 The Qing army, led by an American general named Frederick Ward, attacked Cixi and won a decisive victory over rebel forces there . The government Qing army led by American general Frederick Ward won the battle .
 Government forces, some of whom were equipped with bolt-action rifles, then overwhelmed the tired and hungry defenders . Government forces then overwhelmed them with the help of government forces .
 The middle of the 19th century was a time of great upheaval in South America . Emergent nations fought over disputed territory and formed coalitions to unseat dictators .
 Many of the latter's troops surrendered before the fighting began . Juan Manuel de Rosas was facing a coalition of opponents to the rule of the rule .
 The issue was decided by a coalition cavalry charge that smashed Rosas' right flank . Rosas was defeated in the final round of the battle .
 Paraguayan dictator Francisco Lopez invaded Brazil and Argentina in an ill-advised attempt to expand his rule . Lopez invaded both countries in an attempt to extend his rule of Paraguay .
 The result was the bloodiest war in the history of Latin America, which almost destroyed Paraguay . Paraguay was almost destroyed by the war .
 Little disputes between Britain and Burma expanded into open warfare as a result of heavy-handed diplomacy . Relatively minor disputes between the two countries expanded into warfare .
 The British captured Martaban and Rangoon (now Yangon), driving the Burmese army northward . The British then captured the city of Martaban . The capture of the city was the first of its kind .
 Crimean War 1853-56 drew in British and French forces that were committed to preventing Russian influence from expanding . The British annexed considerable territory and relations gradually normalized .
 Imperial Russian warships attacked a Turkish squadron at Sinope, using shell-firing guns to quickly destroy most of the Turkish force . Russian warships destroyed most of Turkish squadron .
 Britain and France declared war on Russia largely as a result of this action . France and Britain declared war against Russia largely due to the actions of Russia .
 Allied forces found the Russians well dug in on the Alma River in Crimea . Landing north of Sevastopol, the Allied force found the Russian well dug-in on the river . Landing was near the city's capital, Crimea .
 Despite heavy casualties, the Allies were able to force the Russians from their positions . The Russians were forced to withdraw from their position .
 The siege of Sevastopol lasted for a year, with the Allies making slow progress against the defenses . The siege lasted for one year .
 After Russian relief efforts failed, the key strongpoints were stormed and surrender became inevitable . After Russian efforts failed to stop the Russian forces, surrender was inevitable .
 In the ensuing battle, the British Heavy Brigade won notable successes . The battle was fought in the Battle of the Second Battle of July 18, 1918 .
 As a result of misinterpreted orders, the famous charge was crushed by Russian artillery . It was perhaps the most ill-fated event in British military history . The famous charge crushed by Russia artillery was the most British military tragedy .
 The Russians launched a series of determined assaults supported by artillery . Attempting to dislodge the British from a strategic ridge, the Russians launched several assaults .
 Were it not for the intervention of French troops, heavy casualties would have forced a British retreat . The French intervention forced the British to retreat .
 Russian forces besieged the Turkish fortress of Kars in the hope of drawing Allied troops away from Sevastopol . Russian forces siege Kars to draw Allied troops from the fortress .
 Turkish forces sent to its relief became sidetracked elsewhere, and the fortress eventually surrendered . Turkish forces were unable to reach its relief .
 The Russians launched a determined but disorganized assault that failed to dislodge the Franco-Sardinian army . Hoping to relieve Sevastopol, the Russians launched an attempt to relieve the city . The French and Russian army was defeated in the Crimean War .
 Count Leo Tolstoy was outraged at the incompetence of the Russian commanders to write a satirical song about the battle . The battle was fought in Russia in Russia's Crimean War in 1805 .
 The Malakoff, a great stone tower, was a key feature of the defenses of Sevastopol . It was built in the 1930s and 1940s during the Second World War .
 It was bombarded and assaulted repeatedly during the siege, until September 8 . The fortress was successfully stormed by French troops .
 The bombardment of Russian positions at Kinburn established ironclad ships as viable weapons . Although not a decisive action, the bombardment of Russia's positions at the Kinburn set up ironclad warships .
 Allied vessels were hit repeatedly, but it was the Russian forts that were put out of action . Allied ships were attacked repeatedly by the Russians, but the forts were not .
 The Indian mutiny began as a mutiny among sepoy in Meerut in May 1857 . The conflict spread and became a widespread insurrection against British rule .
 Although the situation was largely restored by September 1857, some regions remained under rebel control for much of 1858 . The situation was mostly restored in September 1858, but some regions were still under control .
 British forces advancing on Delhi encountered a rebel sepoy force dug in on the Delhi road . The rebels were a rebel force dug into the road to Delhi .
 British made a flanking attack and drove the rebels from their positions . After being driven back by rebel artillery, the British made an attack on the rebels . The rebels were driven from their position .
 With this obstacle removed, the British force was able to move on to Delhi and begin siege operations .
 Thinking that they faced a small rebel force, the British attacked and were driven back by heavy fire from wellfortified positions . The British attack was thought to be a small group of rebels, but was driven back .
 Many local troops deserted or defected, forcing the British to make a fighting retreat into Lucknow, where they were besieged . The British were forced to retreat from Lucknow to a besieged city of Delhi .
 British garrison was forced to abandon part of the city after being besieged by rebel sepoy .
 The defenders withstood the siege until relief forces arrived . After a failed sally against the rebels, the defenders fought off the rebels . The siege was finally brought to an end .
 The Indian Mutiny occupied Delhi during the 18th century . Restoring the elderly Mogul emperor to power as a figurehead, the rebels took over Delhi .
 They held out under British siege for two months until the city was finally stormed . The siege lasted two months before the city finally stormed by the British .
 After pushing aside a force sent to halt its advance on July 12, the column fought a second successful action at Aong . The column pushed aside forces sent to stop its advance in July .
 Prisoners captured there provided intelligence on the positions of rebel forces in the area . Prisoners were captured and intelligence on rebel forces provided .
 A force of rebel sepoy broke out with the intention of launching an attack on the British positions outside the city . Attempting to break the siege of Delhi, a force of sepoy break out .
 The force was intercepted and attacked as it made camp, forcing a retreat back into Delhi . The force made camp and was forced to retreat into Delhi, India .
 Thousands of British civilians took shelter from the sepoy mutiny at Agra . They were besieged in a half-hearted manner . The mutiny took place in Agra, where the British were besieged .
 After the fall of Delhi to the British forces, a large force of rebels gathered near Agra . The rebels gathered in Agra after Delhi was defeated by the British .
 The column was able to drive off the attack, and pursued and scattered its opponents . The column had driven off the attackers, and scattered their opponents .
 The British routed the rebel sepoy force and pursued it for some distance . Using forwarddeployed artillery aggressively, the British routed it .
 The battle thwarted the rebels' final attempt to regain the cities of Cawnpore and Lucknow . The battle was a turning point in the Indian Mutiny .
 The vastly outnumbered British force suddenly charged at the advancing rebel sepoy force, triggering a panic and general rout . The British forces were attacked by the sepoy sepoy forces in the 18th century .
 According to Herodotus, Azotus in Israel was besieged for 29 years by the forces of Psammetichus I of Egypt . The siege lasted between 29 years and 29 years in total .
 The Ottoman forces of Osman I put Nicea under a three-year siege . The city fell in 1331, after several failed relief attempts .
 Harlech Castle in Wales endured the longest siege in British history . The castle held out for seven years against English forces during the Wars of the Roses .
 The fortress of Ishiyima Hongan-ji was besieged by the forces of Oda Nobunaga in Japan's longest siege . The fortress was besieged in 1570-80 by forces of the forces .
 Ottoman forces encircled the city of Candia, now Heraklion in Crete, for 21 years . They eventually wrested the fortress from the hands of the Venetians . Candia 1648-69 Ottoman forces .
 Combined French and Spanish fleets blockaded Gibraltar for four years, but the British defenders refused to give in .
 Confederate soldiers held out against massive Union bombardments until the end of the U.S. Civil War . Fort Sumter 1863-65 .
 The last major action of the Indian Mutiny was fought around the fortress of Gwalior . The Mutiny is the last major battle of the Mutiny in India .
 The vastly outnumbered Foreign Legion took refuge in a farmstead, from which it made a defensive stand until every one of its personnel was killed or incapacitated .
 Raiding by central Asian nomads prompted Russia to subdue the khanates of Bokhara and Khiva . Russia subdue Khiva to the Khiva khanate . Raids by nomads resulted in the defeat of Khiva by Russia in Khiva.
 Bokharans fended off Russian advances for a time but were eventually forced to accept vassal status . The Bokharan were forced to become vassals of the Russian Empire in Russia .
 Russia made advances in the region during 1847-65 . Previous campaigns against Khiva had failed, but Russia had made advances .
 A large-scale expedition overran the area without much of a fight in 1873, and the city of Khiva became a quasi-independent Russian protectorate . Khiva is now a semi-independent protectorate of Russia .
 Attempts by the Ashanti kingdom to take control of the coastal region from the British resulted in a punitive expedition . Attempts to take over the coastal area resulted in an Ashanti expedition .
 British forces occupied key points in Afghanistan, leading to a treaty . The treaty led to the end of British occupation of Afghanistan .
 Hostilities resumed when the British resident at Kabul was murdered . Hostilities were resumed after the death of British resident in Kabul .
 The epic German siege never managed to take the city, but it did kill more than one million of the city's inhabitants . Leningrad 1941-44 was the focus of the siege . More than a million people were killed in the siege, including more than 1 million Russians .
 Maori warriors would square off in complex, ritual dances called haka . Maori carved wooden club before battle would be used in battle .
 They demonstrated their prowess in athletic displays, often brandishing weapons, such as a carved wooden club .
 At the siege of Gate Pa in 1864, the defenders drew the British into an overconfident assault, which was repulsed with heavy casualties . The British were forced to retreat after heavy casualties in the battle .
 Mexican Legion: 300; French Foreign Legion: entire force killed, wounded, or captured . Mexican:300; French foreign Legion: 100; 300 killed or wounded . Mexican Foreign Legion : 300 killed, 300 wounded or captured; entire force dead, wounded .
 The mid to late 19th century was characterized by colonial conflicts that often involved well-equipped but small European forces facing much greater numbers of local troops or warriors .
 Resistance went on for three years, but the modern weapons of the Europeans provided a decisive advantage .
 Union: 1 ironclad, 5 other vessels; Confederate: 1 . ironclad . Union: 2 ironclad ships; Confederate ships: 2 .
 This was the most famous naval battle of the U.S. Civil War, also known as the battle of Monitor and Merrimack . The battle was the first naval battle to take place in the Civil War .
 Wooden ships were unable to destroy each other, resulting in an indecisive action . The impotence of wooden ships against ironclads was graphically illustrated . The effects on worldwide ship construction were thus immense .
 Confederates caught the Union by surprise by marching up the Shenandoah Valley . Union numbers forced the Confederates to retreat, but superior Union numbers made it to retreat .
 Confederate forces deceived the Union into overestimating their numbers to delay a Union attack . Union forces deceived Confederate forces to overestimate their numbers in order to delay an attack on the Union . Confederate forces deceased the Union by overestimating the numbers .
 The United States Civil War was fought on the issue of the abolition of slavery . Abraham Lincoln's motivation in launching the conflict was purely based on preserving the Union .
 During World War II, China dwarfed the Pacific theatre in terms of casualties and the total numbers of troops involved . The Pacific was the major Asian battleground of WWII .
 The Second Sino-Japanese War had cost the Japanese 186,000 troops even before they went to war with the US . They subsequently lost well over half a million troops in China .
 China's own death toll from the war was somewhere between 15 and 20 million . China was estimated to have killed 15 to 20 million people during the war .
 While dying from a French marksman's bullet at the battle of Trafalgar in 1805, Nelson did not say ""Kiss me, Hardy"" or ""Kismet, Hardy" to Sir Thomas Masterman Hardy while lying on HMS Victory .
 Hardy remained on deck while Hardy was wounded and died three hours later . Hardy was taken below deck and died hours later, while Hardy stayed on deck . Hardy died after being wounded, but Hardy was able to stay on deck for hours .
 The Indian Mutiny was caused by the British having issued musket cartridges that were greased with a mixture of cow and pig fat, making their use taboo to both Hindus and Muslims . It is generally believed that the British had greased the cartridges with the mixture of pig fat .
 An experimental batch was greased in this way, but standard issue cartridges actually used beeswax and sheep-tallow grease .
 The original cartridges did create alarm among the Indian population . But the root causes of the Mutiny were more to do with British social legislation in India .
 The Spanish conquered the Aztecs and Incas with just a handful of soldiers . The Spanish colonization of modern-day Mexico and Peru in the 16th century was conducted by relatively small numbers of troops .
 The smallpox disease imported to the Americas by the Spanish also aided the conquest . Some three million Aztecs alone were killed by the disease .
 The 25th Infantry Regiment was an all-black regiment of the then-segregated U.S. Army . The regiment was formed in 1869 .
 African-American regiments were formed during the U.S. Civil War . Many of the regiments formed during that war were African-Americans .
 The ""Buffalo Soldiers" helped to pacify the western frontier . The "Buffalo Soldiers" were known as the Buffalo Soldiers .
 Victory in the siege of Delhi in September 1857 was costly for the British East India Company . It proved a decisive moment of the Indian Mutiny, which did not end until the fall of the fort at Gwalior in June 1858 .
 Relief forces marched from Kabul to break the siege, but found that the Afghan army had already retired . Relief forces march from Kabul but find that the country's Afghan army has already retired.
 Arabi Pasha led a revolt against the British and French government in Egypt . The revolt was led by Pasha after the takeover of the government of Egypt by the British .
 The British defeated the Egyptians at Tel el-Kebir in a 30-minute battle . Reacting to protect its financial interests in Egypt, particularly the Suez Canal .
 Already in possession of Cochin China, the French pressed northward to Tonkin . Tonkin, then under nominal Chinese rule, was largely under the control of Vietnamese ""Black Flag"" irregulars .
 Despite repeated attempts to drive the French out of Tonkin, the Chinese were eventually forced to cede control of the city to their opponents . The French were forced to withdraw from Tonkin .
 The U.S. Civil War began after 11 southern states seceded from the Union over the issue of slavery . The war pitted the Union army of the north against the Confederate army .
 Huge advantages in numbers and materiel led to a Union victory in a costly war of attrition . The Union had a huge advantage in the battle .
 Confederates began a bombardment that forced the tiny garrison to capitulate . After the Union refused the Confederate demand that the fort be surrendered, the Confederates started a bombardment .
 The action began open hostilities between Confederacy and Union . It was this action that began hostilities between Confederate and Union forces .
 The inexperienced Union army attempted to take the rail junction at Manassas from the equally raw Confederates . The Union army was inexperienced and inexperienced .
 The Union attack was eventually beaten off . The result was a confused action in which the Union attacked was eventually defeated .
 The garrison attempted a breakout, but only a force of cavalry was actually able to escape . The garrison tried to escape, but was only able to get away with cavalry .
 Union cavalry caught the Confederates by surprise, bringing about a confused action that demonstrated that Union cavalry could at last take on their opposite numbers on equal terms . The action was the first time the Union cavalry had taken on its opposite numbers in combat .
 Elements of both armies collided in Gettysburg, drawing the rest of the respective armies into a three-day battle . The Battle of Gettysburg took place in 1863 .
 The action was a decisive Union victory, but losses were very heavy on both sides . Although close-run at times, the action was the decisive victory .
 Most of the Union army collapsed after heavy fighting, forcing a retreat into Chattanooga . Fought in difficult terrain, the action was extremely confused and most of the U.S. army collapsed .
 A series of confused actions in the dense scrub terrain of the Wilderness resulted in heavy casualties . The Taliban were killed in the early stages of the campaign .
 Union army attacked Confederates at Spotsylvania but was unable to break through . Union army then attacked Confederate forces in Spotsyvania . Confederates were unable to defeat Union forces in the battle .
 Failing to make sufficient reconnaissance of Confederate positions, the Union army launched a frontal assault . The Union army suffered heavy casualties in the battle .
 The Confederates were hard pressed until a successful flank attack allowed them to break contact . Despite the caution of the Union commander, which prevented a decisive use of superior numbers .
 Confederate maneuvering and a well-delivered flank attack derailed the Union battle plan . The Union had hoped to hold off Confederate forces in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 General ""Stonewall"" Jackson as a result of wounds sustained at this battle was a severe blow to the Confederacy . General Stonewall Jackson died from his wounds in the battle .
 Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg finally surrendered after several assaults . Confederate stronghold finally surrendered in March 1863 .
 This opened up the Mississippi to Union navigation and effectively split the Confederacy in two . It effectively split up the Confederate Army in 1864 .
 T Beauregard was the first prominent Confederate general of the U.S. Civil War . He was a Confederate general in the Confederacy .
 This commemorative statue of him stands in New Orleans, the city in which he was buried in 1893 .
 Confederate forces launched a series of costly attacks that caused the Union commander, McClellan, to lose his nerve and withdraw from the battle . Confederate forces attacked the Union forces, causing the commander to withdraw . The Union commander was forced to withdraw after the costly attacks .
 Confederate forces captured a Union supply depot and beat off counterattacks until their reinforcements arrived . Confederate forces capture the depot in the Battle of St. Louis .
 Confederate forces advancing into Kentucky were halted and driven back on the first day . Confederate forces were driven back by the end of the day .
 Confederate advance broke the Union line, resulting in large numbers of prisoners being taken . The following day a Confederate advance was also broken by the Union .
 The short-lived Confederate States of America was extinguished with Lee's surrender at Appomattox, Virginia, in April 1865 .
 Shown here is one of the national flags of the Confederacy (the so-called ""Stars and Bars"" pattern) folded beneath a drumstick . The flag was folded beneath the drumstick of a Confederate soldier .
 Raw Union troops were attacked by a much smaller, but more experienced, more experienced enemy . Union troops attacked by the larger, better-known enemy of the day .
 Confederates won a tactical victory but were forced to retreat after discovering the size of the Union army . Confederates were defeated by the Union in the Battle of Stonewall in 1864 .
 After a bungled river crossing under fire, the Union army battered fruitlessly at Confederate positions . The Union army fought fruitlessly against Confederate positions at the river crossing .
 A flank attack achieved some success but was driven off by a counterattack . A counterattack drove off a flank attack but failed to take advantage .
 Caught by surprise, the Union army was reduced to a small perimeter, but received reinforcements and fought on to eventual victory . The Union army received reinforcements in the battle .
 Union squadron of steam-powered wooden ships ran past the forts and Confederate vessels that were defending the approaches to New Orleans .
 More than 46,000 men were killed or wounded in the three-day battle of Gettysburg in July 1863 . The ill-fated ""Pickett's Charge" was the first battle of the Civil War .
 Confederate division lost more than half of its men in disastrous advance on Richmond . Union advance was disastrous .
 Both armies dug in and a nine-month stalemate began, until increasing Union pressure forced the Confederates to retreat .
 After probing heavily fortified Confederate positions, the Union army launched frontal assaults on Kennesaw Mountain, which were repulsed . The Union army was forced to retreat from the heavily fortified positions .
 After clinging to the Confederate line for three days, the Union switched to an outflanking movement . The Union had been clinging to positions close to Confederate lines for days .
 Deprived of naval support, the forts soon surrendered, making the Union blockade complete in the region . The forts surrendered .
 Union forces inflicted massive destruction in Georgia in the face of little resistance . The Union forces were aiming to reduce Confederate fighting capability .
 Winston Churchill: "We shall fight on the beaches. We shall fight in the beaches" Winston Churchill was the British prime minister of Britain during World War II . Winston Churchill made the statement in 1940 .
 General George Patton: "War is a bloody, killing business" General Patton: War is a 'bloody killing business' Patton: "War is bloody and bloody business" Patton: World War II was a bloody business .
 It is the site of the Garden of Eden, of the Great Flood, and the birth of Abraham Abraham . It is also the birthplace of Abraham, Abraham, and is site of Eden .
 The Prussians' breech-loading rifles gave them a huge firepower advantage over the Austrians . The Austrians relied on bayonet charges, which relied on a bayonet charge . The Prussian army was defeated in the Battle of Mannheim .
 Hanoverian army attacked westward, inflicting a serious defeat on part of the Prussian army . Hanoverians were surrounded by Prussian forces, but suffered serious defeat .
 Superior Prussian numbers remaining in the field forced a retreat which led to a surrender two days later . The battle was over for Prussian forces .
 Abandoned Petersburg, the Confederate army made an orderly withdrawal but was pursued . The Confederate army was pursued by the enemy but was eventually defeated .
 General Lee surrendered at Appomattox Court House . Lee surrendered what remained of his force as Union infantry arrived in great numbers .
 The rise of Prussia in the 19th century brought it into conflict with the Austrian empire . AUSTRO-PRUSSIAN WAR 1866 saw Prussia and Austria enter into conflict .
 Military action broke out in 1866, and in the ensuing Seven Weeks War Austria was decisively beaten . Austria was defeated decisively in the Seven Weeks war .
 Prussian forces advancing into Bohemia were met by Austrian troops, which were pushed aside . Austrian troops pushed aside by Prussian troops .
 Austrian reinforcements forced Prussians into a hasty, disorganized retreat . But the subsequent arrival of reinforcements forced the Prussianians to retreat . The Prussian army was defeated by the Austrian army .
 Despite early reverses, the Prussians' superior artillery and rifle fire forced the Austrians to withdraw . Their tactic of using small, flexible units against the dense Austrian masses forced the Austrian forces to withdraw.
 The eventual restoration of the emperor of Japan after more than a decade of sporadic fighting, unified the country under a strong centralized administration . Imperialist forces and the ruling Tokugawa shogunate united Japan .
 As Japan began to open up to foreign trade, the Choshu clan began firing on foreign ships in the straits .
 Foreign warships retaliated with a series of bombardments, forcing the Choshu to surrender . Foreign warships also bombed the Japanese capital, Tokyo .
 The Satsuma rebellion, 1877 General Saigo Takamori rebelled against Japan's Meiji government . Saigo was a Japanese general who fought against the government of Japan .
 The uprising ended with the battle of Shiroyama, the final, and most devastating, of many attacks against the new government . It was the final battle of the uprising against the government .
 This was refused, so a naval squadron made a show of force in Kagoshima harbor . The Japanese government refused to accept the request . This was made in response to a refusal from the Japanese government .
 Conflict between the shogunate and those wishing to restore the emperor erupted into full-scale war . Conflict between those who wanted to restore Emperor began in 17th century .
 Imperial army advanced steadily eastward, securing oaths of loyalty from local rulers along the way . The Imperial army moved eastward and westward .
 The army of the shogunate retired to Hokkaido and set up a rebel republic, the Ezo . Defeated by Imperial forces, the army set up the republic, which was set up by the shoganate .
 Both sides used steam warships and modern weaponry, including Gatling guns . Both sides made use of steam warships, including steam warships .
 Angry at the rejection of a proposal to invade Korea, the Satsuma clan rebelled . Angry at being rejected a proposal, the clan rebels rebelled against the proposal .
 The Satsuma samurai were opposed by a modern army with artillery and rifles, and were crushed . The samurai were defeated by the modern army in Japan in 17th century .
 The Franco-Prussian war saw these two great European powers clash over a Prussian contender for the vacant Spanish throne . The war took place in 1870s and 1871 .
 New military technologies, notably breech-loading rifles and early machine guns, were deployed for the first time on a large scale . Early machine guns were deployed in the early 1900s .
 The war and ended in defeat for France, which lost the territories of Alsace and Lorraine to a newly unified Germany . The war ended with a victory for Germany .
 Wissembourg was garrisoned by the French to secure their line of supply for an attack into German territory . The French garrisoned the town to secure the French's supply for a German attack into the German border .
 The French garrison was surprised by the Prussian attack and defeated after a stubborn defense . The Prussian army was defeated by the French garrison after a strong defense .
 A somewhat confused German attack suffered heavy casualties due to French Chassepot rifle fire, before reinforcements arrived and forced a French withdrawal . A German withdrawal forced the French to withdraw .
 Clashes between sentries and foraging parties expanded into a general conflict characterized by great confusion . Clashes began in the early days of the Second Century .
 The Prussians gradually gained the upper hand and pulled back under cover of darkness . The Prussian forces were eventually defeated in the battle .
 French were blocked by Prussian forces at Mars-la-Tour and became trapped in the vicinity of Metz . Retiring toward Verdun, the French were forced to retreat from Verdun .
 In the biggest battle of the war, the Prussians launched a renewed attack . The battle was the biggest of the year in Germany and Austria .
 French had a chance to break out but were hampered by indecision at high command level . The French were hampered in their failure to make a decisive decision at the highest level .
 After the battle, the French retired into Metz and were besieged there . The French were besieged in Metz after the battle . The battle was one of the most famous battles of the year .
 French forces were encircled and under bombardment by Prussian guns overlooking their positions . French forces made repeated breakout attempts to escape Prussian gun fire .
 Napoleon III surrendered to the Prussians in order to avoid further bloodshed . None were successful, however, and he surrendered to them .
 French army was besieged in Metz, Metz . Defeated in the field at Gravelotte, France was defeated in the battle .
 Metz surrendered on October 23 . Initial attempts to relieve the city were beaten off, and Metz was eventually defeated .
 The force holding Paris was poor, but the defenses around the city were impressive . The defenses around Paris were impressive, with some of the best in the world .
 Some 10,000 Chinese troops commanded by Yuwen Tai beat 200,000 men commanded by Gao Huan . Gao is commanded by the Chinese army, which was defeated in the battle .
 A massive Hindu army of 540,000 troops was overwhelmed by 40,000 Muslim soldiers at Kaithal, India . The Hindu army was outnumbered by the Muslim soldiers .
 Just under 6,000 British troops defeated an army of 20,000 of France's best cavalry and infantry at Agincourt .
 Francisco Pizarro captured Inca capital, killing 7,000 with no losses . Cajamarca Francisco Pzarro captured the Incas capital with no loss . Pizario captured Incas' capital, killed 7,500 with no casualties .
 British soldiers of the Royal Engineers and British Army 24th Regiment of Foot successfully fought off an assault by Zulu Prince Dabulamanzi kaMpande . Rorke's Drift is a battle from the Anglo-Zulu War .
 Wellington defeated 75,000 Indian soldiers with just 7,000 men in Assaye, Maharashtra, India . Duke of Wellington defeated some 75,000 Indian soldiers with only 7,000 troops .
 In the Balkans, war broke out between Russia and Turkey as Russia attempted to regain territory it had lost during the Crimean War . In the 1875-78 war, Russia tried to regain control of the Balkans .
 Struggles took place as Balkan peoples sought to gain independence from Turkish rule . Struggles also took place in the region as people sought to become independent from Turkey .
 Risings in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Bulgaria led to intervention by irregular forces from Serbia and Montenegro . Serbia, Montenegro, Serbia and Serbia intervened in response to rising tensions in the Balkans .
 The Turks also sent irregular forces of their own in an attempt to quell the risings, which resulted in massacres . The Turks were also sending irregular forces in their own .
 The Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78 ended with a ceasefire, but fighting broke out again during the Russo-Russoya War . The war was the first Russian-Turkish war between Russia and Turkey .
 Russian forces advanced on Plevna expecting to find a garrisoned but unfortified town, only to discover it had been heavily fortified in secret . Russian forces expected to find garrisoned and unfortened town, but instead found it heavily fortified .
 A five-month siege resulted, and although the Turks were eventually forced to surrender, Russia's strategic military plans lay in ruins . The Turks eventually surrendered, but Russia was forced to abandon its strategic plans .
 During the later part of the 19th century, many nations, including Chile and Peru, obtained ironclad warships, by then the most powerful vessels in the world . The ships were then the world's most powerful warships .
 Peruvian and Bolivian: 7,000 plus naval assets; Chilean 4,000 more naval assets . Bolivians and Peruvian, Chile, Bolivia, Peru, Bolivia and Peru have naval assets in the region . Chile, Peru and Bolivia have more than 6,000 naval
 The war was dominated by sea power as the terrain inland made logistics virtually impossible . The terrain in the area was virtually impossible for logistics .
 Ironclad Hudscar carried on a campaign of blockade, bombardment, and harassment almost single-handedly against the superior Chilean navy .
 The British advance base at Eshowe became cut off after the disaster at Isandhlwana . The base was cut off by the disaster and became isolated in the area .
 A relief column fought through to the position in April and the defenders withdrew . The defenders withdrew from the position .
 A British advance encountered unexpectedly large numbers of Zulu warriors, forced a disorganized retreat to Kambula . The Zulu forces were forced to retreat after being attacked by British troops .
 The operation was originally mounted to tempt the Zulus to attack Kambula, however, and so can be viewed as a strategic success . It was originally intended to tempt them to attack, but it was a success, however .
 Hudscar was eventually pounded into submission by the entire Chilean navy . Hudscar is located off the coast of the Bolivian coast .
 The British were deployed in a wagon laager reinforced by field fortifications . The British used to travel in wagon-wagon laager .
 Rifle fire, artillery using canister rounds, and bayonet charges broke the attack . Rifle fire broke out the attack, and the attack was stopped .
 The British column was attacked in camp at Isandhlwana . The Zulu army was looking for their Zulu enemies .
 Buffalo river crossing, west of Isandhlwana, Natal, South Africa, is a river crossing . Buffalo river crossings were never quite so aggressive .
 British detachment at Rorke's Drift fortified their position and defended it against enormous odds . With no prospect of withdrawal, the British detachment defended their position against enormous .
 The 21 st Lancers won three Victoria Crosses at Omdurman, Sudan, on September 2, 1898 .
 The lancers mistakenly charged into the main body of the Mahdist army, driving it back despite heavy losses . The army was driven back despite losses of more than 1,000 .
 British forces invaded Zululand in 1879 and were initially repelled by the highly organized Zulu warriors . British forces were defeated in the war of 1879 .
 Despite Zulu bravery, superior firepower made the eventual British victory inevitable . The Zulu was defeated by the British in the Battle of the Nile .
 The British column fortified itself in a wagon laager as the Zulus approached . Advancing to the relief of Eshowe, they fortified themselves in the wagon .
 Although the attack was pressed home, the ferocity of earlier Zulu charges was not evident here and they retreated from the battlefield . The battle was not over for the Zulu, but they were able to take a decisive victory .
 The British force met the Zulu charge with rifle volleys, Gatling guns, and artillery firing canister . Advancing in a large square, the British force advanced in a big square . The Zulu attack was a success for the British .
 Zulu military power was shattered for good, though odd skirmishes went on for some weeks afterward . Zulu forces were shattered by the end of the Zulu war .
 People of the Sudan revolted against colonial governance in 1883-99 . Inspired by religious leader Muhammad Ahmad, known as the Mahdi, the people revolted .
 Attempting to capture the Mahdi, who was besieging El Obeid, the Egyptian force became lost and desertions began . Desertions began after the Egyptian forces became lost . The Mahdi was captured by the Egyptian army .
 A small Anglo-Egyptian garrison held out in the hope of relief . Besieged in Khartoum by the army of the Mahdi, a small garrison held .
 The city fell just three days before the relief force fought its way through . The relief force was able to get the city back to safety .
 As the main relief force for Khartoum advanced up the Nile, another camelborne relief force crossed the desert toward Khartum . The Sudanese government has been fighting an Islamist insurgency in the past .
 British formed a square to repel an attack near Abu Klea . The British formed the square and repelled the assault .
 Although the Mahdists managed to exploit a gap in the British line, they were driven off with heavy casualties .
 Some retired in disorder while others defended the village to the death . Some retired from the village in disorder . Others defended their village to death .
 Zululand's last king Cetshwayo kaMpande went to war with the British empire when it demanded that his army disband . The British empire demanded that the king disband his army .
 In colonial wars, small, well-armed European forces were often pitted against much larger native troops equipped with relatively primitive weapons . European forces pitted against larger native forces equipped with primitive weapons.
 Some native forces were able to arm themselves with modem weapons, such as artillery pieces captured by the British near Kandahar . The British captured the artillery pieces in Kandahar, Afghanistan .
 A Mahdist incursion into Egypt was attacked and overwhelmed by Egyptian troops . Egyptian troops aided by a handful of British cavalry helped by a few British cavalry .
 After artillery preparations, British and Egyptian forces attacked the Mahdist camp at Atbara, which was quickly overrun . The camp was overrun by the Egyptian army .
 The Mahdi had chosen the village of Omdurman as his base of operations in 1884 . The village was chosen by the Mahdi for his operations in the area .
 Although outnumbered, the British force possessed the many advantages of modern technology . The British force was outnumbered by the British forces .
 Their Maxim machine guns and artillery broke charges by the Mahdists, and the British cavalry made one of its last charges .
 The British drove off an attack using Maxim guns . The Mahdist camp was attacked by the Mahdist army .
 There was little further resistance as remnants of the revolt were eliminated .
 In the opening conflict of the Sino-French war, a Chinese fleet was annihilated by French warships . In China's first war, the French destroyers annihilated the Chinese fleet .
 In the First Italo-Ethiopian War, the Italians unwisely left their defensive positions and advanced into unfamiliar terrain . The Italians were not wise enough to leave their positions and advance .
 A failed pro-Japanese coup in Korea prompted Japanese military intervention and war with Korea's powerful ally China . First Sino-JAPANESE war began in 1894-95 .
 Rising tensions between Japan and China resulted in an exchange of fire between Japanese cruisers and Chinese vessels . The incident was the first time the two countries had exchanged fire .
 As the engagement ended, a Chinese transport and its escort arrived and were also attacked . The Chinese transport was also attacked as it arrived and was attacked .
 In the first major land battle of the war, the Japanese advanced on the port of Asan and drove the Chinese forces there toward Pyongyang . The battle was first major battle of North Korea's invasion of Korea .
 The Chinese were expecting reinforcements, but these were lost in the naval battle of Pungdo a few days earlier . The Chinese had lost their reinforcements in the battle .
 A Japanese flanking movement forced the garrison of Pyongyang to surrender . While a frontal attack occupied the Chinese defenders, a Japanese attack forced the surrender . The battle was the first to take place in Pyongyang .
 Although the Chinese fleet was superior in numbers and firepower, it was hesitantly handled . It was hesitant to take advantage of its superior firepower .
 Poor-quality shells and a tendency of their vessels to catch fire also hampered the Chinese . Poor quality shells and tendency of vessels catching fire were also hampering the Chinese forces .
 The Japanese used a pontoon bridge to make a crossing and launched a night assault that routed the Chinese force . The Chinese force was routed by the Japanese forces .
 The Japanese launched a night assault that overran the landward side of the port's defenses . The attack was the first time the port had been attacked by Japan .
 Pockets of resistance held out for the next day, after which they were abandoned . The remaining positions were abandoned after the day of fighting .
 The Chinese fleet fell back to Weihai after the loss of Lushunkou, and assisted in the defense of this port against a Japanese land attack . The Chinese forces were able to defend the port from a Japanese attack .
 The town fell early in the month, after which the Japanese navy gradually wore down the remaining Chinese naval strength . The town was the last of China's naval strength in the region .
 Although this was the last battle of the war, numerous skirmishes followed . Several skirmishes were fought between the British and German forces .
 As the First Sino-Japanese war drew to a close, Japanese forces stormed the port of Niuzhuang, taking Yinkou unopposed .
 Japanese invasion of the Pescadores Islands was undertaken to provide a base for a campaign into Taiwan . The invasion was undertaken by the Japanese as part of a plan to attack Taiwan .
 The Chinese defense of the islands collapsed as quickly as the invaders could advance . After determined initial resistance, the Chinese defense collapsed .
 The 1st Regiment of Artillery fired on Qing dynasty troops near Port Arthur in Manchuria (modern Lushunkou, Northeast China), during the First Sino-Japanese War .
 The expanding soft-nosed bullets that ""mushroom"" on impact with the body are so called after their creation by the British at the Dum-Dum arsenal in India in the late 19th century .
 At the top of the prohibited list are the Schedule 1 chemicals that have no use, or negligible use, except as weaponized substances . The list includes Schedule 1 chemical substances that are banned from being used as weapons .
 This does not, however, apply to remotely triggered mines, such as Claymores . This is not the case for remote triggered mines such as the Claymore mines .
 Ottawa Convention bans use of such weapons against civilian targets . Ottawa Convention also prohibits the use of napalm against civilians .
 White phosphorus and napalm fall under the convention, but it has been circumvented by many nations exploiting legal loopholes . The convention is meant to prevent the use of napalm and white phosphorus .
 Taiwan was ceded to Japan as part of the Chinese surrender . It was part of China's surrender .
 Occupation of the new territory was opposed by forces of the newly created Republic of Formosa, but the defense was disorganized and feeble .
 An expansionist United States built on its support for the Cuban independence movement . The U.S. planned to annex Spain's existing colonies in the Caribbean and Pacific .
 Treaty of Paris also ceded Puerto Rico and Guam to the United States . The treaty ended Spain's role as a colonial power, ending its colonial rule .
 The United States intervened in an attempt by the Cuban populace to win independence from Spain . Seizing on the probably accidental sinking of USS Maine in Havana harbor in February, the U.S. intervened in a bid to get Cuba independence .
 The Spanish forces were easily defeated and Cuba effectively became a U.S. protectorate . Cuba was effectively a United States protectorate of the United States .
 Spanish forces occupy two hills protecting the approach to the capital city of Santiago . Spanish forces occupied the hills protecting two hills .
 These were successfully stormed by American forces, opening the way for an advance into Santiago, which surrendered on July 17 . Santiago surrendered to the U.S. on July 18 .
 Having defeated the Spanish squadron based at Manila, the United States occupied the islands . The U.S. took control of the islands in the early 1900s .
 Local Filipino resistance to American rule went on for some time . Sovereignty was transferred to the United States at the end of the Spanish-American war .
 The Second Boer War pitted British regulars against mobile, sharpshooting Boers of southern Africa . The Boers were particularly adept at mounted infantry tactics .
 The causes of the war are complex but this was the culmination of two centuries of conflict . The British empire had taken possession of the Cape and the Boers had established two independent Boer republics, the South African Republic and the Orange Free State .
 The highly mobile Boer horsemen defeated British forces in the field and besieged them in the cities . Boers were equipped with modern rifles and artillery, and were able to defeat British forces .
 However, the Boers were thinly spread and their success was short-lived . However, they were thinly-spread and they were only thinly-spent .
 Kimberley was besieged and bombarded, but there was no serious attempt to assault the town . Kimberley had been besieged and bombed, but no serious attempts were made to assault it .
 The siege was broken by a force of cavalry and mounted infantry, forcing a retreat, which led to the Boer defeat at Paardberg . The battle was the first to break the siege of the Boers .
 British army in the region initially attempted to fight in the field . The British army attempted to take part in the battle but was defeated .
 After actions at Talana Hill, Elandslaagte, and Nicholson's Nek, it was driven into Ladysmith, where it was besieged until relieved by a force under Sir Redvers Henry Buller .
 A British column advancing to the relief of Kimberley encountered a Boer force equipped with machine guns . The Boer had machine guns on their side of the line .
 British troops made a night approach that became disorganized . Seeking to retake the rail junction from the Boers, British troops were disorganized. The Boers were defeated .
 The attack failed and some British troops were left behind in the subsequent retreat . Some British troops remained behind during the retreat of British troops .
 The British were heavily defeated just short of Kimberley . Pushing on from the Modder River, the British were defeated by the Australians .
 Attempts to relieve Kimberley were postponed as a result of the battle . Attempts were postponed due to the battle in which Kimberley was injured .
 British troops had the advantage of numbers, but they failed to undertake adequate reconnaissance . The British troops failed to take adequate reconnaissance on the battlefield .
 Boer forces were well dug in, and inflicted serious casualties . As a result, they ran into Boers well dug-in, and suffered serious casualties. The Boers were well-prepared for the battle .
 Having attained the heights of Spion Kop, the British found themselves exposed to heavy fire . The British were forced to retreat from the battlefield .
 Kimberley is located 23 miles southeast of Kimberley, Orange Free State, South Africa . Location is located near Kimberley in the Free State state .
 The British conducted an eight-day artillery bombardment, which forced the Boers to surrender . After an initial frontal assault failed, the British conducted eight days of artillery bombardment . The Boers surrendered after an initial assault failed .
 Location 23 miles east of Bloemfontein, Free State Province, South Africa, is located in the Free State province of South Africa . Location is located 23 miles west of the city .
 Boer forces mounted a raid on a convoy to capture a convoy and disrupt the British water supply . Boers captured the convoy and disrupted the British supply of water .
 British defenders of Mafeking were in a state of starvation by the time a relief column approached . Under siege since the start of the war, the British defenders were starving .
 The battle at Diamond Hill was one of the last ""formal"" battles between the British and the Boers . The Boers had begun to adopt guerrilla tactics, and the battle was the last of its kind .
 With the conventional war lost, the Boers resorted to guerrilla warfare . The Boers were forced to rely on guerrilla warfare in order to survive .
 They achieved some success but were gradually worn down by the British . The British were eventually worn down .
 The Boxers, more correctly the l-ho-chuan, or ""Righteous and Harmonious Fists,"" attacked Western foreigners around Beijing in reaction against Western foreigners in reaction to Western expansion of China .
 A multinational force was sent to deal with them, eventually capturing Beijing and suppressing the rebellion . The rebellion was eventually suppressed by a multinational force .
 Boxers attempt to remove all foreign presence from Chinese capital . Boxers attempted to remove foreign presence in the Chinese capital from the city .
 Small numbers of guards from various foreign nations, assisted by civilian vounteeers, defended the ""foreign"" community until relief forces arrived . The ""foreign" community was defended by small numbers of soldiers .
 The Japanese navy, though newly created, was a thoroughly modern and well-trained force . Japan's navy was founded in 1903 .
 Japanese destroyers torpedoed Russian battleships and cruisers at anchor . The Japanese attack was led by a force of destroyers, led by destroyers .
 The next night a follow-up attack caused additional damage to the Russian fleet . The Russian fleet was damaged by the attack .
 Soldiers fighting in the Second Boer War are armed with various weapons, including German Mauser bolt-action rifles and British MkIV caliber .577/450 Martini-Henry rifle .
 Japanese forces surrounded the port by sea and land, gradually encroaching on the defenses . The port was attacked by Japanese forces in the early 1900s .
 The Japanese captured a hill overlooking the port, forcing the Russians to surrender . Suffering high casualties, the Japanese captured the hill . The Russians surrendered .
 Russian fleet came out of Port Arthur to engage the blockading Japanese . The Russian fleet engaged in the battle against the Japanese .
 A running fight ensued for several hours before contact was lost in darkness . Contact was lost after contact between the pair was lost .
 Russian ships were forced to seek safety in neutral harbors and were interned . Several Russian ships forced to leave neutral harbor . Several of the ships were taken into internment by the Russians .
 Using large numbers of machine-guns and forward observers linked to the artillery by telephone, the Russians were able to inflict heavy casualties . The Russians inflicted heavy casualties in Mukden, Manchuria .
 Russian fleet was in poor condition after sailing from the Baltic . After sailing all the way from Baltic, the Russian fleet is in a poor condition .
 A modern Japanese force outgunned and outmaneuvered it to inflict a massive defeat . It was met by a modern Japan force, which outgunted and defeated it . The Battle of the Second World War was defeated by a Japanese force .
 The first (October 1912May 1913) pitted Bulgaria, Greece, Montenegro, and Serbia (the Balkan League) against Ottoman forces . The first pitted Bulgaria against the Ottoman forces in 1912 .
 The second was an internal conflict arising from old tensions between the member states of the Balkan League . The Balkan league was formed from the former Yugoslavia in 1998 .
 Ottoman attack on the first day made some gains but was pushed back by Serbian counterattacks . Ottoman attack in the early days of the Ottoman invasion pushed back .
 A second attempt was made the next day, despite significant desertions during the night . The first attempt was unsuccessful, but the second was made in the second day .
 Serbian counterattack drove in the Ottoman left wing, forcing the Ottomans to withdraw . A Serbian counterattraction drove the Ottoman forces out of the battle . The battle was the first of its kind in Serbia and Serbia .
 Edirne captured from the Turks by forces from Bulgaria and Serbia in March 1913 . The town was captured by Bulgarian and Serbian forces from 1913 .
 A breakdown in mental health forced by the trauma of war has affected soldiers on active service throughout all periods of history . Combat stress reaction is a breakdown in the mental health of soldiers .
 The effects of CSR can endure long after the sufferer has left active service . CSR is a form of mental illness that can be traced back to the beginning of life .
 Viking chess pieces from as early as the eighth and ninth centuries depict warriors about to go into battle gnawing feverishly on the top edge of their shields . Early evidence of CSR chess pieces suggests the Vikings played chess pieces to prepare for battle .
 It would be centuries before combat stress became recognized as a genuine and specific medical condition . Yet, combat stress would be a medical condition centuries before it became a genuine condition .
 Russian prisoners march past the Japanese army after the lengthy siege of Port Arthur during the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05 . Port Arthur was the focus of the siege of the Japanese capital .
 CSR began to be recognized as a medical condition only after the Second World War . CSR is a reaction to the effects of war, but CSR was only recognized after the war .
 The two world wars brought an explosion of research into CSR based upon tens of thousands of 'shell-shock' victims . The studies helped refine the methods of prompt battlefield treatment .
 Although the postwar world recognized CSR as a medical condition, it remains imperfectly handled, largely because of notions of manhood and resilience . CSR is still a problem, but it is not considered a serious medical condition .
 Rapidly advancing technology refined the art of warfare, while the sheer numbers of military personnel involved, and civilians affected, reached staggering proportions . The sheer numbers involved in the war against the U.S. government have reached staggering levels .
 Modern global war in terms of destruction and human suffering can scarcely be comprehended . Along with the other brutal conflicts of the early 20th century, the tragedy and scale of modern global war is scarcely comprehended. The tragedy of this brutal conflict can be scarcely be understood .
 World War I began in 1914-18 . Arising out of long-standing tensions between the European powers . Afv A » .
 World War I was sparked by conflict between Austria-Hungary and Serbia . Serbia was the only major ally of Austria and Serbia in the conflict .
 The expected war of maneuver became an entrenched stalemate in many areas . The expected battle of maneuver was a stalemate between the two sides .
 The Belgian army, though smaller and not as well armed, inflicted significant delays on the advancing Germans, with some elements holding out around Antwerp until October .
 Germany carried out a deliberate terror campaign intended to ruthlessly subdue any resistance, it has been claimed . The German government has been accused of a terror campaign to subdue the opposition .
 The French plan of war called for an offensive to retake its lost provinces of Alsace and Lorraine . The French government plans to take back its lost provincial provinces .
 The German army fell back, drawing the French into a trap, and inflicting massive casualties . The French suffered massive casualties from artillery and machine-gun attacks . The battle was the first of the Second World War .
 First Corps of the German Eighth Army attacked the advancing Russian First Army at Stalluponen, pursuing them east until halted by Russian artillery fire . First Corps pursued the advancing First Army east until they were halted .
 The German attack at Gumbinnen was halted, counterattacked, and driven back . The attack was halted by the German troops and counter-attacked .
 During World War I, many nations used propaganda posters to stir young men to join and fight, or others to contribute money and work for the war effort .
 British battlecruisers, assigned at the last minute, proved decisive in the battlecruiser raid . A raid by British forces intended to draw out the German Fligh Seas Fleet resulted in a confused action .
 The German Fligh Seas Fleet was instructed to remain in port and avoid contact with the Royal Navy . As a result of the incident, the German Flight Seas Fleet remained in port .
 Machine gun changed the way wars were fought on land, in the sea, and in the air . Austrian machine gun was the first machine gun to be used in World War II .
 The Germans learned of imminent Russian marching plans by radio intercepts . They transferred reinforcements from the Western Front and laid a trap .
 Japanese forces besieged the German-owned port of Tsingtao in China . Japanese forces, as well as a small British contingent, besieged the port .
 The garrison managed to hold out until November in the face of bombardment and night raids . The garrison held on until November despite being bombed and bombed .
 As the German advance from Belgium into eastern France became overextended and disorganized, the Allies launched a counter-offensive . The Allies launched an offensive in eastern France in 1944 .
 Although the fighting was evenly balanced, the German army was ordered to withdraw after suffering severe casualties . The German army suffered severe casualties during the battle .
 After defeating the Russian Second Army at Tannenberg in East Prussia, German forces attempted to encircle the Russian First Army . German forces were defeated by the Russians in the battle .
 The Russians were able to extricate their army from the trap and withdraw in reasonable order . The Russian army was able to pull out of the trap .
 French and British forces launched a frontal attack on German positions . Crossing the Aisne River under fire under fire, French forces crossed the river under fire . The attack was the first of its kind since the Second World War .
 As elsewhere along the front, the assault was ineffective, and resulted in the Allies learning how pointless it was to carry out such strategies . The Allies learned how pointless such strategies were to carry on .
 French forces attacked near Albert and counterattacked for little gain on either side . Attempting to outflank fortified German positions in what became known as the ""Race to the Sea,"" French forces attack near Albert .
 In an effort to break through to the Channel ports, the German army attacked a salient in front of the town of Ypres, which was held by the BEF with French support . The BEF held the salient, which is now held in Belgium .
 Little ground gained for the attempt, and casualties were appalling on both sides . Little ground was gained .
 Brought to battle at Coronel in November 1914, the German Far East squadron annihilated its opponents . Then rounded Cape Horn to raid the coaling station at Falklands .
 Outgunned by the force it encountered there and unable to flee, the squadron fought a gallant but hopeless action . The squadron was unable to escape, and was forced to fight .
 Dresden, the only surviving German warship, remained at large for three months before surrendering off the Juan Fernandez Islands . Dresden surrendered after three months . Dresden was the last surviving German ship to survive .
 Strategy dictates the goals of an operation and what resources are available to achieve them . It is up to the tactician to use those resources effectively in order to achieve his goals .
 Through tactical decision-making, commanders display understanding of their own strengths and exploit them, while seeking to expose an enemy's weaknesses . Commanders display understanding and exploit their strengths to expose enemy weaknesses .
 Siege is a protracted blockade and armed assault against a city or fortress . Siege may last for days or even years and may last days or years . Siege is protracted blockade .
 Jewish rebels, outnumbered ten to one, chose suicide rather than surrender to the Romans . Masada was surrounded in their hilltop fortress near the Dead Sea, Israel .
 When an enemy force is encircled, it is prevented from receiving supplies and reinforcements, and is open to attack from all sides . Encirclement outflanks when an enemy forces are encirrounded .
 A flanking maneuver is an attack against the exposed sides of an enemy force . Flanking is a move against exposed sides, and a maneuver is a maneuver to attack exposed sides .
 Confederate forces routed Union troops during the American Civil War . Confederate forces attacked Chancellorsville .
 Union tactics allowed Confederates to redeploy against flank of one Union force and inflict defeat while keeping the other at bay . Confederates were able to inflict a defeat on flank of Union force .
 Hannibal formed a deep crescent-shaped defensive line and executed a double envelopment to defeat a numerically superior Roman army, which was destroyed as a fighting force . Hannibal's army of Carthage under Hannibal executed a deep, defensive line to defeat the Roman army .
 The Swedish army closed a classic pincer movement to rout an alliance of Saxony-Poland and Russia . During the Great Northern War, the Swedish army used a pincher movement in a victory over an alliance with Russia .
 Advancing through the Ardennes forest, in terrain considered by the Allies to be unsuitable for tanks to drive through . German armored forces were able to bypass the Maginot Line and fight a war of maneuver on their own terms .
 Tannenberg German attacks collapsed both wings of the Russian Army and resulted in the loss of 140,000 Russian troops in World War 1 . German attacks on Russian Army collapsed both sides of the war .
 Layered defenses behind a front line allow an armed force to delay the advance of an enemy and slow their momentum, giving an opportunity to mount counterattacks or await reinforcements . Defense in Depth is a way to delay an enemy's advance .
 The opposing trenches of the battlefields of World War I provided supporting lines and fortifications . Trench warfare was a form of warfare in the trenches during the war .
 The multiple defenses behind the front lines allowed enemy gains to be quickly recaptured by each side, leading to stalemate . The battle was fought in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 Normandy German defenders held back armored forces from the D-Day invasion beaches . German defenders instead fortified the hedgerows in the open countryside .
 This was intended to slow the Allies and allow time for reinforcements to arrive . This was meant to allow the Allies to arrive at the end of the battle .
 A clash between battlecruiser forces on the Dogger Bank resulted in a British chase . The British chased the Germans for several hours before catching up and exchanging fire with them .
 The armored cruiser Blucher could not keep up with her consorts and was sunk . The ship was the first to be sunk in World War II .
 The German Ninth Army attacked the Russian Second Army . Supported by experimental tear gas shells, the German army attacked the Russians .
 Russian counterattacks were beaten off and heavy losses were sustained by both sides . The battle was fought in a series of battles between the Russian and British armies .
 The use of poison gas on the battlefield by 1915, European armies began to issue respirators . European armies issued respirators to their soldiers .
 The first attempts were merely doth filters, as worn by these French soldiers . The first attempt was merely filters .
 An attempt to force a passage of the Dardanelles with battleships failed, a land offensive was launched . After a failed attempt to get through, the land offensive launched in 1941 . A land offensive against the Turkish capital was launched in 1944 .
 The attack was launched to eliminate a German salient near Neuve Chapelle . It was the first time the French troops had been able to attack a salient .
 Increasing shortages and a German counterattack prevented greater gains being made . Increasing shortages of supplies and a counterattack on March 12, prevented further gains .
 Allied troops landed to remove Turkish forts commanding the Dardanelles straits . After the failure of a naval attempt to force the straits, Allied forces landed on the strait to remove the forts . Turkish forces were defeated by Allied forces .
 The landings were successful in some areas, but a resolute Turkish defense prevented major success . The landing was a major success for the U.S. in World War II .
 The use of chlorine gas, against which Allied troops were powerless, created a large hole in the defensive lines . It created a huge hole in Allied troops' defensive lines.
 Allied forces advance up the Gallipoli Peninsula toward the town of Krithia . After artillery preparation, Allied forces advanced . Allied forces moved to the town .
 Turkish troops were driven off by a Turkish bayonet charge . They were met by a stout defense, and their right flank was driven off . The battle was fought between the British and Turkish forces .
 A short bombardment devastated the poorly trained Russian troops, who were crammed into inadequate trenches .
 They broke and fell back, allowing German and AustroHungarian troops to advance rapidly . They fell back allowing them to advance quickly .
 This offensive marked the British army's first attempt at a night attack . It was opened by primarily Indian troops . This offensive was the British Army's first night offensive .
 Heavy artillery preparation had been ineffective but significant gains were made early on in the attack nonetheless . The heavy artillery preparation was ineffective and the heavy artillery had to be used in the battle .
 Renewed assaults by the Allies succeeded in gaining only a little more ground . Renewed . assaults succeeded in . gaining only little more . ground than the . Allies .
 Turkish preparations for a counterattack intended to dislodge the Allied beachheads were observed . Turkish preparations were observed for the counterattack .
 The Turks were forced to advance over open ground against well-prepared defenses and suffered heavily . The Turks suffered heavily in the battle .
 Italians launched a major offensive across the Isonzo River, Italy . After attempting a surprise attack, the Italians launched major frontal offensive . The Italian army was defeated in a major battle against the Italians .
 Despite some minor gains, the assault failed for lack of artillery support . The assault failed due to lack of support for the troops .
 The Allies made good gains on the first day of the offensive, but could not bring up their reserves fast enough to maintain momentum . Using gas to precede the advance, the Allies made .
 Serbia was attacked by the combined forces of the German Eleventh Army, Austria-Hungary, and Bulgaria in the autumn of 1915 . After defeating Austro-Hungarian offensives in 1914, Serbia was defeated by the Germans .
 German charities of World War I supported troops captured while fighting in the trenches . After trying to batter through Austrian positions twice using massed infantry attacks, the Italians brought much more .
 Stalemated trench warfare inspired European armies to raise highly mobile regiments of light infantry . The Bersaglieri sharpshooters were the sharp shooters of the Italian army artillery to bear .
 This resulted in even greater gains, but at the cost of heavy casualties . 1916 massive loss of life for no territorial gain . 1916 .
 The conflict resulted in more than 250,000 battlefield deaths and at least half a million wounded . The conflict ended in 2007 in Afghanistan, Afghanistan .
 By 1916 it had become clear that the deployment of reserves would dictate the course of the war . By 1916, it was clear that deployment of reserve troops would dictate course of war .
 Strategies to draw enemy reserves into or out of critical areas were implemented on all sides . Strategies were implemented to draw enemies into critical areas .
 British forces advancing on Baghdad were driven into Kut-al-Amara and besieged there . The siege was a British invasion of Baghdad in the early 1900s .
 After initially resisting the assault, the British and Indian troops were eventually starved into surrender . The first ever attempt to supply a besieged garrison by air was the first attempt by air to supply the besieged garrison .
 Allied forces were withdrawn from Gallipoli . Disguised their evacuation by using ruses, such as leaving self-firing rifles behind in the trenches .
 Allies did not gain access to the Dardanelles until Turkey withdrew from the war in 1918 . The Allies gained access to Turkey in 1918 after the withdrawal of the war .
 By attacking Verdun, the Germans' plan was to draw the French reserves in and eliminate them . The Germans wanted to draw in French reserves to eliminate them, according to the Germans .
 Launched to draw German reinforcements away from Verdun, the offensive suffered from a lack of supplies and muddy thawing ground . German reserves were also drawn in, however, resulting in German reserves being drawn in .
 Initial attacks made little progress and the operation tailed off with no real gains made . Initial attacks make little progress, but operation tails off with little real gains .
 The Austro-Hungarian army launched a surprise offensive as the Italians were preparing for another assault on the Isonzo River .
 The Austrian offensive was halted by redeployed Italian reserves . Redeployed reserves were used to halt the offensive .
 This was the only significant collision between the German High Sea Fleet and the British Grand Fleet in World War I . After a battlecruiser action, the two main fleets clashed twice .
 The battle was a strategic victory for Britain, confirming its naval superiority . The British sustained heavier losses before the German fleet managed to slip away in the dark .
 From the Pripet Marshes, south to Czernowitz Theater Eastern Front. Location From the Pomerim Marshes to the Eastern Front . Eastern Front was the eastern part of the Holocaust .
 In the Great Siege of Malta, 5,500 Spanish marines retook the Mediterranean island from the Ottoman invaders and returned it to the control of the Knights Hospitaller . In the 1565 Ottoman-Habsburg Wars 1565, the island was taken back by the Spanish .
 Commonwealth troops landed on the shores of Gallipoli during World War 1 . They became locked in a battle of attrition before withdrawing months later .
 1943 U.S. Marines invaded a Japanese-held Pacific atoll and learned bitter lessons in the art of such operations . Tarawa was Tarawa atoll in the Pacific .
 Allied forces landed near the Italian resort town of Anzio in 1944 and become bogged down in a stalemate . Allied forces were trying to outflank the German positions along the Winter Line during World War II .
 Allied troops landed on the coast of northwest France on June 6, 1944 . Operation Overlord was the largest amphibious landing ever executed .
 Okinawa was the largest amphibious operation of World War II in the Pacific . The landings were followed by 82 days of fighting before the island was secured by Allied troops .
 United Nations forces landed at Inchon to relieve pressure on the Pusan Perimeter during Korean War 1950 .
 Elements of the Royal Marines' 3 Commando Brigade and the Falklands War Parachute Regiment of the British Army went ashore during the liberation of the Falkland Islands .
 Allied forces attempted, unsuccessfully, to conquer a Turkish garrison at Gallipoli . In 1916, Russian General Alexei Brusilov suggested an untried form of assault, which involved attacking at several points instead of just one .
 Using this method, the Russians achieved total surprise over the Austro-Hungarian forces, who were comfortably dug in to deep trenches . This method was used by the Russians in the Second World War .
 They launched with a colossal and accurate, though brief, artillery barrage against the Austrians . The Austrians were killed by the Germans in the Battle of the Somalian Peninsula .
 The final gains were outweighed by the costs, as German reinforcements arrived from the Western Front . The final victory in the Battle of the Somalian War was overshadowed by German reinforcements .
 Arab guerrillas, rebelling against Ottoman rule from Constantinople, tied down large numbers of Turkish troops and carried out joint operations with British forces . British forces were involved in the fight against the Ottoman Empire .
 Arab cavalry and camel-mounted troops working alongside British armored cars eventually occupied Damascus . Arab forces eventually occupied the city of Damascus in 1953 .
 Lawrence rose to fame as the British liaison officer to the Arabs, coordinating their operations with Allied forces in the region . Lawrence is credited with coordinating operations in the Arab Spring .
 Western Allies launched a large-scale offensive on the Somme to draw German artillery and troops away from the battle for Verdun . The Somme offensive was the first major offensive since the Second World War .
 After an eight-day bombardment, the British launched their attack against positions they expected to find shattered by artillery . After eight days of bombardment, they launched an attack on positions they thought would be shattered .
 To the south of the British sector, French divisions made their own attack . The French divisions also attacked .
 French forces suffered fewer casualties due to their use of infiltration tactics and the fact that a French assault was unexpected . The French assault took place during the Second World War .
 The Allies continued to attack on the Somme throughout July in a frantic bid to draw German reinforcements away from the battle for Verdun .
 First German reserves pulled from Verdun on July 11, as the Allies gained the first line of German trenches . The first German reserves were pulled from the German trenches in July .
 The Turks tried again as the British began moving their positions forward . The Turks had failed once to gain control of the Suez Canal .
 The Turks were driven off by a counterattack, ending the threat to the Suez Canal . Initially securing part of Romani, the Turks secured part of the Romani .
 Italian army made significant gains in the battle for control of northern Syria . The Italian army has been focusing on a single point in the region since the fall .
 The Austrians pulled back to preserve their forces, which were thinly stretched and having to fight on two fronts . The Austrian forces were forced to pull out of the battle .
 The Allies made slow progress against the German lines, relieving the pressure . Assisted by a small number of tanks, the Allies made further progress .
 The final Allied push on the Somme resulted in further minor gains and assisted the French offensive around Verdun . The Somme was part of the Allied push in the final months of the war .
 Mud was the dominant feature of many World War I battlefields, hindering movement and causing sores on the soldiers' wet feet . Mud was also the predominant feature of the battlefields .
 British stretcher-bearers carry a comrade at Passchendaele in 1917 . The Battle of the Somalian Plains was the deadliest battle of the Great Depression .
 The Allies deployed tanks while Germany relied upon highly trained infantry . The Germans relied on the Allies' tanks to fight back .
 Russia suffered political collapse and left the war, depriving the Allies of manpower . Russia's political collapse forced the Allies to pull out of the war .
 A five-day bombardment warned the German defenders of a coming assault . The use of tunnels to get close to German positions gave an element of surprise to the Germans .
 The French hoped the Nivelle Offensive would provide a breakthrough . Using new tactics and tank support, the French hoped it would provide the breakthrough . The offensive was the first of its kind in the French capital, Paris .
 Delays allowed the Germans to prepare, and the assault achieved little . The assault was delayed, but the Germans were able to take advantage .
 At Almeida, Portugal, a French shell detonated 75 tons of powder, 4,000 prepared charges, and a million musket rounds . A witness to the BOLSHEVIK UPRISING, MAY 1917, witnessed the explosion .
 Union engineers packed tunnels beneath Confederate lines with four tons of gunpowder . Battle of the Crater occurred July 30, 1864 during the siege of Petersburg .
 At 7:28am, the British detonated 27 tons of explosives, signaling the beginning of the devastating battle of the Somme . The British detonated the explosives at 7.28am in 1916 .
 Along the Messines-Wytschaete Ridge, 21 mines were placed under German lines . Messines was one of the most important battlefields in the war .
 U.S. forces have utilized the 7.5-ton Daisy Cutter bomb to clear landing zones . Daisy Cutter bombs have been used in combat in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The detonation of explosives in tunnels under the German positions resulted in a successful assault . It was detonated by explosives detonating in tunnels .
 Lenin's Red Guards seized control of the capital and set up a revolutionary government . Red Guards set up the government in Petrograd, Russia, in the wake of the German invasion of Russia .
 The Allies initially made good progress until well-prepared reinforced positions halted them . Using ""bite-and-hold" tactics to make and hold on to small gains, the Allies made and held small gains . The Allies made progress but were halted by reinforced positions .
 Austrian army managed to break the weary Italian line and force a retreat . Bolstered by German troops and officers, the Austrian army forced a retreat in Italy .
 The Russian offensive made good progress at first but rapidly faltered in the face of a German counterattack . The offensive quickly faltered as the Germans counterattack continued .
 In World War I, explosives set off by detonators were used to dig fortifications, mine enemy approach lines, and destroy infrastructure . Electrical detonators set off explosives were used in World War One .
 Making the first massed tank attack, the British achieved great gains on the first day . The British made great gains in the battle against the Soviet Union .
 Mechanical breakdowns and lack of preparation robbed the British of the chance to exploit the victory .
 They were committed to a series of offensives intended to win the war before American manpower reached the battlefields . There, they were committed .
 The stubby Ross bayonet and pocket knife were designed for the Ross Mk III rifle issued to Canadian troops . They were designed to be used by Canadian troops in the early days .
 Germans used infiltration tactics backed by massive artillery bombardment to beat the British line . Using infiltration tactics, the Germans smashed a hole in the British front line .
 The Allies planned to scuttle old cruisers as blockships, rendering the canals useless . Attempting to eliminate U-Boat bases, the Allies wanted to scutttle old ships as blocks ships .
 Determined resistance prevented the ships from being scuttled in the right place . The ships were attacked by the Nazis in the early 1900s .
 German forces made a successful attack in the direction of Amiens, France . Supported by 13 tanks, German forces were able to make a successful assault on Amiens .
 During the fighting, the first ever engagement between tanks took place . During the battle, tanks were used in the first battle between tanks and trucks .
 German High Command launched a surprise offensive against American troops . Hoping to win the war before American troops arrived in strength, German forces launched an offensive .
 Lack of supplies, fatigue, and Allied counterattacks halted the offensive . Initially it made large gains but lack of supplies and fatigue halted the operation .
 American forces in Europe launched their first offensive, albeit on a small scale, against the village of Cantigny in France . The village was the site of the U.S. invasion of France in 1944 .
 Combined with French tank, artillery, and air support, the position was taken and held against counterattacks . The position was held by French tanks, artillery and air .
 American troops suffered heavy casualties attacking across open ground in the face of machine-gun fire . U.S. forces suffered heavy losses in the battle .
 The Austrians hoped to crush on the Italian army . Advancing in a pincer movement, the Austrians were hoping to crush the Italians .
 The Italians had recovered from the disaster at Caporetto and, with French and British reinforcements, made a successful counterattack . But the Italians were still at risk of being overrun by the British and French .
 Using modern combined-arms tactics with massed machine-guns and heavy tanks . Using mass-gunned machine-gunners and tanks .
 The German offensive was halted by the Allies, who forced them to fall back to the Aisne . Pushing across the Marne River, the Germans pushed across the river .
 August 8 was described as the ""Black Day of the German Army" by the Allies . Surprise was achieved, allowing the Allies to make dramatic gains in the battle .
 With vast numbers of tanks and aircraft in support, the Allies began making substantial gains against the exhausted Germans . The Allies began to make substantial gains with the help of vast numbers .
 Demoralization and political upheaval ended Germany's ability to resist . Germany's inability to resist has led to the collapse of the Berlin Wall .
 In June 1918, at the Battle of Belleau Wood, U.S. Marines earned their German sobriquet Teufelshunde for their hand-to-hand fighting in attacks, which helped halt a German offensive .
 By using a creeping barrage tactic the Allies made good gains, prompting their decision to undertake further offensives against the weakening German army . The Allies used the tactic to make good gains in the battle .
 Italian advances met with fierce resistance, which suddenly collapsed after hard fighting . Italian forces met fierce resistance in the Battle of the Second World War . Italian advances were met by fierce resistance .
 The Austrian army ceased to exist as a fighting force and an armistice was agreed as the Austro-Hungarian empire began to disintegrate . The Austrian Army was the last of the Austrian army to exist .
 The Russian Civil War was not an issue between two sides . It was not the only issue between the two sides. It was the only thing between Russia and Russia .
 Within the ""Red"" and ""White"" factions there were several groups, many of whom disagreed violently with one another . The ""Red" and "White" factions were the most violent factions in the world .
 Several foreign forces, including British, Americans, Japanese, Czech, Czechs, and Poles, intervened to protect their national interests .
 The Bolsheviks built an army and won a bloody war for control of Russia . Threatened by foreign forces, nationalist groups and by the White armies, the Bolsheviks won the bloody war .
 Both Poland and the Soviet Union sought to control regions lying between them . Frontiers between Poland and Soviet Russia had not been clearly laid out in the Treaty of Versailles .
 Foreign interests further muddied the waters, and conflict became inevitable . Foreign interests also mudded the waters in Iraq .
 The eventual peace treaty of 1921 divided the disputed territory between Poland and the Soviet Union . Poland and Soviet Union fought over the Polish territory .
 Polish attempts to secure their nationhood led to an invasion by Soviet Russia . By the middle of summer the city of Warsaw seemed fated to fall . The city was invaded by the Soviet-occupied Warsaw .
 A surprise Polish counter-offensive threatened the Russians with envelopment before they reached Warsaw . A surprise counteroffensive threatened to envelopment by the Russians . The Russians had already reached Warsaw, Poland, but had not yet arrived .
 No other military icon so vividly embodies both the idealized romance and risk of warfare than the fighter ace . Perhaps no other military hero embodies both a romance and the risk of war .
 The phrase originated during World War I, when French newspapers lionized Adolphe Pegoud for shooting down five German aircraft . Pegoud shot down five Germans during the war, killing five .
 Fighter aces often engage in single combat, and thus can take individual credit for kills . Fighters aces can also take individual credits for kills in the fight .
 B McCudden Britain 57 United States . Edward Rickenbacker 26 William Lambert 22 August laccaci 18 Frank Luke, Jr. Frank Luke Jr. William Lambert died August 22 August 18 .
 World War I saw the first widespread use of airplanes in combat . Richard Bong 40, Thomas B McGuire 38, David McCampbell 34, Francis Gabreski 28 . Hiroyoshi Nishizawa 87, Hiroyosh Nishizaw 87 .
 German air ace Ernst Udet earned 62 confirmed kills in the war . He was one of the most successful German airmen in the world .
 Tetsuzuzo Iwamoto 80 Shoichi Sugita 70 Saburo Sakai 64 Soviet Union Ivan N Kozhedub 62 Aleksandr Pokryshkin 59 Grigori Rechkalov 58 Nikolai Gulayev 58 . United States Joseph McConnell, Jr.
 The Spanish Civil War poster extols the strength of the ""proletariat"" to resist the ""military bullying"" of the Nationalists . The National Revolutionary Army won several major victories in 1926-27 .
 Three warlords, once allied with Jiang Jieshi and the Nationalists, broke away and a civil war began . The warlords' break away from the Nationalist and fought for independence from the state .
 Chiang Kai-shek's faction benefited from air power, and emerged as the dominant force in China . But the campaign against the Communist Red Army was weakened by this internal conflict .
 Forces 80,000 in initial Communist outbreak from Jiangxi province . Forces in China's first Communist outbreak in 1934-35 .
 Communist forces break through Nationalist encirclement in Jiangxi . Communist forces marched north to find a secure base . Nationalist Nationalist forces march north .
 Casualties were high from harassing attacks and the hardships of the march, but eventually the survivors reached safety .
 US-built SR-71 Blackbird spyplane stands unbroken today, the currently deployed . MiG-25 interceptor is the fastest military aircraft in history .
 Relations broke down when a Communist force including many civilians was encircled and all but annihilated by Nationalists . But relations broke down after the Communist forces were encirrounded by Nationalist forces .
 During one of a series of engagements in central China, Communist forces destroyed a contingent of Japanese soldiers and Nationalist troops previously subservient to the Japanese occupiers .
 Without popular support, weak Nationalist troops were virtually annihilated by well-organized Communist forces . Jiang Jieshi ordered them to stand their ground until reinforced .
 The Spanish Civil War was fought between Spain's Nationalist Nationalists and the loyalist Republicans . The Republican side was led by General Francisco Franco, who fought for the Spanish Republic .
 The International Brigades of more than 40,000 anti-fascist foreign volunteers from more than 50 countries joined the Republican side . More than 40 per cent of the vote will be held in the Republican primaries .
 The best troops of the Spanish army, garrisoned in Morocco, crossed into Spain to take part in the war on the mainland . Assisted by German and Italian air transport forces, the best troops were deployed in Morocco . The best Spanish troops were taken to the mainland by the German and
 This successful operation was the world's first large-scale military airlift . It was the first airlift of its kind in the world .
 Republican forces established a beachhead on the island of Mallorca . Republican forces managed to establish a beachfront on the Spanish island .
 With the help of overwhelming Italian air power, the Nationalist forces launched a counterattack which drove the Republicans off the island . The Nationalists were able to defeat the Republicans on the island with a counter-attack .
 Its flawed design made it dangerous to use, and its weak cartridge had considerably less stopping power than comparable Western rounds . The flawed design of the gun made it difficult to use .
 Two Nationalist heavy cruisers were sent to drive off two Republican destroyers threatening the supply route between Morocco and Spain . One sank one and forced the other to retreat with heavy damage .
 The arrival of the first volunteer International Brigades on the Republican side enabled the besieged city of Madrid to hold out under attack by the Nationalists . Madrid was besieged by the Spanish Nationalists during the Second World War .
 Republican reinforcements, led by Soviet T-26 tanks that outgunned those of the Nationalists, arrived in time to drive off the attackers . Republican reinforcements arrived at the end of the battle .
 The air attack on Guernica, ostensibly against military targets, was "without regard for the civilian population"", with deliberate attacks on civilians reported .
 The city was defended by extensive, labyrinthine fortifications, including bunkers, tunnels, and fortified trenches in several rings . All protected by artillery fortifications .
 The elaborate fortifications were incomplete by the time of the battle and were breached . Known as the ""Iron Belt" by the battle, they were breached by the end of the war .
 By then the designer had defected to the Nationalists, along with his plans . By then, he had already defected from the party .
 Republicans were forced to withdraw in the face of greater numbers . Ultimately the GOP was forced to pull out of the race .
 The Republicans launched a failed offensive across the Ebro river . Facing certain defeat, the Republicans launched an offensive across Ebro River .
 Special Forces or Special Operations units exist within the military establishments of many nations . Special Forces units exist in many nations, including the United States .
 Unit Nation Founded In Action Stormtroopers Germany 1915 Italian Front, Western Front Arditi Italy 1917 Italian Front . Brandenburger Regiment Germany 1939 Low Countries, Eastern Front Long Range Desert Group Great Britain 1940 North African Desert Commandos . Special Boat Service Great Britain . Special Air
 Chindits Great Britain 1942 China, Burma, India and Popski's Private Army . North African Desert Rangers United States 1942 Mediterranean, Western Europe . Chindit's actions include Desert Storm and Operation Iraqi Freedom .
 The ill-equipped and disorganized Chinese warlords were easily overrun by the Chinese army .
 Casualties Total at Shanghai:200,000; Chinese at Rape of Nanking:250,000 . Casualties total at Shanghai at the time: 200,000, 500,000 killed . Chinese at rape of Nankan: 250,000.
 Nanking, by contrast, was not ferociously contested but was still sacked by the Japanese . Nanking was the only major city to be sacked by Japan in China .
 Having overrun China, Japan now found itself sharing a border with Russia in Manchuria . The war began in 1938-39 .
 Mistrust between the two ran deep, and a dispute over the location of the border developed into a brief war . The two nations were at war over the border .
 Taking Manchuria away from the Chinese, the Japanese army came up against Soviet forces in the region . The Japanese army took over the region from China and fought the Soviet forces .
 Japan claimed that the Soviet Union had tampered with the border demarcation, and so attacked . Japan claimed it had been attacked by the Soviets in the early 1950s .
 This gained the Japanese some ground but they were ultimately dislodged . This gained them some ground in the battle but they ultimately lost ground .
 As Japanese troops pushed into the Soviet area of influence, the Soviets launched an armored counterattack supported by mechanized infantry . The Soviets launched the counterattack against Japanese troops in the area of Soviet influence .
 None of the nations that fought in World War II was fully prepared for conflict . However, none of the countries were fully prepared to fight in WWII .
 The Allies declared war over the German invasion of Poland, but were not in a position to take direct action . As a result, the Allies were not able to take action against the Germans in Poland .
 A ""phoney war" ensued, which then gave way to conflict on a massive scale . A ""Phoney war"" ensued, followed by a massive war on a huge scale. A 'phoney' war ensued, and a massive conflict ensued .
 The speed of the German advance, coupled with the use of tactical air power, weakened the Polish defense . Poland's defense was weakened by the speed and tactical power of the Germans .
 Polish army fought to the best of its ability against superior forces . Attacked by superior forces along a broad front, the outmatched army fought .
 A combination of soldiers and civilian volunteers defeated armored assaults on the city, which then came under siege . The city was then under siege by the city's residents, which was heavily armed .
 When it became apparent that the Western Allies were not going to assist Poland, the defenders surrendered . The defenders surrendered after it became clear that the Allies would not help them .
 The Soviet forces had far more soldiers, aircraft, and tanks than the Finns . The Finns were defeated by Soviet forces in the Soviet invasion .
 Supermarine Spitfire Mk VB. overconfidently advancing into Finland, the Soviets suffered heavy casualties and were fought to a standstill at the Mannerheim Line .
 The pocket battleship CrafSpee was cornered in the Plate River by Allied cruisers . After an effective raiding cruise the pocket battleships were cornered . The battleship was eventually forced to withdraw into the River .
 Graf Spee's captain ordered her scuttled after he thought a massive Allied force had arrived . Duped into thinking that a huge Allied force was behind her, she was ordered to scuttle her .
 Denmark, Norway, and France were quickly overrun, and an invasion of Britain might have taken place if air superiority had been obtained . Britain was quickly overrun in Denmark and Norway .
 Allied landings came too late to prevent the fall of Norway, but resistance continued throughout the war . Allies landings failed to stop the fall .
 Invasion troops ashore were also bombarded by the destroyer force . Invasion troops were also bombed by the destroyers .
 A large Allied force sank several ships at Narvik and attacked shore installations . The battle was fought in the Battle of Narvik, which ended in a defeat .
 An aircraft from the battleship Warspite also sank a U-boat . It was the first time a submarine had been attacked successfully from the air in the war .
 The fort of Eben Emael dominated crucial river crossings with its artillery . The fort was built in the 18th century .
 German airborne forces took it, helping secure a route for rapid advance into Belgium . It was taken by airborne forces and helped secure the route into the country .
 German armored forces broke through the Allied line and headed north for the Channel ports . Advancing through the Ardennes forest, German forces fought back from the Allied lines .
 Allied light bombers made repeated but ultimately fruitless attacks on advancing German columns and on the bridges themselves . Engineers detonated charges as the German were crossing the Meuse bridges .
 Casualties were high among the obsolete Fairey Battle aircraft, used for many of the strikes .
 Reports claimed the attacks delayed the German advance by four days . Later reports claimed that the attack delayed the Germans advance .
 The French held well-fortified positions and were receiving reinforcements as the German attack began . The German attack was the first of its kind in the French capital .
 Massive air attacks stunned the defenders and resulted in a rout among some of them . Massive air strikes stunned some of the defenders . Some of the attackers were stunned by the air attacks .
 A small force of Allied tanks and supporting infantry launched a counter-strike that overran elements of the German force . As the German armored spearhead advanced toward the Channel coast, the Allied force was overran by elements .
 The attack was eventually driven off but delayed the Axis advance significantly . The attack eventually led to the defeat of the Axis forces .
 1,887 aircraft; British: 1,023 aircraft; Blitz: 43,000 British civilians . German: 1.887 aircraft, British: 1,023 aircrafts during the Blitz . Blitz was the first Blitz in the UK to be fought in the Blitz,
 The Battle of Britain was the first major campaign to be fought entirely in the air . It was fought in an air-only campaign in the first time ever fought in the skies .
 German policy shifted from attacking fighter bases to the intense bombing of cities . Gradually the policy shifted to attacking cities in order to protect the population .
 This tactic of blitzkrieg was intended to demoralize the civilian population of Britain . Blitzkrieg intended to demoralize the civilian population in Britain .
 Elite special forces have conducted numerous operations during situations . Elite forces have carried out numerous operations in the past .
 They have been involved in advance attacks, deploy from land, sea, and air to conduct hazardous missions, suppression of terrorist activities, and the resolution of hostage hostage which live on to become famous .
 German Stormtroopers Caporetto 1917 Shock troops overwhelmed Italian defenders in surprise attack . Force Location Location Location Date Action was German .
 German Brandenburger Regiment Gennep, Netherlands 1940 . Special forces seized the bridge across the Meuse river intact intact .
 German Airborne Eben Emael captured Belgian fortress in 1940s . He was the first German paratrooper to enter Belgium .
 British Commandos Beda Littoria 1941 Raid on German General Erwin Rommel's North Africa headquarters failed . Raid on Rommel headquarters in North Africa failed .
 Free French and Foreign Legion troops defended the Gazala Line in North Africa in 1942 . French Foreign Legion Bir Hacheim . Free French troops defended Gazala line in North African .
 1942 Marines struck Japanese garrison in the Pacific . U.S. Marines struck the Japanese base in Makin Atoll .
 First Special Service Force Monte la Difensa captured enemy position in 1943 . US-Canadian Commando unit captured enemy positions .
 German ambush near Italian town inflicted heavy casualties on U.S. Army Rangers Cisterna 1944 . German ambush was a major source of heavy casualties for the U.N. troops .
 Special forces captured Merville Battery overlooking Sword Beach on D-Day . The battery was captured in Normandy 1944 .
 Elite troops scaled heights of Pointe du Hoc on D-Day 1944 . Elite troops scale heights of the Pointe de Hoc .
 French Airborne and Foreign Legion Dien Bien Phu 1954 Special forces defended outpost against Viet Minh forces . Special forces defend outpost against Viet Minh .
 British, French, Israeli Special Forces seize control of the Suez Canal in 1956 . Suez 1956 operation was a joint operation between the British and Israeli forces .
 Attempt to free POWs ended when Vietnam camp was discovered evacuated . Vietnam camp is discovered evacuated after being discovered evacuated in 1970s .
 Israeli Commandos Entebbe 1976 Raid freed hostages taken to Uganda in airline hijacking . Israeli commandos were involved in the 1976 raid on Uganda's Uganda Airlines Flight .
 German special forces rescued 90 hostages from hijacked aircraft . GSG9 Mogadishu was hijacked by a Somali hijacker in Somalia in 1977 .
 SAS Iranian Embassy London 1980 assault freed 19 hostages and killed five Iranian terrorists . SAS Iranian embassy hostages freed in 1980 assault on Iranian Embassy in London .
 Attempt to rescue United States hostages held in Iran failed . United States Combined Special Forces Special Forces Tehran 1980 .
 SAS and SBS South Georgia Island 1982 Special forces conducted operations in the Falklands . British SAS and South Georgia island operations were conducted .
 United States Army Rangers Mogadishu 1993 ""Blackhawk Down" raid failed to capture Somali warlord . U.S. Army Rangers were involved in the raid on Somali warlords in Somalia .
 The convoy routes of the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea were severely threatened by German U-boats and surface raiders . W. EDNEY, a member of the Royal Navy, was killed in the sinking of a U-boat .
 Without the ability to move supplies and troops by sea, the Allied war effort would have ground to a halt . Without the access to the sea, Allied forces would have had to rely on the sea to transport supplies .
 Aircraft carrier HMS Glorious was sunk by gunfire from German battlecruisers . Caught without her aircraft in the air, the aircraft carrier was sunk .
 Battlecruiser Scharnhorst's withdrawal to Trondheim enabled the Allied evacuation convoys from Norway to pass safely through the area later that day . Her two destroyer escorts met a similar fate, though a torpedo and a number of 4.7-inch shell hits damaged the
 The battle of the Atlantic resulted because of a German attempt to blockade Britain using its submarine forces . The battle was because of an attempt to block Britain using submarine forces.
 The practice of escorting convoys across the Atlantic limited losses somewhat, and gradually the balance tipped in the Allies' favor . Eventually the balance of the war against the Nazis tipped the balance in the balance .
 Beginning in 1917, the United States armed forces issued a medal, the ""Purple Heart,"" for soldiers, sailors, and airmen wounded or killed in action against an enemy . Swordfish aircraft from British carriers attacked the Italian fleet in harbor, torpedoing three battleships .
 Part of the Italian squadron was caught lying stopped at night by the British force . The squadron had crippled a cruiser and damaged a battleship .
 Invaded by Italy in October 1940, Greek forces counterattacked and initially managed to drive the Italians back into Albania . The Greek forces were able to drive back into the country .
 German intervention made defeat inevitable despite transfer of British troops from North Africa, compromising the Allied position there . Allied forces were defeated by German intervention in North Africa .
 The Bismarck and her consort Prim Eugen were pursued by massive Allied forces . Breaking out into the Atlantic to attack Allied convoys, they were chased by massive forces . They were captured in the Battle of the Second World War .
 Crippled by air attack, the Bismarck fought to the end against overwhelming odds . The Bismarkenen, Germany, was the last German city of the First World War .
 German airborne forces managed to gain control of the airfield at Maleme, allowing supplies and reinforcements to be flown in . Despite taking heavy casualties, the German airborne force managed to take control of Maleme .
 The initial invasion of the Soviet Union went extremely well . Catching the Soviets by surprise, the invasion went very well . The invasion was caught by surprise .
 Soviet resistance did not collapse as the Germans had predicted and the invasion fell behind schedule . However, Soviet resistance was not as strong as expected . The invasion of the Soviet Union was delayed by more than two years .
 Romanian troops besieged the city of Odessa, capturing it on the fourth attempt . With some assistance from German forces, Romanian troops captured the city . The city was captured by Romanian troops on the third attempt .
 German forces arrived in North Africa to assist the Italians . They pushed the Allies eastward . German forces helped push the Allies to North Africa .
 Tobruk was left as an isolated outpost under siege, which, in December 1941, Allied forces broke through to lift the siege .
 Leningrad withstood siege until January 1943 . Threatened by the Finns as well as the main Axis advance, the city was eventually taken over by the Soviets .
 Axis troops advancing on Moscow had to contend with stiffening resistance and worsening weather that turned the roads to mud . Axis troops advance on Moscow in the winter of 1941-1944 .
 Freezing conditions restored mobility, but by this time a solid defense was in place . Freezing weather restored mobility but by the time it was too late, it was difficult to get out .
 German forces surrounded and gradually reduced the port of Sevastopol . Deploying the world's largest artillery piece, German forces surround and gradually reduce the port .
 A few senior officers escaped by submarine; the remainder of the garrison stayed and fought to the end . The British troops died in the Battle of the Atlantic Ocean .
 Operation Crusader was the first major Allied victory over Axis forces . It was launched with the objective of relieving the siege of Tobruk . Operation Crusader took place during the Second World War II .
 Tank losses on both sides were heavy but the Allies were better able to replace theirs . Both sides suffered heavy losses, but were able to get back on their tanks .
 Axis forces captured Rostov as part of an operation intended to secure the industrial centers of the Don basin . Rostov was captured by Axis forces in 1942 . Axis forces were limited by commitments elsewhere .
 The overextended Axis forces were counterattacked and made their first major withdrawal of the war . It was the first major retreat of the Axis forces in the war.
 The Soviets transferred troops from Siberia and, supported by new T-34 tanks, launched a huge counter-offensive . It was intended to drive German forces out of Russia and drive them out of the country .
 A surprise attack by Japanese air forces caught the United States unprepared and caused serious losses . The U.S. was unprepared for the surprise attack .
 United States aircraft carriers were at sea at the time, but survived . They survived to become the mainstay of the United States Pacific war . The aircraft carriers survived .
 Red Army and air force counterattacking against the German invasion in 1941 . Red Army counterattacked against German invasion by air force . Red army poster depicts the Red Army fighting against the Germans .
 History's largest warships have been primary projectors of their nations' foreign policy and military power . The largest warships of all time have been the most powerful warships in the world .
 Naval supremacy has long been a component of empire building, national security, and prestige . The U.S. has long relied heavily on naval supremacy .
 The ship was launched from the Blohm & Voss shipyard, in Hamburg, Germany, in 1939 .
 The Dawn Patrol, 1930 Richard Barthelmess; Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. Richard Bartheless, Jr., Richard Barthemess, Richard Fairbanks and Douglas Fairbank Jr. Douglas Fairlock Jr.
 All Quiet on the Western Front, 1930 Louis Wolheim; Lew Ayres Lewis Milestone Universal Anti-war film set during World War 1 and based on the novel by Erich Maria Remarque . All Quiet is set in France during WW1 .
 D-Day Allied landings and invasion, June 6, 1944, based on the book by Cornelius Ryan . The Longest Day, 1962, starring John Wayne, Henry Fonda, Robert Mitchum, Sean Connery and Richard Burton .
 Outnumbered British soldiers defeat Zulu warriors during the epic battle of Rorke's Drift . Zulu, 1964 Stanley Baker; Michael Caine Cy Endfield Endfield Diamond Films .
 War and Peace is based on the classic novel by Leo Tolstoy . Sergei Bondarchuk directed the film of the Russian defense against Napoleon . The film was released in 1968 .
 Breaker Morant, 1980 Edward Woodward Bruce Beresford 20th Century Fox Story of an Australian folk hero during the Boer War .
 Platoon, 1986 Charlie Sheen; Tom Berenger; Willem Dafoe Oliver Stone . Oliver Stone: Action in the Vietnam War. Platoon . Charlie Sheen: "Platoon"
 The high tide of the Confederacy during the United States Civil War . Gettysburg, 1993 . Martin Sheen; Tom Berenger; Jeff Daniels .
 Schindler's List is the story of a German businessman saving Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland . Liam Neeson and Ben Kingsley starred in the 1993 film . The story of Schindlers' rescue of the Jews is told in the film .
 Saving Private Ryan stars Tom Hanks, Matt Damon and Tom Sizemore . The film is based on World War II combat during the Normandy campaign .
 D-Day operations were immortalized in movies such as The Longest Day and The Downfall . Downfall, 2004 Bruno Ganz; Alexandra Maria Lara; Juliane Kohler Oliver Hirschbiegel .
 Ben Vandervoort was commander of second battalion, 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment, in the 1962 film, The Longest Day . He was the commander of the second battalion in the film .
 During the battle of Midway, the United States and Japanese navies fought a decisive combat over this strategic atoll in the Pacific Ocean .
 The carrier USS Yorktown was mortally wounded by Japanese torpedo bombers . It was the first carrier to be hit by Japanese aircraft in the war .
 After the bombing of Pearl Harbor, Japanese forces moved south to attack British, Dutch, and American colonies in Asia . After the war in the Far East, the Japanese began attacking British and Dutch colonies in the region .
 It was conceded that Hong Kong was indefensible, but reinforcements were sent anyway . The British government conceded that it had to send troops to Hong Kong .
 The Allies were driven back to Hong Kong island and held it for a time, but were eventually overwhelmed . The Allies held the island island for more than a decade .
 Allied troops were repeatedly overrun or outflanked by the fast-moving Japanese . Attempting a forward defense on the Malay Peninsula, Allied forces were repeatedly outflanked .
 The result was a series of defeats as the Allies were pushed back toward Singapore . The result of the Allies being pushed back into Singapore was the result .
 After the loss of major air assets on the ground, American and Filipino defenders were unable to prevent Japanese landings . The Japanese invasion was the first Japanese invasion of the Philippines in 1944 .
 United States forces held out for a time before being forced to surrender . Retreating to the Bataan peninsula, U.S. forces were forced to retreat .
 Attempting to interfere with Japanese invasion plans, Allied vessels came under heavy attack from the air . Allied vessels were attacked by the air during the invasion .
 The action graphically demonstrated the capabilities of air power at sea . The action was the first of its kind .
 Axis advance was halted at sea in the Pacific and on land in Europe . However, the Axis advance in Europe was halted on land and sea in Asia .
 The balance would shift back and forth several times during the year before beginning to tip in favor of the Allies . The balance of the war would shift between the Allies and the Allies several times .
 Later, the Japanese advanced into India from bases in Burma, but were stopped and ultimately driven back across and out of the country . The Japanese were ultimately driven out of India in 1945 .
 Demoralized by defeats in Malaya, the Allies made a stand on Singapore island . The Allies were forced to retreat from Singapore island after being defeated by Malaya .
 Japanese forces were unable to prevent Japanese forces crossing the straits from the mainland . However, they were able to stop the Japanese forces from crossing the Straits .
 The subsequent loss of Singapore was a severe blow to British morale and prestige in Asia . Singapore was the first city to be ruled out of Singapore in 18 years .
 Last significant Allied naval forces in Southeast Asia were sunk or driven off . In a series of surface actions involving cruisers and destroyers, the last significant Allied forces in the region were sunk .
 The first air raid by American forces against Japan during World War II, the Doolittle Raid was conducted by bombers launched from an aircraft carrier . The raid was the first to carry out against Japan .
 Raid did little damage but it influenced Japanese strategic thinking and bolstered Allied hopes during a very bleak period . The raid did little material damage but helped bolster Allied hopes in Japan .
 Aircraft from carriers from both sides inflicted losses on both sides . Surface warships acted as floating anti-aircraft batteries in the battle .
 German armored forces became trapped for a time before a supply line was forced through, enabling the panzers to break through and capture Tobruk . German forces were attempting to cut the British Eighth Army off from the rear .
 A Japanese attack on the strategically important U.S. base at Midway resulted in a decisive clash . The Japanese attack was a major clash between Japan and the United States .
 U.S. carrier aircraft destroyed four Japanese aircraft carriers in the Battle of the Pacific . Heavy losses were taken on both sides, but United States carrier planes destroyed four aircraft carriers . The battle altered the balance of naval power .
 Axis forces advanced on Tobruk after breaking through at Gazala . Axis armored forces advance on Tobrak and attacked . Axis forces broke through Gazala and advanced on the city of Gazala. Axis forces were forced to withdraw from Tobruki .
 The previously formidable defenses around the city were quickly overrun . Lacking adequate anti-tank guns and caught unprepared, the city was quickly overrun by the Taliban .
 The Allies retreated eastward after the defeats at Gazala and Tobruk . The Allies made a stand at El Alamein .
 Axis advance halted after intense fighting, but the Allies failed to make headway . The Axis advance was halted after fierce fighting, with the Allies failing to make progress .
 U.S. forces struggled to retain airstrip on Guadalcanal against repeated attacks . The airstrip was captured by Japanese forces in World War II .
 Naval victories allowed the United States to cut off Japanese supplies and reinforcements . U.S. naval victories helped the U.K. cut off the Japanese supplies .
 The experience gained from the raid, however, was invaluable in planning later amphibious operations including the Normandy landings . The raid was the first to take place in 1944, but the experience was invaluable .
 Soldiers and leaders alike have sought spiritual help during crises . Soldiers have sought help from spiritual leaders during times of crisis .
 Many Japanese soldiers in World War II carried flags decorated with Shinto prayers and family names . Many soldiers in WWII carried flags like this one, decorated with family names and prayers .
 Algeciras Bay Napoleonic Wars July 8 and 12, 1801, near Gibraltar, killed 1,700 . Spanish warships fired on one another, killing more than 1,000 .
 Flying Tigers attacked a retreating column of Commonwealth troops, believing them to be Japanese . The Flying Tigers thought they were Japanese .
 Polish 1st Armored Division and Canadian 3rd Armored Division were bombed by U.S. aircraft during Operation Totalize . Hundreds of Polish and Canadian soldiers were killed during the bombing .
 Royal Air Force planes attacked ships carrying concentration camp survivors and Red Army prisoners of war, killing more than 7,000 . Lubeck, Germany May 3, 1945 .
 Misdirected fire from helicopter gunships killed two U.S. soldiers and wounded 35 . Hamburger Hill Vietnam War May 11, 1969 .
 Two Exocet missiles, fired by an Iraqi fighter struck the frigate USS Stark during the Iran-lraq War, killing 37 and wounding 21 . The missiles were fired by the Iraqi fighter .
 U.S. fighters downed two Black Hawk helicopters, mistaking them for enemy aircraft, killing 26 . April 14, 1994 United States fighters downed the helicopters .
 Battle of Stalingrad was one of modern history's bloodiest battles . Red Army and German Sixth Army had to fight for every street and building . Red and German armies fought for every building and street .
 Soviet soldiers break cover during an assault through the city's ruins . Soviet soldiers broke cover during the assault .
 The tide of victory was finally beginning to turn in favor of the Allies in 1942 . It was not yet readily apparent during the summer months of 1942 that the tide was turning .
 Allied: 1 aircraft carrier and 12 other ships lost; Axis: 2 submarines lost, many aircraft shot down . Axis: Two submarines lost; Allied: 2 aircraft carriers lost . Allied: One aircraft carrier, 12 others, 12 other vessels lost . Axis aircraft carrier lost .
 Operation Pedestal was the last chance to get desperately needed supplies through to Malta, which had been under siege for months . Malta was under siege by the Maltese government for months and has been in the grip of a siege .
 The battle for Stalingrad degenerated into desperate and chaotic street fighting . Axis forces pushed slowly forward as the Axis forces fought slowly forward .
 Axis forces were then encircled and trapped in the ruined city, eventually being forced to surrender . Axis forces then encracked and trapped . The Axis forces eventually surrendered .
 B-17 Flying Fortress bombers of the Eighth United States Air Force attack Nazi Germany by day . Flying Fortress bomber was the Eighth Air Force's most powerful aircraft .
 Joint US-British landings seized ports in Morocco and Algeria, after which troops advanced eastward into Tunisia . U.S. troops advanced into Tunisia after landings .
 This led to the action at Kasserine Pass and the eventual removal of Axis forces from North Africa . The action was led by the actions of the Axis forces in the region .
 Germany was bogged down in a struggle at Stalingrad and the Japanese had been halted in the Pacific at Guadalcanal . The Japanese had already been halted by the end of the war in the Philippines .
 By year end, the Allies had ejected the Axis from North Africa and begun the invasion of Italy . The Allies were ejected by year end of the war .
 British offensive resulted in bloody, confused fighting . The British offensive ended in bloody confusion .
 A counter-offensive was repulsed before the British attacked again, driving the Germans back . The Germans were defeated by the British in the Second World War .
 Axis forces attacked United States formations holding the Kasserine Pass . Axis forces inflicted a sharp defeat on the U.S. forces holding the pass, inflicting a sharp .
 A United States counterattack was repulsed before the Axis force withdrew . A U.S. counterattack against Axis forces was repulseed .
 A reargard action by panzer forces enabled a retreat, but remaining Axis forces fell soon after, ending the war in North Africa . The war ended with a victory over the Axis Axis forces in Libya .
 RAF bombers breached Mohne and Eder dams and damaged two others . RAF Lancaster bombers breached the Mohne, Eder and Mohne dams . RAF bombers also damaged two other dams .
 To defeat anti-torpedo defenses they used specially designed ""bouncing bombs"" that skipped across the water . The bombs skipped over the water to avoid detection by submarine fire .
 Soviet reserves turned the battle and by the middle of July the Soviets were able to advance . The battle turned into a victory for the Soviet Union .
 Bad weather disrupted the airborne component, yet the amphibious landings went well . Bad weather disrupts the airborne part of the mission .
 USAAF bombers attacked by day while RAF aircraft made night raids . USAAF bomber attacks by day and RAF bomber raids by night . RAF bombers attacked day raids by day .
 The combined raid on a ball-bearing factory at Schweinfurt and an aircraft plant at Regensburg was the most costly U.S. bombing mission in the war to date . The raid on the ball bearing factory and aircraft plant were the most expensive to the United States in the
 Axis forces broke off and withdrew after failing to dislodge the Allies . Axis forces were forced to withdraw from the battle .
 RAF undertook a series of large raids on Berlin to break German morale and to lure the Luftwaffe into a decisive battle . The RAF launched attacks on the German aircraft industry .
 After the Luftwaffe had been severely weakened, the Allied invasion of Europe could proceed . Allied invasion was able to defeat the German air force .
 Small-caliber anti-tank guns such as this PAK 36 were standard issue for many infantry units during the early 1940s .
 During World War II, the United States was a leading producer of arms, military equipment, and raw materials . The U.S. produced the largest quantities of some materiel in the world and, in others, second only to the Soviet Union .
 Although Germany possessed few major warships, they were a serious threat to Allied convoys . The Germans were a major threat to convoys in the early years of the war .
 Large naval forces had to be deployed, particularly in the north Atlantic, to watch and contain them . Large naval force was deployed to contain them, especially in north Atlantic .
 Scharnhorst encountered a powerful Allied force in an attempt to intercept an Allied convoy . The German battle cruiser was attempting to intercept a convoy .
 She was torpedoed repeatedly by destroyers and sunk . Deprived of her radar and later slowed by shell hits, she was slowed by shells .
 Roosevelt and Churchill were idealized as liberators of Europe and Asia . Allied poster depicts the two men as a liberator of Asia and the world .
 Allied aircraft sunk one of the last Japanese battleships, Haruna, off the Kure naval base in 1945 . Allied aircraft sank the battleship, which was sunk by Allied aircraft .
 The monastery of Monte Cassino resisted repeated assaults by the Allies even when reduced to rubble . The monastery was destroyed by Allied forces in the Second World War .
 The Allies launched an amphibious landing but caution prevented them front exploiting the landing . Attempting to outflank Axis defenses, the Allies launched a landing attempt .
 Japanese forces attempt to take the Naga Hills and establish a defensive position . Japanese forces attempted to take Naga hills and establish defensive position in Naga .
 After a battle of attrition, a lack of supplies caused the Japanese force to collapse . The Japanese force was forced to withdraw from the Japanese army .
 Japanese forces clung to a defensive position until starvation and lack of ammunition forced them to retreat . Attempting to prevent resupply and reinforcement of Allied troops at Imphal, Japanese forces retreated .
 The speed of the Soviet advance meant preparations to hold Sevastopol were incomplete . Plans for the city were incomplete due to the speed of Soviet advance .
 The Allies sought to cripple German oil production, targeting the Ploesti oilfield . The Allies also sought to destroy the German oilfield in the fall .
 Bomber losses were heavy, but production was halted by the middle of August . Production was halted at the end of August after heavy losses .
 The Allies launched a massive crossChannel invasion of Europe, the largest single-day amphibious invasion of all time . The invasion caught the defenders by surprise and caught them by surprise .
 The heaviest Allied losses were at Omaha beach; elsewhere the landings went according to plan . The heaviest losses were in Omaha beach .
 Air power crippled the movement of German supplies and reserves, allowing the Allies to advance into Normandy . The Allies advanced into Normandy in 1944 .
 More than 8000 VI and 3225 V2 weapons launched . VENGEANCE WEAPONS CAMPAIGN J June 13, 1944-march 29, 1945 .
 Unmanned flying bombs and ballistic missiles were launched in long-range attacks against the Allies . The Allies were attacked by the Germans in 1944 and 1945 .
 The V3 weapon, a giant artillery battery, was incomplete at the end of the war . It was completed in 1944, but was never completed .
 German units held off the attempted Soviet reoccupation for several weeks but were forced to retreat when outflanked by offensives in other areas . Assisted by Estonian forces, German units fought off Soviet attempts to reoccupy the area .
 As the Soviet army approached Warsaw, the Polish Home Army rose up and took control of most of the city . The Home Army took over the city from the Soviet Army .
 A pause in the Soviet advance allowed the Germans to suppress the uprising . The Germans were able to repel the Soviets' advance .
 Allied forces landing in southern France encountered little resistance because most Axis troops in the region had been transferred north to oppose the D-Day landings . Most of the Axis troops had been moved north to opposition to the Allied invasion . Allied forces landed on southern France in 1944 .
 Gothic Line was heavily fortified and bitterly contested . A northerly defensive line, the Gothic Line, was heavily contested and heavily fortified .
 Weather conditions prevented further offensives in 1944 . By the time it was breached by the Allies, weather conditions had prevented further attacks .
 The Allies landed paratroops ahead of an advancing armored force in Elolland . The Allies were trying to seize vital bridges to enable the Allied forces to advance rapidly northward into the German lowlands .
 Operation failed after 10 days of bitter fighting; the Rhine bridges at Arnhem remained in German hands . The operation failed after ten days of fighting .
 Ruins of Monte Cassino monastery, Italy, destroyed in 1944 . Minefield in ruins of the monastery in ruins .
 Allies eventually dislodged a German force that had moved in and seized the heights after the Allies bombed the abbey . The Germans had taken control of the heights in the early 1940s .
 German forces held the Hiirtgen Forest region against advancing American troops . In an action reminiscent of those of World War I, German forces fought American troops in the area .
 During Allied attempts to breach the Siegfried Line, Aachen was taken by the Allies after a week-long battle . The Allies took the city from the German capital during the Second World War .
 Japanese ships then came under attack from aircraft and submarines . The Japanese ships were then attacked by aircraft, submarines .
 The Soviets trapped and destroyed German units, which had been given ""no retreat"" orders by Hitler . Hitler had given them no retreat orders .
 Hitler ordered a counter-offensive that ensured the loss of these forces . Hitler ordered the defeat of the German forces .
 Soldiers from the United States Army Quartermaster Corps wade ashore at Normandy, France, on June 7,1944, the day after D-Day . Allied landings in Normandy were the first to take place in Normandy . Soldiers waded ashore in Normandy in 1944 .
 Operation Overlord began a campaign of reconquest that helped defeat Nazi Germany . The landings, known as Operation Overlords, were the first to land in the World War II era .
 Japanese surface forces were met with massive air attack as well as gunnery engagement in Surigao Strait . Four aircraft carriers and thousands of men were lost in battle .
 The battle of Leyte Gulf was the most extensive naval battle of World War II . The battle was also the first notable battle in which Japanese aircraft used organized suicidal kamikaze attacks .
 Japan had fewer aircraft than the Allied Forces had sea vessels . This illustrates the contrast in power of the two sides at this time of the war . Japan had less aircraft than Allied Forces .
 The last months of the war were marked by increasingly desperate resistance on the part of the Axis . The final months of WWII marked by desperate resistance from the Axis forces .
 Japanese troops defended Pacific islands to the death, while German forces were resolute in the defense of their homeland . German forces defended their homeland in the Pacific .
 Sudden counter-offensives by Axis forces achieved limited success but generally failed for lack of resources . Axis forces failed to counter-attack against Axis forces in the Second World War .
 U.S. forces based in China and several Pacific islands could now attack Japan . Boeing B-29 Superfortress bomber could now be used to attack Japan. Boeing has developed a prototype of the bomber .
 Starting in June 1944, conventional bombing raids with . incendiary munitions proved highly effective, causing huge firestorms . The firestorms were caused by the use of incendiary munitions .
 Six major Soviet offensives were launched to reduce the pocket, resulting in heavy losses . Surviving Axis troops surrendered at the end of the war . The surviving Axis troops also surrendered .
 German forces made good gains but were hampered by lack of fuel . German forces launched surprise attack from the Ardennes, but were forced to retreat .
 As the Soviets encircled Budapest, Hitler ordered it held at all costs and sent forces to break the siege . Hitler ordered the city to be held at "all costs" in order to keep it held .
 The fall of Berlin ended the war in Europe, while the projected invasion of Japan was expected to be so costly in casualties that nuclear weapons were seen as a viable alternative .
 Japan eventually surrendered on September 2, 1945, after the nuclear bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki demonstrated the overwhelming firepower that the USA could bring to bear on its cities .
 The Soviet offensive made good progress despite armored counterattacks, forcing the defenders into withdrawal . The Soviets were forced to withdraw from the Soviet offensive .
 The offensive halted at the Oder to clear the flanks before the advance on Berlin was resumed . The offensive continued at the end of the first day .
 While part of the Japanese army retreated into the hills, a force fortified Manila and defended it to the death . Manila was the last city to be defended by a force of troops .
 Thousands of Filipino civilians were killed in the fighting or massacred by the Japanese . Thousands of Filipinos were killed during the fighting in the Philippines .
 The bridge at Remargen was captured intact, while other forces crossed elsewhere . The bridge is captured intact .
 Once bridgeheads established, the German position on the river was untenable . Once bridgeheads were established, it was impossible for Germany to hold on to the river .
 As German air defenses began to weaken, the Allies launched a massive attack on the historic and previously untargeted city of Dresden . Dresden was a previously unttargeted city .
 By the time the USAAF attacked on the 14th, much of the city had been reduced to ruins . The firestorm caused by the night bombing had reduced the city to ruins.
 The Japanese heavily fortified two Jima after the U.S. invasion of the Home Islands . The Japanese were expecting the United States to use the island as a base for the invasion . Two Jima was one of the most fortified islands in the world .
 Japanese created inland defensive positions that were defended to the death . Rather than contesting the beaches, the Japanese created defensive positions .
 The Lake Balaton offensive came as a surprise to the Soviets, and the Axis made good gains at first . The Soviets were surprised by the success of the offensive .
 A counterattack by the Soviets, launched as the offensive wound down, retook all of the ground that had been lost . The Soviets retook the ground after the offensive ended in defeat .
 Unable to hold the entire island, Japanese forces contested the southern end of the island . At sea the invasion fleet was subject to kamikaze suicide attacks .
 A series of fortified positions were held almost to the last man, with occasional counterattacks . The battle was fought to protect a series of fortresses in the area from the start of the conflict .
 During April the Allies mounted the largest bombardment in the Pacific War before renewing the offensive . During April, the Allies mount the largest bombardments in the war's first major offensive .
 The Japanese force was directed to attack Allied ships engaged in the invasion of Okinawa . But was shattered by air attack before even getting near the target .
 Among the ships sunk was the battleship Yamato, one of the most powerful warships ever built . The battleship was sunk in the Battle of Yamato .
 Soviet troops supported by a KV-1 heavy tank, Soviet troops reach the Reichstag . Soviet troops reached the Reichsag with the help of a heavy tank .
 Two fronts competed for the honor of reaching Berlin first, even fighting each other . Two Soviet fronts competed to reach Berlin first .
 The last major resistance to the Allies took place in Prague, Prague, after the surrender of Germany .
 German troops holding the city were able to put down a rising by Czech partisans but were soon overwhelmed by massive Soviet forces .
 A flotilla of British destroyers attacked the Japanese heavy cruiser Haguro . The attack took place in the Battle of the Second World War in 1941 .
 A series of torpedo attacks sank the cruiser, while her escorting destroyer escaped with light damage . The cruiser was sunk by a series of torpedoes .
 This is the last traditional surface action fought with gun and torpedo . This was the last naval action fought in the Battle of the Atlantic Ocean .
 At 8:15am on August 6, 1945, Enola Gay dropped the uranium atomic bomb, nicknamed ""Little Boy," on Hiroshima, Japan . The bomb was nicknamed "Little Boy" by the U.S. Army Air Force .
 Hiroshima bomb detonated 1,900 ft above the city . The explosion levelled or damaged up to 90 percent of Hiroshima buildings . The bomb detonated 15,000 tons of TNT .
 The total number of deaths from radiation exposure continued to mount years afterward . Radiation exposure in the United States continued to rise .
 The United States Boeing B-29 Superfortress Bockscar dropped the plutonium atomic bomb, nicknamed ""Fat Man,"" above the Japanese city of Nagasaki on August 9, 1945 . The bomb was nicknamed "Fat Man" by U.S. pilots .
 The bomb's yield was estimated at 21 kilotons, significantly greater than the uranium bomb dropped three days earlier on Hiroshima . Detonating at an altitude of 1,650 ft (503 m) The Hiroshima bomb was detonated at a height of 2,500 ft (1,650
 It is impossible to establish exactly how many died, either instantly or from long-term radiation effects .
 The superpowers have asserted their influence through fighting proxy wars in Greece, Korea, Vietnam, and elsewhere . They have been involved in proxy wars against each other for decades .
 Independence movements have erupted into civil war, the states of the Middle East have renewed centuries-old disputes . Terrorist terrorism has triggered intervention in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Nationalist Forces won several large battles in Manchuria, but were defeated in a series of small engagements . Nationalist forces were defeated by small battles in several small battles .
 Communists captured large amounts of heavy equipment in this way, notably artillery, before launching a decisive campaign . The Communists captured many of the heavy equipment before launching an offensive campaign .
 Communist forces decisively defeated a larger Nationalist army by dividing their enemy into pockets, then surrounding and eliminating each pocket in turn . The battle was one of seven major battles in the Central Jiangsu Campaign .
 Nationalist and Communist factions were focused on fighting the Japanese during World War II . The defeat of this common enemy signalled the renewal of their rivalry for control of China .
 A Nationalist offensive to capture Siping City was thwarted by Communist resistance, helped by melting snows .
 Communist Party: 1,000,000; Nationalist Party:1,00,000 . Communist Party Party: 500,000 members of Communist Party in Russia . Nationalist party: 100,000 Russians in Russia in 1948 .
 Communist forces temporarily blocked a Nationalist offensive aiming to occupy the Communist base at Guanzhong . Nationalist forces temporarily block the offensive . Communist forces blocked the offensive in China .
 Enamelled badges, featuring Chairman Mao Zedong, were issued throughout Mao's rule of China .
 Although the Nationalists controlled the major cities, these were isolated from one another by Communist-held territory . Although the main cities were controlled by the Communists, they remained isolated from each other .
 Communists brought heavy artillery firepower to bear and trounced the enemy . Concentrating rapidly against different Nationalist forces in turn, the Communists were able to outnumber the Nationalists .
 During the Zhengtai Campaign by the Communists, Nationalist forces defending a mountain pass and outnumbered two to one, left their fortified positions and attempted a disastrous counterattack in response to a Communist flanking manoeuvre . Nationalist troops were outnumbered 2 to 1 and were forced to abandon their
 Nationalists concentrated at Beijing and Tianjin . As the balance of the civil war tipped ever further against them, they concentrated on Beijing .
 Communist forces from the Liaoshen campaign joined local armies to achieve overwhelming superiority . Victorious Communist forces join local armies with overwhelming superiority in China .
 Beijing surrendered and was named capital of the Communist-controlled state . Beijing surrendered after the war and became capital of China's Communist-held state .
 Communist forces converged to assault a Nationalist garrison from all sides . In a series of engagements near the city of Tianjin, Communist forces converge on the Nationalist base .
 Nationalists held out for several hours before surrendering when reinforcements failed to appear . The Nationalists were forced to surrender when reinforcements did not appear .
 Communist forces attacked the island of Quemoy as a prelude to invading Taiwan itself . The island was attacked by Communist forces during the invasion of Taiwan itself.
 The level of resistance was underestimated and the attack failed, allowing the Nationalist government to survive on Taiwan . The attack failed and allowed the government of Taiwan to survive .
 Defending their position against Nationalist attacks the outnumbered Communists managed to inflict heavy casualties on the Nationalists . Eventually forcing their withdrawal, the Communists were forced to withdraw .
 The Nationalist position was compromised when four divisions defected to the Communists . Four divisions of the Nationalist Party defected from the Communist Party .
 The exposed Nationalist wings were then encircled and bombarded into submission by artillery . The exposed . Nationalist . wings were encirrounded and . bombarded by . artillery .
 Communist forces turned back a larger Nationalist army sent to relieve the city of Kaifeng, ensuring the success of the Eastern Henan Campaign . Nationalist troops were turned back by Communist forces in the battle .
 During this decisive battle Communist forces employed heavy artillery in a successful attack that drove the Nationalists from the city of Jinzhou and a strategically important road junction . The battle took place in Jinzhou, China's capital, Jinzhou .
 Nationalist troops failed to take advantage of their superior numbers and arms, employing their troops piecemeal and so dooming their counter-offensive to defeat . Nationalist forces failed to use advantage of superior numbers, arms and troops .
 After Xuzhou, the Nationalist forces began to collapse while the Communists continued to gain in strength . The Communists gained in strength in the aftermath of the fall in China .
 Once Tianjin was taken, Beijing fell almost unopposed and the advance on Shanghai could begin . Beijing fell in Tianjin, but then the advance could begin.
 A Communist attempt to take control of a small island off the east coast of China resulted in failure . It helped to secure the survival of the Nationalist government and its control of Taiwan .
 Nationalist troops forced to withdraw from defensive positions and abandon the city of Jiange, opening up Sichuan Province to Communist attack . Nationalist forces were forced to abandon Jiange .
 HMS Amethyst was fired on by Communist guns on the Yangtze river en route to guard the British embassy in Nanjing, China . The ship remained trapped for 14 weeks in the river .
 Nanjing, the Nationalist capital, fell without a fight on April 24, 1949 and, in May that year, Shanghai also fell . Nanjing was the first city to fall in 1949 . Shanghai was the second to fall; Nanjing fell in May 1949 .
 Realizing that all was lost, the Nationalists relocated to the island of Taiwan . Realizing they had lost, they relocated to Taiwan .
 Mata Hari was executed by firing squad in October 1917 for spying for Imperial Germany . She was also alleged to have been a double agent working for the British and their Allies .
 After the war, Chinese nationalists tried, convicted, and executed her for treason . She was executed by Chinese nationalists .
 Anthony Blunt shared British intelligence information with the Soviet Union . During World War II and after, Blunt gave intelligence information to the Soviets .
 Blunt famously completed a mission on behalf of the Royal Family to retrieve personal letters sent to the Third Reich . Blunt also completed a secret mission to retrieve letters from the Nazi regime .
 Under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher Blunt's spying was exposed and the Queen revoked his knighthood . Under PM Margaret Thatcher, Blunt was accused of spying on the British government .
 Vasili Mitrokhin, an archivist for the KGB, defected to the West in 1992 . He defected from the Soviet Union in 1992 and is now a Russian citizen .
 During his career he amassed an exhaustive collection of copied Soviet documents . He is best known today for his work on copying Soviet documents, for which he is known today .
 The so-called ""Mitrokhin Archives" include detailed information on the global activities of the KGB and other Soviet agencies during the height of the Cold War . The archives contain detailed information about the KGB's activities .
 In 1994, Aldrich Ames was convicted of spying for the Soviet Union . Ames was a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst .
 Ames sold the Kremlin the names of American agents and Russian contacts working inside the Soviet Union . Ames sold names of agents and contacts working in Soviet Union to the Kremlin . Ames was one of the most successful agents in the world .
 Even prior to the defeat of the Nazis, Nationalist and Communist factions were battling for control of Greece . GREEK CIVIL WAR MARCH 1946 - 1949 .
 Northern Greece. suppressing an uprising of militant Indonesian students. suppression of uprising of militants. suppressing uprising of Indonesian students .
 Greek Communists attempted to seize the city of Konista for use as the capital, but were repulsed by a smaller force supported by heavy artillery fire and the city's civilian population .
 As soon as Israel declared independence, Arab armies invaded from several directions . 1948-july 1949 may be the year of Israel's independence .
 Short supply lines and good training allowed Israeli forces to reverse Arab advances . The Israeli forces were outnumbered by Arab forces, but were able to reverse the advance .
 Several Israeli attempts to dislodge Jordanian troops blocking a vital road into Jerusalem were unsuccessful . Several attempts were unsuccessful. Several of the Israeli attempts were successful .
 During a 60-hour offensive, Israeli forces removed Arab troops from Upper Galilee and the frontier areas of Transjordan . During the offensive, Israel removed Arab forces from Upper . Galilee . Arab troops were removed from the frontier area of the region .
 U.N. had planned for the area to be part of the Arab state of Palestine . The United Nations had hoped the area would become part of Arab state .
 Following World War II, a Communist insurgency took up arms against the newly independent government of the Philippines . The insurgency was based in the Philippines following the end of WWII . The government was overthrown by the Communist Party in 1946 .
 North Korean forces invaded South Korea in an attempt to reunify the divided peninsula by force . North Korea invaded the Korean Peninsula in a bid to reunite the divided Korean peninsula .
 Hostilities ended with an armistice; however, a formal peace agreement has never been concluded . Hostilities began with a cease-fire, but the peace agreement was never concluded .
 British troops occupy Indonesia's second-largest city of Indonesia . British troops are occupying Indonesia's capital, Jakarta .
 Indonesian fighters helped to increase support for the independence movement . However, the resolve of the Indonesian fighters was not enough to defeat the Indonesian government . Indonesia's independence movement was largely based in Indonesia .
 British troops were driven back to Semarang by Indonesian forces commanded by General Sudirman, a leading figure in the Indonesian independence movement .
 Indonesian national hero I Gusti Ngurah Rai wiped out by a much larger Dutch force trying to pacify the island of Bali . Rai and his small band of guerrilla fighters were wiped out .
 During one of the largest battles of the war, Macedonian soldiers fought in Western Macedonia . The battle took place during the Second World War .
 The following year, with support from United States advisors, the Nationalists won a decisive victory, and the Greek Civil War effectively ended . The Nationalists took over Greece from the Greek Nationalists .
 The opening phase of the war saw North Korean troops easily defeat a weaker formation of South Koreans, making way for the Communist advance on Seoul . North Korea was defeated by a weakened formation of the South Koreans in the opening phase .
 In the first engagement between the Americans and North Koreans, a U.S. task force delayed the Communist invasion of South Korea by about 12 hours .
 United States 24th Infantry Division, U.S. Marines mount scaling ladders as they come ashore at Inchon, Korea, in September 1950 .
 This was the last major combat landing undertaken by U.S. forces in the 20th century . The landing was the first major combat landings in the United States in the last century .
 Samuel Colt opened the floodgates on mass-produced small arms at the zenith of the Industrial Revolution . Colt and his mid-19th century contemporaries opened the door to mass production .
 Mass-produced weapons, including rocket launchers, tanks, and artillery, have changed the character of modern battlefields and other scenes of violence around the globe . These and other mass produced weapons include tanks, tanks and artillery .
 UN-backed response prevented the fall of the whole country in North Korea . North Korea invaded South Korea in 2009 . UN backed a UN backed response to the invasion .
 UN forces gradually pushed outward after being forced into a pocket around Pusan . UN forces were forced to withdraw from the area around the border .
 An amphibious landing at Inchon involved numerous logistical difficulties . An amphibian landing was a major logistical challenge .
 The surprise assault was successful, with few casualties among the UN/South Korean forces . Nonetheless, the surprise assault is successful .
 UN forces push northwards into North Korea, taking the capital, Pyongyang . UN forces pushed northwards to take over North Korea's capital .
 UN forces, made up primarily of United States and British battalions, inflicted heavy casualties on the enemy . The UN forces conducted a successful withdrawal south to the port of Hungnam .
 Under the command of General Matthew Ridgway, UN forces began to advance behind a ""meatgrinder” bombardment by aircraft and artillery . The UN forces were advancing behind a "meat grinder" bombardment .
 A major Communist counterattack resulted in large numbers of UN troops being cut off, forcing an order to withdraw . A major UN troops were cut off by a major counterattack, forcing the withdrawal .
 The United States 23rd Regimental Combat Team and attached units held onto control of territory near the South Korean capital . The U.S. 23rd Regiment Combat Team held on to control territory near Seoul .
 Operation Courageous, designed to trap Communist troops north of Seoul, succeeded in this geographic objective, although enemy troops had already evacuated the area . The airborne phase of the operation succeeded in trapping Communist troops .
 For three days the British 29th Brigade held off a Chinese offensive to recapture Seoul . The British army held off the Chinese offensive for three days .
 The Gloucestershire Regiment was surrounded and devastated, but managed to inflict heavy casualties on the Chinese . The Chinese suffered heavy casualties during the battle .
 UN forces managed to withstand numerous Chinese attacks, helping to halt the Communist spring offensive of 1951 . Outnumbered UN forces were able to withstand many Chinese attacks .
 These early jet fighters are dumping excess fuel prior to landing on the carrier after a sortie over Korea .
 UN forces launch an attempt to break the stalemate along their line near the 38th Parallel . Both sides are seeking to exert their influence on the newly initiated peace talks .
 Superior UN firepower forced the North Koreans to withdraw to nearby Heartbreak Ridge . The North Koreans were forced to withdraw from the area .
 UN forces had made repeated attempts to take Heartbreak Ridge, but had failed . The UN forces included elements of the United States 2nd Division as well as attached French troops .
 A UN victory was only ensured after their troops introduced tanks, which helped to isolate the high ground and made it possible to fire directly onto the enemy positions . The UN victory in the battle was ensured after the introduction of tanks .
 Australian forces of the UN led to the capture of Hill 317 . Hill 317 was captured by Australian forces . Australian forces were involved in the capture .
 The area was eventually abandoned to the Communists after the Australian troops were ordered to withdraw . However, the area was abandoned after the Australians were ordered out of the area .
 UN forces finally managed to retain control of the area after a series of largely inconclusive engagements that involved high ground changing hands numerous times . High ground in the area has been contested for more than a decade .
 Two days of air strikes by UN warplanes destroyed 90 percent of the Sui-ho dam's capability to generate electricity . The U.N. military said it destroyed 90% of the dam's hydroelectric facilities in North Korea .
 Five engagements at Hill 266, nicknamed ""Old Baldy" by U.S. forces, began when UN forces captured the crest during heavy fighting and were driven off by a strong Chinese counterattack . Hill 266 is nicknamed "Baldy"
 A hill along a UN supply route was repeatedly attacked by Chinese forces . It was a hill along the UN supply line that was attacked repeatedly by Chinese troops .
 The disputed high ground changed hands 24 times before Communist troops were forced to withdraw from the area . The disputed territory was taken by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 A series of attempts by U.S. and South Korean troops to dislodge Chinese forces from positions at Triangle Hill and nearby Sniper Ridge were abandoned due to mounting casualties .
 French Foreign Legion badge caps include the gold Legionnaires' insignia and the silver badge of a qualified paratrooper . Foreign Legion badges include gold Legionnaire's insignia .
 Foreign Legion paratroopers formed much of the relief force defending Dien Bien Phu in 1954 . They suffered heavy casualties during the siege .
 UN troops maintained control of Pork Chop Hill in March . During two controversial engagements, UN troops kept control . UN troops temporarily lost control in March, temporarily losing it .
 In the following weeks renewed Chinese attacks were repelled by reinforcements . However, UN command subsequently abandoned the position .
 UN forces repulse Chinese attempts to capture high ground in four separate battles . UN troops repulse attempts to seize high ground from China .
 Any territory gained would have given the Chinese bargaining power during the impending peace negotiations . The Chinese would have gained territory during the peace talks .
 UN forces, primarily Greek and American troops, succeeded in defending an outpost in the so-called Iron Triangle north of Seoul, against repeated assaults by Communist infantry . UN forces were primarily Greek, American troops .
 These tests conducted under water, underground, above and in the atmosphere, generate considerable tensions around the world . These tests are conducted under . water, . underground, and above and above the atmosphere .
 The characteristic fiery mushroom cloud of a thermonuclear bomb rises above the Marshall Islands in the Pacific Ocean in March 1954 .
 The 27-ton bomb was flown to an altitude of 34,449 ft aboard a modified Tupolev Tu-95 ""Bar"" bomber . The 27.ton bomb weighs 27 tonnes .
 The weapon fell to an altitude of 13,780 ft before exploding . Slowed by a drogue parachute (one that deploys from a fast-moving object) The weapon was dropped by a parachute .
 The explosion resulted in a fireball 26,400 ft in diameter, and a seismic wave that registered more than magnitude five on the Richter scale . The explosion was caused by an explosion that registered a magnitude five .
 The United States exploded a hydrogen bomb above the Marshall Islands in a test dubbed ""Castle Bravo" The U.S. detonated the bomb in an atmospheric test dubbed "Castle Brav"
 Bravo used a so-called ""dry"" lithium-hydrogen fuel, which helped the designers create a smaller, lighter weapon that could more easily be transported and delivered . Differing from the frozen fuel of other early fusion bomb designs, the designers created a smaller and lighter weapon .
 A Xian H-6 bomber of the Chinese People's Liberation Army Air Force dropped a 4-mt thermonuclear bomb over the Lop Nor test site in western China .
 The bomb was China's largest atmospheric test, as well as its largest nuclear test overall . It was the largest atmospheric nuclear test in China's history .
 The largest of these, codenamed ""Canopus,"" was a 2.6-metre thermonuclear device detonated above the Pacific . The largest was a nuclear bomb detonated by the Japanese in 1945 .
 Suspended from a hydrogen balloon, the device exploded 1,800 ft above the ocean . The device was suspended from a helium balloon . The explosion was the first of its kind .
 France made a succession of attempts to reassert its control in the various parts of its widespread colonial empire . With the end of World War II, France made attempts to . reassert . control in China . First China War was fought in 1946-1954 .
 In French Indochina, a rebellion was gradually gathering force, driven on by growing Nationalist and Communist sentiment . The rebellion included Cambodia, Laos, Cambodia, and parts of modern Vietnam . It was led by Nationalists and Communists .
 This would eventually lead to the complete withdrawal of France from Southeast Asia . France would eventually withdraw from the region in the future .
 A combined French airborne and ground offensive managed to inflict heavy casualties on the enemy . In an effort to deplete the combat capabilities of the Viet Minh, a combined French and Vietnamese forces inflicted heavy casualties .
 Large numbers of Communist troops were successful in slipping away . However, large numbers of communist troops were able to slip away .
 French and Vietnamese troops were almost completely annihilated after being driven into a steep gorge along one of their vital supply routes close to the northeastern border with China . Troops, including paratroopers and members of the Foreign Legion, were driven into the gorge .
 This offensive by the Viet Minh had been planned as a direct advance on the capital city of Hanoi . This offensive was planned as an attempt to take control of the capital .
 The Viet Minh had reached about 30 miles (48 km) south of the city when they were defeated and driven back by the vastly outnumbered French troops . However, they were decisively defeated by the outnumbered French forces .
 After this conflict, it became clear to the French that the battle for control of Indochina was likely to be much more prolonged than had initially been expected . After the conflict, the French became aware that the French were likely to lose control of the region .
 Supported by naval gunfire from three destroyers, heavily outnumbered French soldiers managed to successfully hold off a Viet Minh attack on the city of Haiphong and its surrounding area . Supported by . naval gunfire, French soldiers successfully held off the attack .
 Haiphong was crucial to the success of the French campaign . It was the main port through which large quantities of their vital reinforcements and supplies flowed .
 The French launched an offensive that was designed to lure the enemy into an open, pitched battle . The French launch an offensive designed to draw the enemy to an open-ended battle .
 French troops finally forced into taking up a defensive position . However, this tactic failed and the French troops were finally forced to take up defensive positions . The French soldiers were eventually forced to retreat from the battlefield .
 The French were decisively defeated, despite the Viet Minh forces suffering considerably heavier casualties . French forces suffered heavier casualties than those of the Vietnamese forces .
 The French successfully employed ""hedgehog defense""tactics" - entrenched positions capable of all-round defense . The French used air support for the first time in the battle .
 The use of similar tactics at the later battle of Dien Bien Phu, proved disastrous . Similar tactics were used by the French at the same time .
 This was one of the numerous French operations that were designed to draw the Viet Minh guerrillas out into the open, where they would become more vulnerable to the vastly superior air power of the French forces .
 The operation was abandoned after it failed to provide any significant results . It was abandoned because of the lack of progress in the project .
 French offensive had been designed with the hope of engaging substantial numbers of Viet Minh soldiers and thereby limiting the enemy troops that would therefore be available to engage in the enemy's regular attacks on the French supply line via Route 1 .
 The operation was eventually seen as a failure and the French troops were ordered to withdraw . The French forces were eventually seen to have been ordered to leave .
 French troops succeeded in their mission to establish an airbase at Dien Bien Phu . French troops were air-dropped into a remote area in the extreme northwest corner of Vietnam .
 Just four months later, the Viet Minh forces successfully launched a devastating attack on the French forward base, destroying it completely . However, just four months after the attack, the French base was destroyed completely .
 The French seized Dien Bien Phu, a village surrounded by hills that needed to be supplied by air . Hoping to draw out the Viet Minh for a decisive battle, the French seized the village .
 The village was shelled from positions in the hills, then besieged and eventually overrun by the Viet Minh, crushing French control in Indochina and forcing their imminent withdrawal . The village is shelled and then besieged by the Vietnamese .
 During this final major engagement of the war, Viet Minh guerrillas ambushed and savaged French troops that were attempting to withdraw, following their defeat at Dien Bien Phu . During this last major engagement, the French troops were ambushed by the guerillas .
 Three days later, on July 20, 1954, a ceasefire was announced, and on August 1, an armistice was implemented . The ceasefire was declared on July 1, 1954 and August 1 .
 The use of sulfur mustard compounds as battlefield weapons dates to July 1917, when the German Imperial Army used ""Yellow Cross"" gas at Ypres against the British and French armies . Mustard gas was first used by the Germans in July 1917 .
 The chemical has an extreme blistering effect on the skin, and can destroy mucous membranes in the eyes, mouth, and lungs . It can destroy sensitive mucus membranes in eyes, mouths, and eyes .
 Chemical burn wounds caused by exposure to vesicants are difficult to heal and may result in septic infections or other serious medical complications . The chemical burn wounds are hard to heal .
 Organophosphates are chemicals similar to those found in industrially produced pesticides . Sarin, the United Kingdom's VX, Russia's VR, and others, are similar to Sarin and VR .
 Weapons containing such chemicals distribute toxins that can be devastating to humans, experts say . Weapons containing these chemicals distributed toxins that are devastating to human life, they say .
 Nerve agents affect the central nervous system, blocking neurotransmitters in the brain . Nerve agent affects central nervous systems, blocking the brain's ability to communicate .
 Among its effects are loss of involuntary muscle control, causing cramping pain, nausea, uncontrollable defecation, and urination, and difficulty breathing .
 These chemicals can cause permanent neurological damage or death through asphyxia . Victims lose consciousness and become unable to breathe, asphyxiation .
 CS gas is classed as a non-lethal agent and is used by police forces and military units around the world for riot control and other law enforcement activities . CS gas CS or tear gas can be used in riot control or for other purposes .
 CS has also been used in military settings as a teaching tool to demonstrate the effectiveness of chemical warfare protective equipment and procedures during basic training of recruits .
 CS has been used to obscure movements and deny the enemy access to areas . CS has also been used during some search and rescue missions to recover downed pilots during the Vietnam War .
 Military organizations have experimented with the weapons potential of some biological agents, such as anthrax bacillus . Military organizations experimented with some of the biological weapons potential .
 The deadliness of anthrax is shown by the deaths of five people and the severe illness of 17 others during a series of terrorist attacks through the United States Postal Service in September and October 2001 .
 Biological agents have proved to be more difficult to store, handle, move, and deliver than would be militarily useful . However, as a rule, biological agents have proven to be difficult to handle, handle and deliver .
 Most developed countries that formerly amassed stockpiles of biological weapons have isolated and destroyed them under a series of international agreements .
 New recruits to the United States Air Force are subjected to a simulated chemical and biological warfare attack . The simulated attack is part of their basic training .
 Eventually, after several peaceful attempts to restore public order, there was an especially savage response from the French forces that were deployed in the country .
 The Algerian guerrilla movement was eventually broken, but there were heavy casualties on both sides, including civilians .
 In March 1962, with increasing anti-colonialism and worldwide opinion going against them, the French government finally made the decision to withdraw completely from Algeria . Algeria was then granted independence in 1962 .
 The Front de Liberation Nationale or National Liberation Front embarked on a campaign of terror in Algiers . The French army was brutally defeated by the French army in Algeria .
 Civil unrest sparked a revolt against the pro-Soviet Flungarian government . Civil unrest led to the overthrow of the government of Soviet-backed regime .
 A new reformist government was installed, which appealed to the United Nations for support . The new government appealed for support from the U.N.
 It declared its intention to withdraw from the Warsaw Pact and set up free elections . The country declared its intentions to withdraw and set for free elections in 1968 .
 Soviet troops and tanks marched into Hungary and crushed the rebellion in November 1956 . Flowever, in early November 1956, Soviet troops stormed into Hungary to crush the rebellion. Flowever was the first Hungarian uprising since 1956 .
 An Egyptian blockade of the Israeli port of Eilat caused Israel to launch an attack into the Sinai Peninsula . Israel launched an attack on Sinai Peninsula in response to the Egyptian blockade .
 Egypt nationalized the Suez Canal to gain almost total control of sea trade in the region . Egypt decided to nationalize the canal in order to gain control of the region's trade .
 A combined Anglo-French force attempted to seize control of the canal and gave their support to Israel in Sinai . When talks failed to persuade Egypt to reverse this decision, a combined AngloFrench force tried to seize .
 UN pressure forced a ceasefire with more than 3,000 UN troops deployed in the area to keep the peace . UN pressure eventually forced the ceasefire, with UN troops in the region to keep peace .
 Fidel Castro led an effective guerrilla campaign against the rule of Fulgencio Batista in Cuba . Fidel Castro returned from Mexico to lead a guerrilla campaign .
 Popular support for Castro gradually grew, until he was eventually able to assume power . Despite a shaky start, popular support for the Castro government gradually grew .
 While his brother Raul marched on Santiago, Fidel Castro led his Communist force to victory over a government army that was three times its size . Jan KRCMAR, a CZECH JOURNALIST, was a Czech journalist .
 The triumph at Santa Clara helped Castro consolidate his hold on Cuba . Under the command of Che Guevara, the revolutionaries' triumph helped Castro to consolidate his position .
 Fidel Castro addresses crowd from Palacio Municipal in Santa Clara, after the city had fallen under Communist control . The Cuban revolutionary leader made the speech in 1959 .
 General Fulgencio Batista fled the country within 12 hours of the victory . The former Cuban leader had fled the island .
 First Katanga province broke away from central government, then other areas began to declare their independence . Other areas of the country declared their independence in the 1960s .
 Mercenaries participated extensively in the prolonged conflict that followed . Mercenaries were involved in the conflict between the Soviet Union and Russian forces .
 An invasion force of Cuban exiles sponsored by the CIA was put ashore at the Bay of Pigs on the south coast of Cuba . The aim of attacking and overthrowing the Communist government, set up and led by Fidel Castro, was to overthrow the government .
 Support for the exiles by the U.S. government had been severely scaled back and they were easily defeated by Castro's troops . However, support for the former rebels by the United States government was severely scaled down .
 Several factions battled with British forces for control of the crown colony of Aden . The Egyptian-backed wave of Arab nationalism was spurred on by an Egyptian backed wave of nationalism .
 After four years of fighting, British forces were withdrawn from southern Arabia . The People's Republic of South Yemen was established after the war .
 Dubcek has been criticized by hardline Communists who want to hold back on further reforms . Hardline Communists fear they would lose control of the country if they did not reform . Dubceka's government has been accused of corruption in the past by the Communists .
 The Soviet government ordered a contingent of Warsaw Pact troops to occupy Czechoslovakia . When he refused, they enlisted the help of the Soviet government, which ordered the troops to invade .
 The occupying forces met with some opposition, but very quickly took control of Prague, Czech capital . They met with resistance, but quickly took over the capital .
 Dubcek and his fellow reformers were arrested, and civilian resistance was swiftly quelled . Over a period of several months the reforms of ""the Prague Spring"" were gradually eroded . Dubcec was arrested and the reforms were slowly eroded .
 Ho Chi Minh initially led an effort aimed at uniting North and South Vietnam . Ho Chi-Minh led the effort to unite the North-South Vietnam . He was assassinated in 1968 .
 Following the French withdrawal from the region, the U.S. became increasingly involved in the region . The United States finally withdrew after more than a decade of military intervention . Following the withdrawal of the French, the United States became involved .
 Attacks by Viet Cong guerrillas on the United States air base at Pleiku and in the nearby town of Qui Nonh prompted President Lyndon Johnson to order bombing raids .
 These raids were to serve as a pretext for the widening of U.S. participation in the Vietnam War . The raids were intended to be a pretext .
 Viet Cong guerrillas were repulsed in their attempt to overrun the South Vietnamese camp at Nam Dong under cover of darkness . The American and South Vietnamese defenders faced an enemy force more than three times larger than they were .
 Viet Cong guerrilla forces ambushed and inflicted heavy casualities on an elite troop of South Vietnamese Rangers and Marines that was accompanied by a small contingent of U.S. advisors . Having been well supplied by the North Vietnamese Communists, the North Vietnam Communists were well supplied .
 Operation Rolling Thunder was a three-year aerial bombing campaign . The campaign was intended to apply pressure on the North Vietnamese government to stop promoting the war in the South . The bombing campaign was launched in 1961 and ended in 1968 .
 The Americans learned that low-level raids incurred unacceptable losses of aircraft and crews from antiaircraft fire . They switched to less accurate but deadly high-altitude bombing . The Americans soon learned that .
 South Vietnamese and U.S. Special Forces were successful in driving Viet Cong guerrillas from the village of Song Be, from the area . The village was occupied by the Viet Cong .
 This victory helped boost the flagging morale of the South Vietnamese troops, who had recently experienced a number of setbacks . The victory helped to boost the morale of South Vietnam troops .
 Matthew B Brady was one of the pioneers of modern photojournalism . He was most famous for his photographs of the U.S. Civil War .
 James F Hurley documented the horrors of World War 1, at Ypres and Passchendaele . Hurley died in 1962 at the age of 62 .
 He also photographed the 1914 Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition of HMS Endurance under Sir Ernest Shackleton .
 Joseph J Rosenthal famously photographed Marines raising an American flag on Mount Suribachi on Iwo Jima in February 1945 . He famously photographed United States Marines and a navy corps man raising American flag .
 United States Marine Corps photographer, Louis R Lowery, took the first photograph of the flag raising . The event was repeated for Rosenthal's more famous photograph .
 George Silk is credited with the first photographs of the Japanese city of Nagasaki after its devastation by an atomic bomb in August 1945 . Silk was credited with taking the first photos of the city after it was bombed in 1945 .
 Yevgeny Khaldei famously photographed the moment a Red Army soldier raised his nation's flag above the Reichstag amid the ruins of Berlin in May 1945 . The photo of the moment the Red Army raised the flag was taken by Khaldea .
 Dickey Chapelle covered World War II and the Vietnam War . Chapelle also covered Vietnam War and World War I . He also covered WWII and Vietnam .
 While on patrol with U.S. Marines in 1965, she was killed by fragments from an exploding Viet Cong grenade . She was killed in 1965 .
 French photojournalist Henri Huet famously photographed her last moments . The last moments of her life were captured by Huet in Paris .
 Eddie Adams captured the moment that South Vietnamese Brigadier-General Nguyen Ngoc Loan executed Viet Cong terrorist Nguyen Van Lem with a revolver . Adams' most famous shot captured the execution of Nguyen Nguyen Nguyen Lem in Vietnam .
 Nick Ut's photograph of children fleeing a South Vietnamese napalm strike in 1972 earned him the Pulitzer Prize for Spot News Photography . Ut took the picture of the children fleeing the South Vietnam napalm attack .
 In the firing line War photographers during the Vietnam War faced immense dangers in their quest to capture the full horror of modern warfare . The Vietnam War was one of the most bloody years of war .
 Communist troops in Vietnam carried crudely made knives with wooden handle . The weapon was typical of small weaponry carried by Communist troops .
 First major battle between U.S. forces and North Vietnamese Army was first major battle . United States airborne troops fought successfully to protect landing zones .
 The garrison of the Special Forces base at A Shau fought for hours, sometimes hand-to-hand, with the Communists . Despite being heavily outnumbered, the garrison was ordered to evacuate .
 The vicinity later became a staging area for North Vietnamese operations . The area was later used by the North Vietnamese to stage operations .
 A joint United States and South Vietnamese offensive was successful in inflicting heavy casualties on the North Vietnamese . A joint U.S. and South . Vietnamese offensive in Vietnam was successful .
 This action prevented the capture of Quang Tri province by the Communists . The action prevented Quang tri province from being captured by the Communist Party .
 The North Vietnamese forces quickly withdrew across the Demilitarized Zone . North Vietnam forces withdrew across Demilitanized Zone across the border .
 Operation Cedar Falls involved placing a United States cordon around the so-called Iron Triangle area north of Saigon . Operation Cedar Fall was part of the U.S. cordon that was placed around the Iron Triangle region .
 Helicopter borne forces then secured and searched the area within the cordon for signs of enemy bases and tunnel complexes . The area was searched by helicopter borne forces and searched by helicopters .
 United States and South Vietnamese troops attempted to clear Viet Cong fighters from a stronghold in Tay Ninh Province near Saigon . U.S. and South Vietnam troops were attempting to clear a stronghold from a Viet Cong stronghold . The Viet Cong had been fighting for more than a decade .
 Large numbers of the Viet Cong evacuated the area while the operation was taking place, but then returned when it was over . The operation was the first to take place .
 Communist forces failed in their effort to destroy a large United States troop formation, but succeeded in drawing many enemy units away from South Vietnam's cities, leaving them under-defended .
 This was in preparation for the Tet Offensive that took place two months later . The Tet Offensive was two months before the Tet offensive .
 During the Tet Offensive in March 1968, United States Army and South Vietnamese troops battled Communist insurgents in downtown Saigon . U.S. troops, in Ml 13 armored personnel carriers battle Communist insurgents .
 The isolated United States firebase (camp providing artillery support) at Khe Sanh and nearby positions endured a 77-day siege . The siege was initiated in conjunction with the Tet Offensive . The isolated U.S. firebase survived the siege .
 The outpost at Lang Vei fell to the Communists, although air and ground operations by United States and South Vietnamese troops relieved the besieged United States Marines' base at Khe Sanh . The outpost was eventually taken over by the Communists .
 This massive campaign was planned to coincide with the two-day Vietnamese Tet holiday . Many South Vietnamese soldiers would be on leave during the holiday . This is the first time many soldiers have gone on leave in Vietnam .
 Viet Cong guerrillas and North Vietnamese Army forces seized and took control of a number of urban areas in South Vietnam . South Vietnam was invaded by both sides in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Most captured areas were retaken by the Americans and their South Vietnamese allies within days . Most of these captured areas are retaken within days of the capture .
 Military and naval forces around the world use abbreviations and acronyms as shorthand for describing common concepts, actions, or equipment . Use abbreviations to describe common concepts and actions .
 The table below lists some of the abbreviations and acronyms developed for use by multinational NATO units operating in the field . The table includes some of NATO's most common abbreviations .
 American and South Vietnamese: 2,500; North Vietnamese and Viet Cong: 10,000 . North Vietnamese, Viet Cong and American Vietnamese: 1,000; 2,000 American, South Vietnamese, 2,200 .
 During the Tet Offensive the Communists occupied large portions of the provincial capital of Hue, where they massacred many civilians . Many of the victims were killed by the Communists .
 United States soldiers entered the South Vietnamese villages of My Lai and My Khe, where they proceeded to massacre civilians . U.S. soldiers killed civilians in the villages .
 Only Lieutenant William Calley was ever convicted for the atrocity . 26 U.S. soldiers faced charges for their part in the massacre .
 A series of heavy attacks by a much larger Communist force forced the U.S. and South Vietnamese defenders of the Special Forces camp at Kham Due to abandon their position . The United States and South Vietnam were forced to abandon the camp .
 No further infiltration of the Viet Cong guerrillas south into the Central Highlands . However, there was no further infiltration into the area .
 During 26 days of fighting, Australian troops backed by United States forces played a major role in disrupting an offensive against the South Vietnamese capital, Saigon .
 The operation was intended to subdue Communist interference with U.S. stabilization and pacification efforts in the area around the Mekong Delta, and to disrupt enemy communications . This operation was aimed at subdue communist interference with United States stabilization and . pacification .
 It was seen as controversial because attacks were mainly at night and many civilians were killed . Many civilians died in the attacks, including many civilians, during the attacks .
 U.S. troops involved were later accused of carrying out atrocities . United States troops involved in the massacre were later blamed for atrocities .
 Hamburger Hill was fortified by the North Vietnamese . Officially designated Hill 937, it is located in the base of Camp Camp 937 .
 In a series of direct assaults, U.S. and South Vietnamese forces captured the higher ground in Vietnam . In the fall of the Vietnam War, the United States and South Vietnam took control .
 The battle remains controversial due to the negligible strategic value of the hill . The battle was fought in the early 1950s .
 Communist counterattacks inflicted heavy losses on U.S. and South Vietnamese forces . They succeeded in recapturing the town of Ban Dong, overrunning two fire-support bases .
 North Vietnamese Army launched major offensive against South Vietnamese forces . Changing their mode of operation from mainly guerrilla tactics to the use of open warfare, the North Vietnamese army launched this major offensive .
 Intervention by United States air power helped to bring the offensive to a standstill . Intervention by U.S. air power brought the offensive into a halt in Syria . Intervention helped bring down the offensive .
 Communist forces initiated a series of heavy attacks on the smalt town of Loc Ninh close to the border with Cambodia, causing many casualties . During their Easterside Offensive, Communist forces started heavy attacks . The offensive was launched during the summer of 1968 .
 The defenders were eventually forced to abandon their positions and retreat . The defenders eventually abandoned their positions after the battle .
 Subsequent airstrikes were ordered by the United States command to destroy what remained of the fortifications, in order to prevent them from from falling into the hands of the Communists .
 A colorful political poster celebrates the key figures involved in Cuba's socialist revolution, including Fidel Castro and Che Guevara . The poster was created by Cuban President Salvador Salvador Salvador Dina Castro .
 The latter would meet his end during his less successful campaign to overthrow the Bolivian government in 1966-67 .
 The strong Communist thrust toward Saigon during the Eastertide Offensive was blunted at An Loc by a single South Vietnamese division supported by massive U.S. air power and a scattering of United States advisors .
 The North Vietnamese forces besieged the city for 66 days, before being forced to retreat . The city was besieged by North Vietnam forces for more than 66 days .
 U.S. air power disrupted enemy resupply efforts and bombed tactical targets inside North Vietnam, thereby halting the Communist operation . The Eastertide Offensive was a major success in the United States' response to the North Vietnamese Spring Offensive .
 U.S. air power made a massive assault on the North Vietnamese capital and its major harbor . Popularly known as the Christmas bombing, the U.N. bombing was a major assault on North Vietnam capital and harbor .
 This action forced the diplomats back to the negotiating table after peace talks that had been held during the autumn of 1972 had faltered . This action was the first time diplomats had been forced to return to the negotiations table .
 Airlift operation evacuated more than 5,000 U.S. and Vietnamese personnel to safety . Communist forces overwhelmed and took control of the South Vietnamese capital, Saigon .
 Fighting over the administration of the disputed state of Kashmir . India and Pakistan declared war on each other .
 It resulted in thousands of casualties on both sides, and ended with a UN-mandated ceasefire . Thousands of people were killed in the conflict, which ended in 2011 .
 His band of guerrillas was pursued and eventually destroyed by the Bolivian army . However, lacking the support of the local people, his band of rebels was pursued by the army .
 An Israeli incursion into Jordanian territory was countered by units of the Jordanian Army . The incursion was prompted by repeated attacks from terrorist groups linked to the Palestine Liberation Organization .
 Lengthy wars for Angolan independence from Portugal and the controversial South African influence in Namibia became intertwined . The wars involved United Nations supervision and military contingents from other African countries and Cuba .
 Facing external threats from several directions, Israel launched a devastating preemptive strike . The Six-Day War lasted June 5-10, 1967 . Israel and the U.S. faced a series of external threats .
 Israeli forces drove through as far as the Suez Canal and into Syria . Israeli forces also advanced into Syria after smashing the Egyptian air force .
 Israelis' anti-tank weapons destroyed 40 Egyptian tanks, while they only lost half that number themselves . During the offensive into the Sinai Peninsula, the Israelis lost half their tanks .
 The Israeli victory facilitated a further advance into the Sinai Desert . The victory facilitated the Israeli advance into Sinai Desert.
 Israeli paratroopers launched an attack on the Jordanian troops that were occupying reinforced bunkers near the Police Academy in Jerusalem . The Jordanian troops were occupied by Israeli troops in the area .
 Israelis suffered a considerable number of casualties in re-establishing their control of the western section of the city . But by underestimating the strength of the opposing force, they suffered a lot of casualties .
 At the height of the Six-Day War Israeli aircraft and torpedo boats launched a surprise combined air and sea attack on the neutral United States Navy technical research vessel USS Liberty .
 Israel claimed it mistook the U.S. vessel for an Egyptian cargo ship . Israel said it was mistaking the ship for a cargo ship from an Egyptian ship .
 Some sources still claim that the action was premeditated, and the incident is considered to be controversial to this day .
 UH-1 helicopter pushed over side of U.S. Navy ship to allow more to land during evacuation of Saigon in April 1975 . Operation Frequent Wind was part of the U.N. effort to evacuate Saigon from the communist country of Vietnam known as "Operation Frequ
 In approximately 27 hours of combat, Israeli forces took control of strategic high ground . Syrian artillery had repeatedly bombarded kibbutz settlements along the border and had threatened an invasion of northern Israel .
 It influenced the outcome of the South African Border War, and that of the Angolan Civil War . The South African border war was fought in South Africa and Angola .
 The newly declared Republic of Biafra received support from France and Rhodesia . The Republic of Nigeria was seeking independence from Nigeria . It was the first African nation to seek independence in the country .
 Nigeria eventually forced the besieged Biafrans to surrender . With the assistance of Soviet-supplied weaponry and a naval blockade, Nigeria eventually made the Biafans surrender . Nigeria was eventually forced to withdraw from the Nigerian territory .
 Cambodia 1975-79 Mass killings of political dissidents, Muslims, Buddhist monks, and ethnic minorities . Possibly 1,700,000 killed under the Khmer Rouge under the regime of Pol Pot .
 Nuon Chea is a former leader of the Khmer Rouge and is still expected to stand trial . Most of the key figures died before they could be brought to justice . Most key figures were killed before they were caught up in the conflict .
 Rwanda April 1994 Massacre of Rwanda's Tutsi minority by members of the Hutu ethnic group 800,000 killed . Interahamwe and Impuzamugambi Hutu militias. Hutu militia militias.
 The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has convicted 25 of the perpetrators, with several others not yet arrested . Several others have not yet been arrested .
 Bosnia-Herzegovina 1992-95 Removal and killing of members of Bosnian Muslim population by members of the Serb ethnic group . Srebrenica massacre in 1995 200,000 killed Republika Srpska troops and other Serbian military .
 The International Criminal tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has indicted former Serbian commanders, Slobodan Milosevic, Radovan Karadzic, and Ratko Mladic . The tribunal also indicted former Serbomomomos commanders Slobododovic, Radvan Karad
 Possibly 500,000 killed; 2,500,000 displaced . Various militias, including the African-Arab Janjaweed. Various militias .
 In March 2008, the International Criminal Court indicted Sudan's president, Omar al-Bashir, for genocide, crimes against humanity, and murder . Sudan has been accused of genocide by the ICC since 2008 . Sudan's prime minister has been indicted by the court for genocide .
 Easter skirmishes with British Army and Northern Ireland police units across Ireland helped lead to independence for three provinces of Ireland, except Ulster in the North .
 Provisional IRA attacked British interests in the north for 28 years in a conflict that killed more than 1,700 people in the United Kingdom, Europe, and elsewhere . More than a quarter of the conflict was fought between the IRA and the British government .
 Today, a group calling itself the ""Real IRA"" continues to carry out attacks in Northern Ireland . Today, the Real IRA is still carrying out attacks .
 IRA militants have helped train operatives from other terrorist organizations, including Colombia's FARC, and nationalist and Islamic groups in North Africa . IRA militants also have trained operatives from FARC and nationalist groups .
 Strong public condemnation of ETA's tactics have somewhat lowered the organization's profile . The 2004 bombings at Madrid's Atocha station left ETA with a high profile profile .
 The FARC began as the military arm of Colombia's Communist revolutionary insurgency . FARC's activities have tended to focus on criminal enterprise, such as narcotics trafficking and kidnapping .
 Today, the FARC fields 9,000-12,000 fighters in the remote border area between Colombia and Venezuela . The FARC is believed to be the biggest rebel group in Latin America .
 The organization is responsible for a number of criminal activities, including murder, drugs trafficking, and extortion . The organization has a history of murder and drug trafficking, including extortion .
 The Tamil Tigers are one of the most violent groups in the world . Tamil Eelam is an independent Tamil state of Sri Lanka . The group is known as the Tamil Tigers .
 The Black Tigers unit Tamil state in the north of Tamil state became infamous for its suicide bombing tactics .
 The LTTE developed such an extensive Sri Lanka fundraising network overseas that it was able to field a limited number of ""attack"" aircraft . Sri Lanka is the only terrorist group in history to have its own air force .
 The LTTE was in retreat before dramatic advances made by government forces . Following the breakdown of peace talks in 2006, the LTTE has been forced to retreat .
 Al-Qaeda and its network of linked or affiliated groups has carried out many other attacks in Afghanistan, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Kuwait, Morocco, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Tanzania, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States .
 Osama bin Laden (the network's ideological leader) has urged Muslims that their duty is to kill U.S. citizens and their friends and allies anywhere in the world . The network has been in touch with the United States since September 11, 2011 .
 Tamil Tiger soldiers at the funeral of an assassinated leader at Thandiyady, Batticaloa, Sri Lanka in February 2005 . Rebel militants stand their ground Tamil Tigers soldiers . Sri Lanka's Tamil Tigers have been fighting for more than a decade .
 These men are armed with either Russianor Chinese or American-made weapons . They are armed in either Russian or Chinese weapons .
 North Korea seized the crew of a U.S. intelligence vessel operating in international waters . The crew was held for 11 months, before their negotiated release .
 Sino-Soviet frontier and Zhenbao Island, Ussuri river on the border . Location of the island is located in the U.S. and China .
 During the spring and summer of 1969, animosity between the two Communist powers erupted in a series of border clashes and a dispute over an island . Both nations claimed an island that both claimed .
 Religious and political friction in Northern Ireland led to a complex conflict involving paramilitary forces . The conflict involved several paramilitary forces, including several paramilitary groups .
 Government troops and police operated against paramilitaries until a peace agreement was reached in 1998 . Government forces and police were involved in the conflict .
 Internal troubles in Pakistan led to war with India . InDO-PAKISTANI WAR DECEMBER 3-16, 1971 . Pakistan and India fought in 1971 .
 East Pakistan quickly overrun and became independent as Bangladesh . East Pakistan was quickly overrun by the Pakistani army .
 In the opening act of the war, the Pakistani Air Force launched preemptive air strikes against targets in India . The strike was inspired by Israeli success in the Six-Day War .
 Egyptian forces made good use of guided anti-tank and surface-to-air missiles . Egypt launched a surprise attack against Israel in 1973 .
 After a desperate period, Israel had begun to make gains by the time the UN established a ceasefire . The UN established the ceasefire in order to end the conflict .
 Syrian troops assaulted an Israeli command post during the opening phase of the war . Syrian troops captured Mount Ffermon and held it against a determined Israeli counterattack two days later .
 Heavily armed fighters of the Uniao National para a Independentia Total de Angola patrol at Nova Lisboa, Angola in 1975 . Angolan guerrillas on patrol .
 Guerrilla groups battled for dominance during Angola's struggle for independence . Angola was ruled out of independence from colonial rule of rule of law .
 Syrian forces attacked an Israeli armored battalion, pushing the Israelis to breaking point . In this four-day battle in an isolated valley, strong Syrian forces attack an Israeli battalion . The Israeli army was attacked by Syrian forces in the area .
 They had lost a substantial number of tanks but still had overwhelming advantage . They still had an overwhelming advantage in the battle for victory .
 Egyptian troops overwhelmed the small Israeli garrison of the Bar-Lev Line and steadily advanced . Utilizing the cover of surface-to-air missiles, Egyptian troops overpowered the small . Israeli troops were able to advance on the border .
 Israeli forces recovered and encircled the Egyptian Third Army . However, Israeli forces were unable to stop the Egyptian army .
 Israeli naval vessels wiped out an entire Syrian squadron . Employing surface-to-surface missiles, Israeli naval ships wiped out entire squadron .
 Israeli vessels on routine patrol discovered Egyptian seaborne commando force intent on striking at Israeli positions in the Sinai . Egyptian commando forces intent to strike at Israeli forces in Sinai .
 The Egyptians were driven off with significant losses and several vessels sunk . Several vessels were sunk by the Egyptians .
 A renewed Egyptian offensive to relieve pressure on Syrian forces to the north was repelled by entrenched Israeli infantry and armor . Egyptian forces retreated to positions along the Suez Canal .
 Israeli forces successfully placed a bridgehead across the Suez Canal, but paid dearly for their victory . In an attempt to isolate a large number of Egyptian troops in the Sinai Peninsula, Israeli forces placed the bridgehead .
 Determined to retake Mount Hermon, reinforced Israeli troops assaulted the Heights from the east . Despite heavy casualties, heavy casualties compelled the Syrians to retreat from positions they had captured two weeks earlier .
 In the final battle of the Yom Kippur War, Israeli forces attemped to capture the town of Suez . Israeli forces attempted to capture Suez but were defeated .
 Egyptian troops and militia suffered heavy losses during several days of intense urban combat . However, they were repulsed by Egyptian forces and militia, who suffered heavy casualties .
 In response to a Greek-sponsored coup on the island of Cyprus, Turkish forces invaded and took control of 37 percent of the country . In the 1980s, the island was invaded by the Turkish government .
 Independence from Portugal left Angola with three rival groups fighting for power . Angola's independence from Portugal in 1961 left the country with three rebel groups . Angola is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 The Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola gained control of most of the country . But conflict went on for many years, with many still fighting for independence .
 Jewish passengers from a hijacked Air France airliner were held in the terminal at Entebbe . Jewish passengers were held by passengers from the hijacked airliner .
 Israeli Defense Forces landed and stormed the terminal, killing the terrorists and some Ugandan troops . Some Ugandan soldiers were also killed in the attack .
 Syrian forces attacked Israeli positions along the Golan Heights . In concert with the Egyptian offensive in the Sinai, Syrian forces also attacked Israel . Syrian forces have attacked Israel in the past .
 The Israelis advanced into Syrian territory . Eventually, the Syrians were halted and the Israelis advanced .
 Israeli soldiers riding aboard an Ml 13 armored personnel carrier, backed by a tank, patrol the Golan Heights in Syria during the Yom Kippur War of October 1973 .
 Following the Vietnamese invasion of neighboring Cambodia and Vietnam's occupation of the long-disputed Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, the Chinese government decided to counter these measures by launching a series of army incursions into Vietnamese territory .
 After some bloody clashes on the border, both China and Vietnam claimed victory . The campaign eventually ended with both countries claiming victory .
 The Soviet Union sent in 85,000 troops in response to U.S. support for rebels fighting the Communist-led government in Afghanistan .
 A successful insurgency by the mujahideen took place in the Afghani countryside . The Soviet army was able to take and keep control of urban centers in Afghanistan .
 Eventually, the Soviets decided to cut their losses and ordered their troops to withdraw from Afghanistan . The Soviets eventually decided to end the war in Afghanistan .
 Soviet special forces and other troops assaulted the Tajberg Palace in Kabul, taking control of the city and assassinating Afghan President Hafizullah Amin . Amin was assassinated along with a number of his bodyguards .
 Soviet special forces suffered heavy losses during operations to elminate guerrilla activity in the villages of Sangam and Daridam . Special forces suffered losses in the operations .
 The guerrillas employed hit-and-run tactics and Soviet casualties were nearly 75 percent . Soviet casualties from the Soviet war were 75 percent of the Soviet casualties .
 An Afghan army offensive against a mujahideen supply base was initially successful . The Afghan army has been battling the Taliban for two years .
 Afghan resistance held out, despite Soviet air strikes, in spite of air strikes . Afghans withdrew after suffering heavy casualties from Soviet air attacks .
 Following heavy fighting, mujahideen guerrillas eventually abandoned their base at Zhawar . The Taliban eventually abandoned Zhawar after heavy fighting .
 Soviet forces successfully assisted an Afghan army operation to relieve the besieged garrison at Ali Sher . During their withdrawal from Afghanistan, Soviet forces helped to relieve a besieged garrison in the area .
 Soviet forces set their plans for withdrawal from Afghanistan in motion . Operation succeeded in temporarily opening the Satukandav Pass and relieving Khost, which had been surrounded by mujahideen .
 A single company of Soviet paratroopers held high ground against mujahideen guerrillas, who outnumbered them 10 to one . The Soviet troops were outnumbered by guerillas at the time of the invasion .
 The Soviets repelled at least a dozen assaults by the mujahideen . Exhausting their ammunition supply, the Soviets fought back . The Soviets were exhausted by the assaults .
 Mujahideen guerrillas launched a successful operation to take control of the KabulJalalabad Highway . They captured large quantities of weapons and ammunition .
 Afghan forces supported by air strikes and Soviet missile batteries inflicted heavy casualties on mujahideen attempting to capture the city of Jalalabad . Afghan army forces backed up air strikes, Soviet missile fired on the city .
 The crash and other factors influenced President Carter's decision to cancel the mission . President Carter canceled the mission after the crash . The mission was canceled .
 The failure was due to a number of factors, including the poor mechanical readiness of several of the helicopters . Poor tactical communications, poor tactical communications; and poor training coordination; were among the factors .
 Afterward, the government established the United States Special Operations Command as an independent-budgeted organization within the Department of Defense . The U.S. Special Forces Command is now an independent budgeted organization .
 SOCOM's mandate was to coordinate the manning, training, equipment, and combat readiness for all the U.S. military services' special operations units . SOCOM was created to coordinate manning and training for all of the military's special operations .
 Panamanian guards Manuel Noriega's Panama at the airfield assumed defensive positions . They hit the Americans with personal aircraft automatic weapons fire before they could reach the hangar .
 The SEALs were unable to call in supporting fire from an AC-130U gunship due to poor communications . Poor communications meant they couldn't call in support from a gunship because of the lack of communication .
 The SEAL platoon did destroy Noriega's jet with an AT-4 anti-tank rocket, but four SEALs were killed in the firefight .
 The Russian forces deployed a chemical overpower Chechen Russia agent, most likely an anaesthetic gas, to disable the hostage-takers .
 The gas separatists holding also disabled many of the hostages, as well as two members of the FSB hostages at a city assault team . Gas separatists also disabled several hostages as a result of the attack .
 After initial Iraqi gains, the war degenerated into a bloody stalemate . However, after some initial gains, Iraq's invasion of Afghanistan degenerated to a stalemate.
 In the spring of 1982, the Iranian army launched an offensive to recapture territory that had been taken by the Iraqis, including Khuzestan Province . The offensive was launched in the spring 1982, when the Iranians were in full control of the region .
 The Iranians briefly besieged the port city of Khorramshahr, which fell, following two days of heavy fighting . The port city fell, after heavy fighting, following a two-day siege by Iranian forces .
 The Iranians succeeded in recapturing the city of Bostan and severing a major Iraqi supply line . Employing their superior manpower in costly ""human-wave"" attacks, the Iranians successfully recaptured the city .
 The Iranians made successful use of ""human-wave"" attacks to wrest the Dazful-Shush region from Iraqi control . In what is considered the turning point of the Iran-Iraq War, the Iranians used the technique to wrest control of the region .
 Iranian troops then went on to press their advantage into enemy territory . Iranian forces then pressed their advantage over the border .
 Iranian troops launched a surprise attack on a force of Iraqi conscripts in an attempt to capture the vital Al-Faw Peninsula on the Persian Gulf . The attack was carried out in a surprise assault on the Iraqi army conscript .
 Operation Dawn 8, a later Iranian campaign, resulted in the capture of the peninsula . However, it was a later Iran-led campaign that resulted in capture of peninsula . Operation Dawn was the first operation to capture the peninsula from Iran .
 The territory was subsequently retaken by the Iraqis near the end of the war, aided by the massive use of chemical weapons . The territory in Iraq was retaken in 2007 by the Iraqi government .
 Hostilities began when Argentine troops invaded and occupied the Falkland Islands and neighboring South Georgia in 1982 . Afghanistan, Iraq, Angola, Angola and Cambodia are the countries with the most landmines in the field .
 British forces suffered serious losses from air attack, especially from Exocet missiles . At sea, British forces were also hit by Exocets missiles .
 On land, the British advanced steadily across the islands, eventually liberating the Falkland Islands' capital . The Falklands' capital was eventually liberated by the British .
 British troops captured Argentine strongpoints at Goose Green and Darwin . The strongpoints could have posed a threat to the British landing area at San Carlos .
 3 Commando, supported by naval artillery, defeated Argentine forces that were occupying the high ground . In one of a series of three assaults on high ground surrounding the capital of the Falklands, Port Stanley, British troops of 3 Commando .
 British troops of 45 Commando attempted to seize the heights of Two Sisters during a daring nocturnal assault . The assault was made to make sure their advance on Port Stanley was not going to be threatened from the rear .
 Argentine forces were successful, despite coming under heavy fire from the Argentine forces . They were successful despite heavy fire .
 British troops of 3 Para captured Mount Longdon, which commanded the approaches to Port Stanley . The attack was coordinated with the attacks on Mount Harriet and Two Sisters .
 Elements from the 2nd Scots Guards, 42 Commando, and Gurkha Rifles, were assisted by tanks of the Blues and Royals and naval gunfire in their capture of high ground .
 Armor of the Blues and Royals and artillery of 29 Commando supported the airlifted 2 Para in its assault on Wireless Ridge . Wireless Ridge, which guarded the approach to Port Stanley, was the target of the attack .
 After invading Lebanon to deny the region to Palestinian guerrillas and to counteract Syrian influence, Israel then withdrew most of its forces . Israel withdrew most forces in Lebanon after invading Lebanon .
 Operation Urgent Fury ended the influence of Cuba and other Marxist nations in Grenada . The U.S. and allied forces ended Cuba's influence of Grenada and other communist nations .
 They helped topple a military government, which had imposed strict martial law on the island's population . They also helped to topple the military government . The island's residents helped topple the government .
 American support for the ""Contras" continued until the Sandinistas were voted out of power in elections held in 1990 . American support continued for the Contras until the 1990s .
 Operation Just Cause launched in Panama in response to alarming abuses of that country’s leadership . The U.S. government sent troops into the central American state of Panama in 2010 .
 U.S. forces successfully launched attacks on a range of both military and civilian targets . The attacks instigated measures to stabilize the nation's government and taking the Panamanian military dictator .
 Noriega was transported to the U.S. to stand trial on a variety of charges, including election rigging and human rights violations . He was brought to the United States to face charges of election rigging .
 In response to Iraq's occupation and annexation of neighboring Kuwait in August 1990, a UN coalition force was sent in to liberate the country . In March 1991, the U.N. coalition forces liberated Kuwait .
 After an air campaign lasting 6 weeks, coalition forces launched a ground offensive that succeeded in driving the Iraqis out of Kuwait . The offensive lasted 6 weeks and drove Iraqi troops out of the country .
 High-tech weapons played a key role in helping the coalition to triumph over an Iraqi army . The Iraqi army was largely made up of inexperienced conscripts . High-technology weapons were key to the coalition's success .
 Iraqi forces crossed the border into Saudi Arabia and occupied the town of Khafji . During the first substantial ground combat of the Gulf War, the town was occupied .
 Fighting continued for two days before the Iraqis were forced to retreat . The Iraqi government was forced to pull out of the battle .
 War in the desert in the Kuwaiti desert in 1991 . U.S. soldiers were killed by Iraqi tanks in the war .
 A line of oil wells, set alight by the retreating troops of Saddam Hussein, blaze away from the Iraqi capital . The wells were set ablaze by Saddam Hussein's retreating troops in the fall .
 The spearheads of the coalition advance, consisting mainly of the United States 1st and 3rd Armored Divisions, were unable to break through prepared Iraqi lines of entrenched infantry defenses .
 American casualties were not heavy, but among them were a number of victims of ""friendly fire" incidents . American casualties from friendly fire were not high .
 With the approach of the coalition forces, Iraqi troops surrendered in great numbers . The 2nd Brigade of the United States 1st Armored Division was part of the U.S. 1st Division .
 Coalition forces demolished the bulk of the Iraqi Republican Guard Tawakalna Division . Coalition forces, primarily U.S. and British, destroyed the division .
 The U.S. 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment destroyed Iraqi tanks and armored personnel carriers . Iraqi tanks were destroyed in the battle . The United States 2nd armored cavalry unit destroyed the tanks .
 F/A-18 HORNET PILOT STEVE POMEROY ON ANTI-AIRCRAFT FIRE, GULF WAR, 1991 . Russian special forces soldier mans a 7.62x54mm PK machine gun, defending a landing zone near the border .
 The fighting at Norfolk decimated the remnants of the Tawakalna Division of the Iraqi Republican Guard, which had fought at 73 Basting hours earlier .
 The breakup of Yugoslavia resulted in a series of complex and bloody conflicts between factions divided along political, ethnic, and religious lines . Yugoslavia was one of the most turbulent countries in the world .
 Civilian casualties were very high, partially as a result of deliberate polices of genocide and ethnic cleansing on the part of some factions . Some factions were responsible for ethnic cleansing and genocide .
 The conflict eventually drew in an international response, with NATO troops and air forces operating in both a peacekeeping role and directly against some factions . NATO troops were involved in both peacekeeping and directly fighting some factions in Afghanistan .
 Serbian forces surrounded the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo, bringing about the longest siege in modern history . Serbians surrounded the city in 1992 . The siege was the longest ever held by Serbian forces .
 Sarajevo was shelled and subjected to sniper attacks . Initial attempts to assault the city failed, but it has since been shelled .
 Serbs:3,200 plus 5,000 prisoners; Croatians and Bosnians:1,500 . Serbs and Croatians: 1,500. Casualties Serbs, Croatians, Bosnia and Croatia: 3,200 . Serbians: 3.200 plus
 Croatian and Bosnian troops attacked the parts of Croatia controlled by separatist Serbs . Croatian forces attacked parts of the country controlled by Serbs in the 1990s .
 The offensive was a complete success, resulting in the reintegration of Serb-held areas . Economic damage was extensive, but economic damage was also extensive .
 Operation Deliberate Force was a NATO bombing campaign carried out from land bases and aircraft carriers . Undertaken in response to threats to UN-designated safe areas in Bosnia, the campaign was carried out in the early 1990s .
 In the first battle of the Chechen War, an advancing Russian convoy was attacked by Chechen rebels . The first battle took place in the first Russian convoy of the war's first battle .
 The Russians immediately retaliated with attack helicopters and airstrikes on Chechen positions . The Chechen rebels have been fighting in the region since 2008 .
 Battle raged for two weeks, with the Chechens managing to hold out against Russian fire . Chechens managed to hold on against Russian forces in the region .
 Russian forces won a costly victory in their attempt to capture the Chechen capital, Grozny, during the opening months of the war . Russian forces win a costly battle in the opening weeks of the conflict in Chechen .
 The morale of the Russian conscripts suffered and the Chechen civilian population rallied around the rebels . Chechen civilians rallied behind the rebels in Chechen .
 A major guerrilla raid by Chechen rebels into the Russian Federation resulted in a succession of battles with Russian troops . The Chechen rebel raid was the first major invasion of the region .
 The Chechens were forced to withdraw, taking with them a number of hostages, including captured Russian servicemen . Chechens are forced to take back their hostages, taking them with them .
 Pervomayskoye was completely destroyed by retreating Chechens . However, a fierce battle erupted as the retreating Chechen passed through Russian siege lines . The Chechens destroyed the village completely .
 An ambush by Chechen fighters virtually annihilated a large Russian troop convoy . Only a handful of soldiers escaped what had been a perfectly laid ambush . The ambush was a perfect laid ambush in Chechen territory .
 Chechen separatists made a rapid advance into the capital, Grozny, managing to break up the Russian defenders into dozens of small contained pockets of resistance . Chechen rebels have taken over the city from Russian forces .
 After Chechens had repelled several ill-conceived and badly executed Russian attempts to regain control of the city, a ceasefire was called .
 Russian forces laid siege to and eventually occupied Chechen capital, inflicting heavy casualties on the rebels . Chechen rebels raised many charges of atrocities, raising many questions .
 A considerable number of rebels chose to flee rather than stay and fight a pitched battle against the superior Russian force . The rebels were forced to flee the Russian army .
 Serbia's continuing refusal to accept a settlement was finally reversed after an intensive and prolonged campaign of bombing by NATO forces . Serbia's continued refusal of a settlement in the 1990s was eventually reversed after a series of bombing campaigns by NATO .
 Several prominent KLA fighters and a number of civilians were killed as police dispersed a hostile crowd in the town of Prekaz . The incident occurred during a clash between police and KLA members .
 An incursion by Kosovo Liberation Army units resulted in a stalemate, following weeks of fighting along the Yugoslav frontier . The incursion was followed by weeks of clashes along the border with the Kosovo Liberation .
 Four airliners were hijacked and used for suicide attacks on buildings important to American financial, military, and political power . The attacks were carried out in the U.S. military, financial and political arenas .
 Accusing the Taliban government in Afghanistan of harbouring terrorists, the U.S. and Britain invaded . The United States invaded Afghanistan in 2001 .
 Much of the country was pacified, but the Taliban leadership remained at large . Taliban leadership remains at large in Taliban-controlled areas of Afghanistan . Much of Afghanistan has been pacified .
 Northern Alliance forces, assisted by United States troops, mounted an offensive aimed at the occupation of the Taliban stronghold of Mazari Sharif . U.S. troops, supported by the Northern Alliance, are in the area .
 The Taliban evacuated thousands of its fighters in order for them to avoid capture . The advance was surprisingly rapid, the advance caused the Taliban to evacuate thousands .
 Northern Alliance, Iranian, and U.S. Special Forces orchestrated a civil uprising against Taliban rule in Flerat . The city was liberated without a fight from the Taliban .
 Taliban forces withdraw and the local population welcomed the Northern Alliance troops . Taliban forces withdrew from the area after the withdrawal .
 A coalition force, assisted by anti-Taliban tribesmen, rooted enemy fighters from caves, inflicting serious casualties . In an effort to eliminate terrorist resistance, a coalition force helped to root enemy fighters out of the caves .
 Joint coalition and Afghan government operation against insurgent stronghold in Shahi Kot Valley . Early deployment difficulties at Takur Ghar overcome and enemy fighters eventually dislodged .
 Canadian troops led a coalition, including Afghan forces, in a two-phase operation to flush out and eliminate pockets of Taliban resistance in the rugged countryside of Kandahar Province . Heavy artillery and air support was used to meet resistance to meet Taliban resistance .
 NATO forces, primarily British Royal Marines, engaged in a series of small but sharp battles with Taliban insurgents in southern Afghanistan . NATO forces are trying to clear areas of southern Afghanistan from Taliban control .
 A number of key insurgents were killed, although there were civilian casualties . There were also civilian casualties in the fighting, although some were killed .
 While conventional military operations are mainly targeted at destroying an enemy's means to wage war, terrorism instead attacks the will of the target to continue the struggle . Terrorists use terrorism to attack their enemies' will to continue their struggle .
 In the modern age the terrorist has a powerful weapon in the form of mass media, which allows the ""message"" to reach vast numbers of people . The terrorist's message can be spread through mass media in the modern era .
 Some attacks are designed to cause damage, but the main goal is to provoke fear in as many people as possible, sending a message to the people of the target nation that any of them could be the next victim . The main goal of the attacks is to cause as much damage as possible
 Terrorist organizations seek to influence the world's great powers by terrorising their populations rather than by fighting their armed forces . Terrorists are seeking to influence world's greatest powers rather than fighting them in the war .
 This table does not include massacres committed by governments or quasi-governmental organizations . These may be classified with other violations of international law, such as war crimes and genocides .
 Spanish emergency services work amid the wreckage of the bombing of Atocha Station on 11 March 2004 .
 Terrorists claimed that they acted in retaliation to Spain's support of the US-led wars in Iraq and Afghanistan . Terrorists said they were acting in retaliation for Spain's backing of the U.S.-led war efforts .
 On the third day of the siege, Russian police and military counter-terrorism units stormed the school . The siege lasted for three days, with the siege lasting three days .
 In a related attack, a bomb exploded at Tokyo's Narita airport's baggage terminal . The airport was hit by a bomb that exploded in a separate attack .
 The attacks led to a three-day siege between the terrorists and Indian security forces . The attacks were the first to lead to the Indian government's defeat in Kashmir .
 Taliban insurgents detonate a number of car bombs and ambushed several army patrols . The Taliban survivors managed to slip away from the Afghan army and coalition troops .
 Taliban insurgents forced to retreat after three days of intensive fighting in Musa Qala . Coalition forces forced Taliban insurgents to retreat from town . Taliban insurgents took prominent role in first battle of the war in which Afghan army soldiers took a prominent role .
 People's Republic spent $ 121,900,000,000 of China . Russia spent $70,000 a year . United Kingdom spent $55,400,000 . U.S. spent $30,600,000 per capita .
 Although the port was secured quickly, fighting persisted in the older parts of the city . The port was secure quickly, but fighting continued in older parts .
 United States Special Forces and Peshmerga fighters cut across Highway 2, facilitating further movement into the oil fields of Kirkuk . The U.S. Special Forces cut across the highway to facilitate further movement in Kirkuk.
 Javelin anti-tank missiles destroyed numerous Iraqi armoured vehicles during the battle . During the battle, javelin anti-tank missile missiles destroyed numerous Iraqi armour vehicles .
 U.S. troops responded to mortar and small arms attacks in Baghdad by Iraqi insurgents . United States troops launched a massive sweep through the city and captured several large weapon caches . The insurgency did not wane appreciably .
 U.S. forces captured bridges across the Euphrates river during heavy fighting early in the invasion of Iraq . The bridges were captured in the early stages of the invasion .
 Operation Phantom Fury resulted in the liberation of the city of Fallujah, previously a hotbed of al-Qaeda activity . Known as 'Operation Phantom Fury', the operation liberated Fallujah from the city . The city was previously a hotspot of al Qaeda activity .
 The fighting included some of the most intense urban warfare experienced by U.S. troops since Vietnam . The fighting was intense and intense in urban warfare . It was the deadliest urban warfare in the United States since Vietnam.
 Taliban forces attempted to assert their control over Oruzgan Province in central Afghanistan in 2007 . In what was to be their largest offensive during 2007, Taliban forces made some initial gains .
 The coalition forces eventually regained their lost strongholds and drive the Taliban back . However, the superior firepower of the coalition forces ultimately gained the upper hand .
 In a series of coordinated raids, coalition troops uncovered and disrupted a number of Taliban bombmaking facilities . They inflicted heavy casualties on the insurgents, causing them to disperse .
 A large cache of Taliban arms and ammunition was also seized by the coalition forces during this operation . The operation also seized a large number of Taliban weapons and ammunition .
 British troops capture the secondlargest city in Iraq after two weeks of fighting . British troops captured the second largest city in the country after capturing the city .
 United States forces carried out probing attacks to test the defences of Baghdad . U.S. forces entered the Iraqi capital three days after gaining control of its airport . The Iraqi capital is the capital of the Iraqi city .
 Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein fled and managed to elude capture for several months . Saddam Hussein eluded capture by eluding capture for months . Iraqi leader managed to escape capture by hiding in Iraq .
 The Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia is published by the Instituto . It is published on the website of the Institutio Nacio N.N.E. Historia .
 Alamy Images: Mary Evans Picture Library fcla; Corbis: epa crb; Stapleton Collection fera; Getty Images: era, ferb; Purestock . Nick Medrano: www.ww2incolor.com cb.
 David J Colbran is the Trustees of the British Museum . The Trustees are responsible for the museum's collection of art .
 DK would like to thank the following museums and staff for their kind assistance on the book: Arme Museum, Stockholm; Firepower, The Royal Artillery Museum, Woolwich; Royal Armouries, Leeds; Royal Museum of the Armed Forces of Military History, Brussels; and The
 DK would also like to thank Helen Peters for the index; Caroline Hunt for proofreading . Helen Peters, Karen Van Ross, and Jenny Baskaya for picture research assistance . Anna Hall and Todd Webb for design assistance .