 In October 1962, The United States looked down ""the gun barrel of nuclear war,"" according to Kennedy speechwriter Theodore Sorenson . In October 1963, the U.S. looked "down the gun barrel" of nuclear warfare .
 In the aftermath of the Cold War, the declassification of top secret records introduced new interpretations . Top secret records were declassified in the wake of the Soviet Union .
 Since 1987, scholars and archivists have used the Freedom of Information Act to obtain, consolidate, and archive documents across the spectrum of Federal agencies about the Cuban missile crisis, events that led up to it .
 Newly available records also let historians study the Cuban missile crisis from the point of view of the Soviet Union and Cuba as well as the U.S. as well . Newly available .
 The following resources filter only a few among the many available materials to provide an overview of the issues and main actors .
 This simple interactive site from the National Endowment for the Humanities summarizes the situation from the point of view of the Presidential cabinet .
 Visitors examine the choices Kennedy and his advisors faced and get a brief analysis of the consequences of each . Visitors also learn about the National Intelligence Estimate, a key briefing document for the advisory committee .
 It's a helpful site for summarizing the complexities from the viewpoint of the Cabinet . It's also helpful to summarise the complexities of the President's Cabinet .
 Resources include primary source materials, a detailed timeline, and documents and audio files, from both the United States and the Soviet Union charting causes and events of the Crisis . Resources include . primary source material, . documents and . audio files .
 Analytical essays from historians sift through the historiography and recent evidence . They discuss how this new evidence has rearranged assumptions and conclusions about the missile crisis .
 American accounts have always left Cuba out of the story . The film Thirteen Days ignores the Soviet Union as well .
 The United States State Department suggests watching Thirteen Days and comparing the story told by historic documents with the version relayed by Hollywood . Using the Motion Picture Analysis Worksheet from the National Archives .
 The Presidents also provides well-selected primary source documents incorporating correspondence circulating among Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Fidel Castro on the Cuban missile crisis . The PBS American Experience series The Presidents The Presidents is available on PBS .
 Use Wordle to help students wend their ways through some of the more complex vocabulary, documents, and issues of the Cuban missile crisis . Explore using Wordle for students to learn more about the Cuban missiles crisis .
 Teachinghistory.org is designed to help K–12 history teachers access resources and materials to improve U.S. history education in the classroom .
 The Center for History and New Media has created Teachinghistory.org with the goal of making history content, teaching strategies, resources, and research accessible .