 All images from Google Images to give you a better understanding of the events that took place that changed the shape of global society .
 February 4th – 11th 1945 Yalta Conference Meeting . Meeting between Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin to decide what would happen at the end of the war . Meeting was between Churchill and Roosevelt to discuss the fate of the world's war .
 May 8th 1945 V E Day Victory in Europe as Germany surrenders to the Russian army . E Day victory in Europe was a victory for Germany .
 The Potsdam Conference formally divided Germany and Austria into four zones . The conference was held July 17, 1945 and August 2, 1945 .
 German capital Berlin would be divided into four zones . It was also agreed that Berlin would have been divided between zones . Berlin would also be divided between four zones in the capital .
 August 6th 1945 The United States dropped the first atomic bomb on Hiroshima . August 8th 1945 the U.S. dropped the second bomb on Nagasaki . August 7th 1945 Nagasaki was the first Hiroshima bomb .
 The Japanese surrendered bringing World War Two to an end . August 14th 1945 V J Day was the end of the war .
 Ho Chi Minh proclaimed Vietnam an independent republic from the French . September 2nd 1945 Vietnam Independence . Ho Chi-Minh declared Vietnam a republic from France . Vietnam was declared independent in 1945 .
 March 5th 1946 Churchill’s Iron Curtain Speech Churchill delivers his ‘Sinews of Peace’ speech which contain the famous phrase ‘..an iron curtain has descended on Europe’ March 12th 1947 Truman Doctrine President Truman promised to help any country facing a Communist
 The Marshall Plan was a program of economic aid offered by the United States to any European country . June 5th 1947 Marshall Plan . This was an economic aid program of the U.S.
 The French, USA and UK partitions of Germany were merged to form West Germany June 24th 1948 Berlin Blockade . Russia cut all road and rail links to that sector in response to the merger .
 The Korean War began when North Korea invaded South Korea . The North Atlantic Treaty Organization formed with member states Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom, and the United States .
 The war will involve both sides invading each other’s territories and end up being a stalemate at the 38th Parallel and a Demilitarized Zone being set up between North and South Korea .
 March 5th 1953 Death of Stalin will be known as The Forgotten War . Joseph Stalin died at the age of 74 . Stalin was the leader of the Soviet Union .
 This set of documents ended the French war with the Vietminh and divided Vietnam into North and South states . The documents were signed by the French government in 1945 .
 A joint British and French force invaded Egypt to regain control of the Suez Canal which had been nationalized by the Egyptian leader Nasser . October 30th 1956 Suez Crisis .
 The attack was heavily criticized by World leaders, especially America because Russia had offered support to Egypt . Russia offered support for Egypt, but the attack was criticized .
 The world's first artificial satellite was about the size of a beach ball . It took about 98 minutes to orbit the Earth on its elliptical path .
 USSR Sputnik II carried Laika the dog, the first living creature to go into space . November 1st 1957 Space Race was the first time the dog had gone into space.
 Russian cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human being in space in 1961 . April 12th 1961 Space Race was the start of the Space Race .
 A force of Cuban exiles, trained by the CIA, aided by the U.S. government attempted to invade Cuba and overthrow the Communist government of Fidel Castro . April 17th 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the murder but there has always been speculation that he was not a lone killer and that there may have been communist or CIA complicity . Oswald was not the sole killer, but it is believed to have been a CIA or CIA involvement .
 Many did not want and were adamantly opposed to the war . It would result in a time of social and political unrest in America . Many were opposed to war .
 The war would be escalated on several occasions including “carpet bombing’s” and village massacres by both sides . Both sides would be involved in several massacres including the massacre .
 Warsaw Pact forces entered Czechoslovakia in a bid to stop the reforms known as ‘Prague Spring’ instigated by Alexander Dubcek . August 20th 1968 Soviet invasion of Czechsoslovakia . Soviet invasion took place in bid to halt the reforms made by Dubce
 December 21st 1968 The Space Race US launched Apollo 8 – first manned orbit of the Moon . 20th July 1969 US Apollo 11 landed on the Moon and Neil Armstrong became the first man on the moon . Neil Armstrong was the first person to land on the lunar surface .
 The Four Power Agreement was made between Russia, USA, Britain and France . It reconfirmed the rights and responsibilities of those countries with regard to Berlin . September 3rd 1971 .
 Paris Peace Accords ended U.S. involvement in Vietnam in 1973 . Paris peace accord ended American involvement .
 Khmer Rouge attacked and took control of Cambodia in 1975 . April 17th 1975 Cambodia was the start of the uprising against the Khmer regime .
 The capture of Saigon by the North Vietnamese led to the whole country becoming Communist . January 20th 1977 Carter President Jimmy Carter became the 39th President of the United States .
 A group of Iranian students and militants stormed the American embassy and took 53 Americans hostage to show their support for the Iranian Revolution . 53 Americans were taken hostage during the embassy's hostage crisis .
 A number of countries including the USA boycotted the summer Olympics held in Moscow in protest at the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 . The USA was protesting the invasion of the country .
 March 11th 1985 Gorbachev became leader of the Soviet Union . March 11 is the day of the first anniversary of the fall of the USSR . Mikhail Gorbachachev was the first Soviet Union leader .
 Gorbachev announced his intention to follow a policy of glasnost – openness, transparency and freedom of speech; and perestroika – restructuring of government and economy . He would be responsible for major changes to the system and the subsequent end of the USSR .
 February 15th 1989 Afghanistan The last Soviet troops left Afghanistan . June 4th 1989 Tiananmen Square, Beijing, China were crushed by the government .
 Tadeusz Mazowiecki elected leader of the Polish government – the first eastern bloc country to become a democracy . The Velvet Revolution, also known as the Gentle Revolution, was a series of peaceful protests in Czechoslovakia that led to the overthrow of the Communist government .
 Mikhail Gorbachev and George H W Bush met in Malta on December 2nd, 3rd 1989 Malta Summit . The meeting reversed much of the provisions of the Yalta Conference 1945 .
 Riots broke out which culminated in the overthrow and execution of the leader Ceauşescu and his wife . December 16th – 25th 1989 Romanian Revolution .
 East and West Germany were reunited as one country . The Warsaw Pact which allied Communist countries was ended 31st July 1991 START The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty was signed between Russia and the USA 25th December 1991 Gorbachev resigned .