 The Bill of Rights Institute is based in New York City, New York, New Jersey . It's the most effective way to achieve that is through investing in the Institute of Rights . Investing in the institute is the best way to protect your rights in the U.S.
 Teachers and students contribute to teachers and students by providing valuable resources, tools, and experiences that promote civic engagement through a historical framework .
 1962 aerial photograph shows the construction of a medium-range ballistic missile launch site in Cuba . The site was built in Cuba in the 1960s .
 Fidel Castro’s leadership of Cuba alarmed the U.S. primarily because Castro rejected the advances of Communist China . The Communist Chinese aspired to export revolution throughout Latin America threatened an invasion of southern Florida .
 Nikita Khrushchev’s objectives in placing nuclear weapons in Cuba in 1962 . Lifting the trade embargo with China . Permitting nuclear forces in Cuba and Turkey Formally recognizing Communist China Free Response Questions .
 Map of the western hemisphere showing the full range of the nuclear missiles under construction in Cuba was used in Washington, DC, during secret meetings on the 1962 Cuban crisis . Map was used to show the range of missiles being built in Cuba .
 The exposure of suspected communists within the United States government led to the Cold War . Postwar decolonization led to an increase in the number of nonaligned nations in Latin America . Cold War competition to Latin America led to increased nonaligned countries .
 The expansion of a free-market global economy . Support for mutual coexistence A strategy of containment Island hopping . Island hopping 3. A strategy for containment is containment .
 History is presented through a series of narratives, primary sources, and point-counterpoint debates . History invites students to participate in the ongoing conversation about the American experiment .
 The crisis was defused, and the missiles left Cuba as the quarantine was lifted in November . The roots of the crisis lay in the superpowers' contest over Berlin .
 In 1962, Castro indicated to the Soviet Union that, should it lack enthusiasm for communist expansionism in Latin America, he would court Chairman Mao\u0026#8217;s communist China as an alternative partner . The Soviet Union decided to submit to Castro's pressure .
 In the summer of 1962, the Soviet Union increased its exports of important military materiel to Cuba, depriving formerly favored allies such as Gamel Abdel Nasser\u0026#8217;s Egypt .
 The shipments included nuclear missile components that, when readied, could easily reach the U.S. When readied in the future, the United States would detect these developments .
 In 1960, Kennedy had bemoaned a gap between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, even though he knew the balance of weapons actually favored the United States .
 By having missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev hoped to discredit Kennedy by showing that the missile gap had become more extreme under Kennedy . Khushchev's decision was exceedingly dangerous and risky .
 Kennedy: "It was \u0026#8220;one hell of a gamble,” as Kennedy observed during the crisis that October . Kennedy: “It was a gamble. It was a hell of gamble."
 On October 16, Kennedy received word from his national security staff that aerial photography definitively showed Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . However, the United States government did not regard the two situations as comparable .
 Kennedy chose the blockade but adjusted it to a quarantine . This meant that American naval vessels would only permit goods to pass into Cuba that were not associated with war materiel . The blockade was imposed by the U.S. Navy .
 Soviet responses to Kennedy's moves were not conciliatory . With large military forces gathered in and around Cuba, the world sensed nuclear war could be imminent .
 On October 26, Kennedy received an otherwise-standoffish letter from Khrushchev that appeared to offer notes of conciliation and compromise . The United States Navy was stopping and boarding ships, and at least one Soviet submarine with nuclear weapons was harassed .
 The United States confirmed that it would end the blockade when the missiles and their attending apparatus were gone . The U.S. also pledged not to invade Castro’s island .
 A unanimous vote among its three top officers was required to launch the sub's nuclear weapons . The sub's top officers were required to vote for a unanimous vote .
 Arkhipov refused to assent without receiving orders from Moscow, likely saving the world from nuclear holocaust . Khrushchev had secured an ally in Cuba, but it was an ally that had pushed him around .
 He also did not secure the prize . that had motivated him to act in the first place . He also didn't secure the . prize .
 The missile crisis also introduced a new sober realism to U.S.-Soviet relations . He immortalized his success in a 1963 speech in that city .
 The second circle, labeled 1020 NM, includes the southeastern United States, half of Mexico, Costa Rica, Haiti, Santo Domingo, Puerto Rico, Panama, Panama and the northwestern tip of South America . The other circle includes the United States and half Mexico .
 WOR America in the World Learning Objective: Unit 8H Explain the various military and diplomatic responses to international developments over time . History of the U.S. role in the world is explained in Unit 8 .