 Recently opened Irish Wles provide some insight into how that crisis enveloped Dublin’s authorities .
 Wles the environment Irish policy-makers faced during that crisis . Fortunately, one can Wnd documented in these Wles . Wles documented the environment Ireland faced during the crisis .
 What may have appeared unneutral at Wrst glance is at least understandable . For that reason, what may have been unneutral was at the moment .
 The latter claims that Ireland had never had a real tradition of neutrality . Ireland has a long history of neutrality, says the former president of Ireland .
 Wrst established his deWnition of neutrality and then measured the Irish experience against that deWNition . He supported that claim by measuring Ireland's history against that of his own .
 The object in this study is to put the decisions in this crisis into the context that supported them, the author says . The object of the study was to put these decisions in the context of them, he says .
 In fact, that knowledge permits one to argue that speciWc Irish decisions were the most neutral open to them at that moment . IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 67, was the subject of the
 The Irish policy of neutrality is understandable only when placed into the context of its application . The events of October, 1962, were the events of that month in Ireland .
 The idea of a policy of neutrality for Ireland appeared in the aftermath of the Easter Rebellion in 1916 . It was the first time the country had a policy in place of neutrality .
 For centuries the British had believed the defense of England required the control of Ireland . The Irish after 1916 tried to satisfy that British need by suggesting that an independent Ireland would adhere to a policy of perpetual neutrality .
 A free Ireland would in no way threaten the United Kingdom, but the British rejected that concept in the negotiations that led to the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921 . The British assumed would deny any possibility of Ireland being neutral in a British war .
 Winston Churchill, the British wartime prime minister, actually oVered such a deal in the summer of 1940, but Eamon de Valéra, the Irish leader, refused on the ground that the British would have been unable to deliver on such a promise .
 The Irish remained neutral throughout World War II and that policy has remained a central pillar of Irish foreign policy ever since . The Irish, thus, remained neutral during the war .
 From the beginning the Irish deWnition of neutrality involved the avoidance of war as the above debates reXect. From the start of the . century the . deWNition of . neutrality involved avoiding war as well as the avoidance . of war .
 Salmon agreed that that was what the Irish wanted and that they succeeded to do that in World War II . But he also claimed that the mere avoidance of war was not neutrality .
 They rejected the invitation on the ground that they could not join in the defense of Europe against the threat from Stalin’s Soviet Union as long as Great Britain continued to occupy a portion of Irish territory, Northern Ireland .
 The Irish may have expected the U.S. to end its support of the Belfast government in exchange for access to the strategic position the Irish thought they could provide the Americans in a confrontation with the Soviet Union . But that did not happen .
 The Irish maintained the image of a neutral nation through the demise of the Cold War in 1990, the Soviet Union in 1991, and Communism in Russia in 1992 . The Irish never did join NATO and maintained a neutral image .
 During both World War II and the Cold War, the Irish were able to remove the world of civil aviation from their policy of neutrality . During both the war and Cold War the Irish was able to take control of the world's aviation industry .
 During World War II both land and seaplane bases were built in Newfoundland and on the River Shannon in Ireland . The distance between those two points was the shortest route from North America to Europe .
 The United States and Great Britain continued to use the Shannon facilities during the entire war under the guise that those Xights were civilian, not military . The U.S. and Britain continued the use of the facilities throughout the war .
 The Irish attempted to trade their use of Shannon for civilian and even military equipment . Both found that civil aviation cover quite helpful to their joint war eVort .
 The scope of their neutrality policy was enhanced when the Irish received an invitation to the Chicago International Conference on Civil Aviation that opened on November 1, 1944, with the purpose of planning the use of the sky after the war in the context of a multilateral agreement .
 Meeting quickly degenerated into a dispute between the British and the Americans . The conference ended with only limited success .
 The United States sought bilateral agreements that would give American airlines access to strategically signiWcant airports . That caused the U.S. to seek a number of bilateral agreements .
 On February 3, 1945, the two states signed a bilateral agreement that gave the U.S. full access to Shannon Airport . In that process the Americans approached the Irish during the Chicago Conference .
 The British saw that agreement as a direct attempt to extend American control over the North Atlantic before the British were ready to compete . The British believed that the agreement was an attempt by the U.S. to extend control of the Atlantic .
 Ireland continued to proclaim its neutrality in World War II . In the months that followed that war, growing animosity between Washington and Moscow eventually ended in the Cold War .
 Czechoslovakia was absorbed into the Soviet Union’s satellite state system in Central Europe in 1948 . The eVort signed such an agreement with Czechsoslovakia on January 29, 1947, 1947 .
 Ireland refused to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The suddenness and brutality of that act forced the Western European nations to sign a defensive alliance . From that alliance, the NATO Organization was formed .
 The U.S. and Great Britain wanted to limit the use of Shannon, but the Irish had signed a bilateral agreement with Czechoslovakia two years earlier . The Czechs had received rights that the Irish could not simply erase .
 Czechs did nothing to exercise the rights they had received in 1947 until they suddenly asked the Irish on February 29, 1960, for permission to Xy a route through Shannon to Montreal . The Czechs had been granted the right to travel to Canada in 1947 .
 Czechs in October, 1960, asked for full commercial rights on a new route from Prague to Havana, via Brussels, Shannon, and Gander, Newfoundland . Before that could be arranged, the Czechs asked for commercial rights .
 The Irish delayed telling the Americans and the British what the Czechs wanted until February 27, 1961 . That startled the Irish and presented them with a serious problem, mainly because Cuban-American relations had deteriorated .
 Seán Lemass, the taoiseach, indicated that Shannon should be used to the maximum . The British “had no comment to make,”12 .
 There is no explanation of why there was the three-month delay in this Wle. There was no explanation for the delay in the announcement .
 The Czech Republic was told in September that they had permission to travel to Montreal by way of Shannon . When neither Washington nor London responded, the Irish told the Czechs they could travel by way to Montreal .
 Why the Irish delayed is hard to say, but it could have been the U.S. elections that were then underway . It could also be the timing of the Irish election in 2008 .
 The Americans sent a note to Dublin on April 26 on the Czech request . That American-planned invasion, unfortunately, failed and that failure inXuenced .
 The United States was concerned about increased Xights of Soviet Bloc aircraft over territory of friendly countries . The U.S. wanted assurances that Ireland was taking all feasible means to prevent such transit .
 Lemass oVered no objection to that approach . Frank Aiken, the Irish minister for external aVairs, wanted to continue to stall on ‘the Czech request’
 Cubana Airlines sought technical stop rights at Shannon on a proposed Havana-Gander-Shannon-Prague service in 1961 . Shannon was the first stop for Cubana on a planned Havana to Shannon service .
 Edward Prince was in charge of the American Embassy because Eisenhower’s appointee as ambassador had left and Kennedy’�s nominee, Grant Stockdale, would not arrive until May . Prince was put in charge because Stockdale would not be in office until May.
 Cremin sent that reaction of the American Chargé to Lemass’ oYce with the suggestion that he would wait “until the week after next” before telling the Czechs . Cremin says he will wait until next week to tell the Czech Republic . Lemass
 Prince's interview with the U.S. would give Americans time to make whatever comments they wished . That would give them time to comment on the conversation he had with Prince .
 IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, and CIVIL AVIATION 72 about the delay in the granting of their request on the same route . The U.S. government has requested the request be granted .
 The Irish knew that both Cuba and Czechoslovakia had signed the International Civil Aviation Organization Transit Agreement . They were obligated to grant both nontraYc rights to Xy over Irish air space and to stop .
 Those complaints led to a meeting with the Czechs on November 15, 1961 . Those complaints and that information led to the meeting with Czechs .
 The Irish learned that the Czechs wanted only technical stop rights . There were only technical stops rights in the Czech Republic .
 The British have granted the CSA technical rights to Prestwick and Manchester . That meeting was followed by the news that the British had granted Prestwick technical rights .
 Irish had to act to save the Prague traYc for Shannon . Consequently, the Irish government had to step in .
 Irish told the Czechs they could overXy Ireland and land for technical reasons . The Czechs were told they could land in Ireland on December 20 . The Irish told them they could now overXY Ireland .
 In the next month the Canadians granted both Cubana and CSA permission to make regular nontraYc stops at Gander with a weather alternate at Halifax .
 ICAO rules automatically permitted the Cubans to land at Shannon . That permitted the Cuban to Xy and they landed at Shannon, which ICA rules automatically allowed them to do .
 The Irish, in eVect, without any formal exchange of notes permitted Cubana Airlines to use Shannon, again to insure its use rather than some other airport in Britain .
 By avoiding any formal exchange of notes the Irish avoided any direct negotiations with Havana and any adverse American reaction to such negotiations . The Irish also avoided direct talks with Havana .
 The Irish did not want to antagonize the Americans who were preoccupied with Castro’s Cuba . Thus ended a Wfteenmonth eVort to stall a Xight from Prague to Havana .
 Czechs raised their demands upon the Irish on April 25, 1962, when they asked for full traYc rights at Shannon on the Havana route . Unfortunately, the Czechs did not live up to their expectations .
 Cremin summarized the problem by July 13 . That triggered another review of the whole situation . Cremin: "The problem is a problem. It's a problem that needs to be solved"
 The Irish Department of Transport and Power wanted to give the Czechs what they wanted, and also because of the interline proposal . The principle of using Shannon as much as possible still had validity .
 Irish application for admission into the European Economic Community . The latter problem had been brewing since the announcement on June 6, 1947 by Secretary of State George Marshall .
 The speech was followed by the formation of the Organization for European Economic Co-operation and the Marshall Plan, both of which attracted Irish participation . The Marshall Plan and the OECO were both created by the Irish .
 Ireland joined the European Economic Community in 1956 . It led to the question of whether the Irish should join the community .
 On July 31, 1961, Lemass sent a letter to the EEC, announcing Ireland’s desire to join the European Union . Lemass: "Ireland's desire to become part of the European Economic Community is to be accepted by the EU"
 The Irish had not heard that their application would be accepted prior to Cremin’s memo of July 13, 1962 .
 The British and Danes applied after the Irish and were invited to open negotiations on their applications on November 8, 1961 and November 30 respectively . The British, Danes and the Irish applied after .
 The Course of Ireland’s Entry into the EEC (Dublin: Institute of Public Administration, 1986), 136. The course of Ireland's entry into the . EEC was the first country to enter into the European Economic Community .
 74 inate behind the Iron Curtain . IRELAND, the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, and CIVIL AVIATION 74 in . 74 in a row .
 The Czech oVer of an interline agreement could mean that the service to Havana would more or less originate in Shannon and be Wlled up by feeder service from Prague . The matter would take on an entirely diVerent complexion .
 Cremin argued that if the Irish concluded they should grant the Czech request, they should tell the U.S. and try to ascertain whether such a decision would be taken badly .
 There might not remain in the American mind, even behind a relatively neutral reaction, an element of dissatisfaction, and possibly a feeling that it should not really be necessary for us to permit the full use of Shannon for a service linking with its ‘friends’ in Eastern Europe a country
 IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, and CIVIL AVIATION 75 that some other country would not give the Czechs what they wanted. The Czechs wanted. IRELand, the Czech Republic, the U.S. says .
 They hoped that the Irish would have granted nothing more than transit and overXight rights . They had hoped that they would have been granted nothing less than transit .
 When the U.S. signed the Civil Aviation Agreement with Ireland on February 3, 1945, American airlines got access only to Shannon and not to Dublin . The agreement was signed in 1945 .
 As early as 1946, the U.S. airlines started to pressure the Irish government to force the Irish to give them permission to land in Dublin . That rankled the American airlines and they started pressuring the government to allow them to land .
 Full-scale talks were held in Washington in January, 1948, and in Dublin in September, 1949;29 the American ambassador in Dublin tried again in 26 Note, 20 July 1962 .
 Eisenhower’s administration reopened the issue on July 23, 1958, and again in April, 1960 . The Irish never once deviated from their position that an American presence in Dublin would lead to requests from every other airline for the same right .
 That would redirect air traYc to Dublin and away from Shannon, which would have disastrous results for the West of Ireland . That would have been disastrous for the west of Ireland, especially in Shannon .
 No Irish government could withstand the explosion of electoral resentment that would follow such a concession . No Irish Government could withstand such an explosion of resentment .
 If the Irish felt that the arrival of John F Kennedy in the White House would change anything, they were wrong . They were wrong. The Irish feel that the President of the United States will change anything .
 On July 28, 1961, Kennedy’s Wrst ambassador to Ireland asked for new negotiations on the issue and those opened on November 27 . On November 27, 1962, President Kennedy asked for negotiations to end the war .
 The Americans quickly learned that the Irish would not permit American planes entry into Dublin . The controversy continued into the spring of 1962, both in the public press and in the private correspondence between the Irish government and the American Embassy .
 Czech request for landing rights on Havana Xight delayed until they learned the British had given them such rights . In the midst of that six-month debate the Irish had stalled the original Czech request . The Czech Republic was given landing rights by the British in 1947 .
 Ireland denied access to Dublin to placate the Americans on that issue, while they denied the Americans access to that issue . One can only assume that they did so to appease the Americans .
 Irish decision to stall the 1961 Czech request to Cuba was a factor in the decision . The Czech request was denied by the U.S. in 1961 . The request was made by the Czech Republic, Czechoslovakia, in 1962 .
 Lemass had to decide what to do with the April, 1962, Czech request . Lemass: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do" Lemass says .
 This chronology was declassiWed on April 4, 1988, and remains the property of the Department of State . It was declassified in 1988 .
 U.S. Ambassador Matthew B McCloskey arrives in Ireland . He is the ambassador to the U.N. for the first time since arriving .
 Aiken used the words “at present” to denote that the issue would remain open . Aiken said the Irish expected that the Americans would inform them if they learned that any other nation was about to grant such rights to the Czechs .
 Aiken referred to the earlier American request to postpone the granting of technical stop rights on the route to Cuba, which the Irish did . The Irish did, only to hear that the British were considering granting them, he said .
 Aiken did not see much point in the U.S. stand that the granting of Wve freedom rights would “help the Warsaw bloc’s espionage,” since there were other ways to get to Cuba and Latin America, he says .
 Kinsley AirWeld in Bermuda is under American control and a military Weld as well . McCloskey was surprised when he explained that the return trip used the same plane .
 Pan American operated a daily Xight from Miami to Cuba and Cubana Airlines operated to Mexico City . Aiken added that Pan American also operated daily Xights from Miami .
 Aiken again raised the Irish expectation that the U.S. would tell them if any other country were about to grant such rights to the Czechs . Aiken said thousands of passengers through Shannon each year on their way to Prague could be added .
 McCloskey did what Aiken had feared . When he had Wnished his presentations, McCloske did what he'd feared . Aiken's presentation was one of the most important things he'd hoped for .
 Aiken: "It would be economically impossible for us to accede" to that request . Aiken immediately responded that the issue had been discussed at a long conference "a few months ago"
 Aiken recognized that reporters had asked McCloskey, upon his arrival in Dublin, upon arrival in August 1962, to ask him if he would be able to return to Ireland .
 McCloskey said he would have to support Pan American’s request in his capacity as the American Ambassador . The Irish could not change their position, but the American could not .
 McCloskey agreed that he saw nothing that the Americans could oVer the Irish by way of additional facilities to compensate them for the damage to their economy that opening Dublin would mean . Aiken hoped the Americans would drop their objection to the granting of rights to Shannon to the Czechs .
 Aiken's conversation with McCloskey in August was followed by Fidel Castro’s decision to put the Wnal touches to the new draft agreement between Cuba and the Soviet Union on military cooperation and military defenses, which continued a massive arms build-up .
 President Kennedy believed the Soviets had decided to send ballistic missiles to Cuba . At the same time, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency, John McCone, dictated a memorandum for Kennedy .
 As the crisis deepened in mid-October, Kennedy's advisors concluded that they would have to take some steps to prepare America’s allies and even neutral, but friendly, states for that speech .
 Special brieWng teams to London, Paris, and Bonn, and another to Ottawa, Canada .
 For the others, including Ireland, he ordered the preparation of special letters to be delivered prior to the speech and on October 22 at 10:55m. For the other countries, he has also ordered that letters be delivered before the speech .
 A special message was sent to embassies around the world to deliver those letters . IRELAND, the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, and CIVIL AVIATION 79, were sent to the world .
 Kennedy’s letter to the Irish government was delivered to Dublin time on Monday morning . The letter was delivered by a journalist who delivered it to the government in Dublin .
 Tanaiste Seán MacEntee, received it for the government, since Lemass was in Bonn. Tanaist Seamiste Seam Seán MacEntee received the government .
 Lemass met with leaders of Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Italy and France to discuss Ireland’s application to join the EEC . Lemass had met with the leaders of the . leaders of . Belgium, . Luxembourg, . the Netherlands and Italy, as well as the
 On the day of Kennedy’s speech, October 22, he had arrived in Bonn for an oYcial state visit to the Federal Republic of Germany and was in conference with Konrad Adenauer, when the German leader learned what was about to happen in Washington .
 Kennedy’s letter to Lemass explained the situation of the missiles in Cuba, but also included the draft resolution that Ambassador Adlai Stevenson was going to submit to the United Nations on the next day . Kennedy's letter also included a draft resolution on the issue .
 Dublin must support Stevenson and speak forthrightly in support of that resolution . But that was all he asked of Dublin, he said .
 At the end of the session, Diefenbaker immediately asked his subordinates to insure that Canadian airspace and air transport facilities be denied to the Soviets . The Soviets were denied access to Canada's airspace .
 American ambassadors in London and Bonn briefed British and German leaders . A half hour later the ambassadors in Bonn and London gave brief to the German and British leaders .
 Under Secretary of State George W Ball met with forty-six pro-Western and neutral ambassadors to Washington to give them an advance brieWng as well . The special event took place in London, Paris, Bonn and Ottawa .
 Kennedy’s speech had been delivered at midnight Dublin time, its news did not reach the majority of the Irish people until the next morning . The news of the Cuban missile crisis was delayed for the next day .
 Ambassador McCloskey felt that he should advise the State Department about the amount of traYc going through Shannon to and from Cuba . They had not, but that afternoon news arrived that the State Dept. had not .
 The Canadians literally closed their air space to the Soviets on October 23 and the Irish learned that on October 24 . Meanwhile, the Canadian government closed its air space .
 Soviets had never joined the International Civil Aviation Organization nor signed the 1944 Chicago Convention agreements . Soviets were able to do so because they had never signed the agreements .
 When the Canadians granted the Soviets use of their airspace and facilities, therefore, they had done so only as a courtesy and were free to stop that courtesy at any time for any reason .
 The Canadians would continue to permit Cubans and Czechs to land, refuel, and overXy, but they would subject all Xights to a search for arms . The Canadians claimed the search was allowed by both ICAO rules and Canadian law .
 The reporter added that such support “must have gone some way towards correcting Dr. Dr. John Sutter’s error . Dr. Sutter is a doctor in the U.S.
 The Irish had, as of that day, not received any request to deny transit facilities to the Czechs or Cubans, Cremin told the British . But he did explain that the American ambassador had asked for data on the amount of Czech and Cuban traYc going through Shannon .
 The Canadian ambassador called to see if the Irish were contemplating any action similar to the Canadian decision to search Czech and Cuban planes on the Prague-Shannon .
 We do not wish in the conXict between the free democracies and the communist empires to be thought of as neutral. We want to be neutral, we do not want to think of them as neutral, says the PM .
 82 Gander-Havana route . Gander, Havana route . IRELAND, the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS .
 The Canadians later sent an aide-mémoire that justiWed their search for arms under Section 35 of the ICAO convention and a speciWc section in Canada’s Air Regulations .
 The Irish, however, made no decision to follow that policy because the Americans had not asked them to do so . The Irish did not follow the policy because they were not asked to .
 The Soviets replied with their own resolution which condemned the quarantine, but also asked for negotiations to end the impasse . The Soviet Union responded with a resolution condemning the quarantine .
 At the time, Ireland had a seat on the Security Council and thus, Aiken could speak directly to the crisis . Aiken was speaking to the U.N. Security Council .
 His speech on October 24, however, contained neither a rousing condemnation of the Soviet Union nor a resounding call for support for America .
 Aiken opened with a sympathetic description of how the Castro revolution came to clash with the U.S. and the vast majority of Latin American states . On the contrary, Aiken says the revolution was a model for the United States .
 The Soviet military build-up went far beyond a defensive position to give the Soviets power to strike the U.S. and Cuba’s other neighbors with modern weapons . The Cuban interest in defending their security was to defend their security, but he felt that the Soviet military building-
 Aiken later explained that as I was due to speak, the two Xeets were getting very close together in the middle of the Atlantic . So our suggestion was that, as the two resolutions after making their demands wound up by suggesting negotiation, we should take the last part of the
 Czech and Cuban planes collected the information by flying over Irish territory . Meanwhile, the Soviets and Americans tried to deal with the crisis over the next four days .
 Ireland at the United Nations, 1962 , 84 . The Americans, however, on April 26, 1962, died at the U.N. Ireland .
 Salmon accepted the public perception of 1962 that Aiken supported the U.S. during the crisis . Salmon accepted public perception that the former governor supported the United States .
 He may not have read the speech, however, since it was much more evenhanded, or neutral, than he implied . The speech may have been much more neutral, or evenhanded .
 See Salmon, Unneutral Ireland, 203, and U.N. Yearbook, 1962, 106 .
 Aiken claimed he had met Chester Bowles in late 1960s and spoke to Stevenson about the Cuban problem and the Cuban fear of an American invasion . In that same interview Aiken also claimed to have met Bowles and Stevenson .
 Aiken sent a letter to Bowles on January 25, 1961 on “armaments control,” which Bowles sent to Stevenson on February 6, 1961 . I found no evidence of conversations on that subject with either man in the Stevenson papers .
 The Irish had sought assurances that Soviet bloc aircraft landing in Ireland did not carry munitions in violation of the provisions of international aviation agreements . IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 84 1961 .
 The Americans had never received an answer to that request, but the staV in the U.S. embassy had understood at the time that the Irish were prepared to take the steps necessary to ensure that condition .
 They also wanted assurance that no cargo could be put on those planes at Shannon .
 By then, however, the crisis over the missiles had dramatically changed . By that time, the situation had changed .
 On October 28, 1962, Nikita Khrushchev had capitulated to the West . On the previous day, the Soviet Union had been overthrown by the West in a coup d'agreement .
 The Executive Committee of the National Security Council met at 11 a.m. to frame a response to Khruschev’s decision to dismantle the missiles . The committee framed a response .
 The Cuban Missile crisis was over, but the Cuban problem in Soviet-American relations remained . The Cuban missile crisis ended with the collapse of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Two days later, Irish Wnally made their decision to search Cuban and Czech aircraft at Shannon to ensure that they were not carrying arms and justiWed that by arguing that such a practice would violate the ICAO convention .
 In addition to the number of passengers, cargo, etc. of those Xights and similar data for past periods, they would continue to provide information on the number, cargo and other data .
 The quarantine had been lifted on November 21 . The reporter was surprised to hear that as the quarantine was lifted .
 The Canadians got good coverage for their actions in The Times , October 25, 27, 29, 29; but that paper did not even carry the Irish press release .
 That may have been the result of the lateness of the release, as the issue was history by then . That may be the reason for the delay, as it was history .
 The Irish had delayed that decision until after the crisis had eVectively ended, when there was little chance of Wnding any arms on the planes searched . See text of cable from U.N. Department .
 Still, the Irish had submitted to an American wish, which had never been expressed, other than prior to the crisis . Still, it is not the first time the Irish have submitted to American wishes .
 The Irish government agreed to cooperate with the American and British civil aviation policy toward the Soviet Union and its satellites on March 25, 1949 . It agreed to delay granting even technical stopping rights at Shannon on the Prague-Havana route from October, 1960, to December 20, 1961 .
 The decision was taken by a small nation that professed to adhere to a policy of neutrality . While such decisions might not be viewed as those of a truly neutral state, they were taken .
 The easy answer is that these decisions indicate that Ireland was not neutral, but the Irish would not accept that, because it simply was not true . The easy answers would be that the Irish were not neutral .
 They had a policy of neutrality, but it was limited to the avoidance of war and, particularly, a British war . They had to avoid war and avoid being involved in any British conflict .
 Irish believed they did not have, nor ever would have, the ability to repel such an invasion . Any other policy would only invite invasion and the Irish believed that such a policy would invite invasion .
 Flights through Shannon of Czech and Cuban Aeroplanes bound for Cuba, 29 November 1962, ibid. Flights to Cuba were bound for the island nation .
 Salmon does not state that Aiken's speech was an example of what he called Ireland’s ‘unneutral and ambivalent” policy, in the context of his study one can assume that he would label it and these other decisions as examples of that policy .
 IRELAND, the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, and CIVIL AVIATION 86 permit their neutrality to deny the state an economic advantage . That meant that the Irish had to follow a policy that would insure the maximum use of Shannon airport .
 The Czech Republic did the same in the Cold War . Their policy of neutrality had attracted the attention of the Czechs . The Czechs were keen to remain neutral .
 Any use of Shannon by Communist states would have to be subject to American sensitivities . Any grant of rights to Czechs would lead to American demands to Xy into Dublin .
 If that happened, the eVect upon Shannon would have been the opposite of what the Irish wanted from a grant to Czechoslovakia . If that were to happen, it would have led to a grant of €1.5 billion to the Czech Republic .
 The use of Shannon would also have to be subject to the sensitivities of the members of the EEC, which the Irish had sought to join on July 31, 1961, and had received no response .
 The Irish decisions were, therefore, the result of having to satisfy the Americans, the Europeans and the Communists, but within the context of the Irish policy of neutrality . The Irish decision was made in response to the U.S. and the European Union .
 In 1949, the Irish agreed to limiting civil aviation rights to the Soviet Union and its satellites . The agreement was "generally speaking in principle" but not specifically speaking in a particular case . The decision was made in 1949 .
 The Irish government agreed to nothing; they closed no door; they told the Americans and the British what both wanted to hear . They had, in other words, made an Irish decision, which is a decision not to make a decision .
 Lemass government’s delay in giving Czechs rights to Shannon on the Havana run from October, 1960, to December, 1961 may be attributed to fear of an American reaction, especially during the negotiations on American access to Dublin that took place from July to December 1961 .
 The Czechs and Cubans were given the same rights to Prague by the British . Only after those talks were suspended, the Irish gave the Czechs the right to fly over to Prague .
 The desire to maximize the use of Shannon in a competitive atmosphere forced the decision . The need to use Shannon in an economic need forced that decision .
 The EEC Council met that day, October 22, to grant the Irish the right to open negotiations on their application . In fact, the Irish were granted the right that day .
 Cubans were Xying the British-made Britannia, but not that they had been ordered before Castro came to power .
 Ireland agreed to reverse decision to give Czechs full commercial rights at Shannon on the Havana run under direct American pressure in July, 1962 . They did agree to reverse their decision to . give the Czechs the commercial rights . in July 1962 .
 The Irish did not see that decision as any violation of their neutrality, however, however . The decision was made by the Irish government .
 They were willing to placate the Americans only in return for knowledge that others would not grant such rights . They would not have been able to do so if they had been granted such rights, they would not be able to .
 The Irish government feared that the British and the Canadians, founding members of NATO, would grant such rights to the Czechs . The Czech Republic became part of the Czech Republic in 1998 .
 The Irish also agreed to support the United States resolution in the Security Council of the United Nations . Aiken’s speech oVered no resounding support for either side .
 At the time, it was seen as support for the American argument that the Soviets had introduced oVensive weapons to Cuba, but that was quite obvious to anyone who looked at the pictures taken .
 If anything, Aiken placed Ireland only on the side of that dispute that the world had taken and did so in a way as to be least oVensive to the Communist countries .
 When he asked both sides to negotiate, he did not oVend the Cubans and Soviets, but he did please Washington . He reduced the fears of the Europeans about Ireland’s commitment to European unity .
 Aiken never did vote for the American resolution, as it never reached that point . The resolution was never approved by Aiken .
 If it had, he would have voted for it, but one would have been hard pressed at the time to use that vote in those circumstances to prove that the Irish were not neutral .
 The decision to deliver raw intelligence to the U.S. was the closest the Irish came to violating even their own deWnition of neutrality, but even that is explainable .
 The Czechs acquired them later on lease from the Cubans and put them into service on the Prague to Havana run in early 1962 . Czechs put them on service on a Prague-to-Cuba run in the early 1960s .
 The British were also actively seeking increased trade with the Czechs in 1962 . The British sent a trade delegation to Prague in July 1962 .
 The Irish feared the British would deal with the Czechs, if the Irish would not . The Irish had ample reason to fear the British .
 IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 88 impact upon the Irish decision; and in all probability it was information the Americans already had. IRELand, the C.C.M.A. crisis, and the
 The Irish refused transit rights to Cubans and Czechs . At any rate it was better to do that than wait for the United States to request the Irish to refuse all transit rights .
 The Irish government had been quite concerned that such a request would possibly arrive, since the Americans had asked the British to refuse Czech and Cuban transit rights, and they may have known that they had also asked the Canadians to do so .
 The Irish decision to search for munitions clearly came after the Soviet capitulation, when one could assume, in all probability, no such attempt to transport such materials would be made . Such searches were, moreover, well within Irish international rights, according to the Irish .
 The Irish government waited until November 6 to announce the end of the missile crisis . The announcement was made when everyone knew the crisis had ended .
 The decision to search, however, was clearly made to placate the Americans, who had not asked for it, by duplicating the Canadian action . The U.S. did not ask for it .
 The decision would not alienate the Czechs or Cubans to the degree that they would stop using Shannon . At the same time, the decision wouldn't alienate Cubans or Czechs .
 Shannon was still the most neutral stop on the way to Havana, but the Irish could not take any chances . That may not have been necessary, since Shannon is still the best neutral stop .
 Similar decisions were made by other nations that professed neutrality during the Cold War and, even, during the world wars of the century .
 If such decisions made Ireland unneutral, then one would have to conclude similar decisions by other states would have made them unneutral also . Ireland is the only country in the world to have made such decisions .