 Cuban President Fidel Castro announces that Cuba has moved to make any direct U.S. attack on Cuba the equivalent of a world war . August 29, 2018 at 12:00m.
 CIA Director John McCone sent memo to Kennedy expressing belief that Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles will be deployed in Cuba Aug. Aug. 1962 . CIA Director McCone believed Soviet medium range ballistic missiles would be deployed to Cuba .
 Andrei Gromyko warns a U.S. attack on Cuba could mean war with the Soviet Union . Soviet Foreign Minister: A United States attack could lead to war with Russia . U.N. speech was made at the United Nations in 1961 .
 Kennedy calls assembles a group to become known as EX-COMM to discuss possible diplomatic and military courses of action . Two days after U-2 photos were taken and analyzed, Kennedy meets with a group of friends .
 Kennedy flies to Connecticut to campaign for congressional candidate Abe Ribicoff . Kennedy: "I'm not scared. I'm scared"
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen later update Kennedy at airport that Joint Chiefs of Staff strongly argues for air strike against Cuba . Kennedy was traveling to the U.S. from New York to Washington, D.C.
 After a second U-2 flight, military discovers intermediate range SS-5 nuclear missiles . U.S. military: After second mission, U.N. launches first SS-2 missiles .
 Kennedy attends scheduled campaign speeches in Cleveland and the West Coast . Kennedy is scheduled to speak to voters in Cleveland, West Coast and Cleveland, Ohio .
 Kennedy orders a defensive quarantine instituted as soon as possible . Kennedy meets with his advisors and orders the quarantine instituted .
 Maxwell Taylor tells president that an air strike could not guarantee to destroy all Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy decides on quarantine of Cuba for the time being . Kennedy quarantines Cuba for time being.
 U-2 flight that day reveals bombers and Soviet fighter planes being assembled . Cruise missile sites were being built on Cuba”s northern shore . U.2 flight reveals bombers, Soviet fighters being assembled and cruise missile sites .
 Congressional leaders meet with Kennedy at White House and shown photographic evidence of Soviet missile installations . Congressional leaders met with Kennedy after he was shown photos of Soviet installations .
 Robert Kennedy sends Robert Kennedy to Soviet embassy to talk with Ambassador Dobrynin . Kennedy sent Robert Kennedy on mission to Soviet Embassy in Moscow, Russia . Kennedy was in the midst of a war with the Soviet Union .
 Soviet ships en route to Cuba with questionable cargo either slow down or reverse course except one . Soviet ships carrying questionable cargo often reverse course . One of the ships was a Soviet ship bound for Cuba, which had questionable cargo .
 Military forces go to DEFCON 2 the highest ever in U.S. history . Military forces in the United States go to the highest level ever in United States history .
 Kennedy sends letter to Khrushchev laying responsibility for the crisis on the Soviet Union . Kennedy writes letter laying blame for crisis on Soviet Union in wake of Soviet Union collapse .
 EX-COMM discusses proposal to withdraw U.S. missiles from Turkey in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Ex-comm discussed proposal to pull missiles out of Turkey and Cuba in exchange with withdrawal .
 Kennedy tells EX-COMM he believes quarantine alone can not force the Soviets to remove missiles . Kennedy says quarantine alone won't force the Soviet Union to remove the missiles .
 CIA report states there is no halt in progress in development of missile sites . CIA report: There are no plans to halt progress in the development of missiles sites .
 Khrushchev sends new letter to Kennedy proposing removing missiles if Kennedy publicly announces he won”t ever invade Cuba . Kennedy was president of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s . He proposed removing missiles from Cuba if Kennedy said he wouldn’t invade it .
 Khrushchev proposed public trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for U.S. missiles in Turkey . New letter proposes public trade in Cuba with United States missiles in Turkish territory . Khrushchevski proposed trade in exchange for Soviet missiles .
 American U-2 is shot down over Cuba killing the pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson . Major Anderson was killed by the U.2 in Cuba .
 U-2 strays into Soviet airspace near Alaska near Alaska, nearly intercepted by Soviet fighters . U.2 aircraft nearly intercepted in Soviet airspace .
 Dobrynin and Robert Kennedy meet and discuss price of removing missiles from Cuba . Kennedy: Cost of removing missile missiles is too high to justify removing missiles . Kennedy and Kennedy met in 1960s to discuss removal of missiles from Cuban territory .
 Kennedy writes Khrushchev that he will state that the U.S. will not invade Cuba if Khrushche removes the missiles from Cuba . Kennedy says he will not remove the missiles if they are removed . Kennedy writes that the United States will not attack Cuba if the missiles are removed
 Woman Executed by U.S. for first time since 19539 in Florida . Woman executed by United States for First Time since December 9, 2009 .
 Putin Faces Cancer Surgery; His Temporary Fill In Won’t ‘do Anything Rash’ country singer Naomi Judd died by suicide .