 Two years after he became President a major Cold War crisis erupted involving the island of Cuba . The island, which is very close to the USA mainland, was very near to the US mainland .
 In the early 1960s, Cuba had become a Communist state and was led by Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban government in the 1960s .
 Cuba began to develop close ties with the USSR and this caused problems for the new USA President . Cuba's relationship with the Soviet Union caused problems with the new President .
 Castro began to develop closer economic and military links with the USSR and its leader, Khrushchev . As a result of this, Castro developed even closer economic ties with the Soviet Union .
 In 1962 a USA U2 spy plane took photos of a missile launch site being built in Cuba . The site was being used to launch missiles at the time of the attack .
 Ships from the USSR were heading in the direction of Cuba with what looked like parts of missiles . Also ships from the Soviet Union were heading towards Cuba with missiles .
 President Kennedy came under pressure from military advisors who wanted to bomb the missile sites . Another group wanted to set up a naval blockade around the island .
 In the end Kennedy ordered a blockade to prevent these ships getting to Cuba . Kennedy ordered the blockade to be set up .
 To prevent the spread of the other beliefs they threatened each other with nuclear warfare one of the biggest examples being the Cuban missile crisis . To prevent each other .
 Both Truman and Stalin helped increase tensions in Europe and East Asia in the years following World War II . The Cold War itself was likely inevitable .
 The alliance that had formed between the U.S. and the USSR during World War II was not strong enough to overcome decades of suspicion and unease between the two nations . The alliance was formed during the war but was never strong enough .
 Between October 14th to October 28th of 1962, the two countries at the time almost started World War III over missiles that were secretly placed in Cuba by the Soviet Union . The missiles were placed by the Soviets .
 Communism is a political ideology which has the central principle of ¡§communal or communist ownership¡¨ of all property and therefore the abolition of private property . Communism is the belief that all property is owned by the state .