 Failed Negotiations 2 War Breaks Out 2. Failed negotiations 1. Failed negotiation . War breaks out . Failed negotiations . Failed negotiation.
 Negotiations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union collapse after Khrushchev turns down Kennedy's demand for removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba and American missiles from Turkey . Kennedy demanded removal of Russian missiles and removal of Turkish missiles .
 President Kennedy, his entire Cabinet, Congress, the Senate and the Joint Chiefs are evacuated from the Greater D.C. area in order to preserve government in case of a nuclear attack . Cuban radar mistake U.S. aircraft moving south from Florida and U.,S. naval movements as
 President Kennedy is alerted that the Cubans have launched a Soviet nuclear missile at the U.S. He immediately orders two missiles to be launched on his command . The Cuban missile was launched by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 The Cuban missile explodes in just short of Washington D.C. with the force double that of the Hiroshima bomb . More than half of the city including the Pentagon, the National Guard and heavily damaged the Capitol Building were obliterated .
 Two minutes later, President Kennedy is alerted and orders the launching of both missiles immediately . President Kennedy was alerted and ordered the launches immediately .
 Khrushchev is informed of what has happened and orders Soviet and Warsaw Pact forces to capture West Berlin . West Berlin was captured by Soviet forces .
 He also orders Soviet bombers to begin commencing air raids on U.S. cities and orders the Soviet navy out to sea . The Soviet navy is also ordered out of sea .
 One minute later one of the American missiles explodes in Havana killing thousands, including Fidel Castro and Raul and Fidel Castro . Thousands of people were killed in the attack .
 Second missile explodes squarely in Moscow reducing the entire city to ruins . Six minutes after that, the second missile explodes . The entire city was destroyed .
 President Kennedy fails to make contact with Khrushchev during the war with the Soviet Union . Kennedy was in the midst of a war raging across the world and the survival of his nation at stake .
 House to house conflict erupts between NATO and Warsaw Pact forces in Berlin . NATO forces clash with Warsaw Pact troops in house-to-house conflict in house to house clash .
 Soviet Bombers begin reaching their targets in the continental U.S. Soviet bombers began bombing the continental United States in 1944 .
 Nuclear-armed bombers drop their payloads all over the continental U.S. and Canada . Seattle, Minneapolis, Anchorage, and Detroit, are all annihilated .
% of Soviet bombers are shot down as they enter or leave U.S. airspace . Tens of thousands of civilians are killed or wounded .
 Similar events occur in Europe, the Middle East, East Asia, the Soviet Union, Central America and Australia . Similar events take place in Europe and the United States .
 At 3:15 PM a Soviet 2 megaton bomb reaches its target at Strategic Air Command in Omaha, Nebraska, Nebraska . The bomb was a Soviet missile strike that struck Omaha . It was the first time a Soviet bomb had hit Omaha .
 Soviet Missiles strike Communist China in a preemptive strike to stop a possible Chinese invasion of the Soviet homeland . Missiles were fired in a pre-emptive strike against Communist China .
 Six American missiles are launched from their bases in Turkey at targets in the Soviet Union . All but one missiles reach their targets and effectively destroy several key Soviet command centers and air bases .
 Soviet Command and Control Authority orders the launching of 6 additional missiles at Key Chinese military sites . The remaining Soviet command and Control authority orders the launch of six additional missiles .
 Chairman Mao is killed when a Soviet missile destroys his bunker, and 3 more missiles hit their targets . U.S special forces and regular army units begin securing vital oil supplies throughout Saudi Arabia . Egypt, Syria and Jordan begin invading Israel .
 Farther East, India and Pakistan begin engaging in armed heavy conflict . Farthers East: India, Pakistan engage in armed conflict . Pakistan and India are engaged in conflict in Kashmir .
 In the United States President Kennedy declares martial law while in Europe full scale war breaks out as Warsaw Pact forces begin invading Western Europe . In the U.S. President Kennedy declared martial law in response to the invasion .
 Several airfields in Western Europe begin launching nuclear armed bombers towards the Soviet Union . October 30 9:17-9:32 PM: Soviet paratroopers begin landing in Alaska .
 Combat in Alaska escalates to full battles with heavy combat . Heavy combat occurs outside Anchorage, Alaska .
 In the Middle East Israeli aircraft successfully destroy hundreds of their Egyptian and Syrian counter parts . In the Mideast Israeli aircraft have destroyed hundreds of counter parts in the region .
 Attempts by Chinese aircraft to destroy U.S. base at Okinawa disastrously fail . Attempts to destroy the base fail to materialize .
 Soviet and Warsaw Pact armored forces supported by aircraft begin blitzing West Germany and Finland . The invasion of Finland and West Germany was the first of the Cold War .
 October 31 3:00-3:36 AM: Nuclear armed Soviet bombers successfully destroy several air bases in Western Europe using tactical nuclear weapons . October 31: Soviet aircraft attempt to destroy the U.S. base at Pearl Harbor . October 30: Soviet bombers destroy several Western Europe air bases
 British, French and American leaders send more missiles towards the Soviet Union's advancing armies . Upon hearing of this British and French leaders sent more missiles .
 In the Middle East Egyptian, Jordanian and Syrian armies are thwarted, but more re-inforcements arrive . In the region, the Egyptian and Jordanian armies have been thwarted by the Arab Spring .
 In Alaska Soviet paratroopers begin to suffer huge losses after additional American forces show up . In Alaska, Soviet troops suffered huge losses due to the presence of American forces .
 NATO missiles launched by NATO detonate at medium altitude above advancing forces of the Warsaw Pact . The missiles detonated at medium altitudes above the advancing forces . NATO missiles were launched by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The blasts seriously damage communications among the advancing battle groups and disorganise their forces . Though only light casualties, the blasts cause light casualties . The blasts also disorganize their forces, disorganizing them .
 British troops begin engaging Soviet forces in West Germany by attacking at the best opportunity . Despite being at war, a power struggle breaks out between rival Chinese leaders to determine the next chairman of the Communist party .
 Soviet forces suffer great casualties and lose valuable equipment, though sheer numbers settle it into a stalemate . The battle was fought in the Soviet Union's first major battle since the Second World War .
 Italian, French, British and Dutch aircraft cause enough Soviet casualties to stop the advance of NATO forces . NATO forces are miraculously saved by the aircraft .
 Soviet commanders, believing that their enemies must not be allowed to escape order tactical nuclear strikes across a large area . Soviet commanders believed their enemies would not be able to escape .
 When the weapons are dropped they detonate and inaccurately destroy huge swaths of land . Thousands of NATO and Warsaw Pact forces as well as civilians were killed by the bombs .
 American paratroopers begin landing in Cuba and meet fierce resistance from the Cuban military . The Cuban military responded with fierce resistance to the landing .
 Soviet forces in Alaska refuse to surrender and begin a second round of fighting . Soviet forces continue to fight in Alaska . Russian President Vladimir Putin declares victory over Soviet Union .
 Soviet and American forces destroyed key oil reserves in Saudi Arabia . Saudi Arabia's oil reserves were destroyed by both Soviet and U.S. forces .
 Israel captures the Golan Heights and West Bank and beats back the Jordanian army and Egyptian tank units . The war between Israel and it's neighbors meets a turning point in Israel's capture of the West Bank .
 In China the war with the Soviet Union spreads into Mongolia with Chinese forces moving against the capital city of Ulan Bator . In China, the war against the Soviet Soviet Union ends in Mongolia .
 American troops begin sailing into Cuba, and the country begins to lose strength . The country begins losing strength though still furiously fighting against American troops . U.S. troops begin to sail into Cuba and begin to withdraw .
 Massive Egyptian forces begin to attack Israel, and set up trenches far into Israeli land . Egyptian forces began to attack Israeli land in the early 1950s . Egyptian government forces set up trench lines far into Israel's land .
 Cuban and American troops slaughter each other at the battle of Matanzas . The battle took place at the end of the Cuban-American conflict .
 American ships begin to be torpedoed, but they are slightly winning the ground battle . U.S. is slightly winning ground battle, but losing ground battle.
 Britain comes in from the North and attacks large cities such as Bremen and Hamburg . Britain comes into from the north and attacks big cities like Hamburg and Hamburg.
 The Germans are granted permission from NATO countries to begin building their own Anti-Soviet army . The Germans have been granted permission to build their own anti-Soviet forces .
 Soviets are ambushed from the back of their offensive and when another fire bomb is launched, they are forced to submit . Soviets were forced to subdue after being ambushed by fire bombs .
 President Kennedy meets with the Joint Chiefs at a top secret location to discuss the war . President Kennedy was in the middle of the war when the war broke out .
 With U.S. forces beginning to gain the advantage Kennedy and his generals debate whether to negotiate peace with the Soviets or to continue to fight . Kennedy's generals debated whether to continue fighting with Soviets .
 In Cuba, U.S. troops continue moving inland and take several key strongholds after suffering heavy casualties . U.N. forces continue to move inland after heavy casualties in recent weeks .
 NATO forces continue to push Soviet forces back hundreds of miles in Europe . NATO forces are pushing Soviet forces into Europe's borders .
 At 4:01 PM a spat of nuclear exchanges occur after the Red Army uses nuclear weapons in China and via submarine on the U.S. cities of Los Angeles, Charlotte, and Atlanta . The exchanges take place in China, China and the United States .
 Kennedy orders the launching of a missile at Smolensk in the Soviet Union . Kennedy ordered the missile launch after hearing of the threat .
 China sends its own missile directly toward Samara . After the detonation of the missiles, China sends it back directly to Samara.
 In the Middle East, the United States suffers heavy losses against the Soviet Union in Saudi Arabia . The U.S. suffered heavy losses .
 In Israel the Egyptians once again are pushed back by Greek re-inforcements . In Israel, the Egyptian government is pushing back by re-invasion . In Egypt the Egyptians are pushing back in Israel .
 In Pakistan, Indian forces break through and begin capturing huge tracks of land in Kashmir . Indian forces capture huge tracks in Kashmir and capture Kashmir in Pakistan .
 In Alaska the Soviet drive continues and thousands more U.S. re-inforcements arrive to try to quell the Red Army . In Alaska thousands more re-insurgents arrive to fight the Soviet invasion .
 In South Africa black uprisings occur which are met with violent response by the government . The government has a history of violent reaction to the black people's movements .
 Finland and Sweden officially join the war on the side of NATO and begin to invade the North Western Soviet Union . Finland joins the NATO invasion of the Soviet Union in the invasion of North Western Russia .
 The Red Army in Alaska becomes completely surrounded by U.S. forces and once again begins experiencing heavy losses . Red Army begins to experience heavy losses again .
 Soviet forces surrender after attempts to break through American lines fail . U.S. forces were outnumbered by Soviet forces in World War II .
 The attacks mostly fail and produce high casualties for both Pakistan and Bangladesh, though they are successful in destroying six of them . The attacks are mostly unsuccessful, but the attacks are successful .
 American troops begin entering the major cities of Cuba though resistance is fierce . U.S. troops make progress .
 Uprisings against the Shah in Iran turn into all out war when troops are deployed to the streets . The Shah was overthrown by the Shah during the Shah's reign in Iran .
 Within twenty minutes Britain and Portugal have requested American and French support, which comes quickly . Within 20 minutes British and Portuguese have requested U.S. and France support .
 The U.S. military tells China to pull back from Hong Kong and Macau or face nuclear retaliation . China has threatened to use nuclear weapons if it withdraws control of Hong Kong or Macau .
 When China refuses an American submarine destroys Beijing with a nuclear missile . The U.S. forces a submarine to attack China with a missile when China refuses .
 A British missile heads toward Shanghai, and Macau's invaders are forced to submit under heavy French and Portuguese offensives . Macau is forced to subside under heavy pressure from the French, Portuguese forces .
 After the British missile obliterates Shanghai, the Chinese air strike flies over Hawaii and bombs it heavily, but are beaten back before much damage is done .
 Brazil stations troops in the Lesser Antilles and sends supplies and re-inforcements to U.S. troops in Cuba . The resistance is now slightly more powerful than the American troops .
 Greek and Turkish troops fail to arrive in time at Bulgaria, which had just been invaded by Soviet Forces . The incident took place during the Second World War .
 A massive Japanese air offensive heads stealthily towards Novosibirsk, while China prepares another strike . Japan's massive air offensive headed stealthily to Russia's capital .
 Bulgaria tries to invade Greece, but is only successful in provoking more Greeks to fight them . Bulgaria was successful in invading Greece, only provoking more people to fight it .
 Italy sends troops to help the Greeks, but Bulgaria manages to hold up after fresh Soviet troops come to help . Bulgaria managed to hold on despite Italy's intervention .
 An official ceasefire has been signed between Israel, Egypt, Jordan and Syria . The Syrian conflict has been a major source of tension between Israel and Egypt .
 The four countries would eventually accept each other and form an alliance . The four nations eventually accepted each other .
 Japanese bombers reach Novosibirsk, and only one of the group of 14 shot down and captured . Only one of them is captured .
 This would be an asset for the Japanese, since the Soviet Union was dealing with America . The Soviet Union would be dealing with the U.S.
 German, Scandinavian, and French troops pushed harshly against Soviet Resistance . German and Scandinavian troops pushed against Soviet resistance .
 Cuban revolutionary hero, Che Guevara, was killed during combat with U.S. forces . Che died in a house firefight with the United States in 1968 .
 As time passes the Cubans, begin to lose more and more men and material and are pounded on all sides by the U.S. military. As time . passes, Cubans begin to . lose more . and more . material and lose more than .
 German aircraft heavily bomb Yekaterinburg, but many bombers are shot down . Many bombers were shot down after successfully completing the bombing run .
 Chinese leaders sign a ceasefire with NATO and the Warsaw Pact . After suffering unprecedented losses and destruction, Chinese leaders signed a cease-fire with NATO . Chinese leaders say they are committed to fighting for their country .
 Khrushchev meets with many of his top advisers to discuss a plan for the dire situation of the war . The war broke out in the early 1950s .
 Iraq, seizing its chance invades Iran and makes rapid progress and faces little resistance . Iranian troops are busy putting down a rebellion. Iraq invades the country and makes progress quickly .
 The great Soviet offensive begins with the remaining Soviet troops moving east and south to strike the advancing NATO armies . The great offensive begins in the fall of the Soviet Union .
 NATO forces are pounded on all European fronts by the advancing Warsaw pact . Within hours NATO forces were pounded by all fronts by advancing Warsaw Pact .
 The Soviet attack is relentless as they use numbers rather than tactics to strike at NATO's lines . The Soviet use of numbers and tactics to attack NATO forces is a key strategy .
 NATO aircraft begin to penetrate the Warsaw Pact's weak air cover and begin inflicting vast casualties on the Pact's forces . The Soviet advance was drastically slowed as NATO aircraft began to penetrate air cover . The Warsaw Pact forces suffered vast casualties in the battle .
 By 10:30 PM the remnants of the Red air force arrive to provide relief to their armies . The remnants of their air force arrived to provide aid to the Red army .
 At 11:00 PM President Kennedy orders a massive retaliatory air strike on the Soviet and Warsaw Pact armed forces . President Kennedy ordered a massive air strike against the Soviet, Warsaw Pact military forces .
 NATO aircraft begin a massive air raid against the remaining Warsaw Pact air bases and munitions supplies across Eastern Europe . NATO aircraft take part in massive air raids against the Warsaw Pact bases . The raid is the largest ever in NATO history .
 The raid destroys huge portions of the Soviet military industrial complex . The raid was the first to destroy Soviet military installations in the Soviet Union .
 As the war begins to cool down, Kennedy manages after much difficulty to contact Khrushchev . Kennedy managed to contact the Soviet Union leader in the early 1950s .
 The USSR and Continental Europe have sustained the greatest damage . The Iranians eventually succeed in pushing out the Iraqi invaders . In South Africa, the Apartheid regime is taken down and a liberal democracy and equality is set up .
 Massive use of tactical nuclear weaponry leaves the interior of Europe decimated . Heavy radiation leaves much farmland unarable .
 In Eastern Europe, people begin to rebel against Soviet domination, feeling that the Soviets are responsible for their plight . The Soviets were responsible for the people's plight, and they began to rebel .
 The Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland is dissolved . Taiwan, taking advantage of the chaos, makes small territorial gains on southern Chinese coast .
 Poland invaded and annexed its territory lost after WWII . Finland invades the inhospitable Karelia regions of the Soviet Union and annexed them . Romania annexed Bessarabia. Finland invaded the Caucasus .
 In Spain, the dictator Francisco Franco is overthrown by the European Crisis and the Third Republic is proclaimed Spanish . The dictator was overthrown in Spain by the EU Crisis .
 As the USA is recovering from its own crisis unable to help, many Europeans migrate to Latin America . Europe is now in chaos and anarchy, many European migrants are leaving the country .
 First Strike Timelines community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted . Community content is published under the use of these images and videos under the authority of First Strike .