 No attempt was made to list all press queries, only those of significance . No attempt is made to show all press questions from the press .
 October 15, 1962, is October 15 . October 15 is a day of remembrance of the events that took place on October 14, 1962 .
 Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, Atturney General, General Taylor, Messrs. McNamara and General Taylor attended the memorial service . The memorial service was held in New York City, New York .
 Gilpatric, Ball, Martin, Bundy, Sorenson, Dillon, Bahlen, O'Donnell. Bundy, Dillon and Bahlen. Bundy. Bundy . Bundy. Dillon. Bundy: "It's a good thing for you to be a good guy"
 Aerial reconnaissance shows indications of 28 launching pads and other significant indication of mobile launches with missiles . October 17, 1962 Wednesday Aerial Reconnaissance shows indications that 28 launch pads were used .
 Aerial reconnaissance continues. Nc announcements made and no queries answered regarding Cuba . Nc. announcements made .
 CINCONAD commences movement of forces to augment air defense of Southeast United States . CIN CONDOAD: Movements to augment U.S. Air Force presence .
 Last March USAF announced it would activate an F-105 wing at George AFB . F-100 wing would be moved from George to Homestead AFB to make room for the wing .
 Air Force also announced last January it would buy some McDonnell F4H fighters . The Air Force will buy some of the fighter jet's fighters .
 In March it announced it would set up two wings in Florida at McDill AFB and have the people in place and ready to receive the new aircraft .
 The Air Force has placed no aircraft in Florida in recent months and has no announced plans to ""beef up"" against MIGs in Cuba . The Air force has no plans to "beef-up" Cuba .
 V A Support personnel and equipment for aviation units engaged in the Carribbean exercise . Why were they sent there? Support personnel .
 Pentagon denies any alert has been ordered or military measures have been set in motion against Communist-ruled Cuba . Pentagon spokesman denies any emergency military measures are in place .
 The Pentagon has no information indicating the presence of offensive weapons in Cuba . Further, the ipokesman said the Pentagon is not aware of any offensive weapons .
 The ENTERPRise loaded more than 80 planes yesterday for sailing to meet any hurricane eventuality and to conduct certain engineering testa at sea . The Enterprise Enterprise loaded 80 planes for sailing .
 Q UPI San Diego asks why Marines are being loaded on planes at El Toro . U.P. San Diego asked why Marines were being loaded up on planes .
 AP has reports of movement of Marines yesterday from Pendleton to El Toro . Marines were reportedly moving from the base in El Toro, California .
 PHIBRIGLEX-62 is an Atlantic Fleet exercise £n the Caribbean which began October 15 . It is scheduled to end in coming week with an amphibious sequence .
 October 20, 1962: "We know of no encampment of Army troops there and would assume they are forces headed for participation in participation in the war"
 Routine local exercise was carried out at Jacksonville today by the Navy . The exercise ended at noon and was a routine exercise .
 Q Report that 476th TFS at George AFB, California, sent eight or nine planes'of support equipment and personnel to Cuba early this week . Q Report: 476 TFS sent 8 or 9 planes' of support equipment to Cuba .
 Aerial reconnaissance definitively indicated buildup of offensive weapons in Cuba . N October 21, 196Z Sunday Aerial reconnaissance confirmed buildup of military forces in Cuba.
 JCS directed CINCLANT to be prepared to evacuate dependents from Gtnio . JCS also directed Cinclant to prepare for evacuations of dependents .
 Sunday Q Report from Langley that KB -50 tanker planes have taken off and unable to find out their mission . October 21, 1962 Q Report: "KB -50 tankers take off"
 Some KB-50's have taken off as reported but it is a part of a normal mobility training activity . A Some of the reported incidents have not been reported .
 Authorieed TAC to implement 1/8 airborne alert and execute force dispersal plan . Authorized to implement . 1/4 airborne alert, execute force .
 Objective of quarantine is to prevent entry into Cuba of offensive weapons and to attain the withdrawal of the weapons now in Cuba, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin .
 Announced redeployment of air defense units, reinforcement of Guantanamo, evacuation of dependents in Guantanamo . Increased alert status of forces world-wide .
 Described type missiles now in Cuba and pointed out missile installations on photographs . Described the type missiles that are now being used in Cuba .
 Announced presence of IL-28 bombers in Cuba and gave a general description of the capabilities of that aircraft . Announced the presence of the IL-27 bombers in Havana .
 Q When will correspondents be permitted on board ships in quarantine operations and go to Gtmo.com . Q When . correspondents will be permitted to travel to the U.S. and other countries .
 These Marines will be retained in the area for further training and then returned to Camp Pendleton . The Marines will then be sent back into the U.S.
 Tuesday Executive Committee NSC meet* twice, 10:00m. and 6:00 m. ET twice . NSC meeting: 10:30m. ET, 6:30pm ET, 7:00pm ET .
 President signs Proclamation of Interdiction and Executive Order authorizing SECDEF to call up Reserves and retain personnel on active duty . SECDEF is authorized to call-up Reserves, retain personnel .
 Released seven pictures of Marine reinforcements arriving at Guantanamo . 2:10 a.m. release of pictures of reinforcements arriving .
 Admiral Dennison, CINCLANT, as responsible Unified Commander for overall operation . Announcement of appointment of Admiral George Anderson as the Executive Agent for Operation of the Quarantine, Admiral George .
 President signed Executive Order authorizing Secretary of Defense to call up Reserves and retain personnel on active duty . Announcement that President signed .
 Declined to predict when first intercept would occur and declined to comment on position of Soviet ships . Declined not to predict first intercepts would occur .
 Four picture* of aerial reconnaia sauce released . Public AFFAIRS Affairs: 1962 .
 There will be no release of any such information including pictures or film without the approval of the designated office . The film will be shown at the end of this article .
 Mr Sylvester refused to comment on whether or noi any intercepts had been made .
 He said he expected that the media and the people would be informed after an interception and boarding had occurred . He expected that he expected the media to be informed .
 Public AFFAIRS took place October 24, 1962 . It was the day of the arrival of ships carrying dependents from Guantanamo Bay .
 Informed Services, JCS and Unified and Specified Commands of twelve types of information considered vital to our national security and not releasable by Department of Defense .
 From time to time as the situation develops, specific information may be judged nc longer necessary to be with held and can then be released . Specific information may then be judged no longer necessary and then released .
 President issues instructions for the interdiction and inspection of non-Bloc ships . President issues orders to interdict and inspect non-Russian ships .
 USNS UPSHUR, USS DUXBURY BAY, USS DESOTO COUNTY arrived Norfolk, Virginia in the afternoon with 2146 dependents from Naval Base, Gtmo. USNS DUX BURGUR and USS DES DESOTO County .
 Soviet oiler, BUCHAREST, SUIACO, UK from Southampton to Kingston, and Polish ship to New Orleans cleared through quarantine . Soviet oil tanker, BU CHARSTEST, UK, cleared through quarantine . Polish ship, BUCHEST, Polish ship and Soviet oil
 At least a dozen Soviet vessels have turned back because apparently they were carrying offensive weapons . Mr Sylvester announced that at least 12 Soviet vessels had turned back .
 Announced that Navy had intercepted a Soviet tanker proceeding towards Cuba and that it was permitted to proceed without boarding . Announced it was intercepted and allowed it to proceed .
 Navy reports ship heavily loaded; satisfied that it is an ordinary oil tanker . U.S. Navy says it is satisfied that the ship is not an oil tanker; it is just an ordinary tanker .
 Mr Sylvester reports that there are ships still enroute Cuba but refused to elaborate .
 Requests to expand on Mr Sylvester's statement regarding the Soviet tanker were denied . Requests were also denied .
 USS PERRY intercepts Swedish ship COLLANGATTA^ bound from Leningiad to Havana . Swedish ship was en route to Havana, Cuba, bound for Havana .
 Pictures of Commanding Officer and Executive Officer of USS PIERCE and USS KENNEDY furnished to media. 3:15m. ET .
 Soviet ship VINITZA arrived this morning at 4:30 in Havana with a large reception . Have report according to Havana radio that Soviet ship arrived in Havana this morning .
 S jets have not buzzed Cuban airfields today as a demonstration of what we can do . S jets are not buzzing Cuban air fields today as an example of what they can do, says the U.S. Air Force .
 A Cannot answer this question under provisions of the guidance put out on 24 October . Cannot answer it under provisions put out by guidance put in out of October .
 Mr Sylvester at a press briefing on 25 October said, ""There has been constant surveillance. "" 4:50m.m.
 CINCLANTFLT directs interception of Lebanese ship PELLA . Not to be boarded unless advised to do so . 8:35m. 8:45m.
 Low-level reconnaissance planes flying over Cuba had been fired upon by light anti-aircraft and small arms .
 President approves call-up of 24 troop carrier squadrons of the Air Force Reserve . Reserve is the largest reserve force in the U.S.
 Public Affair* hold meeting with executives and representatives of various media to discuss on-the-spot coverage at Guantanamo and with quarantine forces .
 Mr McNamara announces that our unarmed reconnaissance aircraft had been fired on . The aircraft was fired on by the U.S. Air Force, an unarmed aircraft .
 President Obama orders active duty 24 Troop Carrier Squadrons of the Air Force Reserve with their associated support units . Announces that he had instructed the Secretary of the . Air Force to order to active duty .
 Military reconnaissance aircraft conducting surveillance over Cuba was missing and presumed lost . Announced that a military reconnaissance aircraft was missing .
 5th Marine Expeditionary Brigade embarked at West Coast ports, enroute Atlantic. Executive Committee Meeting Meeting . 5th Marines Expeditionary brigade embarked at west Coast ports .
 Announced designations of units of the Air Force Reserve which were called up . Announced the designations .
 Released 10 pictures of chronology of build up of Cuban fire missile bases . Released by Cuban government of Cuban president .
 Quarantine would remain in effect and ships remain on station until arrangements could be made by United Nations for effective inspection . Aerial reconnaissance was presumed to be continuing .
 The tanker and the freighter are the only two ships we can comment on . A tanker and a freighter have been the only ships we have commented on .
 Surveillance flights over Cuba were made today and that all aircraft had returned safely . P3V from Bermuda ordered to locate and photograph MIR and KARL MARX at first light . A Told that Mr Sylvester is due to hold news briefing after 5:00 .
 He also announced that surveillance was not being carried out at the request of SECGEN U Thant . He also said that surveillance wasn't carried out in response to the request by SECGEN .
 In. answer to query refused to identify the type of aircraft missing over Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff reinstitute quarantine operations beginning at daybreak 1 November . Quarantine operations will resume at the start of November 1 .
 No boarding or visit and search or use of force authorized except in self-defense or as directed by higher authority . Use of force not authorized except for self defense .
 You will recall that the original announcements were to the effect that the blockade would be suspended for two days . A You will . recall that . the original . announcements were made to the . effect of the suspension of the . blockade .
 Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr. was shot down over Cuba . Cuban government has agreed to return his remains to the U.S.
 The Secretary of Defense announced that preliminary analysis of aerial photographs collected on 1 November reconnaissance mission over Cuba provided clear indications that work was proceeding on the dismantling of the missile sites .
 A spokesman said launch erectors had been removed, much of the associated equipment removed, cable conduits between control points and launch pads broken up . Some areas of the sites had been plowed and bulldozed .
 November 3, 1962 Saturday 2:30 Two Dominican Republic Frigates report to COMSOLANT for operational control . November 3: 1962 .
 Argentine SA-16s placed under operational control of Commander Air Rescue Service, McDill . Argentine SA16's placed under . operational control . Commander Air . Rescue Service . McDill.
 November 5, 1962 Monday 11:16 a, CINCLANT directs 4 flights photo reconnaissance . A We have no available information on any of the three queries.
 AP says there is no evidence that the Russians are packing up their atomic capable bomber aircraft in Cuba . AP states that "" United States authorities"" say there is no evidence that the Russians are packing up their atomic capable aircrafts .
 <DOD would not comment on any movement or fighting equipment . Pointed out that <Dod would not reveal any movement of any equipment .
 Movement of Soviet personnel and equipment in Cuba towards sea ports suggests hurried disassembly of equipment for overseas shipment .
 The documentation includes the faded U.S.-led invasion at the Bay of Pigs, renewed attempts to overthrow Castro through Operation Mongoose and Operation Northwoods . Topics include naval warfare, naval warfare and Soviet and Cuban decision making and communications during the crisis .
 Two Argentine Destroyers will join the Quarantine Force on 8 November . Announced that two Argentine destroyers were to join the force .
 PERRY assigned to intercept, trail and establish contact at first light 9 November .
 26 media representatives flown to Guantanamo. Flyover quarantine force by 10 media representatives . Flyover quarantines force by . 10 media. representatives .
 November 11, 1962 Sunda y Reinspection of several ships conducted uring the day . November 10, 1962 Saturday Flyover quarantine force by 1Z media representatives . November 11  Reinspections of various ships conducted .
 November 11, 1962 Sunday 4:30 Released four pictures of uncovered missiles aboard Soviet ships outbound from Cuba . November 11: 1962 Sunday . November 12, 1962 . Released four photos of uncovered missile missiles aboard Russian ships .
 Both Admiral Anderson and Admiral O'Donnell have referred to Soviet submarines operating in Caribbean and Atlantic .
 Argentine destroyers ARA ROSALES and ARA ESPORA are now on their assigned stations . 6:20m. ARA ESORA is now on its assigned stations at 6:30m.
 A British, Spanish, Swedish, Norwegian, Lebanese, Greek, German, Czech, and Soviet. A British. Swedish, Swedish .
 Defense spokesman stated that despite the fact that the show had been taped on Saturday, 10 November, the missile count was not verified until just before air time on Sunday, 1 1 November . DOD released number of missiles counted one half hour before airtime .
 Nine ships believed to be carrying missiles were Inspected alongside . 18 media representatives flown to Guantanamo .
 Names of the ships that cleared through quarantine' A Names not available . Names of ships cleared .
 Defense Department satisfied that 42 missiles had been removed from Cuba . Spokesman says 42 missiles have been removed .
 Until we have so-called on-site inspection of the island of Cuba, we can never be sure that 42 is the maximum number that the Soviets brought into Cuba, says CNN.com .
 Nine Soviet vessels were given visual and photographic inspection by the United States destroyers . Hundreds of photographs have been taken from the air and from shipboard of destroyers that took part in the procedure .
 The photographs taken, as well as eyeball reports by naval observers, are now being analyzed at all levels of the intelligence community . The photos taken, along with reports from naval observers are being analyzed .
 Pending that assessment, responsible officials in the Defense Department and in the Government are satisfied, on the basis of evidence to date, that the objects described as missiles aboard the Russian vessels were indeed Soviet missiles .
 Defense spokesman refused to comment on whether any reconnaissance planes had been shot at in the last two weeks .
 A We have nothing to say on Cuba at this time. 15 media representatives flown to Guantanamo € SUMMARY OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTIONS AFTER 16 NOVEMBER 1962 . A 21 November 1962 Announced that as of 6:45m., 20 November, that the quarantine forces
 The Combined Quarantine Force, the Inter -American Force, ordered to discontinue operations . The Combined quarantine Force was the Inter-American Force .
 Outbound Soviet ships would be located and photographed by aircraft of the Anti -Submarine Warfare Forces of the Atlantic Fleet if directed . 12-point security guidelines cancelled .
 The Secretary of Defense authorised Secretaries of the Navy and the Air Force to terminate the extension of tours of duty and to release those Reservists called to active duty .
 Between 17 November and 19 December 33 news media representatives were flown to Guantanamo . E Between November and December 33 media representatives from the U.S. flew to Guantanamo. E
 Phase redeployment of forces in Southeastern United States was announced in November 1962 . C 27 November 1962 was announced .
 18 news media representatives were flown over Soviet ships outbound from Cuba with 1L-28 aircraft aboard . D On 7 December 1962, 18 news reporters were flown . D