 Daily Kos moves in solidarity with the Black community . We are proud to celebrate the success of our community .
 Site content may be used for any purpose without explicit permission unless otherwise specified . Use of this content is limited to allow us to view the content of our content .
 JFKCubanMissile is now in orbit of the Atlantic Ocean .
 Obama might get to read it after an aide to an aide sends it up the chain . My hope is that this revisionism will percolate upwards and that even Obama might be reading it .
 Faux images of the past produce reckless adventures in the present and future . "Faux images" are the result of a search for the past and present .
 JFK deliberately heads towards a crowd trying to assert their right to cross the street . Think of JFK as a drunk driver who deliberately heads toward a crowd . JFK was killed by a police officer in 2009 .
 A wise person in the crowd sees what's going on and amazingly gets JFK's attention and he puts on the brakes . JFK's motorcade was stopped by a wise person who saw what was going on .
 His passengers want him to keep going, but he says no, as his head is now clear . His passengers say he should keep going as he says he's now clear of the ordeal .
 On October 16, 1962, Kennedy and his advisers were stunned to learn that the Soviet Union was installing nuclear-armed medium and intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba .
 Jupiter missiles were an exceptionally vexed component of the U.S. nuclear arsenal . The Jupiter missiles are the most vexed part of the United States nuclear arsenal. They were launched in the 1960s .
 The tapes reveal that Kennedy and his advisers understood the nuclear situation in much the same way Khrushchev did . Remarkably, given the alarmed and confrontational posture that Washington adopted during the missile crisis .
 If so, the missiles paradoxically could have enhanced deterrence between the superpowers, and thereby reduced the risk of nuclear war . The missiles could have increased deterrence between superpowers and reduced nuclear war risk .
 The missiles’ military significance was negligible . Yet, the Kennedy administration advanced on a perilous course to force their removal . The missiles' military significance is negligible, but their removal was necessary .
 It put America in the curious position of having to go to war to uphold the very credibility that was supposed to obviate war in the first place . It still puts the U.S. in the position of going to war for credibility that is supposed to be obviated .
 The administration did not make such an overture to the Soviets . The administration, however, did not .
 Soviet withdrawal precipitated what remains the most dangerous nuclear crisis in history . Instead, the U.S. publicly demanded a unilateral Soviet withdrawal and imposed a blockade on Cuba .
 In the midst of that crisis, the sanest and most sensible observers saw a missile trade as a fairly simple solution . Adlai Stevenson and Walter Lippmann, for the Manchester Guardian, say it was a good idea .
 Khrushchev himself openly made this proposal on October 27 . The proposal was made in an effort to resolve the impasse . In an attempt to resolve this impasse, the proposal was rejected .
 According to the Kennedy administration, Washington rebuffed Moscow’s offer and instead forced a unilateral Soviet withdrawal . The story is said to have been the story of the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The crisis was resolved by an explicit but concealed deal to remove both the Jupiter and the Cuban missiles . In the late 1980s, the opening of previously classified archives and the decision by a number of participants to finally tell the truth revealed the truth .
 He did so for the same reasons that had largely engendered the crisis in the first place . Domestic politics and the maintenance of America’s image as the indispensable nation .
 Only a handful of administration officials knew about the trade . Most members of the ExComm, including Vice President Lyndon Johnson, did not know about it .
 McNamara and Rusk lied to Congress to maintain the cover-up, including McNamara, Rusk, who lied to them .
 JFK and others tacitly encouraged the character assassination of Stevenson, allowing him to be portrayed as an appeaser who “wanted a Munich” for suggesting the trade . Stevenson was portrayed by the administration as a appeaser for suggesting a deal that they would never have allowed .
 The patient spadework of Stern and other scholars has since led to further revelations . Stern's work has led to more revelations about the patient's treatment . Stern and others have spent decades working on the case .
 Robert Kennedy hardly inhabited the conciliatory and statesmanlike role that his allies described in their chronicles and memoirs . Robert Kennedy's posthumously published book, Thirteen Days, shows that he hardly inhabited that role during the crisis .
 JFK’s actions in resolving the crisis were reasonable, responsible, and courageous, says Stern . Stern and other scholars have upended the panegyrical version of events advanced by Schlesinger .
 Kennedy was shaken by the apocalyptic potentialities of the situation . Kennedy advocated, in the face of the bellicose and near-unanimous opposition .
 The U.S.R. had publicly offered such a reasonable quid pro quo. He clearly understood that history and world opinion would condemn him and his country for going to war .
 Kennedy in fact agreed to the missile swap and, with Khrushchev, helped settle the confrontation maturely . The legacy of that confrontation was nonetheless pernicious . Kennedy agreed to a missile swap, but the legacy of the confrontation was still pernical .
 By hiding the deal from the vice president, Kennedy and his team reinforced the dangerous notion that firmness in the face of what the U.S. construes as aggression, makes for a successful national-security strategy . Kennedy's strategy all but defines it .
 The president and his advisers also reinforced the concomitant view that America should define a threat not merely as circumstances and forces that directly jeopardize the safety of the country, but as circumstances that might indirectly compel potential allies or enemies to question America’s resolve .
 He said the U.S. could not tolerate such conduct by the Soviets . But he had privately acknowledged that the deployment of the missiles did not change the nuclear balance .
 This notion that standing up to aggression will deter future aggression fails to weather historical scrutiny . This notion of standing up for aggression will not withstand historical scrutiny, says CNN.com editor .
 After all, America’s invasion and occupation of Iraq didn’t deter Muammar Qaddafi, says John Avlon . America's intervention in Panama did not deter Saddam Hussein in 1991, he says . Avlon: America's war against North Vietnam didn't deter North
 The idea that a foreign power’s effort to counter the overwhelming strategic supremacy of the U.S. is misguided is profoundly misguided . The United States spends nearly as much on defense as does the rest of the world combined .
 Both liberals and conservatives oxymoronically assert that the safety of the United States demands that the country must “balance” China . Kennedy and his advisers perceived a threat in Soviet efforts to offset what was in fact destabilizing U.S. nuclear hegemony .
 Washington views as a hazard Beijing’s attempts to remedy the weakness of its own position . Policy makers acknowledge that the U.S. has crushing superiority right up to the edge of the Asian mainland .
 America's posture reveals more about its own ambitions than it does about China's . America’s posture, however, reveals more than its own ambition than that of China's, it says .
 Imagine if China’s air and naval forces were dominant and potentially menacing presence on the coastal shelf of North America . Imagine that the situation were reversed .
 In a vast part of the globe, the United States will not tolerate another great power’s interference . The U.S. is not willing to tolerate interference in the Arctic .
 America’s security wouldn’t be jeopardized if other great powers enjoy their own spheres of influence, says John Avlon . The U.S. would not be jeopardizing its security, he says .
 Statecraft is the antithesis of statecraft, which requires discernment based on power, interest, and circumstance . This esoteric strategizing has afflicted both Democratic and Republican administrations, and both liberals and conservatives .
 It is a stance toward the world that can easily doom the U.S. to military commitments and interventions in strategically insignificant places over trivial issues .
 It is a stance that can engender a foreign policy approximating paranoia in an obdurately chaotic world abounding in states, personalities, and ideologies .
 Benjamin Schwarz is The Atlantic’s literary editor and national editor . He is also the author of The Atlantic's national and literary editor .
 DK.Https.upgradeToHttp( document.getElementById); DailyKos.story.postRender; This content was created by a Daily Kos Community member .