 Library Connection provides the public with information about upcoming events, major programs and other news of the City of San Diego Public Library . The Library Connection is an online newsletter for the public .
 October Means Time for the ‘Scary Library’ A s Halloween approaches, children and adults are invited to celebrate the spooky time of year and be tricked with haunted themes and Halloween related stories .
 Classics such as “Dracula,” “Frankenstein,’ “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow” and others beckon you from the shelves . “Scary be read.”
 Andrew McDermott, Author of “The Tiger Chase, to speak at Central Library on Oct. 31 . Author of the Tiger Chase will speak at the Central Library .
 McDermott is a member of the new breed of writers who refuse to be shackled to a single genre . McDermott describes himself as just a story teller and is a new breed .
 He proves this with his knowledge and presentation of a diverse range of topics, he says .
 His latest novel is “The Tiger Chase,” which brings to light the plight of the South China tiger . It tells a wonderfully suspenseful story besides .
 Author Andrew McDermott has a new novel, “The Tiger Chase,” that revolves around the plight of the South China tiger . McDermott gives many detailed facts about the misuse of the animal and the quest .
 Mixed with ancient Chinese legends, “The Tiger Chase” is packed with humor, action, mystery and hope for a species that is at the very top of the endangered list .
 McDermott grew up in Nottingham, England . Free tours of the Central Library are held the first and the first .
 Mr McDermott moved with his wife and two children to Queensland this year to celebrate the Central Library’s 50th anniversary, the Australia, where they now live in the Gold Coast hinterland . tours take participants to the two basement levels of the library . Copies of Mr
 Each month the Library presents a variety of films, many of which are independent or foreign films . New Serra Mesa/Kearny Mesa Library distributed .
 In Korean with English subtitles . Central Library, 6:30m. public. munity officials will attend and the event is open .
 These will be inviting landscaped outdoor areas with views and sunshine . See story, page 5. Areas with views will be landscaped with views of sunshine .
 The interior of the building will be lost in a haunted house on the spookiest night of the year . The 10m. length of the San Carlos, 10.m. way. carry the architectural elements inside .
 Mission Valley, 7.m. build or improve 24 libraries throughout San Diego . Mission Valley Library: 7.5 million people visit San Diego. Mission Valley library: 7 million libraries in San Diego have been built or improved in the last five years . Mission valley library: 24 libraries in
 The San Ysidro Branch Library will celebrate its 80th Central Library, 2m. anniversary on Oct. from 2 to 8m. The library's 80th anniversary will be celebrated at 2 p.m.
 Fall Concert Series Continues at Central Library entertainment, food, games, games and other fun activities . The event will include Fall Concert series, food and games .
 The The Library’s Fall Concert Series will continue with three concerts . The public is invited to join in the festivities .
 Wong will perform works by Scarlatti, Schubert, Mendelssohn and Granados . The public is invited to Wong's "Thirty Something" birthday open house on Oct. 2 to 4 .
 Using his personal memories of covering Public Library and the City the conflict, the conflict was covered by the San Diego Public Library . Using personal memories, he gathered evidence from recent records and Club of San Diego .
 The book portrays an embattled young American presi. The cost is $25 for City Club members, and $35 for ingly calm and statesman like and a Russian ruler who was non-members .
 John McCone, the conservative Republican CIA head, was a crucial figure in White House debates . Cityclubofsandiego@prodigy.net.com is a city club of sandiegs.com .
 The San Diego Public Library will present three classical music programs . The U.S. never deployed missiles to Cuba; the Soviets thought the United States would have to acquiesce .
 Khrushchev beat back hotheads in their own councils, this Flutist Sarah Tuck and pianist Bryan Verhogel will perform at 7m. at the Pacific encounter of the Cold War .
 Soriano will perform in the gardens of a grand home in Mission Hills . Soriano is a classically trained vocalist from San Diego . He served as executive editor of The Pia .
 The pre-concert garden tour and champagne/wine tasting will occur at 2m. Pre-concert gardens tour will take place at 2.30pm .
 A special exhibit of a unique form of artwork by decoratthe Mission Hills Branch Library . The program is sponsored by the Friends of a special exhibit by the library .
 Fore-edge painting is an Music Series Music Series . Harpist Amy Lynn Kanner will perform ancient and little-known way of decorating books .
 The music from the English, Spanish and French Renaissance on designs can only be seen when the book is laid flat and the Oct. Oct. at 2:30m. The music is only available in the book and Oct. 30m.
 The San Diego Public Library has one of the Miramar Ranch Branch Library's largest collections of fore-edge painted books in the United Reception to follow in the courtyard . The library is 10301 Scripps Lake Drive .
 The construction of the new San Diego Padres ballpark the San Diego Horticulin downtown San Diego and the gentrification of the area tural Society in collaboraare changing the face of downtown . This event is free to the public .
 The “In the  with the San Diego Shadow of Petco Park” project collects stories of people affected by these changes . Natural History Museum in San Diego, California, collects stories from those affected by changes .
 Library is not normally open on weekends so the event here for generations . San Diegans with roots in downtown provides an opportunity for many people to visit the facility are invited .
 The library changing cityscape and urban dreams of the area . provides resources relevant to environmental services . Writing workshops will focus on each participant programs, and issues producing a personal history and perspective that will form a . personal history .
 A demonstration workshop in calligraphy will be held in the City Heights-Weingart Branch . A six-library tour of artist’s book exhibitions will be the first stop on Saturday, Oct. 31 .
 The representative will be on both Oct. 20 and Oct. 31 . The representative is expected to be in attendance at both those events .
 Visitors to the library during that write patrons’ names on individual bookmarks using calligratime will be able to construct their own accordion-style book phy. The library will be open to patrons' bookmarks .
 The City Heights Branch is located at 3795 Fairmount manager . I assume that we will also have a truck with calligraphy about verbs, titled “Flip It.” books out .
 The student artist’s book exhibit will also be at are challenging this concept . Student artist's book exhibit is also challenging the concept .
 The event is free and open to the San Ysidro Branch, however the dates have not yet been released . The event will be held at the branch, but the dates are not yet public .
 San Diegans can better understand their history and changes to their communities . Saturday, Oct. 3, 3 to 5m. their communities. Saturday, October 3, at 3 p.m. local time . San Diego will host a series of events in San Diego, California .
 African Religions in the Americas in San Diego will host more than 40 events . Panel presentation will enable San Diego residents to learn about African religions in the U.S.
 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is open at 2 p.m. Sunday . The church is a Mormon church .