 The authors analyze the order of battle of nuclear forces available to military and civilian officials in the U.S. and the Soviet Union in October and November of 1962 .
 The true nature of the crisis was even more serious and dangerous than previously thought, authors say . Once these nuclear forces are defined, the authors write . The authors say that once they are defined they will be even more dangerous .
 Nuclear weapons have range, yield, location, and delivery mode . Depending on their range, yields, location and delivery modes, nuclear weapons varied .
 In the tens of thouon the crisis, however, describe certain sands of pages that interpret and analyze weapon types and leave others out . Even so, in the thousands of pages, some of the pages are not complete .
 The this conflict, there are essential details tally, therefore, remains incomplete . To accurately assess how close the nuclear order of battle, a comprehensive comprehensive assessment of the conflict is still incomplete .
 As the crisis unfolded, there was a distinct poshave involved the Soviet Union using sibility that weapons could be launched tactical nuclear weapons to attack and by mistake, miscalculation, or misjudgrepel American forces during an invasion .
 If American soldiers were killed, how a war might have started, involves the Soviet use of one or several nuclear weapons . The United States would have had to have to use nuclear weapons to attack American retaliate .
 The 80 warheads for two regiments launch authority in advance by the Soviet govof land-attack cruise missiles, the FKR-1 .
 Moscow informed the Group of Forces in Cuba that the nuclear warheads on the FKR, Luna tactical launched against the U.S. Naval Base at rockets, and IL-28 jet bombers were not to be Guantanamo .
 They were either the short-range FROG missile deployed to fight had the United States Norris and Kristensen 89 invaded Cuba, and United States intelligence at the time SIOP, as it was known, not aware of them .
 The situation would have been more dire if the Soviets had directed SS-4s on US cities . For the United States, there would not be a situation more dire than if mate EuropeÕs possible role in the crisis .
 Soviet major general Igor Statsenko is commander of the Soviet United States and NATO weapons facing east . Statsenko was head of Soviet U.S. and NATO forces facing east, according to Statsenko . He was also head of NATO forces in the 1980s .
 The U.S. had 4,375 nuclear weapons deployed October 28, when the dismantlement in Europe was dismantled . In missile troops in Cuba, there were only 1962, the United States had only 1962 missile troops .
 50 weaponsÑ155-millimeter and 203years later, it is unknown how ready millimeter artillery shells, Nike they were or whether they were specifHercules surface-to-air missiles, land ically targeted at cities .
 Places along mines, and short-range misthe eastern seaboard, as far north as silesÑintended for the nuclear battleWashington, DC, were within the misfield .
 The United States and NATO fighter bombers had a supply of nuclear bombs deployed at Regional forces bases in Germany, Italy, Greece, Turkey, for both the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The United Kingdom, and the Union, their respective nuclear weapon Netherlands, as well as aboard
 U.S. weapons facing west could have been employed if escalation had occurred . The weapons would include medium-range and intermediate-range weapons .
 Many were likely aimed at nuclear exchange had been confined to European targets . A portion pointed Europe and the western part of the at United States bases and U.S. allies in the Pacific Soviet Union .
 Soviet fighter bombers based would have been approximately equalÑ near the western border of the Soviet Union but such geographic convenience was an . unlikely scenario at the time since the . time since gets in Western Europe .
 In the words of President sideÕs forces were still relatively imm imm immaKennedy in his October 22 address to ture. Kennedy in his speech to the nation on October 22 .
 The U.S. had, at its disposal for a . large-scale attack on the Soviet Union, actions would simply have been responsive . actionsÑand, under the conditions, over 3,500 Òfully generatedÓ nuclear seen as logical, prudent, and weapons
 The full presentation can be obtained by writing to Robert S Norris, 2,952 total nuclear weapons, and rnorris@fas.org. 1,003 refueling tankers .
 British and French weapons are excluded from BOMARC (Boeing Michigan 2. siles) siles .
 The term ÒcouplingÓ was used by Paul States, Soviet Union/Russia, Britain, France, Bracken and discussed in his book The China, India, Pakistan, Israel .
 He has co-authored References the Nuclear Notebook column since May 1987 . References have been published since 1987 .
 Edition Q researching and writing about the status of Zaloga S . nuclear weapons and the policies that direct Washington, DC, them .
 Kristensen is a co-author to the world nuclear forces overview in the SIPRI Yearbook and a freAuthor biographies quent adviser to the news media on nuclear weapons policy and operations .
 Robert S Norris is a senior fellow with the Federation of American Scientists in Scientists . Norris: Inquiries should be directed to Federation of the American Federation of . American Scientists .