 If launched from Cuba, missiles could easily hit the U.S. mainland . Cuba is only 90 miles off the Florida coast, a Soviet client state .
 President John Kennedy established a special executive committee ExComm to help him weigh his options . ExComm included an air attack on the launch facilities, an invasion of Cuba, a U.S. nuclear strike or a blockade of the island . Kennedy chose the option .
 Kennedy ordered a naval blockade and quarantine on all Soviet ships attempting to dock in Cuban ports . Kennedy told the American people that he was ordering the blockade . The blockade was ordered by the U.S. government in October 1962 .
 His aim was to prevent additional military hardware from reaching Cuba while he and ExComm explored possible courses of action . His aim is to prevent more military hardware reaching Cuba .
 The Kennedy administration negotiated with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and the Politburo in a frantic attempt to resolve the crisis and avert a nuclear war . For two weeks, the world held its breath as the Kennedy administration negotiate with .
 Kennedy ordered that all American forces be placed on DefCon (Defense Condition) Two, the alert level just short of wartime footing . The crisis was heightened by the downing of an American U-2 spy plane over Cuba .
 Khrushchev wrote Kennedy that he would remove the missiles in return for Kennedy's pledge that America would not invade Cuba to which Kennedy agreed . Kennedy agreed to remove the missile in exchange for a pledge that the U.S. would not attack Cuba .
 In return for Soviet removal of its missiles, U.S. would remove intermediate-range Jupiter missiles from Turkey, provided their removal was kept secret from the public . The president's brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, told the Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin
 The Cuban Missile Crisis was resolved in October 1962 . The Soviets accepted the deal, and the Cuban Missile crisis was resolved .
 The Soviets ""blinked"" by removing their missiles from the U.S. because the Soviets had removed their missiles . Ever since, it has been considered a victory for the United States because of the move .
 The Soviets came out of the crisis with their primary objective a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba achieved . But viewed objectively, the Soviet Union came out with its primary objective, a United States pledge to avoid invasion .
 Jupiters have been removed from Turkey and removed from the country . And they even got a bonus they hadn't expected the removal of them from Turkey .
 He was attached to a communications outfit stationed in Panama . He was within hours of being shipped to Cuba to take part in an invasion by U.S. forces .
 During 13 days in October, from Oct.-28, 1962, the United States, Soviet Union and the Cubans were on the brink of nuclear war . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were at risk of war for 13 days .
 U-2 spy plane photographed Russian medium range SS-4 missiles being installed in Cuba . U.S. U.2 plane photographed the missile installation in Cuba in 1961 .
 A year earlier, President John F Kennedy cooked up the ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba by dissidents backed by the Central Intelligence Agency . A year later, the CIA backed up the invasion .
 The invaders were to overthrow Fidel Castro, the Cuban strongman, who had just run Rafael Batista out of the country . Fidel Castro was overthrown by the Batista, who was just a few years old .
 Halfway through the invasion, Kennedy pulled the plug and the landing became a disaster for the Cubans involved who were captured by Castro’s Communist troops .
 As a result of the Bay of Pigs debacle, Castro convinced Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to provide economic support for the island nation . Castro convinced the Soviet Premier to provide support for Cuba .
 Khrushchev also snuck several shiploads of Russian missiles into Cuba . In addition to economic goods for Cuba, the Soviet Union also smuggled several Russian missiles .
 They were eventually aimed at the United States mainland when discovered by the American spy plane . The U.S. mainland was eventually discovered when they were aimed at .
 The Soviets denied the United States charge that it had nuclear missiles pointed at the U.S. Tension between Kennedy and Khrushchev almost reached the breaking point when Adlai Stevenson produced aerial photographs of the offending missiles in Cuba .
 He sent a secret letter to Kennedy telling him he would remove the Soviet missiles in Cuba if the U.S. would remove its nuclear missiles in Poland pointed at Russia . The letter was sent in secret to Kennedy .
 President Barack Obama and President Vladimir Putin are in the midst of international discussions . The two world leaders were in the middle of the discussions .
 Cheney was a member of the 3rd Signal Corps Platoon in the Panama Canal Zone . Cheney was awaiting orders to march into Cuba when he died .
 We thought we were about to be shipped to Cuba as part of the assault troops. We were told we were going to be sent to the island nation . We thought it would be part of an assault troop deployment to Cuba .
 At least 30 American war ships sail through Canal Zone headed for Cuba . We were right there at the Canal Zone watching at least 30 war ships .
 Despite the lack of official communication, word got around to us about what was happening with the Cuban crisis . The Cuban crisis has been dubbed a "humanitarian crisis"
 Some months before the Cuban problem erupted, “A hurricane wiped out British Honduras. Some months earlier, ‘A Hurricane wiped out . British Honduras’s government was wiped out by a hurricane .
 “Eight or nine of us from our company were sent to Honduras to help provide communications for the rescue and recovery operation,” he recalled .
 When Cheney returned to Panama he was transferred to a new unit—the 134th Ordinance Battalion . Cheney was transferred back to Panama in 2007 .
 Hawk Missile was a Hawk Missile outfit that maintained and fired the air-to-ground missile . Hawk missile outfit maintained and used the missile to launch the missile .
 He had been asking for a transfer out of his old unit because of lack of promotion . He was asked to leave his unit in order to be promoted to a higher rank .
 He was still a private first class after a couple of years in the service . He said he was still flying in private first-class .
 He wrapped up his three years with the missile outfit and was shipped back to the U.S. for discharge . He was discharged from the base in Florida .
 Right after Christmas 1963, he was discharged from the Army at Fort Jackson, South Carolina .
 After 18 years with the company he was director of operations for a McDonald’s franchise in the Enfield, Connecticut, area . He flipped hamburgers to begin with .
 He ran his own mom-and-pop restaurant in Westfield, Massachusetts, that he ran for a few years . He then signed on with a chain of 24 stores before becoming a food consultant .
 He spent the last 13 years owning another restaurant in Enfield, Conneticut . He spent that time owning another 13 years .
 He and his partner, Sheryl, moved to their North Port home two years ago . He and Sheryl moved to North Port, North Port in 2011 .
 CNN's John Sutter reports on the Cuban missile crisis from the Cuban point of view, then and now . He reports a very different perspective on the missile crisis .
 Cuban authorities say they're convinced that in 1962, the U.S. was preparing to invade Cuba again . A year earlier, the United States had tried to do the same thing again, Cuban officials say .
 Fidel Castro, his brother Raul, and their fellow revolutionary Ernesto Che Guevara wanted their Soviet allies to sign a mutual defense agreement . Under the agreement, the Soviets would treat an attack on Cuba as a Soviet attack on the Soviet Union itself as an attack .
 The Soviets came up with the idea of deploying their nuclear missiles on the island to deter a U.S. attack, Cuban officials say . Cuban officials have reported that the Soviets decided to deploy the missiles in Cuba .
 Cuban officials concluded the Soviets had not been seriously committed to defending Cuba, missiles or no missiles . Looking back on the episode later, Cuban officials said the Soviets were not serious about defending Cuba .
 Mysey Sabb, a former managing editor of ""Prints a la Pena"" the Cuban news agency, has studied the missile crisis closely .
 The crisis was a consequence, more to my opinion, to my understanding, was more than a consequence of bigger things than the possibility of an invasion to Cuba itself . The crisis, more than an invasion, was the result of a bigger thing than the situation itself, he said .
 Sabb says Cuban officials told him the Soviet military leadership wanted the missiles deployed in Cuba because it would help offset the military disadvantage they had at the time with the United States . Sabb says he has interviewed Cuban officials who said the missiles were deployed in the country .
 Sabb himself was 16 years old in October, 1962, and interested mainly in American music, he says . Sabb says he was 16 when he first heard American music in October 1962 .
 Public lighting was dimmed during the most critical nights in Havana, Cuba . He recalls that public lighting was also dimmed in Havana during the critical nights .
 There were few clues that the country was facing a crisis, he says . Other than that, he said, there was little evidence of a crisis in the country .
 "You didn't have this level of information to get a real notion of what might happen," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "You didn't feel on your head at the same as in the states the possibility of a new confrontation and what that might represent for the country," says CNN's John Sutter . "But you didn't . feel on the head"
 Soviet missiles were withdrawn after withdrawal of Soviet missiles . But he explained the situation after the withdrawal of them .
 Sabb says Cuban leaders came to believe Khrushchev had been bluffing with the nuclear missiles in Cuba . Sabb says leaders later came to realize they had a problem . Sabb: "It was a very serious mistake for the Cuban people to believe"
 Whether Fidel Castro and other Cuban leaders were themselves ready to start a nuclear war in order to stop a U.S. invasion, he says, is irrelevant . He says it's irrelevant whether Fidel Castro or other leaders were ready to go nuclear .
 Cubans were not allowed to decide what to do or not to do with the missiles . Cubans are allowed to choose what they want to do, not to decide whether to do .
 The risk of the Cuba, the Cuban leader deciding to launch the missiles was out of the question, he says . So I think that the risk of Cuba . launching the missiles, he said, was out the question .
 Sabb says the move to withdraw the missiles from Cuba was strictly a Soviet decision . Sabb says it was also a decision by the Soviet Union .
 Cuban leaders, he says, had their own demands to make of the Americans . Cuban leaders wanted an end to the trade embargo, for example, he adds . The U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to visit Cuba in 2015 .
 He says he didn't even know the Soviets and the Americans were negotiating . He says they didn't know they were negotiating with the Soviets .
 Had they known in advance with enough time, at least they would have argued . Had they knew in advance, they would've argued .
 Russia would have asked some sort of participation in these talks for the withdrawal of the missiles, the Russian president says . Russia would also have asked for a withdrawal of missiles, he says .
 It was not until the end of 1970 that again the relationship between Russia and Cuba became normal . We are to remember that it is not until 19 -the end of the 1970s that it was .
 Some reports have said the U.S. promised never to invade Cuba in exchange for the Soviet agreement to withdraw their nuclear missiles from Cuba . Some reports say the United States never invaded Cuba .
 The deepening U.S. involvement in Vietnam kept the Kennedy Administration from attempting a second intervention in Cuba, critics say .
 In 1962, President Richard Nixon was in the midst of a crisis in Washington, DC . President Nixon's administration was in charge of the White House during the crisis . The crisis is remembered differently by different people in Washington and beyond .
 The thrust of the argument at the meeting in Moscow is that Nikita Khrushchev feared an American invasion of Cuba and made this extraordinary strategic move to defend his protege, Fidel Castro, the Soviet leader says . The argument was that Khrushche feared a U.S. invasion
 I regret that American participants seemed to accept this reasoning . "I regret that Americans seemed to be accepting this reasoning," she says .
 In fact I have grave reservations about a good bit of the interpretation and some of the evidence tabled by Soviet speakers . In fact, I'm not convinced about the interpretation of the Soviet language .
 CIA Director John McCone briefed the president on the developing story on many occasions in the summer and through to the bitter end of the 13 days in October . I alerted McGeorge Bundy and President Kennedy to the definitive evidence of the secret missile deployment .
 The Soviet Union has never invited me to participate in any of these historical exercises, but I wish it had. I wish I had been invited to participate, he says. "I wish I was invited to take part," he says .
 I clearly remember what we knew and thought in Washington at the time, and I seriously doubt the spin on the story Moscow is presenting . I remember what I remember and what I clearly doubt is the spin Moscow is putting on its story . I think it's time for the U.S
 Many of the Americans reacting to these reminiscences in company with Soviet speakers seem rather to like the romantic idea that the two superpowers were at the very brink of war .
 Both sides were scrupulous in avoiding any remote chance of an actual nuclear exchange . The U.S. had at least a 4-to-1 advantage in ICBMs and perhaps 8 to 1 superiority in nuclear weapons capability, he says .
 None of the informed officials I talked with at the time thought the chances were more than 1 in 1,000 . While it is exciting to speculate on how brilliantly we escaped the nuclear holocaust, none of the . officials thought the chance of surviving the nuclear .
 President Barack Obama drew up a plan to deal with North Korea with a nuclear threat . The president's warning would have been hedged, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer helped draft the plan for the president's Oct. 31 warning .
 Castro might have been tempted, as was suggested in the 1989 Moscow conference, but Khrushchev kept him on a tight rein . Castro might be tempted to join the Communist Party, as suggested in a 1989 conference .
 Another piece of suspect evidence presented at this conference was the suggestion that the Cuban missiles were armed with nuclear warheads, thus heightening the danger of war . The Cuban missiles are believed to have nuclear warheads .
 A military historian said he ''reviewed archive material on the subject'' but did not present confirming evidence of his deduction that 20 warheads were in place . He said he reviewed archive material but didn't present evidence of the deduction .
 Kennedy repeatedly asked me about the subject, and I'm sure it's clear, Kennedy's recollection is clear . My own recollection of this is clear, because this exact subject was what Kennedy asked for, Kennedy said .
 CIA's view, concurred on by the Defense Intelligence Agency as far as I ever heard, was based on two firm pieces of evidence . The CIA's views were based on the evidence of the U.S. involvement in Syria .
 Photo reconnaissance never revealed any evidence of warheads being shipped in or being present . There was firm evidence that structural elements that were designed for nuclear-weapons bunkers did arrive .
 The probability is high that the blockade did stop the delivery of the warheads, the author says . The first missile site revealed a surprisingly leisurely assembly of the weapons and a stretched-out timetable for operational readiness, he says .
 Kennedy's greatest achievement may be his greatest achievement, accounting for Khrushchev's retreat . Kennedy's success may be to blame for the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1960s .
 It is conceivable the warheads arrived secretly and were hidden at a distance from the sites . But certainly bunkers would have been needed for safe storage, and none was constructed .
 Castro's forward base for Moscow's penetration of the Caribbean was a serious motivation for the whole maneuver . The move was not the main one, but it was meant to protect Castro's Cuba base, he says .
 Many of us thought at the time that there was evidence of Soviet preparation for a new Berlin crisis . The end game would have been to threaten war with greater credibility because of missiles in Cuba, thus forcing the United States to abandon Berlin .
 That was the way Khrushchev's mind worked, and it was more complex than the interpretation advanced in Moscow last month . That's not the case, and Khrushchev's mind is complex, he says .
 Hill: Questions remains whether the U.S. is bluffing, and if it is prepared to follow through . Hill: The questions remains, Hill said, whether the United States is bluffed, and whether it is willing to follow up .
 President Donald Trump "doesn't want to go before the American people in 2020 and say 'well, we looked at it and gave it a try," he said . What people do know, however, is that the Trump administration is taking the matter of North Korea seriously, he continued .
 There are 20 million South Koreans within conventional weapons range of North Korea, Hill said . Hill: If there is talk of preemptive strikes and other moves to be ""very clear"" with South Korea about the plans .
 The former ambassador also noted that there must be an understanding with China, and speaking with South Korea about any plans . He said there must also be an agreement with China .
 Cit at ion Sandy Fitzgerald, 'Amb. Sandy Fitzgerald' Fitzgerald was the 'Ambassador of America' Fitzgerald is the son of former President George W. Bush . Fitzgerald was elected to the post in 1992 .
 RFK's family has been involved in a long-running ownership dispute with the National Archives . RFK family and National Archives are locked in a dispute over ownership of RFK Kennedy's estate .
 Bobby Kennedy served as his brother Jack's closest adviser and alter ego during the crisis . The crisis brought the world the closest we have ever come to nuclear destruction . Bobby Kennedy was the brother of Jack Kennedy .
 His contemporaneous notes will be examined closely by historians as a unique window into the thinking of the late president . He sought to avoid nuclear war and negotiate a diplomatic solution with his Soviet opposition .
 JFK Library officials in Boston put hundreds of previously withheld documents online yesterday . The library is hosting a conference of missile crisis experts that will take place on Sunday .
 The new documents include memos between the two brothers written during the so-called ""Thirteen Days"" that marked the peak of the crisis between Oct. and Oct. 1962 . Khrushchev finally agreed to withdraw his missiles from the Soviet Union .
 A source who saw the documents in advance said they include several versions of a note written by Bobby Kennedy on the night of Oct. 11 . The Kennedy note was written following his meeting with the Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin .
 JFK made a secret promise to withdraw U.S. missiles from Turkey as a concession to Khrushchev . JFK made the promise in a secret letter to the Soviet Union . The promise was made in response to a request from the White House .
 The episode remained secret from other members of the ExComm, including Vice President Lyndon Johnson, who had been urging the president to take a tougher line with Khrushchev .
 The newly released records amount to 2,700 pages . They include memos dictated by Bobby Kennedy on Operation Mongoose . The sabotage campaign was designed to overthrow Fidel Castro by October 1962 .
 The bungled sabotage effort had little chance of succeeding, but it was one of the factors that provoked Khrushchev into sending nuclear weapons to Cuba . Although the failed sabotage effort was unlikely to succeed, it was the factor that prompted the decision to send nuclear weapons .
 The release of the documents follows protracted negotiations between the National Archives and the family of Bobby Kennedy . Bobby Kennedy served as attorney general in the Kennedy administration .
 Kennedy family has been pushing JFK Library for a special building to house RFK records . JFK Library has also explored the possibility of selling the papers .
 The agreement between the Kennedy family and the National Archives to release the Cuban missile crisis records sidesteps the question of ownership of the records . The National Archives will release the documents .
 Richard S Heyser of the Strategic Air Command flew over western Cuba in a high-altitude U-2 aircraft on a mission code-named Victor . The mission was code-called Victor .
 The 5,000 feet of film he brought back from his reconnaissance flight was rushed to a nondescript CIA building at Fifth and K streets Northwest .
 CIA's little-known National Photographic Interpretation Center pored over photos . CIA analysts pored through photos in a new book . The book was published by the CIA in 1998 .
 What they found changed history and brought the world to the brink of nuclear war . It was the first time they had seen a nuclear bomb .
 Ex-Marine Vince DiRenzo spotted 62-foot-long canvascovered objects near a town called Los Palacios . He joined the CIA right out of graduate school and joined in 2010 .
 Arthur C Lundahl, the chief and founding father of the CIA's photointerpretation center, was immediately summoned and gravely verified the young analyst's conclusion . Lundahl is the founder of the agency's photo interpretation center .
 The next morning the photos were on the desk of President Kennedy, and the Cuban missile crisis was under way . President Kennedy was the first president to see the photos .
 Dino A Brugioni, one of the CIA photo interpreters present that day, has been permitted to write his own detailed account of that frightening period . He was one of a photo interpreter at the time of the attack .
 It is an exciting, at times riveting, story, even though we know how it turned out - or we would not be around to read it . It is a story that is exciting and riveting - even though it turns out to be true .
 Brugioni's is the first CIA insider's account of the tension-filled days in October . It is rich in anecdotal detail about the policy makers at the top of the government, as well as a primer on the art of aerial photography .
 Curtis E LeMay was the cigar-chomping Air Force chief of staff and a character out of Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. LeMay . LeMay is the Air Force's first female Air Force Chief of Staff .
 A middlelevel CIA technician, his account at times reflects the view that everything would have been better if only the political leaders had left things to the professionals, he says .
 Despite its flaws, Brugioni's book, although perhaps twice as long as necessary, is an invaluable contribution to the history of our times . The book is a valuable contribution to our times, despite its flaws .
 Soviet officials publicly explained why their country instigated the Cuban missile crisis . The Soviets agreed 13 days later to a United States demand that the missiles be sent back to the Soviet Union .
 Students of the crisis have long been mystified by why the Soviets risked a nuclear showdown for the sake of missiles in Cuba . The showdown in Cuba brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any other time in history . In the view of most, most, the world was closer to
 In extraordinary news conference, two Soviets gave fresh answers to some old questions . Two Soviets give fresh answers in extraordinary press conference .
 The Soviet Union admitted that misjudgments and accidents contributed to the crisis . In the latest example of the Soviet Union's new policy of greater openness, or ""glasnost,"" they admitted that . misjudgment and accidents on the Soviet side contributed .
 Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and presidential speech writer Theodore Sorensen. Defense Secretary McNamara was assassinated in 1968 .
 Sergei Mikoyan's father was a top adviser to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev during the crisis . He only started to believe this week that U.S. was not planning an invasion of Cuba in 1962 .
 The other Soviet at the table said Khrushchev had another motivation -he saw the missiles as a step toward nuclear parity with the U.S. The United States had overwhelming superiority in that area .
 Fedor Burlatsky, then Khrushchev's speech writer, also underestimated President Kennedy . He said he also underestimated his adversary, President Kennedy, in the early 1960s .
 The situation worsened when an American U-2 was shot down over Cuba by a Soviet surface-to-air missile . Five days later, a Soviet missile was also shot down by the Soviet Union .
 Mikoyan said the downing of the U-2, which brought the two countries to the brink of nuclear war, was an accident . The downing was the first time the two nations had been involved in a nuclear war .
 He said he knows the identity of the officer who shot down the plane, but he refused to identify him by name or nationality . The plane was shot down by the officer, who is not identified by nationality .
 The crisis ended when Khrushchev agreed to pull the missiles out in exchange for a U.S. pledge never to invade the island . The United States also agreed to withdraw old missiles from Turkey and Italy .
 Khrushchev thought that if he rejected United States conditions, the U.S. would attack the island . The U.K. would have attacked the island if he refused to accept conditions .
 If he accepted them, Khrushchev could claim a victory in a U.S. promise not to invade Cuba, the Soviets said . The Soviets said he accepted the offer, which he could claim to have won .
 The aircraft carrier will be retired Saturday after 38 years of triumph and tragedy . Thirty-two years later, they are returning to bid the carrier farewell when it is retired .
 The Super Sara and its sailors have seen duty at hot spots around the world, including the Vietnam War, the 1967 Six-Day War in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf War .
 One of carrier's early tests was the Cuban missile crisis when it enforced a naval blockade of the island .
 Haakenson, 53, and Senter, 50, said there was constant tension until the crisis was resolved when the Soviets removed the missiles from Cuba . The two men said the tension was constant until the Soviet missile removal was resolved .
 Haakenson, of Anacortes, Wash., served on the Saratoga from 1961-63 . Senter, of Texas City, Texas, was there from 1961 to 1964 . Haakensen, of Washington, served in 1961-64 .
 The warship was removed from active duty at the end of last week . The ship was the last warship to remain on active duty .
 Navy Secretary John H Dalton has given preliminary blessing to turn the carrier into a floating museum . The carrier originally was headed for the scrap heap, but Navy Secretary has given his preliminary blessing .
 The carrier returned on June 24 from its 22nd and final deployment to the Mediterranean . The carrier supported NATO and the United Nations in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
 Haakenson and Harvey Hirsch Jr. boarded the Saratoga in Bermuda for its final cruise into Mayport, Mayport . It was the first time they had been on a final cruise in Mayport since 1995 .
 The Saratoga was the second aircraft carrier built after World War II and the sixth U.S. vessel to bear the name . It was built in 1945 and is the sixth United States vessel to carry the name Saratogate .
 The 1,039-foot ship still appears much as it did in the 1950s, aside from upgrades in wea-pon-ry and electronics and electronics .
 The large guns it had in the early 1960s have been replaced by missiles and a Gatling gun . The country's large guns were replaced with missiles and Gatling guns .
 Castricone remembers a collision with a German freighter and a bad shipboard fire that burned for two or three days . The fire was caused by a fire aboard a ship that burned in the ship for several days .
 A ferry returning Saratoga sailors from leave in Haifa, Israel, capsized in rough seas, killing 21 . The ship was returning from leave at the time of the accident .
 President Kennedy canceled the mission to bomb Cuban antiaircraft bases . The mission was canceled by President Kennedy . President Kennedy was president of the Cuban government .
 Had the ships sailed on another hour, the U.S. Navy would have sunk them . The United States Navy would've sunk the ships .
 Had Kennedy known, he likely would have ordered an air strike within hours of discovering the missiles . Kennedy would likely have ordered a strike in hours of discovery .
 The Kennedy administration, stung by the Bay of Pigs fiasco in 1961, had discarded the idea . The idea was discarded by the Kennedy administration .
 The Soviets felt the United States would try again and this time, they'd do it right . But the U.S. didn't want it to happen again, and it was a mistake .
 Scholars were stunned by the openness of their Soviet counterparts, says James Blight, a Harvard scholar who attended . Blight: Scholars were shocked by the open nature of their counterparts .
 Former Kennedy officials attending included Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy and Gen. Gen. Robert Kennedy . Former Kennedy administration officials attended the event .
 The book contains edited transcripts of the Harvard meeting, analysis, and interviews with U.S. officials .
 More insights are likely at a second meeting of Soviet and American participants in Moscow at the end of the month .
 Cuban officials briefed by Fidel Castro will be there, as will a former senior KGB officer in North America . The former KGB officer will also attend the event .
 The map -along with civil-rights documents - is at the center of a legal tussle between a Web-based memorabilia collector and the federal government . The federal government claims the documents were improperly removed by Kennedy's personal secretary .
 U.S. District Judge Robert Ward temporarily blocks the sale of the map until a hearing next week . The map is expected to be auctioned off in New Jersey .
 In its lawsuit, the government said Evelyn Lincoln -the personal secretary who worked for the White House on Kennedy's papers until July 1964 - also compiled annotated and handwritten notes for the President Kennedy Library Corp. until 1972 .
 The map and civil rights documents were donated to the United States in February 1965 for deposit in the John F Kennedy Presidential Library, the government said .
 The government did not suggest that Lincoln, who died in 1995, had done anything criminally wrong . Lincoln's death was the subject of a parliamentary inquiry .
 He was the first black student admitted into the school, sparking rioting in which two people were killed . Two people died in rioting after he was admitted to school .
 The change of heart meant that U.S.-Soviet understandings that resolved the 1962 crisis never were made permanent . The change in heart meant the 1962-62 agreement was never permanent .
 Attempts to reach a formal agreement between the two countries ended in failure . Both countries took some steps, including removing offensive missiles from Cuba .
 The disclosure sent the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than at any time in their four-decade Cold War rivalry . The disclosure of the U.S. vs. the Soviet Union's secrets sent the United States closer to war than ever before .
 The tradeoff that ensured a peaceful outcome involved a Soviet promise to remove missiles in exchange for an end to a U.S. quarantine of Cuba . The deal was made with a United States no-invasion pledge .
 In the decades since the crisis, successive U.S. administrations were vague about whether the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement was legally binding . The agreement was signed by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Documents strongly suggest it was not, because there was no formal settlement . The documents strongly suggest there was not a formal settlement between the pair .
 Kennedy said he was worried about how a no-invasion pledge would affect the U.S. ability to respond if Cuba undertook a major arms buildup, shot down United States planes or attacked another Latin American country . In a Nov., 1962, conversation with George Ball, the State Department
 Ball says the U.S. has a right to take action under the Rio Pact . Ball: The Rio Pact is the common defense treaty of the Western Hemisphere . Ball said the United States can take military action if necessary .
 The Soviets objected to Kennedy's attempt to renege on his pledge and invoke the Rio Pact . Not surprisingly, the Soviets strongly objected to the move .
 Khrushchev's speech writer during the confrontation, Feodor Burlatsky, said another reason was to help Moscow catch up with Washington in nuclear arms race .
 At the time of the crisis in October 1962, the United States had about 5,000 intercontinental warheads . The U.S. had about five,000 warheads .
 Mr Burlatsky said Mr Khrushchev miscalculated, believing on the basis of a 1961 summit meeting in Vienna that President Kennedy would not react vigorously to the move .
 President Kennedy reacted forcefully after U.S. spy planes discovered that missiles were being deployed . Kennedy reacted strongly after United States spy planes found missiles being deployed in Cuba .
 Some Kennedy advisers feared war was imminent but after days of mounting tension, Mr Khrushchev agreed to remove missiles in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . U.N. commitment to remove some aging nuclear rockets from Turkey was a secret commitment .
 Castro's forces controlled anti-aircraft weapons and would not necessarily obey Moscow's orders . Seymour Hersh reported this week that the crisis was more dangerous than it seemed .
 Co pyrig ht © 19 8 7 Jo hn Fairfax P ublicatio ns P ty Limite www.s mh.coau.