 According to the USUN copy of this telegram, it was drafted by Akalovsky and cleared in substance by Stevenson . Stevenson cleared the telegram in substance, according to the U.N. copy .
 Stevenson and McCloy had a three-and-a-half hour meeting with Kuznetsov, Zorin, and Mendelevich today . Stevenson, McCloy met with the Russian leaders for three hours today .
 Stevenson and McCloy referred to Kuznetsov's conversation with McCloy yesterday . The former expressed misgivings re inclusion of IL-28 aircraft in armaments subject to removal . Stevenson, McCloy refer to the conversation .
 IL-28 aircraft regarded by U.S. as offensive, because they basically obsolete in view of their low ceiling and low speed . B Sovs surprised IL-27 aircraft regarded as offensive by United States as offensive .
 IL-28 aircraft not new, since President's October 22 statement, quarantine proclamation, as well as October 28 letter contained reference to offensive weapons other than missiles . Stevenson and McCloy stressed question question question is not new .
 Pointed out jet bombers capable of carrying nuclear warheads could hardly be qualified as obsolete . They could be used to carry nuclear warheads, experts say .
 Noted such armaments in hands of man like Castro could create gravest situation, said Noted Noted . Noted noted that armaments could create 'grave' situation .
 Kuznetsov's insinuation U.S. seeking obstruct negotiations by raising this very important question . Denied it was an attempt to obstruct talks by raising the question .
 A United States is to give assurances against invasion of Cuba either by United States or by its Allies, or by any state in Western hemisphere; Kuznetsov commented United States trying evade this subject; B As evident from Khrushchev's message, USSR will remove missiles which President regards
 There no question that missiles had been subject to President-Khrushchev exchange, Security Council debate, and current talks, he said .
 USSR would not include IL-28's in arms to be removed, Kuznetsov replied in negative, stating that they were not offensive arms and SovGov would act accordingly .
 Kuznetsov referred to schedule of removal, saying first Soviet vessel, Labinsk, due to leave November 6 . Eight other ships, Bratsk, Leninskiy Komsomol, Kurchatov, Asosov and Divnogorsk, Divn
 Said he had no information whether this would complete removal operation . Said he was not sure if it would be complete removal of debris .
 Details re signals and identification would have been worked out and appropriate information had been given to member UN Secretariat . Details were given to members of the United Nations to work out .
 All Sov ships bound for Cuba would use only northern route, although southern route might be used after November 12 . This vessel would be stationed north of Cuba and would use northern route to Cuba .
 McCloy and Stevenson pointed out no commitment had been made re United States willingness to accept Soviet ship, and noted neutral,e., Swedish, ship could also be used .
 Kuznetsov professed surprise that U.S. had not objected to Soviet ship . He said he was surprised by the response to the incident . The ship was the first Soviet ship to arrive in the United States .
 McCloy reiterated he had stated he had expressly stated he could not commit United States Govt re use of Soviet ship . McCloy reiterated he had explicitly stated he would not commit U.S. Govt . re using Soviet ship. McCloy said he had made clear he would
 McCloy then raised subject of removal of warheads, pointing out this very important matter, and wondered how USSR could satisfy U.S. re their removal . McCloy: USSR could not satisfy United States re . their removal.
 Kuznetsov asserted this question of detail; USSR's actions clearly indicate that all equipment related to what United States calls offensive missiles will be removed . U.S. will remove all equipment associated with offensive missiles, he said .
 There should be no doubt re warheads, if warheads are indeed in Cuba, if they are in Cuba .
 USSR intends to fulfill all these commitments in good faith, but U.S. raising these questions in order postpone final solution of problem . USSR intends . to fulfill these commitments, but United States raising these . questions is a postponement of solution, says Soviet leader .
 Stevenson and McCloy stressed importance of removing warheads from bombers . With some modification they could also be used on bombers, they said .
 Suggested verification of warheads could perhaps be done on see-and-count basis as Kuznetsov had suggested for missiles .
 Stevenson noted problem of warheads highlighted importance of ground inspection . Stevenson wondered what progress Mikoyan had made in Havana .
 USSR would remove from Cuba everything related to ""so-called"" offensive missiles, but noted he could not say anything beyond that . Reiterated that as to warheads, USSR . would remove everything from Cuba .
 Removal IL-28 aircraft, nationality inspection ship, and verification removal of warheads . Kuznetsov had given assurances warheads would be removed .
 Kuznetsov disagreed, saying there was no open question from a standpoint . He said there were no open questions from a Russian standpoint .
 U.S. should consider Soviet deeds and respond to kind. Concluded United States must respond to Soviet deeds . United States should respond and respond in kind.
 Ball reported the Secretary's conversation to Bundy/1/ saying the Secretary suggested the three of them sort this thing out and decide what we want to do . Ball reported that the Secretary of State suggested that the three members of the House of Representatives sort this out .
 Bundy said that Bobby was away today and the President doesn't get back until the middle of the afternoon . Bundy said he was away from the White House . Bundy: "Bobby is away today. Bobby is away"
 He says he would be glad to sit down with Ball and Bob . Ball says he doesn't think it's complicated to talk about politics .
 All we have to do today is to point out the rapid departure and emphasize the speed in the verification procedure . All we need is to do is to highlight the speed and speed of the verification process .
 Ball thought the farther out to sea they get the more difficult it would be for psychological reasons . Ball said the farther they get, they would be more difficult to find . Ball: "The farther out we get, the harder it gets for psychological purposes"
 Bundy thought rather than have the Executive Committee meeting, he would like to have a clear sense that Ball, the Secretary, Bob and Bundy know what we want to do and check it out with the President; then proceed on that basis . Bundy thought instead of having a meeting with the Executive
 Ball told him that Bob thought we ought to make immediate representation to Kuznetsov . Ball said that since they are leaving, it is urgent to get a neutral observer on board . Ball: "Bob thought [Putin] should be able to get immediate representation"
 The easiest way to do it is to take a U.S. ship alongside, he says . "If they won't do it, would we take a Soviet ship?" he asks. "The easiest way of doing it would be to take the United States ship alongside"
 Bundy asked if they were willing to have a U.S. ship alongside and Ball replied they talked like they were prepared to do it . Bundy asked Ball if they would be prepared to have the United States ship alongside . Bundy: "It looks like they're prepared to ... do it
 "These missiles are not crated; they are under tarps, so that it is pretty good from that point of view," says Putin . Putin says the missiles are 'pretty good' and 'not crated'
 If we could get the tarp rolled back to make sure they are not duds, and take some pictures . Also if we could roll back to see if they are actually duds . We hope to get some photos of the event .
 Bundy would be inclined to take up Kuznetsov's offer for UN ships alongside . If we can't count through the tarps ask to see under them, Bundy would like to count through them . Bundy would also like to see if the UN ships are alongside .
 Bundy will check this out with Bob and the President and call Ball back . Bundy will be back on the line to check out the situation .
 Ball suggested that Ball go into that with Ros-he said he meant the MIGs scramble . He suggested that he meant that . Ros: "I don't know what I mean, I'm not sure what it means"
 Bundy could not reach the President, but he expected that Kennedy would call when he arrived at Hyannisport . Bundy expected that he would call the President when he was at the scene . Bundy was not in touch with Kennedy, but was hoping that he could reach him .
 Bundy suggested Ball proceed and promised to call after talking to the President . Bundy suggested that Ball proceed . Bundy said he would call the President to discuss the matter .
 Bundy thought it would be too complicated to try to get neutral observers on board Soviet ships . Ball agreed with Bundy that it would not be 'unrealistic' to try it . Bundy said it was too complicated, and Ball agreed it was not realistic . Bundy and Ball said it would
 What we should do is to get back to the Russians and this is what Gilpatric is being told to get in touch with you about . We want to arrange to get these things photographed at close range and look at them. Ball says .
 Ball-Let me put Alex Johnson on because he wrote this long damn thing from the Department today . Ball: Let me put him on because of his long damn things from the department today. Ball: Alex Johnson is a good writer. He's a great writer, he's a good
 "This thing-5-requires a verification at sea and a loading time which we don't have," says the author of the book .
 The guidelines in this telegram suggested that all offensive equipment had to be on deck and uncrated . If this was to be the verification mode, then the guidelines suggested that .
 What we really need is this-what we need to see are the missiles, Ball says . Ball: "We need to be able to use the missiles" Ball: The missiles will be used to launch a missile attack on the U.S.
 The photographs indicate that they are in the proc-ess of loading the 26 out of the 42 . The photographs we have indicate that . they are . in the . procrastrastrastous of loading 26 of the . 42 .
 We have to tell them we have to see all the missiles and if we can pull along side and see the missiles, we will make sure they are not dummies . We must tell them they must be seen by the eye if they want to see them .
 Photographs will be taken from ship or helicopter, but at close range so that we can count for each missile . Have the tarpaulin pulled back so we can see there are missiles under there .
 Ball-Plus the instructions that the ships-we pull a ship along side and the right to take the picture from a helicopter . Ball-plus the instructions .
 Ball-No: "We just want to make sure that enough of it is going on board" Ball: "It's not enough to go on board. It's just a matter of making sure enough is going to be enough"
 "We are not going to try to take an inventory or count it on a piece-by-piece basis," the mayor says .
 5/5/we have got to pull our wits together. This thing got so vicious last night/5 . 5/4/5: We need to pull ourselves together. 5/6/4: We have to pull together. We are going to get back together.
 If I can't get some instructions pretty soon on the guaranty they are going to clam up, they'll clam up. If I'm not, I'm sure they're claming up. I'm worried they won't be able to get any more instructions .
 Ball: "We are going to have a meeting this afternoon/6/ and we will try to get something out" Ball says . Ball: 'We are trying to get a deal out. We will meet this afternoon'
 Stevenson-I wish they would talk to me before they send these instructions out . Stevenson: "I wish I could talk to them before they sent these instructions to me"
 "The other thing we are going to have to take up again is this warhead business," says President Obama .
 I think you should sit down and talk to him and see what you ought to recommend and get back here and I will see if I can clear it out. I think it's a good idea, but I'm not sure if I'll clear it up . I think he should sit
 Stevenson-Telling them that our ship so and so will come by at a certain time. Stevenson- told them that their ship would come by . Stevenson- said: "I'm not going to lie to them. I'm going to tell them I'm not lying" Stevenson-
 "I am going to have to proceed in writing or God knows where we will be," he says .
 Ball-I think you should talk to Gilpatric about that and he can work it out directly with the Navy people and Defense . Ball: "I think he should talk about that. He should be able to work out that way"
 They say they haven't any except their commitment that they would remove from the island anything that is offensive . Stevenson: "We would remove anything that was offensive. We would remove it"
 "By some small modification, you could use a missile warhead on an airplane," he says . "I gather ... you could ... use a small modification," he adds .
 We can't go on this way, George, it is intolerable, by having a lot of ambiguous talk, says George Osborne . We need to change this, he says, and it's intolerable .
 McCloy agreed to the Soviet ship on Sunday and bitter accusations of bad faith . Yesterday they insisted that McCloy had agreed to a Soviet ship .
 McCloy said he didn't personally care if it was a Soviet ship or not but that he couldn't commit the Government . McCloy: "I think all McCloy . said was he . didn't personal care if . it was Soviet ship . or not, he said . McCl
 "They are going to stall on this ground verification because they can't get it," says Obama . Obama administration will stall on ground verification, says Obama administration .
 They were insistent on bringing it up last night and I am sure they are going to say we have a few things you know about about . They're going to talk about it, and I'm sure they'll say they have a lot of things to do about it .
 I can ask questions like where will the warheads be and on what missiles and can we work out some scheme of identifying them above deck . I can also ask questions about where the warheads will be and what missiles will be, and how will they be identified?
 In all events we have to make up our minds and I think on the removal of the IL-28's and that raises the question of airing nuclear bombs and how to get removal of nuclear bombs .
 "I think all of these things I have to have some broad general sort of objective to obtain they are realistic," he says . "I have to be realistic. I think all these things are realistic. They are realistic"
 If we could just disregard that and get the record clear then we could concentrate on the thing which we can insist on more legitimately . We could focus on the fact that we need to insist on the issue more legitimately. We need to focus on what we want to do more than anything else
 I would think if we are going to do anything about this we should move on this promptly. I would say if we were going to move on it we should do so quickly. I'm not sure how long it will be before we get back to normalcy .
 Ball: "I think on this one point of these arrangements on these ships that you and Ros should go to work on that right away" Ball: I think on that one point, I think we should go on that immediately . Ball: It's a good idea to have these ships
 We will have to reach an agreement within hours as to if it will be a Swedish ship or a Soviet ship . We have to button up on the Red Cross coming in, which is nonsense anyway, anyway, says the PM .
 McCloy's remarks about a Soviet ship have been erased from view . McCloy made the remarks about the Soviet ship in a TV interview .
 The negotiators are waiting here to see what they are to negotiate about . The negotiators will be waiting for the negotiators to arrive at the summit .
 I would tie it to the invasion and to the commitments in the interAmerican agreement and then let me present it along with a demand for a reciprocal promise from them that they won't reintroduce these weapons into Cuba . I would then present it as a demand from the government .
 "We have never let any doubt but that we were not going to make any guaranty at all. We have never given any doubt," says manager Mark Hughes .
 We want some verification of not introducing these then we can make one kind of a guaranty . We want to make sure that they are not introducing them .
 Johnson-Some arrangement in Cuba on missiles-something to verify that these weapons are not being reintroduced . Johnson: "Some arrangement ... is something that will not be reintroduced"
 That would mean inspection of the United States and on intervening countries . It would also mean inspections of the U.S. and other countries .
 Stevenson-I think it would be helpful to proceed on the assumption that mutual inspection is something that will have to be worked out over a period of time by the Caribbean Defense Committee .
 We will guaranty against invasion by the United States in exchange for Soviet guarantee that they will not reintroduce these weapons in Cuba . Cuba will guarantee U.S. against invasion in Cuba in return for Soviet guarantees .
 "Let's get this transaction completed first and then we will sit down and negotiate what we can do and undertake with Cuba on all these things," says President Obama .
 Unless we have some very clear line that we ought to pursue right now, it's difficult to deal with this. Unless we've got a clear line, it will be difficult for the government to tackle this issue, it won't be able to do so again .
 We can say if you don't give us grounds and verification then we must ask for this, we will ask for it . We can't say if we don't have grounds and verify then we will be asked for this. We can also say we have grounds to ask if we want
 "I don't think they will ever buy it. If you do and I don't know what that could be, you will never be able to buy it," says Mark Hughes .
 "They will say we have introduced new matter and we will have another bad time," says minister . They will say they have introduced a new matter, and it will be a bad time, he says .
 I do think that probably we should separate two things-one is the immediate deal with the Russians and the other is future arrangements with Cuba . I do not think that the deal with Russia or Cuba should be separate, he says .
 If we settle with a simple guaranty now and then assume we will run our air reconnaissance, this will present a very serious problem . On the one with the Russians if we settle . now, then assume . that they will run their air reconnaissance, this . will present
 "It will be asserted into the Security Council over and over, regardless of what we promised," he said . "We will continue to insist on it," he added .
 "We will have to preserve the line to run reconnaissance flights to . assure these weapons will not be reintroduced," says Air Force chief . "What we could do is for the future we will . have to . preserve the . line to preserve it," he says .
 Johnson-Isn't it very difficult for us to give-it seems to me it seems to . It seems to be very difficult to give that guaranty without Cuba in turn having done something . Johnson: "It seems to [Cuba] in turn have done something. It seems
 Stevenson-I think we could ask Cuba to give us a guaranty that she won't introduce these weapons . Stevenson: "I think she will not introduce such weapons" Stevenson-
 "I don't want to get in a position where they now want to trade off Guantanamo for something more," says President Obama . "I'm not going to get into a position ... where they want to go to Guantanamo," says Obama .
 It is the sort of thing we should get some of your views on as quickly as possible . It is a matter of urgent concern that the Government should be aware of the issue .
 "We have been able to go through these meetings by saying you will get your guarantees," he says . "Then they get into the subject of protocol and a registered agreement," he adds . "You will get guarantees, but then they will get into protocol and registered agreement"
 Johnson: "We hope to get to this at the meeting this afternoon, then we will get something to you" Johnson says . Johnson: We hope to have something to say about the proposal .
 Stevenson: "That is only one verification for compliance it doesn't take care of the future" Stevenson: It's only a verification of compliance for compliance . Stevenson: That's not only for compliance but for compliance, it's also for the future .
 McCloy has come to the conclusion that the ground verification is a lot of nonsense and he is against doing it . McCloy: "I'm not going to do it. McCloy is against it. It's not a good idea."
 Stevenson-I have one other point: This business of the press stories that come from Washington, when we manage to keep this place silent, has caused us grief for two weeks . Stevenson- I have one more point— this business of press stories, when . we manage . to keep
 Washington is the capital of Washington, D.C. and the nation's largest city . CNN.com will feature iReporters on CNN iReport . iReport.com: Share your photos of Washington from Washington.com .
 I must have some knowledge in advance of what they are putting out there, the State Department, the Defense Department and the White House. I must be able to predict what they're putting out, he says .
 It goes to the Secretary General and we have to unwrap it, it went to the Russians . We have to clear it up with them. The Russians and the Russians are the reason for this. It is not clear whether they will be allowed to take part .
 Stevenson: "We are at the point here where no one sees anything but Yost and me and our own Mission doesn't know what is going on"
 Ball: "This is an old problem and we were able to solve it for a week and we have not been able to solved it since" Ball: This is a problem that has not been solved since the end of the week . Ball: We have not solved this problem since the
 Stevenson: "I would like for you to take it up with Kennedy or Rusk or some one" Stevenson: I would like to talk about it with Kennedy, Rusk . Stevenson: It's a good idea to talk to Kennedy about it .
 "Maybe we could do some backgrounding here and leaking of the right stuff to come out. Maybe we could ... leak the stuff out of here and leak it out," she said .
 "Maybe we could get some of our stories planted and have the right thing come out at the right time," she says . "I hope we could have some of these stories planted," she adds .
 "I don't like to do it, but we did it years ago when we didn't have any control," says former Manchester City boss . "It's not the first time I've been in charge of the United States," he says .
 The meeting was opened by the Vice President at the President's request . The Vice President opened the meeting .
 Secretary Rusk summarized a draft reply to Khrushchev . The letter was revised, approved and later delivered to the Soviet Ambassador .
 Secretary Rusk said that Khrushchev had not mentioned IL-28 bombers but referred to a list of weapons which we considered offensive . Secretary Ruskov said that . SecretaryRusk . said that  Krushchev did not mention .
 If in Finland, or even Sweden, there had developed a government increasingly hostile to you and if then, during a very short period of time-while public and private reassurances were being given-there had been secretly sent to Finland a whole variety of dangerous means of destruction . I am
 President brought into Cabinet Room Mr Aramburu, the former President of Argentina, and introduced him to those present . The former president of Argentina was then introduced to the audience .
 The President interrupted to call attention to a news report alleging that Soviet missiles were being hidden in caves in Cuba . The President called attention to the report .
 Mr McCone said the source of this story has been interviewed, but is unwilling or unable to say anything more than he told the press . The source of the story has not yet been interviewed .
 The President suggested that Mr McCloy talk to Mr McKelway of the Star and other editors in an effort to persuade responsible editors to check such stories with the government .
 The President then began reading the revised draft reply to Khrushchev . The President read the revised reply to the Soviet leader .
 President says statement was not persuasive unless IL-28 bombers were linked to the entire Soviet action . President said this statement would not be persuasive unless the bombers are linked to Soviet action.
 He suggested that the reference in the first paragraph to the IL-28 bombers was not obnoxious . The reference to the bombers is not obnoxious, he said .
 Others said that the Finland paragraph should be saved and used, if necessary, in the next letter . Others said it should also be saved .
 Secretary Rusk said that we did not have a good contract with Khrushchev but we have to get everything out of their language that we possibly can . The former Soviet Union president was assassinated in June 1968 .
 The President commented that the situation was capable of becoming dangerous very quickly . The President said the situation could become very dangerous quickly .
 He thought reference should be made to Soviet military personnel in Cuba . He again stated his support of the reference to Finland .
 Both Mr Nitze and Ambassador Thompson disagreed and the Finland paragraph was finally deleted . The Finland paragraph has since been deleted .
 There followed a discussion as to whether the public should be informed of our efforts to induce the Russians to take out the IL-28 bombers .
 Some felt that our public posture should be calm and not one which would hot things up . Some felt it should not be a public posture which would be too hot for the public .
 Others felt that we should tell the public of the instructions we had sent last Saturday in an effort to get the Russians to agree to remove the bombers .
 Mr Bundy thought we should say publicly that we were discussing the removal of the IL-28 bombers . Mr Bundy wanted to make the announcement public .
 Secretary Rusk recommended that we say nothing about the bombers until all the missiles were out, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 President decided that no official comment on the bombers should be made tonight . No official comment was made tonight.
 The President was informed that Soviet missiles were actually being removed by Soviet ships . The President has been informed that the missiles are being removed .
 He commented that it was more important to get proof of the missiles leaving than to get them out now . He said it was important to have proof of Soviet bombers leaving .
 The Russians are permitting us to take pictures of departing missile ships from helicopters or from United States ships which come along side the Soviet ships .
 Two 50watt medium-wave radio stations, one operated by the USIA and the other by the Navy, to broadcast to Cuba . Mr Minow joined the group to discuss the use of the two radio stations .
 Nine commercial stations have been broadcasting nightly to Cuba . Acting Director Wilson of USIA reported that nine commercial stations broadcast nightly to the island .
 The radio time has been purchased by the United States . These stations are now anxious to return to their regular programs .
 Wilson joined Mr Minow in recommending that the two government-owned stations begin broadcasting this week end under the umbrella of the existing broadcasting of the commercial stations .
 Standard radio band had never before been used by U.S. owned stations . There was a compelling need to go ahead as recommended, Mr Minow said .
 There followed a discussion about the feasibility of using airborne television to get through to the Cubans .
 Mr Wilson reported that the plane carrying equipment would have to fly within thirty miles from Havana .
 In about three weeks after the first telecast, the Cubans could jam the programs so that they could not be received . The programs were jam-jumped by Cubans .
 Mr Wilson recommended that the airborne television be saved for an emergency . Mr Wilson said that airborne television should be saved .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended ten low-level missions, four over the Port of Havana, two over the IL-28 bomber bases, and two over Guantanamo and Santiago . The Joint Chiefs recommended missions over Cuba .
 Secretary McNamara suggested that the President turn down the request for low-level missions over Havana . McNamara: "Turning down missions is a mistake"
 General Taylor reported on an abort of a U-2 reconnaissance plane which was half way through its mission when a Soviet radar locked on . The plane was half-way through a mission when it was forced to abort .
 It is not possible to obtain good pictures from planes flying outside of Cuba even from a U-2 .
 President asked what we would do if a reconnaissance plane were shot down . The President asked if the President would be able to protect himself and his family .
 General Taylor said we would halt further missions and try to find out if the Soviets ordered the shoot-down . General Taylor: 'We will halt all missions and find out what caused the shoot down'
 Secretary Rusk urged that we do nothing which would upset the Castro/Mikoyan negotiations now under way in Havana . Rusk also urged that nothing should be done to upset the negotiations now underway .
 Secretary McNamara said we really did not need the low-level missions over Havana because we were checking on the ships as they move out of Cuba . McNamara: "We really did . not need to go over Havana" McNamara says .
 All Soviet missiles must go as deck cargo because no missile-carrying ships are available to the Russians as of now . No missiles are available for sale to the Russian military .
 The President returned to his question as to what we would do if a reconnaissance plane were shot at or shot down . The President said we would not be surprised if a plane was shot down or shot at .
 McNamara reminded the President that we had told the Russians that they were responsible if any of our planes were shot at or shot down . Mr McNamara .
 The President asked the group to remain subject to call and suggested that we try to get the press to act more responsibly by playing down unsubstantiated reports from Cuban refugees about Soviet missiles being hidden in Cuban caves .
 Light bombers with their equipment are the only major items on the list, beyond missiles and their missiles . The list includes missiles, missiles and equipment .
 The solution of the Cuban affair was established by my letter to you of October twenty-seventh and your reply of October 20-eighth . The solution was established in the letter, which was written to President Eisenhower .
 Proclamation of October twenty-third entitled ""Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba""/4/ specifically listed bomber aircraft .
 It seems clear to me that our exchange of letters covers the IL-28s, since your undertaking was to remove the weapons we described as offensive . These facts were all known at the time of the . time, and so it seems clear that . our exchange . of letters covered the
 "We should not complicate the situation by minor things. Your letter says-and I agree-that we should not . This is a good example of how little things can be done," she says .
 "I assure you that this matter of IL-28s is not a minor matter for us," says President Obama . "But I assure you, this is not an issue for us all," he says .
 U.S. would need substantial measures of military defense in response by the United States, he says . Cuba's bombers are not the most modern of weapons, but they are capable of offensive use against the U.K. and other countries .
 These bombers could carry nuclear weapons for long distances . They are clearly not needed, any more than missiles, for purely defensive purposes on the island of Cuba .
 "Their continued presence would sustain the grave tension that has been created, and their removal, in my view, is necessary to a good start on ending the recent crisis," says President Obama .
 Ambassador Stevenson handed the list to Mr Kuznetsov . Ambassador Stevenson says he is not clear as to what items you object to on the list .
 I entirely agree with your statement that we should wind up the immediate crisis promptly, and I assure you that on our side we are insisting only on what is immediately essential for progress in this matter . I .
 "Strong feelings we have about this whole affair here in the United States. In order to make our position clear, I think I should go on to give you a full sense of the very strong feelings," she says. "I think I'm going to make it clear. I think
 These recent events have given a profound shock to relations between our two countries, says PM . "These recent events [have] given a deep shock," he says .
 The Soviet Union was under no obligation to inform us of any activities it was carrying on in a third country . It may be said, as Mr Kuznetsov .
 "Not only did this action threaten the whole safety of this hemisphere, but it was, in a broader sense, a dangerous attempt to change the world-wide status quo. I cannot accept this view," he said .
 What actually happened in this case was not simply that the action of your side was secret, it was secret . But however one may judge that argument, what actually happened was not just that .
 Your Government repeatedly gave us assurances of what it was not doing, it said . These assurances were announced as coming from the highest levels, and they proved inaccurate, it was claimed .
 I do not refer here only to the TASS article of September, but also to communications which were addressed to the highest levels of our Government through channels which heretofore had been used for confidential messages .
 No missiles would be placed in Cuba which would have a range capable of reaching the United States, officials say . The U.S. was told by the Cuban government that missiles would not have a long range of range . The Cuban government was told that no missiles would have an impact on
 In reliance upon these assurances I attempted to restrain those who were giving warnings in this country about the trend of events in Cuba . In reliance on these assurances, I attempted, as you know, to restrain .
 Unclearable photographic evidence that offensive weapons were being installed was a deep and dangerous shock, first to this Government and then to our whole people, the author says .
 I believe it is vital that we should re-establish some degree of confidence in communication between the two of us. We replied with a measured but necessary response, to which we replied .
 If the leaders of the two great nuclear powers cannot judge with some accuracy the intentions of each other, we shall find ourselves in a period of gravely increasing danger- not only for our two countries .
 I therefore hope that you will promptly recognize that when we speak of the need to remove missiles and bombers, with their immediate supporting equipment, we are not trying to complicate the situation . We are simply stating what was clearly included in our understanding of October twentyseventh and twenty-eighth
 This undertaking has already come under attack here and is likely to become increasingly an object of criticism by a great many of my countrymen . This undertaking is already coming under attack .
 The minimum that is necessary is the verified removal of missile and bomber systems, as we agreed, as well as real safeguards against their reintroduction . And the very minimum is necessary in regard to these assurances, the UK says .
 I should emphasize to you directly, Mr Chairman, that in this respect there is another problem immediately ahead of us which could become very serious indeed, and that is the problem of continuing verification in Cuba . Mr Chairman: "I should emphasize that there is also another problem which could be very
 The United States and other countries of this hemisphere must verify the absence of offensive weapons in Cuba . This is an essential safeguard for the U.S. and the other countries, and is an explicit condition .
 The need for this verification is, I regret to say, convincingly demonstrated by what happened in Cuba in the months of September and October . The need to be verified, he says, is, he regrets, .
 For the present we are having to rely on our own methods of surveillance, and this surveillance will surely have to be continued . We much prefer a better and durable method can be found, as we much prefer, to be found .
 Government has responsibility to ensure weapons are not used to interfere with surveillance, writes UK Foreign Office .
 It was of great importance, for example, for me last week to announce with confidence that dismantling of missiles has begun. It was also important to announce last week that dismantling has begun .
 It will be very difficult for any of us in this hemisphere to look forward to any real improvement in our relations with Cuba if it continues to be a military outpost of the Soviet Union, says President Obama .
 A real normalization of the Cuba problem can't be envisaged while there remains in Cuba large numbers of Soviet military technicians, and major weapons systems and communications complexes under Soviet control .
 When our undertakings against invasion are effective, the need for your military specialists in Cuba will disappear . That is why I think there is much wisdom in the conclusion expressed in your letter of October 26th .
 President Obama says Cuban president's visit to the island is a priority . He says he hopes Cuba will not establish submarine bases in the country .
 Cuba can never have normal relations with the other nations of this hemisphere unless it stops appearing to appear to be a foreign military base . Cuba must adopt a peaceful course of non-interference in the affairs of its sister nations, says President Obama . Cuba should not be seen as a foreign
 These wider considerations may belong to a later phase of the problem, but I hope that you will give them careful thought . I hope you will consider the wider considerations .
 The withdrawal of missiles and bombers, with their supporting equipment, under adequate verification, and with a proper system for continued safeguards in the future, is essential . In the immediate situation, however, I repeat that it is the withdrawal of the missiles .
 This is the first necessary step away from the crisis to open the door through which we can move to restore confidence and give attention to other problems which ought to be resolved in the interest of peace .
 It was drafted the evening of November 6, but not sent until early the following day . The draft of the letter was drafted on November 6 and sent the next day .
 Stevenson, Gilpatric and Yost had a five-and-half hour mtg with Kuznetsov, Zorin and Mendelevich today . Stevenson,Gilpatric, Yost and Mendevich sat down for five and half hour .
 A 38-page memorandum of conversation of this meeting, which lasted from 4-9:30m., is ibid., 1A October/November meetings. Fol summary based on uncleared memcon.
 Stevenson informed Sovs United States not prepared agree to employment . The preferred UN chartered neutral ship, i.e., Swedish vessel available in Carribean area .
 ICRC would verify all Sov flag ships, Sov chartered ships, bloc ships, and bloc chartered vessels . ICRC will verify all of the ships signed by the ICRC, including those chartered and chartered .
 Kuznetsov argued Sovs could speak only for their own ships and perhaps chartered ships, but could not speak for any other country, since that would be violation of sovereignty of those countries .
 Claimed United States approach this problem at variance with Pres's Oct 23 message,/2/ which spoke of ""your"" i.e., Sov ships only . Claimed U.S. approach to this problem is different from that of the previous message .
 Quarantine against offensive weapons imposed on all shipping to Cuba . U.S. willing to replace quarantine temporarily with temporary ICRC verification .
 Kuznetsov claimed quarantine illegal and USSR could not be expected to assist U.S. in making arrangements which would be substitution for it .
 Discussion this subject concluded with Stevenson saying if Sovs refused apply ICRC verification to all vessels with bloc cargoes, U.S. would have to continue use quarantine with respect all ships other than Sov .
 USSR agreed to ICRC ""observation"" of Cuba-bound ships and if United States wished use quarantine for other ships, that its own business . Kuznetsov responded USSR agreed with ICRC to use quarantine on other ships .
 Kuznetsov admitted Sov original proposal had been to use either Sov or neutral ship . After further exchange re nationality ship to carry ICRC team, Kuznnetsov admits Sov original request had been for neutral ship to be used .
 U.N. agreed neutral ship would probably be satisfactory and agreed give USUN final word shortly . Finally indicated neutral ship was probably a satisfactory .
 Stevenson suggested Sovs give U.S. schedule shipment of 42 missiles Kuznetsov had told U.K. had been or were in Cuba . Stevenson suggested Russians give United States schedule shipment 42 missiles .
 Presence of missiles on board Sov ships would be verified either from United States vessel or unarmed helicopter through visual observation and photography . One or two missiles should be sufficiently exposed so as to identify them as such but without revealing technical specifications .
 Photography necessary to verify number of outgoing missiles . Photography necessary for purpose of verifying number of incoming missiles .
 Kuznetsov referred to list of outgoing Sov ships he had given Stevenson yesterday/3/ and said his understanding was those ships were carrying what United States called offensive arms, including missiles .
 Re use of helicopters, observed this new point but said it would be communicated to Sov Govt. He said it will be communicated with the Russian government .
 Gilpatric and Kuznetsov agreed exchange call signals both Sov ships and U.S. Navy vessels concerned . Promised prompt reply 74/Gilpatric .
 Labinsk would sail on November 6, and Bratsk, Lenin Komsomol, Kurchatov, Anosov, Divnogosk, Volgoles, Polzunov, and Alapaevsk would depart on November 7 .
 Masters of Soviet ships had been instructed to inform the U.S. ships that came along side of the number of missiles they were carrying . Masters of the Soviet ships were instructed to . inform the United States .
 If the U.S. insisted upon using helicopters in case of bad weather, the Soviet Union had no objection . If the United States insisted on using helicopters, it would have been OKed by the Soviets .
 Stevenson suggested Sovs furnish number of warheads and schedule their removal, following pattern envisaged for missiles . Stevenson suggested that Sovs furnished warheads and schedules removal .
 Geiger counters should be placed close enough to warhead containers to detect radio active material . Said verification procedure for missiles could be applied to warheads as well, with one difference .
 Gilpatric noted we assumed warheads would be transported in such containers as would not reveal nature of their contents . We did not ask that they be opened, and we did not want them opened .
 Kuznetsov replied he could only repeat what he had said yesterday on subject of warheads, and went on rehashing arguments he had advanced yesterday . USSR honestly conducting negots and intended scrupulously fulfill its obligations with respect to removal of offensive weapons .
 Kuznetsov said he regretted say Sov and U.S. views on question warheads entirely different . In response to further pressing by Stevenson and Gilpatric .
 Stevenson and Gilpatric stressed vital importance question removal warheads, which are essential element offensive weapons, and need revert to it at first opportunity .
 Protested such interference with conduct our aerial surveillance, which we obliged conduct in absence ground verification to monitor removal of weapons . Protested .
 Requested Sovs ensure non-recurrence of such interference during completion of agreements . Request for Sovs . . ensure that such interference does not interfere with the process of completing agreements .
 If SAM sites continued be deactivated as they had been during past ten days, that would avoid need for U.S. taking other measures to make its aerial surveillance effective . Gilpatric noted this very important matter and noted that if SAM sites were deactivated it would avoid U.
 Kuznetsov agreed this major question, but claimed it merely demonstrated United States pursuing policy of gross violation of sovereignty other states . U.S. has been accused of violating sovereignty of Russia and other countries .
 Reiterated this and similar arguments which he had used in conversation with McCloy last week . He had used similar arguments to McCloy in conversation on this subject .
 Suggested United States stop over-flights now because offensive weapons now removed and would be shipped out in couple of days . Suggested U.S. stop over flights now because ""so-called"" offensive weapons would be removed and shipped out within days .
 USSR must take steps to prevent recurrence, on grounds Cuba sovereign state. Refused accept U.S. statement USSR must . take steps . USSR refused to accept United States statement, saying Cuba is not a sovereign state .
 Claimed all this would promote friendly US-Cuban relations and prevent another crisis . Claimed that all this will promote friendly U.S. relations with Cuba .
 UN presence in Carribean, including territory of US, Cuba and other Latin American countries, should be instituted as proposed by U Thant, for purpose of verifying compliance . U. Thant said if such obligations were assumed, UN presence would be instituted . Said if such obligation were
 Stevenson and Gilpatric reverted to question over-flights and emphasized extreme gravity with which U.S. regard any interference with which . United States would hold USSR accountable for whatever occurred .
 Kuznetsov replied USSR could not take any responsibility; United States would be responsible . U.S. would also be responsible for the loss of Soviet Union, he said .
 Stevenson recalled yesterday's conversation this subject and quoted relevant portions of Pres's and own statements to prove jet bombers had always been included in category offensive weapons . Stevenson: "I'm sure we have always been in the category of bombers"
 Stated question IL-28 aircraft was being taken up by Pres with Khrushchev today . Stated questions were being asked by Pres. Pres. Niklas Krasikovsky .
 Noted all other matters on which Sovs negative would also have to be taken up in Moscow unless they could be resolved here . Noted that all other issues would have to also be resolved in Moscow .
 Kuznetsov denied Pres-Khrushchev correspondence referred to IL-28 aircraft . He contended U.S. and USSR had been talking about IRBMs and MRBMs .
 The United States had made certain declarations and submitted lists of items, they were unilateral documents . They were not part of the agreement, the U.S. government said .
 Reiterated arguments re obsolescence and non-offensive nature IL-28, and contended only reason why U.S. raising additional questions was to complicate matters and protract situation of crisis . Reitated arguments that only reason to raise additional questions is to complicate situation .
 Appealed United States be reasonable and take into account fact steps taken by USSR clearly showed it wished implement agreement . Appealed U.S. be reasonable . U.K. appealed to U.N. not to implement agreement.
 Stevenson and Gilpatric asked Sovs reflect on unresolved problems so that they could be settled . Otherwise sharp, profound and grave disagreement would exist which would have to be referred to higher authority .
 Kuznetsov concluded by stating USSR's most sincere desire was not to sharpen US-USSR relations but to take any possible measures to resolve problems and eliminate tensions . He said USSR's desire to resolve any possible problems was to end tensions .
 Regretted he had failed to convince Stevenson and Gilpatric position correct and expressed hope they would consider views so as to find such solutions .
 Thompson was drafted by Thompson; cleared by Cleveland, Alexis Johnson, and Rusk; and approved by Thompson . Drafted by Thompson, cleared by Johnson, Johnson, Rusk, and Thompson .
 Dobrynin in conversation with Thompson last night repeated arguments advanced by Kuznetsov on IL-28's . Thompson: "I don't believe it's possible to be a weapon of mass destruction"
 Soviets considered agreement between President and Khrushchev concerned only missiles . He said Soviets considered that agreement . President and President of Soviet Union considered agreement only missile agreement .
 IL-28 was fifteen-year-old model incapable of being sent on long-range mission, says Air Force chief . IL-27 would be sitting duck for modern air defense system, he says . IL28 would be a sitting duck, he said .
 He stated Soviets considered quarantine proclamation illegal and therefore could not take into consideration its list of prohibited weapons . He stated quarantine proclamation was illegal . He said quarantine proclamation considered illegal .
 Most Latin American countries did not have modern air defenses, says Thompson . Thompson pointed out we did not agree with their appraisal of offensive capabilities IL-28's .
 Dobrynin said Soviets had the feeling they were moving promptly to carry out agreement . Soviets had feeling they had to carry on agreement, he said .
 He understood removal of MRBM's had started November second and was expected to be completed by November tenth .
 The U.S. had not only done nothing to carry out agreement but was endeavoring to expand its scope. The United States had done nothing, the U.N. said .
 Dobrynin asked when and what form non-invasion guarantee would be made . Dobrynkinin: "I'm not sure what kind of a guarantee will be made"
 Thompson drew attention to fact that invasion had not taken place, and that we had facilitated Soviet ships in quarantine area proceeding to Cuba . Thompson: "We had facilitated [Soviet ships] in quarantine areas proceeding to [Cuba]
 The agreement specifically provided for verification of removal of offensive weapons . Cuban Government appeared to be blocking any UN effort to carry out this out .
 He pointed out that there appeared to be two phases to the problem . He said the problem appears to be at least two phases of fixing it .
 The first was the dismantling and removal of the weapons and the second was assurances against their reintroduction . The first is dismantling and removing the weapons, the second is assurances against them reintroduction.
 Dobrynin asked whether U.S. guarantee would be given at the end of phase one . Dobrynins asked whether United States guarantee would given at end of the first phase .
 Thompson replied that the Soviets could be sure that we would not invade but he did not see how formal action on a guarantee of indefinite duration could be taken until longer-range arrangements could be agreed upon .
 Dobrynin said he had no information on what U.S. policy would be on such matters . He stressed that he was speaking personally and had no idea of what the United States would do on such issues .
 Dobrynin replied this possibility had been raised by U Thant when he was in Cuba and he personally thought this was hopeful approach . Dobrynins said this was a hopeful approach to the situation .
 He inquired whether it would be possible to include Florida or part of Southeastern U.S. in Caribbean arrangement .
 Thompson replied that while this might raise a number of problems, we had nothing to hide and he would not exclude such possibility . Thompson replied: "We had nothing we had to hide"
 We will have pictures certainly of missiles aboard six outgoing Soviet ships . We will also have pictures of missiles .
 About 90 percent of the missile erectors have been moved to Cuban ports . About 90 per cent of the missiles are now in Cuban ports, officials say .
 President asked whether we should say something tonight about the outgoing missiles . The President asked if we should . say something about the incoming missiles . President Obama said it was a good idea to say something .
 The President authorized the Defense Department to say that ships with missiles are leaving Cuba . The ships will leave Cuba on Friday .
 Secretary McNamara reported there had been no reaction to today's aerial reconnaissance mission . McNamara: No reaction had been received from the Pentagon .
 A request was made to fly five U-2 flights and twelve low-level flights, some to photograph cave areas . A request for permission was made and permission granted .
 Secretary Rusk said we were heading toward a UN Security Council meeting during which the Russians would announce that there were no Soviet missiles in Cuba . The meeting was set to take place during which Russia would announce there would be no Soviet missile installations in Cuba.
 Secretary General U Thant has put forward a suggestion that the five Latin American Ambassadors in Havana be named as inspectors and travel throughout Cuba . U. Thant suggests that Latin American ambassadors should be named inspectors .
 The President replied that we have a little time now and we should play out our negotiations slowly . The President said we have to play out the negotiations slowly, and that we should be careful .
 We might make a formal commitment not to invade when the Soviets comply fully by removing the IL-28 bombers and removing strategic missiles . We have assurances that there will be no reintroduction of strategic missiles, the UK says .
 We must continue aerial reconnaissance until a UN substitute is in place or until we have ground inspection . We need to continue aerial reporporation until a UN replacement is in place .
 He asked State to draft a statement covering our plans for continuing inspection . State has asked for a statement on the plans .
 He said our posture with the Soviets should be such as to avoid the appearance of holding back in the light of the rapid withdrawal of Soviet missiles . He added that the U.S. should avoid appearing to hold back .
 Mr Bundy said the only weapons in the proclaimed list which we must really get out are the IL-28 bombers . He said only weapons we must get out of the declared list are the bombers . Mr Bundy: 'The only weapons which we need to get out'
 Russia will be held responsible if they retaliate against our surveillance planes they will be responsible, says President Obama .
 UN is discussing a proposal to send teams to carry out on-the-ground inspection in Cuba . The UN is also considering sending teams to inspect the country .
 If we get the IL-28 bombers out we might be prepared to lift the quarantine, says the government . "We might be able to lift [the quarantine] if we get them out of the country," he says .
 The President then asked for a memorandum spelling out what the Russians had agreed to and what we agreed to, the President said . The President asked for the President to explain what the agreement had been agreed to .
 Secretary Rusk said the proposal to use the Latin American Ambassadors in Havana as inspectors is a help but it is not complete . Rusk: Proposal to use Latin American . ambassadors in Havana is not a complete solution .
 President said Ambassadors could look at caves and inspect possible Soviet submarine base sites . The President said these Ambassadors would be able to inspect caves .
 The problem is how we can hurt Castro without a quarantine which stops Soviet ships . The problem was how we could hurt Castro with a quarantine, says the author .
 Secretary Rusk said we might ask the Latin American States to break relations with Cuba . Rusk also said he might tell allies to get their ships out of the Cuban trade .
 Mr Nitze circulated a Defense Department paper on what we would do if a reconnaissance plane were shot down . The paper was circulated by the Defense Department .
 We have a choice of hitting the offending source or if the shoot-down were deliberate, an air attack destroys the IL-28 bombers and the SAM sites . We have the choice of striking the source or attacking the source of the shooting .
 President asked what point we would give up low-level reconnaissance missions . The President asked for what point should we give up reconnaissance missions? "The President asked us to give up"
 He asked for a surveillance plan adequate to meet our interests on the assumption that the bombers remain . The plan should not be based on assumption that bombers remain, he said . He added that the plan would be adequate on the assumptions that bombers remained .
 He asked the group to meet again tomorrow/6/ to decide whether we should go to the mat on the IL-28 bombers . The group will decide whether to continue working on the bombers .
 Thompson and Alexis Johnson drafted by Thompson and U. Alexis Johnson . Cleared by Cleveland, Gilpatric, Bundy, Bundy and Rusk; approved by Johnson . Drafted by Thompson, Johnson; cleared by Cleveland .
 The Soviets take position that KennedyKhrushchev agreement related only to missiles . The Soviets say it was only a matter of missiles .
 They also consider quarantine proclamation an illegal act and that they will ignore list of offensive weapons in that document . They also say quarantine proclamation is illegal act . The quarantine proclamation also considers quarantine proclamation illegal .
 Our primary purpose is to get the MRBM's and IL-28 bombers out and we would be prepared to go far in reducing the list of offensive weapons in order to achieve this purpose . The U.S. is prepared to reduce its list of weapons to reduce the list .
 Any nuclear warheads for missiles, nuclear bombs for aircraft, or any other type of nuclear weapon . The U.S. has no nuclear weapons for missiles or aircraft . The United States has no such weapons .
 With regard to the Komar-class torpedo boats you might, however, inquire whether Soviets intend to furnish any additional craft of this kind of . The Komar class torpedo boats were built in the 1960s .
 What we are concerned about are the missiles and bombers with their immediate supporting equipment, and you could explain that point five in your letter to Mikoyan was included to prevent setting up of bases complete except for missiles which could be brought in .
 On submarines you should take the position that we are relying on Soviet assurances against the establishment of submarine bases in Cuba . On submarines, we should take a position that they did not intend to furnish such offensive weapons system to Cuba .
 Ball told Bundy about the call from Stevenson saying he was concerned they have not seen the President's reply to Mr K/l/ Ball knows it was agreed it not be sent up to them . Ball said he is concerned the President has not seen his reply .
 Someone will have to placate him because he is upset about the fact they can't conduct their business unless they at least know what the exchanges are at all levels . The president is upset that he doesn't know what his exchanges are .
 Bundy thought Bundy thought they were too leaky . Bundy said he couldn't say that to him because his answer would be they haven't leaked anything and Washington has leaked everything . Bundy thought it was too much to say to him .
 Bundy says he knew the substance of what was in the message . Bundy said he knew he knew what it was . Bundy: "I'm not going to lie about it. It's not a lie."
 Bundy was afraid if it were sent to him it would be all over the place . Bundy feared it would 'all over the country' Bundy said he was afraid of sending it to Bundy's home .
 Ball suggested we send it up to him with someone who could show it to him and bring it back . Ball suggested sending it back to someone who was able to get it back. Ball suggested that someone could bring it up with someone to show it .
 Ball told him we should do something because he was upset about it, and he is a member of the Cabinet, he said . Ball said he was 'upset' about the situation .
 The moment anyone says there is a message, we have to show it to Alphand; then we are in trouble . Bundy suggested it for his eyes only/2/ and Ball should explain to him the reason we are being edgy about this .
 President Vladimir Putin has imposed a strict rule on the use of Russian spies in Russia and the U.S. on a list approved by him personally . The rules apply only to people working in Washington and Moscow .
 Stevenson said unless the Mission knew what was being said at other levels, they could not operate . Stevenson said that unless they knew what other levels were being said, they couldn't operate .
 Cuba and Isle of Pines each month requires complete high level coverage of Cuba and of the Isle of Peines each thirty days, plus a sufficient number of low-level flights or ground inspections .
 It is estimated that a schedule providing complete higher level coverage of Cuba once every thirty days would allow elasticity in the scheduling of overflights of Cuba .
 This should lead to no more than six flights per month to produce complete coverage of the island . This should permit selecting days for flight when the weather is relatively good .
 In perfect weather conditions, complete coverage of the island could be obtained in one day by four U-2 aircraft . Four U.2 aircraft could be used to cover the island in a day .
 Oblique photography does not yet have the capability to provide search coverage of Cuba by oblique photography . Cuba is Cuba's only major island of Cuba .
 There is a shortage of cameras for this purpose, and for the foreseeable future, the oblique technique will not provide adequate coverage of interior locations . There is also a shortage in cameras that can be used to record interior locations.
 The number of flights required for low-level photography would depend almost entirely on the extent of suspicions about specific locations arise as a result of high level surveillance or other intelligence .
 In the absence of reliable ground inspection, low-level surveillance would be required as needed as needed to check suspicious locations . Low-level monitoring would be needed in order to keep tabs on suspicious locations, officials say .
 The minimum requirement would seem to be to schedule a sufficient number of such low-level flights to protect the ""right" to them even if no suspicious locations were indicated by U-2 photography of other intelligence .
 This political consideration would indicate a requirement for perhaps two overflights a month, perhaps two such overflights per month, a month .
 In addition to aerial, and such on site inspection as may be available, we would plan to continue all other avenues of intelligence including continuing surveillance at sea of shipping .
 Any unexplained increase in such shipping would be a ground for increased suspicion . It would be an increase in increased suspicion of the shipping industry .
 The missiles are out and we obtain satisfactory on-the-ground inspection . The missiles were out and they were inspected by a team of experts .
 The missiles are out but we do not obtain satisfaction on ground inspection . The missiles were out but not inspected by ground inspection, says the BBC .
 There followed discussion on how pressure could be kept on Cuba without continuing the quarantine . Cuba has been quarantined since June .
 A proposal was made to ask the allies to put the maximum pressure on Castro so as to avoid a situation in which we would be retaliating for a shoot-down of one of our reconnaissance planes .
 Ambassador Thompson urged that we keep the maximum amount of flexibility until Khrushchev replies to our last letter/3/ and until the Mikoyan talks with Castro in Havana are completed . Ambassador Thompson: "We need to keep maximum flexibility"
 The President said the key issue is whether we lift the quarantine if the IL-28 bombers don't come out . President said he wants to lift quarantine if they don't return to the US .
 He thought we would know more in twenty-four hours about what we should do, he said . He said we would have more information in the next 24 hours . He added that we would be able to find out what to do next .
 He was inclined not to reimpose the quarantine, but he did favor pressure on our allies to keep their ships out of Cuba . He said he did not want the quarantine to be reintroduced .
 The first, reimposition of the quarantine, and the second, covert actions against Castro . Castro's actions are the result of a series of covert actions . Castro is accused of trying to quarantine Castro in Cuba .
 Five U-2 flights and ten low-level flights were authorized for tomorrow . The U.S. Air Force is authorized to fly U.2 and 10 low-land flights .
 Secretary McNamara reported that there was no reaction to today's flights, but the weather had been bad, i.e. clouds had obscured targets .
 Stevenson, McCloy, and Yost met with Kuznetsov, Zorin and Mendelevich . Fol is summary of the meeting .
 An 18-page memorandum of conversation took place at the Soviet Mission from 5 to 8:30m., is ibid., 1-A October/November meetings .
 Sovs gave us position as of today of nine vessels leaving Cuba carrying 42 missiles . Sovs says nine vessels are leaving Cuba with 42 missiles, according to Sovs .
 Vessels were said to have turned eastward and proceeding through Bahama Strait by Crooked Island .
 Masters of vessels have been given instructions concerning uncovering some missiles and concerning use of helicopters . Mastermasters of vessels were given instructions about uncovering missiles and helicopters .
 Kuznetsov, after declaring Sovs have complied with their commitment to withdraw offensive weapons and that it is now up to us to comply with its commitments of guarantees to Cuba, read list of seven points which he felt should be embodied in our commitment .
 Kuznetsov described as U Thant's plan for UN presence in Caribbean, including US, Cuba, and other LA states, to observe carrying out of obligations by all parties . These seven points were elaboration of Castro's five points/2/ supplemented by United States acceptance of
 Stevenson made clear guarantees we envisaged are those defined in exchange of letters between Pres and Khrushchev . The guarantees were made in the exchange letters between the two sides, says Stevenson .
 Kuznetsov rigidly maintained Sov position that IL-28s were never included in definition of offensive weapons . He said Sovs had now fully complied with their commitments to remove offensive weapons from Cuba .
 Khrushchev's statement that all offensive weapons will be removed from Cuba means that there will be on Cuba no warheads related to such weapons . As to warheads Kuznetsov said that Khrushchev's statement . Khrushschev: There will be no warheads on Cuba related
 He went on to specify that ""such weapons"" means those loaded on vessels and now proceeding to the Soviet Union . He went further to say that such weapons were loaded on ships .
 Warhead warheads were loaded on board ship and carried out of Cuba immediately after decision to remove missiles had been taken . He added that in fact warheads were carried out on ship and out of the Cuba immediately .
 Any further talk about verification of removal of warheads is pointless . This being the case any further talk of removing warheads from the site is pointless. This is the case .
 It would be absurd to suggest warheads might be left behind after missiles removed since warheads without missiles are not weapons and cannot be used . Warheaders without missiles can't be used as weapons .
 Kuznetsov replied that implementation of this verification depended on Cuban agreement, which had not been forthcoming .
 Guarantee is clear and conditions are clear, he concluded, but transaction is not yet complete . Guarantee was clear, but conditions are still not clear .
 If Soviet Union would help to complete transaction by removal of bombers and by enabling U.S. to verify removals of all nuclear components, then we will give guarantees pursuant to exchange of correspondence, in form of declaration in the SC if that appears to be most suitable means .
 I thought I would get together with Alex over the weekend,/l/ and we will try to figure out something. I thought it would be fun to play with him .
 Are we going to want to do more this weekend or do we want to let this thing sit a few days? Do you want to sit down for a few more?
 "This business of reimposition of a quarantine is much too brutal and much too hazardous," says Dr. Andrew Hammond . He says quarantine is 'much too brutal' and 'hazardous'
 This is the last resort of solution because it would have to be undertaken in an atmosphere where we would be really going it alone, I think. This would be the first time we have been able to go it alone. This is a very difficult time for us to do this, says
 I wasn't at all satisfied with what we came up with yesterday. But there are other things; there are also other things to do with the team .
 The raw materials are in these papers, but someone has to go work and actually develop the scenario . Someone has to work hard to get the idea out of these papers .
 "How soon do we begin to say in a relatively disagreeable tone that if the bombers don't go the deal is off?" asks the U.S. president .
 Our view is it is not only off but pressure needs to be applied on this. Pressure must be put on this, says the BBC . It is not the only off, but pressure must be applied to pressure on this .
 Russia and the U.S. must decide whether to let the Russians off the hook to some extent and concentrate on the Cubans, or hold their nose strictly to it with whatever consequence there may be .
 It might be better— one could just make a shift-OK, we are now going to treat this as a Cuban problem, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 I put forward with McNamara before you came in the meeting yesterday. As a matter of fact this was put forward by McNamara, he said . This is what he put forward before McNamara came in, he added .
 The Russians are helping it this way, and particularly the Cuban assertion yesterday in the UN which was reported that the bombers were theirs . If we could build up this kind of a set of documentation, then we would be in a position to say we appreciate the Soviet Union had done what it
 "We must have freedom of action. Furthermore, since the Soviet Union has indicated that they are not in control of the situation, we must have free of action," she said .
 President Obama said he would start in on pressures on the Cubans . But leave the second stage business, he said, "but leave the first stage business"
 In the meantime, with a kind of tacit understanding with the SU, this may be the best course . It may be best course for the U.S. to have a tacit understanding .
 I think we would do better not try to try to do contingency planning; although the President wants work to go on, he won't sit still for the thing that he doesn't know . I would like to ask the Department, let your office be the center of production of a respectable
 "If they say they will get them out, our whole planning problem changes," says Drexler . "They will have to say they're going to get them," he says .
 President's view is that he would buy this if it doesn't lead him to a nose-to-nose with the Soviets . President would want the strongest program that doesn't do that, he says .
 I think we will probably have to have an Executive Committee meeting later this afternoon,/5/ for news and wrap up for the weekend the best we can .
 I think he would probably want to get the thing organized this afternoon if he can . He would like to get it organized today if he could . He says he's not sure if he'll be able to .
 UN isn't going to be a lively forum, and Mikoyan hasn't come back, etc. The President does not want to take a weekend, I am sure, in any way that would complicate process .
 The report was sketchy on it. They started off by trying to inject right away at the outset the guarantees and wanted to know why we evaded the subject, etc. They wanted to ask why we hadn't given up the guarantees .
 "They keep pulling it back to the guarantee and set forth all of Castro's points in their language. Then we brought it around to the IL-28s and the other items we were interested in, they said . Then they kept pulling it to the guarantees, and they set forth
 Unless something breaks in Havana or Moscow, unless they have something new to present today (it might be Mikoyan's return or something from Moscow, I don't know), we are at the point that they have said all the warheads relating to the missiles have been withdrawn . Now they
 Whether we are willing to accept a certification that all warheads from planes have been withdrawn and won't be reintroduced, or whether we have to take a position later on the IL-28s, will we have another problem in the post-facto verification .
 I think that here it is certainly not accepted that we could simply take their word for it because of the fact that in the . President's letter itself he specified as one of the conditions some continuing safeguards .
 The real posture probably is that unless they are willing to provide for some kind of continuing inspection on the ground, which, with Cuban cooperation, might be worked out under the UN arrangement . The U.S. would have to continue to assure ourselves of the situation through the closest kind of
 I think we would continue the surveillance without arguing and announcing publicly. I think it would continue without arguing publicly. We would continue to be monitored without arguing, I think .
 "We reserve the point on safeguards on the assumption that they have to be some kind of arrangements or something of the sort on the ground" "I think that is probably right, as far as any specifications of the surveillance is concerned"
 On this one, I would avoid getting into any specification on the thing . I would not get into any speculating on the device .
 The reason why they are pressing so hard on Castro's five points, etc. is to make a record for the negotiations in Cuba that they want to be able to go back and tell Castro that they fought his battle to the bitter end, but that there is no give on our side
 Russia is doing what they can subject to their being able to control Castro, Obama says . Obama: "As far as the Russians are concerned they are doing what . they can," says Obama .
 We have the option of accepting their arguments that they can't control Castro or trying to take the position that Castro is, after all, just a creature of theirs and holding them to the performance themselves . We can choose whether to accept the argument that Castro can't be controlled .
 We should insist that we still have to have the safeguards provided in the arrangement, which means ground inspection and some form of ground inspection . We should have to be able to satisfy ourselves against reintroduction .
 The guarantees are for the benefit of Castro, but without Castro's cooperation in these things, we couldn't possibly give securities . Castro is a key figure in Cuba's decision to give the government a guarantee .
 The advantage of this course is that it permits the Russians to disengage if they want to which would leave us free to pursue other subjects with them without the embarrassment of the Cuban problem, while reserving freedom of action .
 One is how we liquidate our deal with the Russians as to ground inspection . Another is how to deal with ground inspection with the Russian government .
 IL-28s are an offensive weapon and could be used against the other LA countries and against us, the UK says . We cannot give assurances as long as Castro is in position on the IL-27s .
 If we are unable to work these things out with Castro, then there is really a problem if the decision is in Castro's hands and it leaves the problem between Castro and ourselves . If we can't work it out, it will be a problem for Castro and himself, he says .
 I think we have to wait to see what they say at 1:30, whether there has been any reflection from the exchange . I think it will be a matter of time to see if the exchange has been reflected in the market .
 I wonder if you think the time has come that we talk about the alternative of verification of warheads by ship inspection as we proposed and the aerial bombs, or whether we would be inclined to take their certification . I wonder .
 If we get the IL-28 question resolved, then we might consider what is fact-that you have no way of verification . We might consider whether you have to verify the fact that you have .
 Gilpatric said AES wanted him to tell Ball that Kuznetsov called the emergency meeting was simply for the purpose of registering a protest . The meeting was meant to register a protest about the way three naval ships were acting in intercepting the Russian ships .
 Alexandraska was not even on the list of ships . The ship was trying to stop the ships, and one ship wasn't even on a list . The ships were trying to protect themselves .
 There was no word about Mikoyan's return, and the Russian Ambassador made a fine speech about Mrs. Mikoyans .
 Ball asked if they pulled the tarps off and Gilpatric said they have been pulling the taraps off, getting down to what they call the rubber pants, which is enough to get an identification . Ball asked what they are known as rubber pants . Ball said they are pulling the
 Ball asked if the picture looked good enough to be persuasive and Gilpatric replied they thought so; they haven't received them yet . Ball asked for the picture to be considered persuasive . Ball said they thought the picture was good enough and they thought it would be persuasive .
 "They show, for example, fins and they show where the conduits were run. They show where they were run," he says of the submarine .
 He thought they would correspond with the Red Square pictures sufficiently, he said . He added that he wanted them to correspond with Red Square photos sufficiently .
 I wonder if you would care to submit a suggestion this afternoon at the meeting/1/ a suggestion which I could dictate. "I could dictate," he asks .
 "It seems to me highly desirable to liquidate-this is all pending, no developments from Moscow or from Castro, I mean Havana," says President Vladimir Putin .
 "If this continues this way indefinitely, we are going to start to lose ground here," he says . "It will reverberate around the country," he adds . "We're going to be losing ground here"
 "Just chew on that for a while and extricate us from the deadlock we are in now," says President Obama . "We are in a deadlock," says Obama .
 This would give them their five Castro points in the forum where we can handle it bestin the OAS . Meanwhile get the munitions out of there and the only verification we will ever get on the warheads anyway .
 The thing about that is it leaves Castro in an extremely favorable position, doesn't it . Castro's position is extremely favorable, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He has lost his aircraft, his missiles, his nuclear striking capability, he says . He has a guarantee against invasion by the U.S. and nothing else .
 He still has his SAM sites and the missiles he never really thought were his anyway . He says he still has a SAM site and still has some of his missiles . But he says he doesn't really think he has his own SAM sites .
 "We are never going to get them, I don't think, without knocking them out," he says . We are going to have to knock them out, he says. We are never getting them, he adds .
 What disturbs me is from the point of view of the whole American state system, he has come out in a good position, he says . What disturbed me is that he has gone out in good position. He says .
 He has given us a guarantee he won't reintroduce these weapons into Cuba . The Soviets have given guarantee that they won't reinstitute them, he says .
 The point is that the problem of verification at the completion of the present transaction is in Castro hands and he isn't playing ball . Castro is not playing ball, he says, but he is playing ball with the government .
 Moscow is the focus of this week's DailyMail.com's weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . The gallery is open to the public for the first time ever .
 The majority view is in favor of doing what you are trying to do which is to draw a line under the Russian undertakings and say we are prepared to accept at face value your statement that you have gone as far as you can go .
 First, are we prepared to give him any undertakings at all until he does something himself which would be, I think, from the point of view of most of the people in Washington, which would require more than simply mutual undertakings. First, he asks: 'Are we prepared
 He would really have to provide for some kind of on the spot inspection or something of the sort of continuing presence that would provide some real safeguards or at least the appearance of safeguards .
 The alternative approach is maybe the thing to do is to let the Russians disengage along the line that you suggest and say to them you have done everything you can do and thanks very much; . We still have the problem of dealing with Castro because our guarantee is with Castro .
 The only thing we will get is a promise the Russians won't reintroduce unless we get ground inspection from Castro and Castro will put that on a reciprocal basis . As to the future safeguards, the only thing that we'll get is the promise that the Russians will not reintroduce .
 If we come off with everything we anticipated, then that leaves us with dealing directly with Castro on any future assurances beyond his promise not to reintroduce . Therefore tying to liquidate the Russian deal and if we come . come off . then that . leaves us . with dealing . directly with
 I think you will find there is a great deal of accord on the first part of this article . I think it will be interesting to see if you agree with the first half of the debate .
 "You can't impose on Castro obligations to do things because the Russians didn't comply," Castro says . Castro says. "You have to impose on obligations to ... do things"
 President Obama has promised to give the world's leader an assurance of support for his administration . The president's promise was conditioned upon certain things being done, some of which were in his behalf, he said .
 "You can withhold the assurance on invasion and cut off now and say we didn't get strict compliance and therefore we are not ground inspection," says minister . "The people will say over here they have had virtual support of everything they expect and they are now reneging on their promise
 I just don't want to get in the position of anybody charging us with bad faith or nonperformance on our part. I just want to avoid being charged with nonperformance or bad faith . I'm not going to be charged with any kind of nonperformance, I said .
 No intimation from your friend as to when Mikoyan might have something . No intimated from friend that he might have had something to do .
 I think we are stuck here for the present and I think he has got down there and they are just going to work us over on these five points and we won't really achieve anything . No, I think they are going to be working us over, and they will just work us
 The Department of State sent this memorandum to the White House on November 14 .
 Unless there is some break from Moscow or Havana-I think the situation is deadlocked . I suggest trying to conclude the transaction with the Russians to enable us to get into contact with Cuba .
 If the Soviets will remove the IL-28 bombers and give us some means of verification and formal assurance that all nuclear warheads for missiles and air nuclear bombs have been removed, and 2. If they do, they must also give us a formal assurance of the removal .
 If the Soviets will give us some means (through the five Latin countries having diplomatic relations, for example) to verify compliances above ex-post facto (I assume our reconnaissance will also verify without any agreement by the Soviets or Cubans), and if the Soviets and Cubans will give
 If the Soviets and Cuba will give us a formal public promise not to reintroduce these weapons into Cuba, 4.4.5.5 . The U.S. should ask Cuba not to bring back the weapons .
 We will call off the quarantine and give Cuba the formal guarantee against invasion . We will ask other Latin States to do likewise. We will give Cuba a formal guarantee of invasion .
 This should be worked out through the OAS, if the other Latin states think it worthwhile . The OAS should be working out through, if it's worthwhile, says the president .
 Adlai E Stevenson/5/ /5/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature . Adlia E Stevenson .
 Ball told Bundy he hoped to get over to him by 10m. tomorrow a memorandum/1/ which is a general kind of planning memo which incorporates some views of the DOD which came out of their meeting this afternoon . Ball hopes to get the memo over to Bundy by 10pm tomorrow
 It amounts to a consideration of direct military action to achieve it or a continued system of surveillance with the expectation of Cuba drawing fire and then taking action on that .
 Ball is attaching a proposal of Stevenson,/3/ which he does not endorse, but which he wanted the President to see on negotiating with Castro . Ball is attached to a proposal which he wants to see if the President is willing to negotiate with Castro in Cuba .
 Source text is part of the President's weekend reading for November 10 . This article is a written version of this article by CNN iReport .
 He noted that it ""was hastily prepared at the request of the White House"" and that it had been slightly revised since submission to the President .
 Ball also noted that the memorandum created the impression that the optional courses of action were mutually exclusive . Ball said the memorandum was created by the government to create a common sense of understanding .
 Assumption A That the USSR will remove the IL-28s and will arrange adequate ground inspection . Assumption that the USSR . will remove . The USSR will . arrange adequate . ground inspection. Assumption That . USSR will allow adequate ground inspections .
 If the removal of the bombers is sufficiently assured and the inspection arrangements are adequate, we could presumably regard the incident as closed and give some form of guaranty regarding the invasion of Cuba . The removal of bombers is enough to give us a guarantee of the invasion .
 These arrangements would need to include more than a provision for Second-Phase inspection by the five Ambassadors .
 Even limited progress might indicate a sufficiently forthcoming attitude to make possible some Third-Phase solution . But even that limited progress may indicate a sufficient willingness to go nuclear .
 Assumption B That the USSR will arrange ground inspection, but will refuse to remove the IL-28s on the ground that these are Cuban property . Assumption A: The USSR will order ground inspection of the planes, but refuses to remove them .
 If the Cubans should agree to yield on the question of adequate ground inspection, then it is hardly likely that they would insist upon the retention of the IL-28s .
 The USSR will agree to withdraw the IL-28s, but will assert that they are unable to arrange ground inspection because of alleged Cuban objections . Assumption C That the USSR will . agree to withdrawal, but would assert that . they are . unable to . arrange ground inspections because of
 Assumption D That the USSR will neither remove the IL-28s nor provide arrangements for ground inspection and continuing safeguards . Assumption that the USSR won't remove IL-27s or provide ground inspection, continuing safeguards. Assumption A: That Russia will not remove IL28s .
 Khrushchev will excuse his non-performance on the ground that Cuba is a sovereign country, the IL-28s belong to the Cubans, and Castro is unwilling to permit any form of ground inspection . Khrushchevitch: Cuba is sovereign country .
 We might take the position that Cuba is effectively a puppet of the Soviet Union since it is economically dependent on Moscow . Regardless of Cuban intransigence, we would continue to look to the Soviet Soviet Union to enforce the Kennedy-Khrushchev undertakings .
 Or second, we might take at face value the Soviet assertion that Russia cannot control Castro . Or we might think that Russia can't control Castro.
 In that event we would tacitly or explicitly accept the fact or fiction that Khrushchev had complied to the extent of his ability . We would then concentrate our pressure on Cuba .
 In that event, not only would we refuse to give any assurance of noninvasion, but we would make it clear that we could not tolerate-for reasons not only of our own security but of the security of the Hemisphere— that Castro be left in the possession of offensive weapons .
 The shifting of the burden of responsibility would minimize the dangers of a direct confrontation with the USSR, which might escalate into a larger conflict . The shift of responsibility could minimize the risk of a confrontation with Russia, which could escalate into larger conflict.
 Khrushchev wanted to extricate the USSR from its involvement in Cuba which is proving more costly and less profitable . It would assist Khrushchchev in extricating the USSR .
 It would eliminate the Cuban question from the US-USSR dialogue and thus permit progress on other major issues . The Cuban question would be eliminated from US-U.S. dialogue .
 It would provide freedom of action for the U.S. to deal with Castro directly, both on its own behalf and on behalf of the other American states . It would allow the United States to deal directly with the Castro directly .
 It should be consistent with our position that the United States cannot accept either the continuance of offensive weapons in Cuba or the absence of adequate safeguards against the introduction of new weapons .
 It should be designed to undermine the authority and prestige of Castro, both in Cuba and in the eyes of the world . Castro's authority should be undermined by the loss of his prestige in Cuba .
 It should be directed towards setting in motion a train of events that would progressively enhance the American ability to deal decisively with Castro . The U.S. should set in motion to set up a train in motion that would enhance its ability to do so .
 Continued systematic aerial surveillance with the strong possibility of provoking interference that might lead to limited or general military action . Continued systematic surveillance of the U.S. might provoke interference . Continued surveillance could provoke military action against Russia .
 I-Direct Military Action is contemplated in a paper prepared by the Department of Defense . Direct military action would be taken against the IL-28s . The paper was prepared by Defense Department officials .
 At the present time it is estimated that such action within the next few days would require attacks on San Mien Air Base with 16 F101 strike aircraft armed with napalm, 2.75"" rockets and 20mm ammunition, accompanied by 8 F-104/F8U aircraft equipped
 If the attack is delayed beyond the next 48 hours, dispersal of IL28s may require attack on additional airfields . If the strike is delayed longer than 48 hours it may require additional airfield attacks .
 In the absence of air counter action, the attack should be strictly confined to the destruction or serious damaging of the IL-28 aircraft by the most precise air attack means available .
 With its preponderant military strength the U.S. could promptly deal with any Cuban reaction . The United States has a preponderance of military strength .
 It would be regarded as a direct attack against Cuba and the Soviet Union might feel compelled to intervene on Cuba's behalf in order to save face, or react elsewhere .
 In the absence of any direct Cuban attack on the United States, world opinion might tend to regard the U.S. action as excessive . The disparity in size and resources between the two countries is the disparity .
 UN has been frustrated in its attempt to establish adequate inspection of incoming ships . The UN has tried to establish an inspection system for incoming ships but it has been repeatedly thwarted .
 The UN has been frustrated in its attempts to establish adequate on-site inspections . The UN says it is frustrated by the lack of adequate inspections of the site .
 The U.S. will maintain the present quarantine until the bombers are removed and adequate on-site inspections are achieved .
 The United States supports the Brazilian Resolution and believes that it may offer an adequate long term solution, not only to the present crisis, but to future crises of this kind . The U.S. supports the resolution .
 If the Cubans fail to comply, the U.S. will have to consider taking additional steps . The United States has been criticized for not complying with the Cuban law .
 If no steps are taken to remove the bombers, then the U.S. should extend the quarantine to petroleum, the government says . "We will lift the quarantine if the bombers are removed and adequate inspection is permitted," the government said .
 The Cubans are estimated to have 60 days' supply of gas and diesel fuel oil . Cubans estimate they have about 1 10 days supply for power and industrial use .
 At the present time not only the OAS but the NATO countries strongly support our insistence on adequate inspection— and, perhaps to a lesser extent, on the removal of the IL-28s .
 The Soviet Union might be willing to withhold further supply to Cuba of items on the proscribed list in order to reduce its investment in a rapidly wasting asset . For this reason, it might secretly welcome a United States blockade .
 The quarantine might result in the strangulation of the Castro regime without any direct loss of life . Castro regime might be strangulated by the quarantine . The quarantine could result in a strangulation without the loss of lives .
 The imposition of a quarantine on shipments of POL would be directly relevant to the immobilization of the IL-28s . The quarantine would be a good example of how the POL quarantine could be used to immobilize IL-27s .
 The renewed quarantine would be a direct challenge to the Soviet right of free sea transit . Arguments Against Quarantine include the arguments against the renewed quarantine .
 It would not meet one of the criteria listed earlier-an action directly operating only on Cuba . It would thus fail to meet another criteria-a move directly operating on Cuba. It would be the first time the U.S. government has taken action against Cuba .
 Khrushchev yielded to the threat of our quarantine once by turning his ships around . Khrushvic yielded to . the . threat of a quarantine once . by turning . around . The Soviet Union did not want to quarantine .
 He could not afford the humiliation of doing so a second time, especially after the missiles have been removed and he has claimed to have complied fully with his undertakings .
 Khrushchev was willing to pull back his ships carrying sophisticated weapons to safeguard USSR technology . He pulled back ships carrying weapons to protect the country's technology .
 The USSR could not stand idly by while the economy of a Socialist state was slowly strangled . The loss of face and appearance of impotence would be too high a price for it to pay. The USSR would not stand by by standing idly .
 The quarantine would be resented by several NATO friends, including the UK, who never acknowledged its legality . The UK never acknowledged the legality .
 They might well refuse to recognize a blockade which cut off valuable shipping of POL-particularly since there is a fairly widespread feeling that we have already won our point by expelling missiles .
 It is suggested that, instead of reimposing the blockade, we should undertake a systematic and unremitting air reconnaissance over Cuba . The reconnaissance provoked an armed response that justified our taking direct military action enabling us, at least, to eliminate the IL-28's .
 This course could be justified under the authority of OAS action . Arguments for Reconnaissance could be made by the OAS .
 It would be consistent with our position that we could not tolerate a situation in which we neither had safeguards against the introduction of offensive weapons nor adequate observation to insure that offensive weapons were not used .
 "No Government can permit national air space to be constantly invaded without demonstrating its weakness, both at home and abroad," says David Cameron .
 Castro could not continue for very long to stand down his planes and restrain his anti-aircraft fire without publicly acknowledging his own weakness . Castro would not be able to continue standing down planes without acknowledging his weakness . The Cuban leader was forced to accept that he was weak .
 The result would be that sooner or later he would almost certainly attack our planes, which would permit an escalating scale of reprisal and counter-reprisal that could permit us to deal conclusively with the problem of Castro .
 Governor Stevenson recommends a solution through Security Council Arrangements . IV solution is explained and recommended in the attached memorandum of Governor Stevenson . IVSolution Through Security council Arrangement is explained .
 Direct action against Cuba on the basis suggested in Section I can probably be ruled out . The Problem of Choice can be summed up with the problem of choice in Cuba . The problem of choosing is not clear .
 Such a course of action would probably be regarded by world opinion as excessive . It would involve grave risks of provoking retaliation elsewhere in the world . Such an action would be regarded as excessive, and could provoke retaliation .
 Khrushchev might in fact be prepared and able to disengage from Cuba . The decision between these alternative lines of policy turns in large part on a judgment as to the extent of the extent to which Khrushchevitch might be prepared . The choice between the two options turns in
 If Castro could cut his investment and leave Cuba without specific security commitments, he might be willing to turn his back . Castro's response to continued-and necessarily harassing-low and high level surveillance is obduracy .
 Khrushchev could not sit idly by while we forcibly eliminated the IL-28's and wiped out SAM sites, he says . On the other hand, if it was felt that Khrushvic could not . sit idlely by, the surveillance course might appear too dangerous, he
 If the quarantine route is followed no military action need to be taken directly against Cuba . Khrushchev would not be called upon to respond to what he must necessarily denounce as imperialist aggression .
 Under these circumstances Khrushchev might be prepared to see Cuba go down the drain through the slow strangulation of a blockade . The blockade of Cuba could see the country's economy collapse .
 The vice of the blockade is that it directly engaged the prestige of the USSR since it interferes with the freedom of movement of the Soviet merchant fleet . But the vice of this is that the blockade was that it . Interferes . with freedom of . movement of . the Soviet
 Khrushchev would have to denounce the U.S. for piracy-as he has already done-and for seeking to starve a small country . His supine acquiescence in that piracy would be read by all the world as a humiliating confession of impotence .
 The existence of substantial doubt regarding the answer to this question suggests that before a quarantine were reimposed some effort might be made to sound out Soviet reactions . It suggests that .
 General Taylor said that SAC is still on DEFCON 2 . General Taylor: "SAC still on DeFCON2" General Taylor says that the U.S. military remains on the brink of war .
 The President suggested that the level of alert might be reduced toward the end of the week, but he did not wish to make a decision now . The President said the President did not want to make an announcement now .
 Secretary McNamara said any reduction in the state of readiness of U.S. forces would be a sign to the Soviet Union . McNamara: Any reduction of readiness would be sign to Soviet Union.
 SAC should stand down as soon as possible because the present alert involves burning out large amounts of spare parts . However, the alert should be stood down soon because of the current alert .
 The air defense units should also stand down, but this could not be done without giving a signal to the Russians . The Russian air defense forces should stand down as well as the air defense .
 Secretary McNamara said he would recommend later this week when reserve air defense units called up last month should be returned to civilian life . McNamara would recommend that the units be re-adapted from their call-up status .
 McCone noted that assembly of IL-28s was continuing, that the Soviet Union had given Cuba $550 million in military equipment and spare parts since August 1, 1962 . McCone: Castro had the ability to support subversion all over Central America .
 Secretary Rusk reported there had been no change over the week end on the political side . Rusk said there was no change in the political situation over the weekend .
 We had received no reply from the Russians on the withdrawal of the IL-28 bombers from Cuba . The Russians had withdrawn the aircraft from Cuba, a spokesman said .
 U Thant's proposal to name five Latin American Ambassadors as inspectors has encountered Cuban objections . Cuban objections to the proposal have been voiced by U. Thant .
 An effort is being made to sell the idea of choosing any five Ambassadors agreeable to the parties concerned . The idea is being sold as a way to get the parties involved in the process .
 The Soviets are refusing to give in on the withdrawal of the IL-28 bombers . They are insisting on the five points which Castro put forward some time ago .
 Ambassador Stevenson said his proposal was aimed at ending the negotiations . Ambassador Stevenson: "I want to end the negotiations" Ambassador Stevenson says his proposal is aimed at an end .
 Before presenting it to the Russians we would consult the major Latin American states to see if it was acceptable to them . The Russian state of Vladimir Putin's government is expected to approve it .
 If they came back with counterproposals, we might have to add to the package such things as an agreement to allow inspection of Cuban camps in the United States . We should avoid unilateral action as is proposed in the State Department papers 74/ We should make every effort to go with
 Secretary Rusk said he agreed we should continue to follow a policy of seeking multilateral actions .
 He urged that we stay on our original course until we get a reply from Khrushchev . He urged us to stay on the original course, until we got a reply .
 He preferred this course to Stevenson's suggestion of putting forward a new proposal now . Stevenson's proposal to put forward new proposal was rejected .
 President asked whether we should give a guarantee against invading Cuba if the Russians refused to withdraw the IL-28 bombers . President asked if we should . give a . guarantee against invasion Cuba if Russia refused to withdrawal the bombers .
 If the Soviets refused to withdraw the bombers, we should make a full statement in the UN Security Council . We should also make a statement in a statement of support for the U.S.
 McCloy, who has been taking an active part in the negotiations, recommended that we make the following offer to Kuznetsov .
 If the Russians would agree to take out the IL-28 bombers by fixed future date, we would lift our quarantine at once . We would lift the quarantine if they agreed to do so by fixed date .
 He said he believed Khrushchev was under real pressure and urged that we deal with the Cuban problem from a world point of view rather than a United States /Cuba problem .
 He suggested that we talk about normalization in the Caribbean and offer to talk to the Russians about other problems . The Russian president suggested that normalization of relations with the Caribbean .
 We should make an informal approach to him now before he comes down very hard in opposition to further measures necessary to resolve the Cuban crisis . We should also make a formal approach to the Cuban leader now, he says .
 Ambassador Stevenson again urged that we put our final position to the Russians before they put their final position on us . Ambassador Stevenson said that we need to put our position to Russia before we put it to them .
 Secretary Dillon asked how the U.S. could give an assurance not to invade Cuba without some safeguard covering the reintroduction of strategic missiles to Cuba . Secretary Dillon said the United States could not guarantee not invading Cuba .
 Ambassador Stevenson replied that we could rely on aerial reconnaissance plus promises from the Cubans and the Russians . Ambassador Stevenson: We can rely upon aerial reconnaissance and promises from Cubans, Russians .
 Secretary Rusk asked whether we should lift quarantine if Russians promised to withdraw the IL-28 bombers . The Russian bombers have been banned from the U.S. since 2002 .
 He felt we should maintain our insistence on aerial surveillance and on on-site inspection but lift the quarantine if the Russians promise to take out the IL-28s . He felt the quarantine should only be lifted if the Russian promise to remove the planes .
 McCloy suggested that we tell the Russians we would give a guarantee if they took certain actions . McCloy suggests that we give the Russians a guarantee .
 The President said he did not want any assurances we might give to be included in any document more formal than a letter . The President does not want assurances included in a formal document .
 Ambassador Stevenson says the ideal arrangement would be a monthly on-site inspection . Ambassador Stevenson: "We can't get on site inspection" Ambassador Stevenson said the ideal solution would be monthly inspection .
 Our only hope is to reach some mutual understanding about inspection, such as counting the missiles as they go out on Soviet ships .
 Secretary Rusk said we must have some way in which to answer the reports that offensive missiles are still being put into Cuba by the Russians .
 McCloy suggested that we could hold the Russians to the commitment made in the October 26th Khrushchev letter . He said that the Russians would not bring in any weapons .
 The Attorney General raised again the question of how we could prove that the Russians are not delivering new arms to Cuba . The attorney general raised the question again, asking how to prove that Russia is not delivering arms .
 Referring to the TV Today show,/6/ the President asked that within twenty-24 hours our officials interrogate every Cuban refugee who was making statements about arms going to Cuba . The President also asked that the President .
 "The refugees are naturally trying to build up their story in an effort to get us to invade. The refugees are ... trying to ... make us want to invade," he said . The refugees' story will be published in the U.S.
 We must get to the people the refugees have no evidence which we do not have. We must be honest about the fact that the refugees are refugees . We must also tell the people that refugees are not refugees, they say .
 Such refugee statements, if they continue, could make the problem almost unmanageable . Such statements could make it almost unmanagingable .
 He suggested that we arrange to check every press, radio and TV report made by a refugee . If there is no evidence behind the refugee allegations, we would then report back to the media involved if there was no evidence .
 General Taylor raised the question of how we ensure the continuation of necessary aerial reconnaissance in the long range . General Taylor said: 'We need to be able to continue to use aerial reconnaissance'
 If SAM sites are operational, we cannot ensure the continuance of aerial reconnaissance with U-2s. Mr McCone pointed out that if the SAM site is operational, it cannot be used for aerial reconnaissance .
 The President said we should conduct the aerial reconnaissance we consider necessary . President Obama said the President said it was necessary to conduct aerial reconnaissance .
 He asked whether we should tell the Cubans we are continuing reconnaissance or just go ahead and do it . He asked if we should continue reconnaissance or not .
 Ambassador Stevenson replied that we cannot tell the Cubans because they would oppose our reconnaissance . Ambassador Stevenson: "We cannot tell [Cubans] because they [would oppose] our reconnaissance"
 The President said our reconnaissance can be based on the OAS resolution/7/ if no other position is acceptable to the Russians . Russia has not agreed to the resolution, but the President said it can be used as a basis .
 Secretary Rusk commented that no secrecy is possible in this hemisphere . SecretaryRusk said no secrecy was possible in the hemisphere .
 Ambassador Stevenson said ex post facto verification of the removal of the Soviet missiles is one problem . Ambassador Stevenson: "Ex-post facto verification" of removal of Soviet missiles a problem .
 Continuing verification that missiles are not being reintroduced is another problem . Continuing verification is also a problem, the U.N. says .
 Attorney General pointed out that these two problems were not separable . Attorney General said the Attorney General's office was not separated from the problems .
 He wanted to know what we tell the American people we are doing to prevent the reintroduction into Cuba of Soviet strategic missiles . He asked us to explain what we do to prevent reintroduction .
 We must have an acceptable guarantee that there will be no reintroduction of missiles, says minister . We must also have a guarantee that no reintroductions of missiles will be reintroduction, he says .
 "We can't live without taking some action which ensures us that we know whether or not he is complying with a statement on non-reintroduction of missiles," says President Vladimir Putin .
 The President suggested that we say we are taking every means to ensure that there is no reintroduction of missiles . The President said that we should take every means possible to ensure there are no reintroductions of missiles.
 Ambassador Stevenson agreed that we should just overfly Cuba and not say we were doing so . Ambassador Stevenson said we should not have said we were going to Cuba .
 We should get the OAS to say that this hemisphere cannot live with Cuba which is promoting subversion and action will be taken, if necessary, to prevent Cuban subversion . The OAS should say that it will take action to prevent subversion, says David Cameron .
 The President commented that an assurance covering invasion does not ban covert actions or an economic blockade or tie our hands completely . The President said the assurance does not guarantee covert actions .
 Secretary Rusk said we cannot unilaterally amend the Rio Treaty 78/ Any assurance which we would give does not affect the provision in the Rio treaty which allows invasion under certain circumstances . Any assurance given would not affect provision in Rio Treaty .
 Ambassador Stevenson said we had to decide whether to give the Soviets a package proposal before hearing from Khrushchev or hold off until we had the Russian reply . Ambassador Stevenson told us to hold off on the proposal until we received the Russian response .
 If we decide on making a package proposal we must decide whether it is a full package or a partial package . We must decide if we want to make a full or partial package, we will have to decide if it's a 'full package'
 The President read the proposed wording of an assurance we would give against invasion . The President then read the proposal for an assurance of support .
 Any assurance should appear as a restatement of undertakings in the UN Charter and Rio Treaty, he says .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that no formal statement be given to the press today . Secretary Rusks suggested that a formal statement would not be made to the media .
 The President asked that a short statement be prepared for him to look at at a 4:00 meeting which would say we are waiting for a Russian reply to our demand that they remove the IL-28 bombers . The President is waiting for the Russian response .
 Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy Moscow, November 12, 1962 . Message from Chairman Khruschev to . President Kennedy: "I'm going to make a big mistake"
 President Vladimir Putin: "Mutual obligations are being carried out both by your side and our side" Putin: 'I would like to express my satisfaction that the mutual obligations taken in accordance with the exchange of messages between us'
 One can say that certain favourable results are already seen already seen at this time . "Certain favourable results already seen in this time," says Dr. John Sutter .
 We appreciate your understanding of the situation and your cooperation in carrying out the obligations taken by our side. We thank you for your cooperation and understanding the situation .
 Russia says it has fulfilled its obligations to dismantle missiles and warheads . Russian President Vladimir Putin: "We have already fulfilled our obligations with regard to dismantling and removal of both missiles, warheads"
 "We appreciate that we must come to an agreement with you regarding the mutually acceptable means for your side to ascertain that we really carry out our obligations," says President Obama .
 Kuznetsov, McCloy, Stevenson and McCloy are in talks with Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin and Putin are expected to meet in Moscow next week to discuss a deal .
 The same should be said about the cooperation between captains of our ships, which were taking our missiles from Cuba, and corresponding U.S. ships . The same could be said to be true .
 This is very good, this has created an impression that your side also wishes to cooperate, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "Only yesterday were very dangerous both for our two peoples and for the peoples of the whole world"
 Soviet side has carried out its obligations and thereby have created possibility for complete elimination of tension in the Caribbean, says Soviet leader .
 "Now it is your turn, it is for your side to carry out precisely your obligations. Consequently, now it is now it's your turn"
 The U.S. must give moral satisfaction to world public opinion and tranquility to peoples, says President Obama . The United States itself will not attack Cuba and will restrain other countries of the Western Hemisphere .
 Cuba must lift the so-called quarantine and stop violating the territorial waters and air space of Cuba, says President Obama . Cuba must also lift the quarantine, says Obama .
 If this continues confidence in your obligations will thus be undermined, it can only grieve world public and throw us back to the positions to which we must not return after the liquidation of such a dangerous situation .
 At present, we must-and we are convinced in that-look forward and draw necessary conclusions from what has happened up till now and from the good which followed due to the efforts of both sides . At the moment, we need to look forward and look forward to the future .
 Conditions are emerging now for reaching an agreement on the prohibition of nuclear weapons, cessation of all types of nuclear tests and on all other questions which are ripe and require solution . Therefore, we believe that conditions are emerging .
 You have already ended your tests and we shall probably also end our tests in November or at least before the end of this year . We will probably end our testing in November . We are happy to thank you for your feedback .
 CNN's John Defterios says it is necessary to think of some real measures to ensure more stable security in the world . He says it's also necessary to consider measures with regard to the question of ensuring a more stable world .
 The United States is ready to support idea of a non-aggression pact between NATO and Warsaw treaty countries . The U.S. is also ready to back idea of idea of NATO and the Warsaw treaty nations . In this connection we attach great importance to your statement .
 The basic question, of course, remains that of disarmament, of destroying the whole war machine of states . But the basic question is disarmament of destroying war machines of states, he says .
 To give more assurance on the first stage it might be expedient to return to the proposals forwarded by us some time ago on the establishment of observation posts on mutual basis at airfields, in major sea-ports, at railway junctions, on highways .
 This would exclude the possibility of a surprise attack if any side does not behave honestly, if it wants to concentrate military equipment and its troops for an attack .
 It goes without saying that the question of a German peace treaty still remains and we can not escape from solving it . The peace treaty is still a mystery, and we must solve it, says German politician .
 "Speediest solution of this question still more imperative. Moreover what we and you have lived through makes it more imperative," says the author of the book .
 I do not name other unresolved questions, we have plenty of them, but I name only the main problems, on the solution of which the destinies of the world largely depend . The future of the U.S. and the world depends on these main problems .
 Now about the matter that, as you state, worries you today-about the IL-28 planes which you call an offensive weapon . Now about . the matter of the matter . That is what you say is an offensive . weapon, you call it an 'offensive weapon'
 We have already given you our clarification on this point and I think you can not but agree with us. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case. We think it is a matter of principle that we should not have been allowed to use the internet to make our point of
 If you do not agree-and this is your right-ask your intelligence after all and let it give you an answer based not on guesswork but on facts . However, if you don't agree, you should ask your intelligence .
 It is long since the IL-28's have been taken out of production and out of use in our armed forces . If it really knows anything it must tell you the truth, the truth must be told .
 Some planes still remain, and a certain number of them have been brought by us to Cuba, says President Obama . "That was done as a result of your action last year," he says .
 "We had to take measures in response to that time, having postponed taking those planes out of use as well," says Air Force chief .
 Had there been no such action we would not have IL-28's in existence because they would have been used for scrap . We would have had them scrapped, but they would still be in existence .
 If your intelligence is objective it must give a correct appraisal of these 12-year-old planes and report to you that they are incapable of offensive actions . It must give an objective appraisal of the aircraft and report the planes incapable of attacking actions .
 Cuba says it brought them to Cuba only because they can be used as a mobile means of coastal defense under the cover of anti-aircraft fire from their own territory . The Cuban government says it is not interested in bringing them in .
 "They can not fly beyond the limits of that cover since they will be immediately destroyed either by modern anti-aircraft means or by simple conventional artillery" "They are entirely defenseless. They can not however fly beyond that cover."
 All this must be known not only to the intelligence but to all engaged in military matters, he says . But all this must also be known, he adds .
 Cuba wants to possess defensive weapons which would permit to defend its territorial integrity of its country . Nevertheless we regard your concern with understanding, though on our part we share the desire of the Government of Cuba .
 If we agreed with you on solving other questions in implementing the mutually assumed obligations then the question of IL-28 bombers would be solved without difficulties . Therefore if you meet this with understanding and if we agreed to solve other questions, then the issue would be resolved without difficulties.
 You should not have any fears that they can be used to do harm to the United States or other neighboring countries in Western Hemisphere . Consequently, you should not be worried about them .
 President Obama has an obligation not to invade Cuba, writes CNN.com's John Defterios.com . He says the weapon should not pose any threat for the US.
 If the enemy were threatening us with such weapon we would ignore that threat completely for it would cause us no anxiety whatsoever . We would ignore such a threat completely if it were a threat that would cause no anxiety .
 The U.S. government has assured that planes are piloted by its fliers and therefore there are no misgivings that they could be used to the detriment of any state .
 "We have removed everything else related to missiles, all the equipment necessary for their use and recalled the personnel manning those missiles," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . "As you ascertained yourself we have removed the missiles," he says .
 The IL-28's is of no value as a combat weapon at present, to say nothing of the future . Now that the missiles are removed, the question of IL-27's is an incomprehensible argument .
 "Let us do away with tension, let us fulfill the mutual pledges made in our messages," she said . Let us come to an agreement on this question as well, she said. Let us fulfill our mutual pledges," she added .
 "We give a gentleman's word that we will remove the IL-28 planes with all the personnel and equipment related to those planes, although not now but later," he said .
 "We would like to do that some time later when we determine that the conditions are ripe to remove them," says the airport chief executive . The airport is expected to be open to the public for the first time ever .
 The blockade would be immediately removed, the pledges of the sides would be registered in the appropriate documents in the United Nations Organization . Non-invasion of Cuba and strict observance of her sovereignty guaranteed . UN posts established in the countries of the Caribbean so that neither one nor the other side
 This would be the best solution which can be anticipated, especially having in mind the tension that we lived through and the abyss we came to . This is the best way to deal with the crisis, especially in terms of the tension we have lived through, the tension .
 President Obama said he was "very close to that abyss" when the country was in danger of collapse . President Obama has been accused of failing to act properly .
 "You and we soberly and wisely appraised the situation and maintained self-control," says President Obama . "But you and we ... well-thoughtfully assessed the situation," says Obama .
 What happened should now prompt us to make new great efforts so that no repetition of such events should be allowed . If we succeeded in finding a way out of a dangerous situation this time, next time we might not safely untie the tightly made knot. We might not untie a tightly
 The knot that we are now untying has been tied rather tightly, almost to the limit . And the knot is now untied, and it's not the first time we've been untied .
 We displayed an understanding with regard to the positions of each other and came out of a critical situation through mutual concessions to the satisfaction of all peoples of the world . We displayed a . understanding .
 Let us give joy to all peoples of the world and show that this conflict really became a matter of yesterday, let us normalize the situation . Let us now give joy, all people around the world, says President Obama . Obama: "Let's normalize this situation. Let's
 It would be good if on your part efforts were made to make the normalization a complete, real normalization and it would be necessary to do this in the interests of all peoples . This is within our power. And this is within your power. It is necessary to .
 Mr Bundy summarized Khrushchev's reply/1/ to the President's message of November 6th . Mr Bundy: "Khrrushchev replied to President Nixon's message"
 IL-28 bombers might come out at some point, but would be removed under Soviet control . IL-27 bombers might be removed from Soviet control under the Soviet Union .
 There was a discussion of the McCloy offer which involved lifting the quarantine in return for the Russian promise to take out the IL-28 bombers . The offer was discussed in a bid to lift the quarantine .
 The question of safeguards against the reintroduction of strategic weapons would not be raised now because we have a limited set of unilateral safeguards to use which we do not want to lose . The UK would not raise the issue now because it is not likely to be raised again .
 Secretary Rusk said there was an issue over whether the Soviet commitment on missiles and warheads was to be public or private . Rusk also said that there was a question over whether Soviet commitment to missiles was public or public .
 The President said we could live for two weeks with no public knowledge of the Soviet commitment . President said he could live in two weeks without the knowledge of Soviet commitment.
 Mr Bundy commented that the IL-28 bombers appear not to be a sticking point . Mr Bundy said that the Illinois-made bombers appear to be not the sticking point.
 President said we still have the questions of continued surveillance and the form of an assurance against invasion . The President said there were still questions about continued surveillance .
 We could set the IL-28s off against the quarantine and our assurances against invasion off against safeguards covering reintroduction of missiles . We could . set the quarantine against quarantine and security assurances against . invasion .
 Ambassador Stevenson referred to the words in Khrushchev's reply ""at some point"" and commented that this was not a specific time but meant that the bombers would come out at some point . Ambassador Stevenson said that the words were not specific and meant that bombers would be released when Khrush
 Ambassador Thompson said the timing of our commitment not to invade was important to Khrushchev because the Communist Central Committee will be meeting in Moscow soon . Ambassador Thompson: The timing of the decision was important because of a meeting in Russia soon .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that we concentrate on a deal involving the quarantine offset against withdrawal of the bombers .
 Mr Bundy suggested we might tell Khrushchev that he should give the order to remove the bombers, that we would then check on their removal, and verify that the bombers had left, we would lift the quarantine .
 There was a discussion of the alternatives which consist of a public announcement that the bombers are coming out or verifiable proof that they are being recrated, plus private assurances that they will be removed . There was also a discussion on whether the bombers will be recrated .
 The question of whether we should ask the Russians to remove them within thirty days was raised . The question was raised.
 The consensus was that Khrushchev should be told that he should give the order to remove the bombers, and when we observe the crated bombers leaving Cuba on Soviet ships, we will lift the quarantine . The consensus in Cuba was to lift a quarantine .
 The public reason a second meeting had been held today was because the group's business had not been finished in the morning . The second meeting was held because of the meeting's business hadn't been finished .
 The President approved up to five U-2 flights and ten low-level sorties for tomorrow . The President also approved ten sorties on Saturday .
 At 8:30m., on November 12, 1962, Robert F Kennedy went to the Soviet Embassy's reception for the Bolshoi Ballet . Kennedy attended the reception at the embassy in Moscow .
 Khrushchev and the President agree in principle that the IL-28 aircraft shall be withdrawn within a certain period of time . Khrushchevitch agreed in principle to the withdrawal of the aircraft . The aircraft were the first to be withdrawn from the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 Following this agreement the United States will immediately lift all quarantine, even tomorrow, without waiting for the completion of the aircraft pullout . The U.S. will not wait until the pullout is complete, but will lift quarantine .
 The United States side would prefer that the agreed time period for withdrawing the IL-28 aircraft were made public . The U.S. side would, of course, prefer to have the agreed period for withdrawal of the aircraft made public.
 If the Soviet side has any objections to making it public, the President will not insist . However, if the President wants to make it public he won't insist it .
 Arthur M Scheslinger, Jr., Jr., in Robert Kennedy and His Times, writes an account of the Kennedy-Dobrynin meeting, page 549 .
 This was not one of the official numbered Executive Committee meetings . This is not the official number of Executive Committees meetings .
 Purpose of the meeting was to crystalize policy concerning procedures to be followed in view of information received on November 12th concerning the disposition of IL 28s .
 Kuznetsov requested meeting with McCloy at 3:00 o'clock;/l/ it was expected that this meeting might reveal Soviet position . McCloy was expected to meet with the Soviet leader .
 No firm policy position was developed, although there was an extended discussion with regard to IL 28s and also the question of inspection . In view of this, no firm policy positions were developed .
 It was agreed that the IL 28s must be removed, and if they were removed, we could remove the quarantine . The quarantine was also agreed to be lifted in order to remove the 'IL 28s'
 If the IL 28s are not removed, then it was felt we could take several steps to exert more pressure on Castro and the Soviets . These would involve a meeting of the OAS to restate their policy, a statement by the President indicating non-compliance on the part of the
 It was felt that one or several of these steps could be taken to extract a commitment to remove the bombers . It was thought that one of several steps was taken .
 We should not make a ""no invasion"" commitment unless appropriate measures for inspection were agreed upon by the Soviets and Castro . However, we should not commit ourselves to a 'no invasion' commitment .
 McCone took a strong position covering the points outlined in attached memorandum of November 13th, warning against the serious long term outlook for Cuba . He felt the Soviets were trading on Castro's position and they in effect could dictate Castro's terms if they so desired .
 Meeting did not seem disposed to go as far as McCone recommended, although the Vice President strongly supported this position . Meeting did seem to be disposed not to go far .
 Also at a meeting on Monday, November the 12th at 5:30 in the White House with all present,/3/ Mr Bundy outlined the substance of a communication which had been received, expressing Khrushchev's views in response .
 It was decided that the communication needed study and hence its receipt was noted and noted . A meeting was arranged for the following day .
 It can be said that through the removal of the missiles (and we must assume but do not know positively that all are removed) The threat to the security of the U.S. and the Latin American states from a nuclear strike is removed .
 "No means have been established to reasonably guarantee that offensive missiles will not be reintroduced or, if offensive missiles remain on the island, that they won't be secretly placed in operational status," the government says .
 Aerial surveillance will help, but will not guarantee our ability to detect such an activity . Aerial surveillance is not a guarantee that we will be able to detect the activity, it says .
 Ground inspection would if properly organized and granted freedom of movement, ground inspection would be allowed to take place . Ground inspection is a form of inspection that would allow ground inspection to be inspected .
 Mikoyan says Castro has denied that he is behind the murder of Castro . But this has been denied by Castro and the denial is now supported by Mikoya . Mikoyans says Castro is not behind the crime .
 SAM sites if operating can effectively deny aerial inspection . Furthermore, the SAM sites are able to deny aerial inspections . SAM sites can also prevent aerial inspection by denying it .
 There can be no explanation for Soviet insistence on leaving SAM sites except to shield future clandestine emplacement of offensive weapons such as MRBMs and IRBMs .
 A combination of aerial inspection and ground inspection would give an effective guarantee against reintroduction of missile systems . A properly organized ground inspection could be a real guarantee of a missile system's existence .
 Ground inspectors would have to have freedom of action so that they could make on-site checks of the ever increasing refugee and agent reports of the storing of missiles and their equipment in caves .
 We must have complete arrangements for inspections and they cannot be frustrated by either the Soviets or Castro . Therefore prior to a ""no invasion"" commitment we must have a complete arrangement for inspections . This must be done prior to the 'no invasion' commitment .
 He also has amphibious equipment capable of supporting insurgency movements against any of the Caribbean, Central American states or states in northern tier of South America .
 Castro has never changed in his determined effort to subvert these states, says Castro . Castro's efforts have never changed, he says, but he will continue to do so . Castro: "I'm going to continue to try and get my hands on Castro"
 He has trained insurgents by the thousands; there are large numbers, they are in Cuba now in training . There are also large numbers of insurgents in Cuba .
 His insurgents are directed against a number of Central and South American states . His insurgents have been fighting in the region for years .
 He repeatedly expresses violent intentions against the organized governments of these states . He has also expressed violent intentions .
 He would use his newly acquired amphibious lift and a substantial part of his excess arms to support insurgents who can readily overthrow neighboring governments . Therefore one can only conclude that he would use . His newly acquired . acquired amphibian lift and . substantial . part of the excess arms would support insurgents
 Our policy should anticipate this and should be designed to take action regardless of how extreme to remove this threat if the eventualities mentioned above materialize . Our policy is designed to prevent this from happening .
 There is no time on the dateline of the memorandum, but the call had to have taken place after 6:40m. when the meeting between Stevenson and Kuznetsov concluded . The call is believed to have been made after the end of the meeting .
 Stevenson-Kuznetsov started by saying that he had a very serious protest against the over-flights over Cuba . They were unlawful in that they violated Cuban airspace, and they would only make negotiations more difficult, he said .
 The Soviets understood the categorical objections of the Cubans, the author says . "These were a violation of the feelings and integrity of the . Cubans," he says .
 The Americans have no convincing arguments for continuing such over-flights which only injure the feelings of the Cubans and increase tension . The U.S. should not continue such flights, the Cuban government says .
 He hopes the U.S. will consider this protest with due attention . He hopes he hopes the United States will consider it .
 The President's letter provides for UN observation and supervision of the fulfillment of this agreement . The UN will observe and supervise the fulfilment of the agreement, the government says .
 The Soviet Union was unable to make such arrangements because of its inability to do so . We have had to use this means of reassuring ourselves that there was in fact compliance, says the UK .
 The IL-28's have enabled us to detect what went, what was going on in Cuba, and we must continue to use these over-flights until they are removed . Any suggestion that they should be ended is most disquieting, any suggestion that should be end is most
 There is also a 25-page memorandum of conversation of the meeting, in USUN airgram 24, November 14 .
 Ball-But you didn't say that we would have to continue until the IL-28's were removed, Ball-Said . Ball: "We will continue to work until we have to remove them" Ball: We will continue working on the project .
 Kuznetsov said on-site inspection by the UN did not fulfill its obligation, the obligation stated in Khruschev's letters of Oct. and 28/2/ .
 In the letter of the 27th he spoke of agreement in principal for verification . He stressed that it could only be done only by agreement of the Cubans .
 On Oct. 27th, Obama said he believes that the Soviets have made many efforts to prove that they are doing everything to come to an agreement with the United States .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says he is ready to explain Russia's position and settle this problem . Putin: "They permitted ship-side verification of the removal of the missiles, and that he is here to explain our position" Putin says Russia is not ready to accept Putin's visit to the
 He believes that all conditions have been created to solve all of our questions in a spirit of mutual confidence in order to normalize the situation in the Caribbean . He believes all of the questions have been set up to solve, he said .
 They had gone further than the agreement in the letter in fact by removing the missiles, the President had only asked for them to be rendered inoperative and the sites dismantled .
 The IL-28's were not included, in the agreement between Khrushchev and Kennedy . They are not being offensive, but only defensive, and only defensive . Kennedy says they are not offensive and not offensive .
 They create indignation and disrespect for the sovereignty and are a violation of the Charter and international law . They are over foreign territories, they create indignation, disrespect for sovereignty, they say .
 If the parties could come to an agreement, all people would be relieved, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 As to the proposition that the U-2 prevented war, what had prevented war was the patience and understanding of K and K, says the U.2 . The U.K. had noted that the leaders could come to agreement quickly .
 They don't think that the U-2 violation of air-space eases tensions; it only aggravates them . The U.2 violation doesn't ease tensions, they say . They say they think it doesn't ease tensions .
 He recalled the incident of May, 1960 and the increased tensions resulting from the failure of the Summit Conference in Paris in Paris . The incident was the result of the failed Summit Conference .
 The recent U-2 flights over the Soviet Union didn't make the situation more favorable . Also, the recent U.2 flight over the USSR didn't help .
 Low altitude planes before the eyes of the Cubans are a source of great irritation . Also the low altitude planes . The Cuban government is frustrated with the low-altitude planes in Cuba .
 Continued flights indicate that the U.S. does not recognize international law and that they are not in the interest of peace or settlement about Cuba . Continued flights show that the United States is not recognizing international law .
 "In answer we said, we quoted the letters of Oct. and 28 on the agreement for UN observation and supervision to verify compliance. In answer to the questions, we said we quoted letters of October. and Nov. and Oct. 28 . In answer, the government said it quoted
 McCloy referred again to the fact that these photos had helped stability . They disclosed facts that had been denied and the secrecy with which these weapons had been placed, he said .
 I said that the way to stop these aggravations of Cuba is to . conclude this agreement to remove the weapons as quickly as possible . I said .
 We had tried to accommodate the realities of the situation to help conclude it, and that we expected them to do the same. We had been trying to accommodate them, the government said . We expected the government to comply with the terms of the agreement .
 The best hope for an improved climate is to end this episode as quickly as possible . The Soviet proposals for safeguards against reintroduction of these weapons in the future should be discussed .
 Kuznetsov said that he agreed on desirability of prompt solution; that they were making every effort to solve . If the matter were still prolonged, it was the U.S. that doesn't show the same approach to the . solution that they did .
 I referred to the President's letter of Oct. with regard to the removal of the quarantine without delay and as to the UN, that they had agreed to stop building the bases and to dismantle them, he said . He said they had actually withdrawn the weapons from Cuba .
 That that could have been done only on a final settlement after verification by the UN, had they chosen to interpret the agreement that way . The UN has said it could have verified the agreement, but that it would have to be done only after verification .
 In other words, the Soviet Union has done everything possible to complete the agreement . The Soviet Union is doing everything possible possible to finish the agreement, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The United States had fulfilled obligations in some document to be presented to the Security Council, the U.N. says . The U.S. has fulfilled obligations to the United Nations, the official says .
 That they too could put forward many questions to prolong the agony if they wanted to . That they could prolong it if they were able to, they said . That is not the case, but it's the case that they can prolong it .
 The time has come to agree on all matters and draft a document for the Security Council, says President Obama . The time is now the time to draft the document, he says .
 They said they wanted to clarify the position of the Soviets on other questions . But they said they still want to clarify their position on other issues .
 McCloy discussed McCloy's thing that there should be no secrecy and that to achieve this we have to complete disarmament . McCloy said there should not be any secrecy, and that there must also be no secret .
 The United States had refused to accept their proposals to start such observation over some parts of the United States and the SU . Also the Soviet proposal to establish observation posts together with certain disarmament measures .
 Mr McCloy said that flights over the Caribbean clarified the situation .
 The way to do it was that we would engage in no recriminations about who was responsible to the prolongation of the discussion. That would be the way of doing it, he said . That was the way, he added. That's the way .
 "If they didn't know how to do it, we could only repeat what we have said before," says BBC chief executive .
 The IL-28s were removed from Cuba in order to remove all nuclear components, obtain from Cuba its cooperation for observation, verification, give us their assurances against reintroduction of such weapons . That was to remove the IL-27s and give assurances with respect to removal of all nuclear
 As to what we, the United States, would do-as the agreement says, we would lift the quarantine and then we would give assurances regarding no invasion . The United States would then give assurances about no invasion, the White House says .
 Soviet Union would lift quarantine now if it removed IL-28 bombers, warheads, if it promised to remove them within three weeks . President Obama said the quarantine would be lifted now if the Soviet Union agreed to remove the bombers and warheads .
 I would defer any discussions of the open skies until some other time as we had all we could manage to resolve this problem at the present . AES-That would defer discussion of open skies .
 Jack enlarged on the ending of the quarantine on the assurances of the removal of the IL-28s now . Jack said the quarantine will be lifted on the assurance of the assurances .
 This was a further concession on our part and meanwhile we would have to continue to continue the reconnaissance flights to confirm the fact of removal of the 28s . This was also a concession to our part, and meanwhile, we would continue to fly reconnaissance flights .
 Kuznetsov came back and said the 28s are defensive weapons and can't be regarded otherwise . The 28s can be regarded as defensive weapons, he said . The Russian national team says they are 'defensive weapons'
 We must be trying to delay working out the final guarantees, he says . We should be talking about a document containing all of our obligations to be presented to the Security Council, he adds .
 The U.S. should say to them how we envision working out such a document contemplated by the letter. That's what the United States should say . That's how it would work out such an agreement, the author says .
 Khrushchev said that they would obey strictly the letter of Chairman Khrushvic . The weapons would be allowed into Cuba .
 The Soviet position ""as it now stands"" is clear. Now as to the IL-28 s they will study and they will consider the U.S. suggestion, but they want us to know that the United States is clear .
 In response I listed the things that we expected the Soviet Union to do, including the quarantine and the declaration of the SC regarding the assurances on invasion . The quarantine was already lifted; that we had only one remaining obligation and that was the declaration .
 We would refer the matter to Washington and we would be glad to discuss our language along with theirs. As to the language on assurances and safeguards we would refer it to Washington . We would be happy to discuss the language with Washington .
 Kuznetsov said he was not going to deal with the previous questions which had been reviewed during the afternoon . However, regarding the IL-28s that he must make a further clarification . The Russian president said he would not be going to address the previous question .
 He wished the United States to understand that they reaffirm their position; that the IL-28s are defensive but that he would report the consideration advanced by the U.S. to his Government . The House then adjourned .
 For the first time it looked as though Mikoyan might be waiting to hear from Kuznetsov on what he could get on overflights and on the guarantees .
 I thought on the whole it was a more constructive meeting than we had had since the beginning of the year . I thought the meeting was a 'more constructive meeting' than we'd had with the beginning .
 He obviously had been fully briefed on the letter and knew it by heart . He was clearly aware of the fact that he had been briefed .
 He spoke again from documents much of the time rather than just free style . He spoke from documents rather than from free style.
 I rather think they are going to go along on the ILs but we will have arguments on the form of assurance and probably they will never be able to concede the aerial surveillance . I think they will be going along on ILs, but probably they won't concede aerial surveillance, says
 GWB-They are probably doing this so that they can tell Mikoyan they made a protest . GWB: They probably do this to tell him they made it a protest. GWB says they are doing it so that he can say it .
 It did occur to me that while they were making this protest that depending on what other considerations may be involved that I am not clear about that if we can slow up a little for a day and run high instead of low it might be a good thing . We can bring them along on
 It seems to be that maybe this is the time when they might be in a crisis there with Castro and that anything that would help there to get agreement on the ILs would help .
 If they don't feel that they have to, then it would be a good idea to ease up a bit . If you don't want to, perhaps it's a good time to relax a bit.
 Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy Moscow, November 14, 1962 . Letter from Chairman Khruschev to . President Kennedy . Letter . Khruski: "I'm not afraid to say yes"
 At 4:35m, Ball telephoned McGeorge Bundy to say that ""Bobby has an answer which is not too encouraging," Bundy said . Ball called Bundy at 4.35m to say he had a "not too encouraging" answer .
 Bundy told Ball that the President wanted the Under Secretary and Thompson to come to the White House to look over Khrushchev's message with the President and Rusk . Bundy said the President asked Thompson and Bundy to look at the message . Bundy: "The President wanted them to come over
 I have read with great satisfaction the reply of the President of the United States/1/ and I agree with the considerations expressed by the President. Lot 74 D 272, Telephone Conversations— Cuba) I have . read with very satisfaction .
 "It is of particular pleasure to me that we seem to have the same desire to liquidate as soon as possible the state of tension and normalize the situation," she said .
 The two countries have special responsibility for ensuring peace lies to a greater degree than with other countries . And this depends in the main on agreement between us- the two greatest powers in the world with whom special responsibility lies with .
 The question of the withdrawal of the IL-28's within mentioned 30 days does not constitute any complicated question . The question is not a complicated question. The withdrawal is not complicated. The question should be answered within 30 days .
 The planes will be removed from Cuba with all the equipment and flying personnel, says President Obama .
 It would be a great relief if the state of tension that evolved in the Caribbean were liquidated as soon as possible . But for me, for . our country, for our country , it would be great relief .
 The withdrawal of IL-28's at the time when your planes are flying over Cuba it creates for us no small difficulties. You understand that when we say that it is necessary to announce now the withdrawal of the IL-27's . It creates "no small difficulties" for us,
 I have no doubt that you will understand-and the Cuban Government understands this-that such actions constitute violation of sovereignty of the Cuban state . The Cuban government understands this, and I'm sure you'll understand this .
 It would be a reasonable step to create in this respect also conditions for the normalization of the situation . This in a great degree would make it easier to meet your wish of expediting the withdrawal of the IL-28 planes from Cuba, says President Obama .
 If we attained all that now and if this were announced, then more favourable conditions would be created for our country to solve the question of time table for the withdrawal of IL-28 planes .
 "It is difficult for us to give explanations to such unjustifiable state of affairs," says minister . It is difficult to give an explanation for such unjustified state-of-the-art, he says .
 It is hard to say for me what specific agreement is possible on the question of UN observation posts . It is not clear if it will be possible for the countries to agree on the issue .
 Government of Cuba has expressed a desire to come to terms on this question . But we as well as the government of Cuba have already expressed an interest in this issue .
 If the question of the observation posts is of interest to the U.S. then I consider it wise to come to an agreement on this. I think it must be of interest . The U.N. should be able to reach an agreement, he says .
 Cuba will not object to the UN posts, of course on the condition of respect for the sovereignty of Cuba . Cuba must be treated as equal which must mean that on the territory of other countries of the Caribbean and in a corresponding region of the United States there will be also set up similar
 "No country can assume unilateral commitments, and it would be wise to make them mutual," he said .
 I have already said that perhaps it will be necessary for us in the negotiations on disarmament between our countries at the first stage to return to our proposals providing for the establishment of posts at airfields, in major sea-ports, at railway junctions, and on highways . I have
 If you would give your representatives-McCloy, Stevenson and others-appropriate instructions on the question of UN posts in the Caribbean region and adjoining regions of the US-and our representatives have such instructions . If they would come to an agreement then all this could be made public .
 The IL-28 planes would be removed from the aircraft list . The plan would remove the difficulties associated with making a public announcement on the withdrawal of the planes .
 These dates will be probably much closer than those which I name and maybe even closer to those which were named by you . The dates will probably be more likely to be more accurate than those of which you name .
 We would create normal relations between our countries to which our people aspire and which your people, we are sure of that, also want . Then we would really cut the knot which was tied tightly enough and having cut it we would create a normal relations .
 I will allow myself to express some other considerations and I believe you will not take offense and will not consider that I intrude too much into the sphere of our internal affairs . I believe it will not be taken offense and that I will not .
 Voting in the elections to the Senate, the House of Representatives and in gubernatorial elections which just took place . Your former rival was clearly preparing again for the next presidential elections .
 It is significant that as a result of the elections precisely those candidates were defeated who, if I may use such an expression, were making most frenzied bellicose speeches . It was significant that those candidates who were defeated were defeated .
 American people already begin to feel that if the arms race continues further, the threat of thermo-nuclear war will be greater . This indicates that the U.S. already begins to feel . that . if a reasonable solution is not found and an understanding is not achieved between our countries
 Let us not keep people of peace all over the world in suspense, let us give them joyous satisfaction. Let us then not keep them of peace . Let us give people joyous . satisfaction. We are not keeping people in suspense .
 Having cut the knot in the Caribbean would "immediately create better conditions" for people in need of better conditions .
 Of course our two states can not do everything, but all that depends on us in the sense of reaching an understanding will be of decisive importance . The two states must reach an understanding, and that will be crucial for the future of the country, says the British PM .
 "There is no other way of meeting the aspirations of all states, all peoples. And he who was especially displeased will have to agree," he said .
 In the first place on the overflights, I haven't been quite able to make up my mind whether it was just a formal protest or whether it is something we have to look rather seriously at . The overflights are something we need to look at very seriously, says the author .
 Ball-It-It is possible that it is something they had to do to help Mikoyan out . Ball-Ball: "It's possible that ... it is possible ... it was something they needed to do"
 The IL-28's will be put in place as a condition of their taking out the IL-29's . But they are going to put that in as a . condition of taking out IL-27's .
 McCloy-But this is what is coming and it's perfectly clear to me, after reading that full message from K the other day,/2/ together with this thing here, that they are going to take the IL-28's out but they want to take them out now
 "Don't talk to us any more about your having done everything and we have done nothing. Respond to that, don't talk about that," says the BBC . "We have not done nothing," says Labour leader David Cameron .
 McCloy-But I would do that on a sort of another walk basis rather than on one of these damn meetings at which Zorin is present and the whole damn works are present, McCloy says . McCloy: "I would like to do that again. But I would
 McCloy-You all get tensed up and the hell with this feeling of dignity, McCloy says . McCloy: "You all need to get tensing up and ... dignity. McCloy."
 This is just an oil-it-it is just a different approach that may very well bring the thing about. This is not an oil embargo, it's just a very different approach to the problem .
 I am damn sure that we are going to be faced with the necessity of drafting something on the guaranty or the assurances . And then the second thing I have got in mind is I am sure that . I am also sure that I am going to have to draft something on a guarant
 McCloy-Because we are trying to get it very shortly from the Soviets and it is going to be a pretty elaborate document, McCloy says . McCloy: "We are going to get [a] pretty shortly from [the Soviets] and it will be very elaborate document"
 McCloy-Get it crystallized if you can, as soon as you can because I think that is going to be the first order of business, McCloy says . McCloy: "I think that will be the next thing you need to do is crystallize"
 I would just say no, and fortunately we have got the UN with us on it and we will hold out on that. I would say no . Fortunately, fortunately we've got to hold out, and luckily we have . The UN has got to us on that, and we are
 In the last analysis I would suppose-I don't know what you mean by protocol-the form of the thing doesn't make a great deal of difference, but I think we are going to get away with a declaration. In the final analysis, I don't think the form of
 The only difference is if you get into a highly formal argument then the amount of comments is going to be terrific . "The only difference" will be if you're going to have a very formal argument, he says. "I'm not going to get into an argument," he says
 McCloy: "I got a letter from Herman Phleger/3/ that caused me a little concern. McCloy-Yes, and moreover I got a . little concern" McCloy said .
 He said if you make a pledge of non-invasion that that has to take the form of a treaty because it is the impairment of the Congress' authority to declare war . This has to be approved by the Senate .
 McCloy-You know Phleger is a pretty good lawyer and he was very serious about this . He didn't see how we could get around it, in view of Congress' authority to declare war, he says . McCloy says .
 All we are doing is what we have already done under the Rio Pact and the UN Charter . There is one thought that they all take comfort in, they say well all we are already done, says the minister .
 Under the UN Charter and the Rio Pact we still supported an invasion from the Bay of Pigs and we defended it . But that may not be so because we are in an awkward position there because of the UN charter and Rio Pact .
 The meeting took place at the residence of the Attorney General at 10:30m., on Thursday, November 14, at the DCI's request . The meeting was held at the request of the attorney general .
 Industry has no clear understanding of the Government's position, Mr Foley said . Mr Foley stated that the Industry had no clear understand of the government's position .
 Mr Donovan had been told to do nothing in this matter and expressed great surprise that the subject was a topic of current discussion among members of the Industry . After explaining to Foley the background of the transaction I told him that Mr Donovan was told to . do absolutely nothing in the matter .
 CIA had 20 million dollars on covert deposit, says CIA . Two letters of credit had been issued one in the amount of 10 million dollars to Pfizer, and one for seven million dollars .
 As long as this money was on deposit and the letters outstanding, there was a danger of publicity emanating from either Donovan or the drug industry, or both . The money is still on deposit, but the letters are outstanding, and there is a risk of publicity .
 Recent press stories identified Administration and CIA activities . Despite the fact that no official government connection had ever been admitted, publicity would implicate the Administration .
 Mr Donovan's denials are almost a certainty that ""leaks"" would come from industry sources as long as the letter of credit were outstanding . I pointed out that certain elements of competition between the members of the drug industry made it almost a certain that leaks would be made by industry sources
 The transaction seemed unrealistic in view of current difficulties with Castro and if an article appeared indicating we were still pursuing this transaction, the American public and a great many others would be confused and disenchanted . Furthermore, consummation of the transaction seemed totally unrealistic, according to the author .
 Also advise Mr Donovan that the pursuit of this effort must await a better climate, although our interest remained constant .
 The Attorney General agreed with the course of action . The attorney general said the decision was made after some discussion .
 We agreed that we should carefully explain to Families Committee and possibly to Miro Cardona that we were in no way abandoning our intention to secure the release of the prisoners . We were forced because of circumstances beyond our control to set the negotiation aside pending further developments on other important problems involving our
 Mr Bundy personally approved the action and, in turn, received approval from higher authority . McCone discussed the above with Mr Bundy who personally approved of the action .
 John A. McCone signed a copy that bears this typed signature . McCone's signature is that of John A McCone .
 McCloy told Ball he thought he would call the fellow/1/ for lunch if it was the desirable thing to do . McCloy said he would be happy to call him for lunch . He told Ball that he will call him if it's desirable thing .
 He asked if Ball had anything new over night that might have some effect on it . Ball was asked if he had something new to change the situation over night . Ball said he didn't have anything new to say about it .
 McCloy is not so sure he would offer what Ball had suggested yesterday . If McCloy did this it would be mainly on a contact basis, but he would not be so sure about it .
 He would simply tell him he was disturbed by his continuous talk that they have done everything and we have done nothing, he would say . He would tell him that he would simply say that they had done everything .
 Ball agreed this would be the thing to do and might be helpful at this time . Ball said it was a good idea to ask for help in the future .
 McCloy asked about the Fowler Hamilton business and Ball told him some time when he sees him he will give him a sketch of what he has in mind there . Ball told McCloy he will sketch what he wants to do when he visits him .
 McCloy said he had invited the fellow/1/ to lunch but he told McCloy he had a date he could not cancel . McCloy: "I had invited him to lunch. He told him he had to cancel it"
 He invited McCloy to come out to his place on Long Island some time during the weekend, and it was left that way . McCloy invited him to his Long Island home .
 McCloy said he could not get anything out of him about Mikoyan . Ball asked McCloy if this would imply that he might be there and said he didn't know . McCloy didn't say what he was looking for, but said he was not sure .
 Message from President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev was sent November 15, 1962 . Message was sent to President Kennedy from the White House in Washington, DC .
 This message was considered an ""oral"" exchange, but a written copy of it was given to Dobrynin . This message is considered an "oral" exchange . Dobrynins was considered to be a "formal" exchange but was given a written version .
 I am glad to learn of your assurance of agreement that the IL-28s should be withdrawn./l/ All that remains is to reach understanding on the timing of the withdrawal .
 Let me review the undertakings in my letter of October twenty-seventh and your letter of Oct. twenty-eighth . Let’s review your undertakings . Let's see what I wrote to you .
 Cuba agreed to remove quarantine measures in effect and to give assurances against an invasion of Cuba . On our side, we undertook to agree to remove the quarantine measures .
 I cannot agree with your statement that you have fulfilled your commitments and that we have not fulfilled ours. I cannot disagree with your statements that you've fulfilled commitments, that we've not fulfilled theirs. I'm not satisfied with our commitments, I'm sure we have fulfilled ours,’
 You have removed a certain number of missiles from Cuba-not under United Nations supervision, but you did cooperate in arrangements which enabled us to be reasonably sure that forty-two missiles were in fact taken out of Cuba . The U.N. says it's not under U.S.
 There has been no U.N. verification that other missiles were not left behind and, in fact, there have been many reports of their being concealed in caves and elsewhere, and we have no way of satisfying those who are concerned .
 The IL-28's are still in Cuba and are of deep concern to the people of our entire Hemisphere, says President Obama . President Obama's visit to Cuba is scheduled to take place at the end of the year .
 Three major parts of the undertakings on your side-the removal of the IL-28's, the arrangements for verification, and safeguards against introduction-have not yet been carried out. Thus, three major parts . The removal of . the IL -28's and verification of verification,
 The Secretary General of the United Nations was not allowed to make arrangements for the experts he took with him to Cuba to verify removal of the offensive weapons . The Cuban Government did not agree to international Red Cross inspection at ports; they have refused the Secretary General's suggestion that the Latin American Amb
 It is difficult for me to understand why the Cubans are so resistant to the series of reasonable proposals that have been made to them by U. Thant . The Cuban people are determined to see the crisis prolonged and worsened, he says .
 We both have means of influencing the Cuban Government and I do not believe that we can allow that Government to frustrate the clear understandings our two governments have reached in the interests of peace . The Cuban Government has a right to influence the Cuban government, says Mr Wilson .
 In these circumstances we have so far been patient and careful, as we have been, indeed, at every stage . We have been patient, careful, in these circumstances, as well, at all times .
 As you know from your own reports, we have always applied the quarantine with care and with regard for the position of others . We have relied on the oral assurances of the masters of your ships and other ships, says the captain of the ship .
 I myself held back orders for more forceful action right to the limit of possibility during the week of October 27th and 28th. Moreover I myself . Moreover I held back . orders . for more . forceful action . during the . week of Oct. 27-28th and October 27
 But we cannot make progress from here-or avoid a return of danger to this situation- if your side now should fall into the mistake of claiming that it has met all its commitments, and refusing to help with the real business of carrying out our purpose .
 We are entitled to insist on removal of the IL-28's and on safeguards against reintroduction of offensive weapons before we lift quarantine or give assurances of any sort .
 "We wish to end this crisis promptly. That is more than we agreed to on October twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth," she said .
 We believe these matters should follow the removal of offensive weapons systems, but just as we have been able to discuss other matters while missiles were leaving, we believe the urgently needed talks can and should go forward .
 "We do not insist that everything wait its exact turn-but only that the essential first steps be clearly going forward," says President Obama .
 'Most urgent is to make some real progress on continuing observations and verification' 'We need to agree that offensive weapons are leaving, and after the quarantine is lifted, we need to make real progress'
 It will be essential to have such arrangements-and this again is clear in the letters of October 27 and 28-before our assurances can be more formally stated . The letters will be sent to the White House on October 27, 28 .
 Our undertaking on this point remains firm and clear, and we want nothing better than to be able to give our assurances, just as we said we would, when necessary conditions exist . We want to give assurances just as well as the necessary conditions .
 In the absence of any arrangements under the United Nations or otherwise for international verification or safeguards, we have of course been obliged to rely upon our own resources for surveillance of the situation in Cuba, although this course is unsatisfactory .
 Castro has new threats by Castro against surveillance, Castro says . Castro says he will continue to fight against surveillance . Castro: "Just today we learned of new threats"
 I should make it very clear that if there is any interference with this surveillance, we shall have to take the necessary action in reply . It is for just this reason that it is so urgent to obtain better safeguards, he says .
 We note with interest that in your last message, the arrangement of observation and verification is enlarged from Cuba to include certain other areas . We also note that in the last message the arrangement was enlarged to include other areas in Cuba .
 This is a substantial change from the terms of our exchange of messages, the BBC says . Any such wider arrangements would necessarily require careful discussion, it says .
 There might have to be observation posts at the appropriate ports in the Soviet Union from which weapons could be shipped to Cuba, as well as in appropriate places in the United States. For example, if we move outside Cuba .
 It seems to us better to work within the framework of our understanding of October 27 and 28 . This is a matter which deserves close study and it may offer a chance of real progress in the long run, but for the immediate future it seems to be better .
 The Brazilian proposal for a verified Denuclearized Zone in Latin America/3/ could, with the cooperation of Cuba and if acceptable to the other Latin American countries, could offer an acceptable means for a broader approach .
 Cuban President Vladimir Putin says he has 'understood' that offensive weapons have been removed from Cuba . But he says the immediate problem is the carrying out of our understanding with regard to verification that weapons have in fact been removed, pending the coming into effect of longer-term arrangements .
 I am sure, Mr Chairman, that you can understand that this is a real necessity if we are to move to the settlement of other matters. Even apart from our understanding, given the history of this matter, given . I am . sure that this . is a . real necessity .
 The first step is to get the bombers started out, and the quarantine lifted-for both are sources of tension . But the first step must be to get them started out .
 Macmillan quotes from the November 14 telephone call in At the End of the Day, 1961-1963, 215 . MacMillan quotes the call from November 14 in At The End of The Day .
 He still wants us to make a ""no invasion"" pledge and there can't be no agreement on how to maintain surveillance . Yes, except that he still wants . There can't agree how to keep surveillance surveillance .
 The IL-28's must be removed before we make an agreement on invasion. The other question, the other question is, "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to live in the U.S.
 We must have some type of inspection of sites, even though it won't mean much with all the caves and cellars in Cuba, says CNN.com correspondent .
 Laos is an example of something negotiated with the Russians . Souvanna would be bad if she left Laos . Laos is a good example of a good relationship with Russia, she says .
 "No agreement with the Russians will last more than a few months. So what about your going to him and pointing out that if fighting breaks out and we have partition, everyone will say that no agreement with Russia will last longer than a couple of months?" he asks .
 If Cuba settled and if Laos will stay together, then we may have a good chance on Berlin . Well, I thought if we got Cuba settled, if Laos stayed together, we may be able to go to Berlin .
 If he will agree to have the IL-28's out before Christmas or New Year's, and will give some type of on-site inspection for the record and understand that we will continue overflights, we will lift the quarantine and make a ""no invasion"" pledge .
 If we can keep Laos together, go ahead on Berlin, we can look at Laos again six months from now . We hope to see Laos again in the next six months .
 Also stated that offensive weapons will not be reintroduced and that USSR was prepared cooperate in seeking suitable formula . USSR prepared to speak about guarantees about their non-reintroduction .
 Stevenson expressed vigorous reaction to Castro letter to SYG/2/ threatening to shoot down U.S. observation planes . At outset of meeting, before Kuznetsov spoke, Stevenson expressed reaction to letter .
 Stevenson said this would be very serious matter with predictable consequences . Stevenson said it would be a serious matter for the UK .
 Aerial surveillance was only means we had to assure ourselves in light Soviet failure produce verification in Cuba . Aerial surveillance only means of verification in light of Soviet failure .
 He was certain we would issue counter-protest to Cuban protest, he said . He hoped this would end issue because consequences would not be our responsibility . He said: "We hope this will end issue and end issue"
 Kuznetsov said he had nothing to add to previous Soviet position on overflights . He said he did not know anything about overflights in the past .
 Kuznetsov took firm position that time had come to deal with entire settlement of Cuban problem, maintaining all remaining questions must be dealt with together and would then be more easily resolved .
 Cuban Government prepared to support UN presence in Caribbean including parts of United States and Western Hemisphere with corresponding control of Cuban territory . Cuban Government was prepared to back UN presence . He referred to suggestion for UN Caribbean presence as means verification these obligations .
 Kuznetsov maintained that spelling out would not be difficult for U Thant to arrange on basis equal rights, obligations and verification . Noting this was at present scheme only in principle, he said .
 Kuznetsov also suggested that Cuba should be brought into discussions inasmuch as they affected Cuba and dealt with obligations of three governments . The discussions should be discussed as they affect obligations of all three governments, he said .
 We did not agree to idea of idea of a protocol and had said on many occasions we were prepared to have mutual declarations in SC in accordance with correspondence .
 Stevenson noted Kuznetsov had said nothing about most important question— withdrawal of IL-28's . Stevenson: "Most important question is withdrawal of Russian IL-29's"
 He stressed that this was key issue which now needed to be resolved . Throughout rest of conversation he stressed that . This is key issue that now needs to be solved .
 Stevenson reiterated we were prepared to lift quarantine when Kuznetsov assured us IL-28's would be taken out within limited period of time . Stevenson reiterated he was prepared to lifted quarantine when .
 Stevenson said we had made accommodations to Soviets on ship-side inspection and were prepared to lift quarantine when Soviets promised to take IL-28's out . In response to repeated Kuznetsov position that USSR had fulfilled its obligations and time had come for U.S. to do something
 When all offensive weapons were out and appropriate inspection arranged we would make declaration on invasion . We would then declare on invasion. We would declare when appropriate inspection was arranged. When all . offensive weapons are out, appropriate inspection . arranged .
 OAS recommends LA states restore status quo prior October 22 by repealing resolution authorizing quarantine . LA states should repeal resolution authorizing quarantines prior to October 22 .
 All rights and obligations under Rio Pact would apply, including obligations with respect to attack of one state against another . This would mean all rights would be applied, including those with attack on one state .
 Kuznetsov said USSR did not recognize OAS decisions and was not interested in being involved in how we obtain LA adherence to President's letter . If United States stated it and LA's would not invade Cuba that would be in accord with spirit of President's Letter, he said .
 Kuznetsov took note of this reply and said he would expect to hear from us further on this point .
 Kuznetsov reiterated that USSR did not object but agreement of Government of Cuba was required . Re on-site inspection in Cuba was re-visited in Cuba .
 Seeking cooperation with other LA states with respect to assurances against invasion . Seeking cooperation of other states with . respect of assurances against . invasion .
 Stevenson concluded that U.S. had assumed no other obligations either to USSR or Cuba . Stevenson concluded with statement that United States had no other obligation to Cuba .
 At conclusion of meeting Kuznetsov said that draft protocol contained provisions which should be in any document . He would appreciate our opinion on their protocol and other suggestions, adding that if all issues were dealt with simultaneously we could reach agreement .
 Stevenson said he hoped we would be able to do so tomorrow . Stevenson: We would be glad to prepare and show them statement . We would show statement we'd be willing to make in SC re assurances against invasion Cuba .
 Stressed however no final conclusion could be reached before IL-28's removed and verification of transaction worked out . No final conclusion was reached before verification of transactions worked out, stressed no final decision was reached .
 Stevenson reiterated toward end of conversation that USSR should take careful note of our protest on Cuban threat to shoot at U.S. planes . Stevenson also reiterated that USSR . USSR should . take careful . note of protest on Cuba threat to . shoot at United States planes .
 The Soviets say that they will take the IL-28's out, not now but at some later point, and the offer so far appears to be tied to a series of prior actions on our part: lifting of the blockade, registering assurances, etc. etc. The offer appears to
 Our view is that the first step must be a Soviet order to remove the IL-28's within a period of 30 days . The first step is to remove them from the Soviet Union within 30 days.
 We have said that when that order is given, we are willing to announce the lifting of the quarantine . The quarantine is expected to be lifted when an order is issued by authorities .
 Russian support for UN observation posts in the Caribbean area, including the United States . U.S. responded by indicating that any reciprocal inspection which included the US should logically include appropriate ports of the Soviet Union .
 We have strongly attacked the Soviet claim that its part of the bargain has been fulfilled . We have also attacked the claim that it was fulfilled by the Soviet .
 The one piece of information not on the Washington-Moscow channel, which is some novelty, is the statement of Kuznetsov to Stevenson that he was instructed to report that all nuclear weapons have been removed from Cuba .
 Castro's letter to the UN Acting Secretary General had been released to the press . President authorized the immediate release of a statement covering our continuing aerial surveillance of Cuba .
 The President asked how we would prove that strategic missiles would not be reintroduced into Cuba . President Obama said he would not allow strategic missiles to be brought back into the country .
 Secretary Rusk said we could watch the Russian ships with big hatches and monitor the unloading of Russian ships . The Secretary of State Rusk says we could also monitor unloading Russian ships.
 As to a Latin American nuclear-free zone, the President said Ambassador Stevenson had predicted that the UN would not accept this idea .
 If inspection of the U.S. were to be allowed, we would have to insist on inspecting Russian ports from which the missile ships could sail . Russia would also have to inspect ports where the missiles would be launched .
 The question was asked whether we would be prepared to accept inspection of Guantanamo Base, of Cuban camps in the U.S. and of Puerto Rico . Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico and Puerto Rico are among the camps .
 Secretary Rusk said that the short-term problem of inspection of offensive missiles related only to Cuba .
 The long-term problem of inspecting to prevent the reintroduction of missiles might be done by a UN commission . The UN commission is charged with maintaining peace in the Caribbean .
 This commission might look at all complaints that peace in the area was being disturbed . Commission might look into all complaints made by residents of the area . This commission will look at the peace in an area that was disturbed .
 The commission would not be limited to Cuba but could inspect in the U.S. and Latin American countries . The commission could not be restricted to Cuba, but to the United States and Latin America .
 The President said it appeared the Soviets were offering inspection in Cuba in return for inspection in Florida . President said that it appeared it appeared that it was a trade deal with the Soviets .
 Mr Bundy said we might discuss some reciprocal inspection which we would not be prepared to implement as long as Castro was in Cuba . Bundy said he would not discuss some reciprocity inspection which would not take place if Castro was still in the country .
 Attorney General said aerial reconnaissance upsets both the Russians and Castro . The Attorney General commented that aerial reconnaissance is a problem .
 The President repeated his view that we should not give a pledge not to invade Cuba until we have adequate assurances protecting us against the reintroduction of strategic missiles .
 The Attorney General said he did not think that we could sell to the American people an inspection of Florida . Florida's attorney general said he didn't think he could sell it to the public .
 Any adequate inspection must include not only Cuba but also two or three Soviet ports . Any inspection must also include Cuba, Soviet ports, as well as Cuba, Russia .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that we not try to spell out the geographical limitations of the inspection . The inspection will be limited to geographical limitations, he said .
 The President responded that we would have to limit inspection to Florida in any proposal that we might consider .
 Mr McCone expressed his concern that the Soviet military base would remain in Cuba . He said he was concerned about the decision to keep the base .
 He considered this a more important consideration than the IL-28 bombers . He considered it more important to consider than other aircraft .
 If we allow a continuing Soviet military presence in Cuba we must have an inspection system . We must have a system of inspection system. We need to be able to inspect Soviet military installations in Cuba .
 SAM sites could ensure that we could not use U-2s to tell us of any military buildup . SAM sites would ensure that U.2s would not be able to use U.S. forces in the region .
 Without the U-2s, the Russians could secretly build up their forces in the interior of Cuba . The U.2s could be used to build up forces in Cuba .
 McCloy expressed his view that the Soviet military presence in Cuba will die on the vine . Mr McCloy said the Soviet presence in the island nation will die .
 With missiles and IL-28 bombers removed, the remainder of the Soviet forces would then be withdrawn . With the missiles and the bombers removed from the Soviet Union, the rest of its forces would be withdrawn from Russia .
 The best Russian equipment now in Cuba will gradually be withdrawn because it was put there to guard the strategic missiles . The best equipment will be gradually withdrawn from Cuba .
 Mr McCone expressed a reservation by pointing out that the Russians may have used Cuba as a staging area for subversion in Latin America .
 The President said we had the alternative of making a realistic proposal or a proposal which we know in advance they would reject and therefore provide grounds for us to hold back on any assurance against invasion .
 Ambassador Thompson replied that Khrushchev must decide shortly which road to go down . Ambassador Thompson said Khrushchevitch must decide soon which road he will take down .
 He needs to get the Cuban problem buttoned down and go on to other problems in order to continue along the existing coexistence line . The Cuban problem needs to be resolved and other problems must be addressed .
 Secretary Rusk argued that we should stay put on our present position of lifting the quarantine in return for getting the IL-28 bombers out of Cuba . The secretary of state argued that lifting of the quarantine should be lifted .
 He would hold off on proposals covering the long-term inspection problem . He would also hold off proposals covering inspection problems . He said he would not discuss proposals to cover the problem .
 UN proposal to name five Latin American Ambassadors as inspectors also rejected . UN presence in Cuba had also been turned down, he said .
 He urged that we stay where we are and felt that we should continue to support an arrangement based on reciprocity rather than geography .
 The President pointed out that our policy of not giving an invasion assurance until we have acceptable inspection arrangements puts Khrushchev under heavy pressure . The President .
 Secretary Rusk replied that we should be in no hurry to work out long-range arrangements . Secretary Rusks said we should not be worried about long-term arrangements .
 "We should keep the situation fluid in the event that the Soviets come to favor a coup in Cuba," he says . The situation is fluid, he says, in the case of a coup .
 In such event they would want assurances that we would not interfere with their staged coup . In such a staged coup, they would need assurances that . We would not intervene in such a coup .
 The President said it would be all right to wait unless Khrushchev is blocked on negotiations on other problems . President said he would be able to wait if Khruschev was blocked on other issues .
 Secretary Dillon doubted that negotiations with the Russians over Cuba would affect the Russians' worldwide policy . Secretary Dillon said he doubted that our negotiations with Russia would affect their worldwide policy.
 The Soviets can't deliver arrangements for on-site inspection because of Castro's opposition, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "We can't give assurances against invasion," he says . Sutter says .
 We can give a conditional assurance if the Soviets continue to behave, i.e., take out missiles, move to take out the IL-28 bombers, and assure us there are no nuclear warheads in Cuba . We can also give the Soviets a conditional guarantee if they continue to behaving,
 There has been considerable talk about a nuclear-free zone, but if we choose to support this idea, we will have to go through the OAS . This will take a considerable amount of time, according to the British Prime Minister .
 Secretary Rusk called attention to the difficulty of formulating any statement about our not invading Cuba . Secretary Rusks: "It's difficult to formulate any statement" about our 'not invading Cuba'
 If we put in the conditions which we must, the statement comes out sounding as if we were all ready to invade. If we do, it will sound like we're ready to prepare for an invasion, it's not surprising to say. We're not ready to put in conditions which
 The President asked that a statement covering our policy toward invasion be prepared for his use at his Tuesday press conference . The statement was prepared for him to use as a reference to the Iraq invasion .
 The President said that we would understand privately that such a position would cover only the next two years . The position would be only two years, he said .
 President's September 13th statement said that pending arms verification arrangements in Cuba, we would continue our overflights unobtrusively . Reference should be made to the President's Sept. 13th .
 The President suggested that we give to Kuznetsov the evidence we have of the Soviet military presence in Cuba . President suggested we give evidence to evidence of Soviet presence .
 He asked that the State Department spell out exactly what we would accept as verification of Soviet arms in Cuba . The State Department has not said what it would accept .
 McCloy said we scared the Russians off their insistence on a protocol containing our invasion assurances by telling them that a protocol would require Congressional approval . McCloy: We scared them off by saying it would require congressional approval .
 The President said he did not want any protocol on the invasion guarantee but merely a statement of our position . The President did not say what he wanted was a protocol .
 He asked that by Tuesday there be a detailed response to accusations that Soviet missiles are being hidden in Cuban caves . He asked for a response to the accusations by Tuesday .
 He said we needed to be in a position to respond to a Brazilian proposal for an atom-free zone . He also said we also needed to respond .
 The President asked for an analysis of the Soviet-Chinese differences including an estimate of the effect of the split on Khrushchev's authority and on Communist parties worldwide .
 Secretary McNamara requested authority for high-level flights but said he did not favor flying low-level missions . McNamara: "I'm not sure if I want to fly that way. I'm sure I don't want to travel that way"
 General Taylor reported that the Chiefs wanted to continue low-level missions . General Taylor said that the Chief Chiefs want to continue the mission .
 Secretary McNamara said the decision should be made on political grounds rather than military . McNamara: Decision should be based on politics rather than on military grounds .
 The President decided to suspend low-level flights planned for tomorrow in the expectation that we might receive a reply from Khrushchev today . The President decides to suspend flights in the hope of receiving a reply .
 These strikes would be followed by massive attacks on Cuban hostile aircraft and other offensive weapons, including MRBMs and IRBMs .
 Subsequent attacks would target troop concentrations, artillery, and armor . The attacks would be directed at troop concentrations and artillery targets .
 SAC is maintaining 1/8 airborne alert and has implemented its force dispersal plan . SAC maintains 1/7 airborne alert .
 Special defensive measures have been taken to protect the Southeast, with particular attention to Florida . Special measures have also been taken in Florida .
 Utilization of the increased Army and Marine forces will require an additional 16 transports, 68 cargo ships, and 11 LSTs . Utilizing the increased forces will need an extra 16 transports . The increased forces are expected to be in full force .
 The LSTs and 15 transports would come from the Reserve Fleet, would require approximately 45 days to activate and assemble on the east coast, and would cost an estimated $28 million . It would take 45 days and cost $28million to assemble .
 For the total shipping requirements of the augmented Plan, chartering, requisitioning, and prepositioning of 60 cargo ships must be accomplished well in advance of execution of the Plan .
 The 5th MEB, at approximately 9,000 strength, has transited the Panama Canal, is in the Caribbean and has been added to the assault force . The MEB is in operation in the region .
 The advanced alert levels, if maintained for a protracted period, can reduce the over-all capability of the force because of maintenance and training short-falls .
 The current status of alert can be maintained for about 30 more days without adverse effect . The status of the alert can also be maintained in the U.S.
 Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend staying in the present posture for the immediate future . Joint Chiefs: Stay in the current posture for immediate future.
 The Chiefs appreciate the opportunity to discuss some aspects of the current negotiations bearing on the IL-28's and other matters related to Cuba . The Chiefs say they appreciate the chance to talk about the negotiations .
 They would like to express their unqualified support for the withdrawal of the IL-28's . To lead-off, they would like the . government .
 The aircraft are of less military significance than the IRBM's and MRBM's which have withdrawn, but their continued presence in Cuba would present a long-term threat to the continental United States . The aircraft would require a higher level of air defense of our southeastern states .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff say the IL-28's must go . These factors added to the public statements of our Government on the need for their withdrawal .
 The Chiefs are aware of the offer to exchange the lifting of the quarantine for Khrushchev's removal of the IL-28's . The Chiefs will regret the possible loss of this useful naval tool if accepted .
 If the Soviets decline the offer, the quarantine will provide an immediate means to apply pressure both on Khrushchev and on Castro not only to remove IL-28's but also to obtain other ends such as the withdrawal of Soviet technicians and the acceptance of an inspection system .
 Chiefs favor extension of quarantine to include a complete blockade of POL products . After appropriate warning to Khrushchev of our intentions, the Chiefs would favor an extension of the quarantine .
 We should continue air surveillance and withhold any assurance against the invasion of Cuba . Concurrently, we should also withhold any assurances against an invasion .
 If the expanded quarantine did not succeed in obtaining the withdrawal of the IL-28s, we should be prepared to take them out by air attack, says the British PM .
 Even if the IL-28's are negotiated out of Cuba, there will remain weapons systems of significant military importance . MIG's, SAM's, the air defense control system, and the large stocks of modern Army equipment .
 The air defense weapons will be a constant threat to our surveillance of Cuba while the Army weapons may be used against Guantanamo or against any invasion attempt . The Army weapons will also be used in any attempt to invade Cuba .
 Thousands of Soviet military personnel remain in Cuba to man it . More important than this equipment is the thousands of Soviet personnel who remain there .
 The Soviet presence in Cuba poses a particularly sensitive problem to the U.S. The United States is concerned about its relations with Cuba .
 When the extent of this presence is known and the weapons systems remaining in Soviet hands are thoroughly appreciated, it will be clear to the Western Hemisphere that it has indeed been invaded and remains invaded by the Soviet Union . The Western Hemisphere has been invaded .
 U.S. and Latin America may demand removal of Soviet personnel and neutralization of their weapons . Under these conditions, we may anticipate a loud popular demand in the United States and in Latin America .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff feel U.S. should generate all the pressure possible to get Soviet personnel out . Eviction is far more important than that of the equipment, they say .
 The Chiefs are very much interested in the terms in which any assurance to Castro may eventually be couched, feeling that it would be damaging to our national interest and to the sense of security of our Latin American allies .
 If it is considered necessary to give Castro any assurance, the Chiefs feel that it should be tied to Khrushchev's proposal in his proposal to withdraw Soviet forces from Cuba, and to cease giving military aid to Castro .
 The assurance should be given without affecting our commitments under the Rio Pact . It should be linked to concurrent good behavior on the part of Castro and to acceptance by the Castro government of continued air surveillance. Also the assurance should not affect our commitments .
 The Chiefs recognize both the importance and the difficulty of obtaining an adequate verification system in Cuba . The Chiefs say they recognize the importance of the system .
 The Chiefs do not like two of the current proposals for inspection and verification . They are sympathetic with their purpose, but are not sympathetic with the current plans .
 Ambassador Stevenson proposes a UN inspection system of the Caribbean or Central America . Ambassador Stevenson also proposes an inspection system for the Caribbean .
 The Chiefs do not favor it because of its reciprocal features, its doubtful effectiveness and the danger of having it regarded as a substitute for effective aerial surveillance . The Chiefs say it is a "doubtful effectiveness"
 The second is the suggestion for the establishment of a nuclear free zone in Latin America . The Brazilian suggestion is based on the idea of a free zone .
 "We do not see any way to obtain from the proposal a satisfactory verification system for Cuba," says the Cuban government .
 That the IL-28's be removed from Cuba, preferably by negotiation-otherwise by blockade followed, if need be, by military action .
 Any assurance to Castro should be hedged by conditions protecting our obligations under the Rio Pact . That would include the duration of the assurance linked to good behavior by Castro and the acceptance of air surveillance .
 We oppose proposals for a reciprocal UN inspection of the Caribbean and for a nuclear free zone in Latin America . That in seeking a means of long-term verification and inspection, which we consider essential, we oppose .
 The meeting opened by General Taylor presenting three papers to the President in response to some of the President's inquiries . General Taylor presented the papers to President . General Wheeler and General LeMay were also present .
 All the Chiefs reported that they could maintain this readiness without any hardship for another month . One paper concerned the level of readiness that we have achieved and the ability to hold this level .
 General Taylor and General LeMay reported that they had altered the SAC readiness so that each crew was getting one training sortie per week . Each crew will get one sortie sortie a week .
 The President asked several questions about leave and rest policies for men away from home . The Air Force reserves that had been called up recently were also discussed .
 The President approved a recommendation that they get the LSTs out and maintain them . There was a lengthy discussion of shipping and LSTS .
 Admiral Anderson reported on a meeting between the head of MSTS and shipowners and labor unions . Admiral Anderson said the meeting was a good discussion of the issue .
 General Taylor summarized the views of the Joint Chiefs on the present situation . Each Chief in turn spoke about his particular zone of interest .
 The President read to the Chiefs the letter from Chairman Khrushchev and the President's reply went out this morning . President read the letter to the chiefs .
 The meeting was arranged as a result of a decision reached between K and E at Mrs. Mrs. K . Mrs. E. K and Mrs K decided to meet at Mrs K's request .
 Kennedy and Eisenhower were attending the inauguration of Dulles Airport . They met at an early date, but under circumstances in which there would be no Press or public recognition that the meeting had taken place .
 President explained to E the present status of the Cuban situation and the problems attendant to the removal of the IL 28s, the inspection to verify that all offensive missiles had gone, and inspection arrangements against reintroduction .
 Kennedy reviewed all of the various proposals that had been made, each one of which had been rejected by Castro, and concluded, that as matters stood at the present time, we would have to depend for the immediate future on aerial surveillance . Kennedy concluded, stating, as matters as stands at
 The President expressed the thought that while it was possible there was some deception in connection with the 42 missiles removed, the probability was strong that this number were actually removed . Having had to withdraw it would be probably most unlikely that the Soviets would make a further attempt to introduce offensive missiles, he
 General Eisenhower raised the question of deception and the possibility, however remote, that what we looked at were sections of large diameter pipe and that the missiles were actually retained . General Eisenhower said the possibility of deception was possible .
 McCone made the point that the examination of the photography gave reasonable assurance that what we were looking at was missiles . There were accompanying the shipments of missiles, which were stored on deck, and large quantities of clearly identifiable related equipment as well as personnel .
 The conversation then turned to the rumors and reports which were disturbing to the American public of missiles being hidden in caves, etc. The conversation went on to talk about the reports of missiles in caves .
 Eisenhower's strong recommendation that the President at an early opportunity make a very positive statement that we were taking actions which would guarantee our knowledge of what was going on in Cuba . He was going to insist that these actions, which included aerial surveillance, be continued .
 The President responded that he intended to make such a statement on Tuesday 72/ It was agreed that this statement should reflect initiative on the part of the President and the Administration . The President said that he planned to make the statement .
 President Kennedy and General Eisenhower expressed their appreciation to me and their desire to continue communication one with the other in about the same form and in the manner of this meeting .
 Eisenhower said he did not believe that our actions in Cuba would necessarily cause the Soviets to react in a retaliatory manner in some other tense location . Eisenhower presented many examples of the actions he took in Cuba .
 Many Soviet experts predicted that his initiative in Lebanon would be met by Soviet actions in Berlin or elsewhere, however the reverse was true . He pointed out that many experts had predicted that many Soviet experts would be disappointed .
 Eisenhower urged the President not to permit his course of action in Cuba to be dictated by fear of Soviet action elsewhere or an attempt to appraise in advance the type of actions Soviets might take elsewhere . Eisenhower said the President should not be allowed to try to predict in advance what the Soviets might
 Ambassador Thompson and others who are presumably Soviet experts. This point appealed to me as being particularly significant because it is the direct opposite of the advice that the President has been given by Ambassador Thompson .
 Rusk continued to meet with Cleveland, Bundy, Johnson, and Ball for the rest of the afternoon until 5:40m . The meeting took place in Secretary Rusk's conference room in Department of State .
 Rusk, Thompson, A. Johnson, Cleveland, Bundy, Murrow, Nitze, . Nitze and . McNamara, Gilpatric, Dillon, McCone 1-0 .
 Russian IL-28 bombers will be withdrawn within the next 3-4 weeks, say members of the US Congress .
 The members discussed and revised a draft letter and declaration /2/ but decided not to send it to Kuznetsov now or to authorize McCloy to inform McCloy tomorrow of its contents . McCloy said McCloy would be informed tomorrow of the contents .
 A decision as to when to give the Russians the letter is to be made Monday . A decision will be made on when to send the letter .
 Secretary Rusk will inform McCloy that in his talk with Kuznetsov tomorrow he is to stay within the limits of our last two letters to Khrushchev . McCloy will not discuss a package proposal, says Rusk .
 McCloy may discuss the situation which will exist Tuesday if we have not received a favorable decision on the IL-28 bombers . President makes a statement to the American people on the Cuban crisis on Tuesday .
 There was a prolonged discussion as to whether low-level reconnaissance flights should be made tomorrow and Monday . There was also a discussion on whether reconnaissance flights would be made on Monday .
 McCone and Bundy advocated high-level flights, but the decision was made not to fly on Sunday, November 18 . McCone noted that he, Bundy, and Thompson .
 If many more days go by without low-level flights, Cubans and others might think that the Cuban threat to shoot down our reconnaissance planes has scared us away from further missions .
 The effect of reconnaissance missions on the IL-28 negotiations - some believe this keeps pressure on . Others believe we should tell the Russians we are not flying low-level missions in order to avoid complicating the decision . Some believe this will keep pressure on; others believe this is to avoid
 Missions could be flown over heavily fortified areas with some risk of being shot down by Cuban antiaircraft fire or over rural areas . Risk of hostile Cuban action would be very low but the Cubans and Soviets would know we were flying low-level missions .
 State Department circulated a paper for later consideration on Caribbean security arrangements 75/ /5/ Not found .
 Arrived at Soviet residence, old George Pratt Estate at Locust Valley, accompanied by Mrs. Mrs. George Pratt . Mrs. Pratt arrived at the Soviet residence .
 After lunch in presence of Kuznetsov, Zorin, Mendelevich and translator we had coffee and talk, which was conducted entirely in English . After lunch, we met for coffee and talked in Russian .
 Kuznetsov said he thought we were stalling in our negotiations; that they felt they had done all that could be expected of them and we had done very little to bring about rapid solution of Cuban problem .
 Kuznetsov said he would like to ask McCloy his impression of where we stood in Russia . McCloy said he was impressed by the result of the match .
 McCloy said that he was glad to have opportunity to tell Kuznetsov just where he thought we stood . McCloy: "I'm glad that I was able to tell him just where I think we stood"
 In first place, we were getting nowhere by constant repetition of repetition that they had done everything and we had done nothing. We had to do nothing, and that we would get nowhere,’s the first place . We were not going to get nowhere. We were going nowhere.
 Soviet nuclear weapons had been secretly introduced into Cuba at the same time we were receiving these assurances . In spite of assurances we had received directly from highest levels of Soviet Government no offensive weapons in Cuba and more specifically no weapons .
 President, who was shocked by this revelation, did not thereupon take direct action against these weapons as we had full capacity to do. Yet President . Yet President. did thereupon taking direct action .
 President, although misled by these assurances, determined upon action which gave both sides time to work matter out. Instead of taking action, he decided upon action .
 Kuznetsov advised that on temporary basis and in order to avoid direct confrontation with Soviet ships we had worked out hail and pass arrangement in connection with quarantine on Soviet assurance that no more weapons were being introduced into Cuba .
 President had done this to relieve tensions and we were glad to note that Soviet Premier had responded in kind by taking out 42 missiles which Soviets stated they had introduced into Cuba .
 President offered to raise quarantine on assurance from Soviet Premier that orders had been given to remove bombers within limited period . Soviet Premier had committed himself to removal of jet bombers as weapons that we considered offensive . President, in spite of fact that Soviet Premier was committed to removing jet bombers, offered to
 Soviet Premier had stated that weapons were to be removed under UN observation . But no steps leading to this observation had been accomplished had been taken by Cuban Government .
 Soviet Union in position to compel Cuba to permit such observation, we aware irresponsibility of Castro . We have sincerely attempted to cooperate with Soviet Union pending such time as verification worked out. Although we felt Soviet Union .
 The problem related to Soviet commitment to provide adequate arrangements to guard against reintroduction of weapons, says Soviet leader . This problem was related to the Soviet commitment . The problem was to provide . adequate arrangements .
 It does no good to pretend that problem does not exist or that one can act as if prior conditions had already been fulfilled . We are aware this not easy problem but must be solved and must not be ignored .
 Removal of bombers cannot be indefinitely postponed based on accomplishment of some vague future event . Removal of planes cannot be postponed indefinitely based on expectation of future event, says Pentagon .
 Offer to lift quarantine very difficult step for President to take inasmuch as he had announced to nation that lifting of quarantine was dependent upon UN observation and upon receipt of adequate assurance against reintroduction of weapons .
 President was prepared to waive one of preconditions even though public opinion throughout U.S. demanded that no relief from quarantine be given until all conditions met .
 President had taken action in response to Soviet Premier's prompt and effective action largely in regard to missiles . U.S. President had also taken action against the Soviet Premier .
 "This action shows we are neither trying to starve out Cubans nor to be unresponsive to any constructive action taken by Soviet Union," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 If this offer does not result in removal of bombers, the President will have no choice but to reimpose quarantine in fully effective form, he says .
 Effort to relate removal of bombers to some final conclusions regarding verification and arrangements for guaranteeing against reintroduction is no more appropriate than it would have been to delay removal of missiles . Efforts to relate . to some . conclusions regarding . verification and . arrangements for . guaranteeing against . reintroduction
 McCloy suggested it might be possible to check out bombers without stopping Soviet ships as had been arrangement with missiles . McCloy said he could not commit his government .
 McCloy then stated that President was going to have a press conference this Tuesday;/1/ that he had postponed it in the interest of giving Soviets ample opportunity to respond to his request regarding IL-28's but on Tuesday he will have to say something about bombers . McCloy said
 President will be placed in very difficult position if not able to say that Soviets have agreed to get bombers out without further conditions . President will have to say he has agreed to allow bombers to be out of the country without further demands .
 If he cannot do this it will put question whether in fact we have an agreement with Soviet Union in regard to removal of offensive weapons from Cuba . If he can't do this, it would put question if we have agreed to remove offensive weapons .
 McCloy next referred to assurances that we were prepared to give in regard to invasion . McCloy: "We are prepared to ... give assurances" McCloy said .
 We will not sign any document embodying these or any other such conditions . We are not signing any document with these or other conditions, we say .
 "We prepared to give our solemn declaration in UN based upon Soviet declaration and fulfillment of conditions precedented that have so often been specifically stated," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Cubans can make any declarations they see fit in UN or elsewhere but we will not be a party to them . Cubans will have to make their own declarations in the U.N. or elsewhere, the government says .
 Castro has defied Soviet Union, U.S. and UN and any proposal to conform to his wishes in return for this defiance is out of the question . Castro's refusal to comply with the wishes of the United States and the Soviet Union is unlikely to happen .
 It will be not to invade, assuming fulfillment of conditions and we will be prepared to recommend to or use our good offices in connection with other Western Hemisphere countries to take same position as we do assuming Cuba does not institute aggression .
 U.S. should not have much trouble in dealing with wording of wording of declaration, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . "We are only wasting time in talking about any such document as has been presented to United States," says Putin .
 McCloy also referred to fact that any suggestion of document with two or three signatories appended to it such as was suggested by Soviet Union would take on character of treaty which might well require consent of two-thirds of Senate and it might be years before such consent could be obtained .
 McCloy: "In McCloy's judgment would never be recommended to Senate by President. Moreover, in McCloy’s judgment, the Senate would not be recommended by President."
 Way to proceed is to get IL-28 issue settled and they would find United States quick to give our best thought to next steps to wind up whole transaction . U.S. should give its best thought on next steps and wind up entire transaction .
 No inspection of United States would be reciprocal without inspection also of Soviet Union . No inspection would be possible without inspection of U.S. or Soviet Union. No inspection also would be needed of Soviet Russia .
 McCloy said one of reasons that caused U.S. to look carefully at assurances regarding reintroduction of weapons into Cuba was full development of our information in regard of extent of Soviet military presence in Cuba . At this point McCloy says one of the reasons for looking carefully is full development
 We were not introducing any new conditions but we were pointing out that military presence there so far transcended any technician status that we had to be cautious about this matter of reintroduction . The military presence in the area has transcended the technician status .
 "We had confirmed presence of Soviet combat command and presence of number of fully manned Soviet combat teams," says CNN.com . We had confirmed . presence of . number of Soviet . combat teams organized in precisely same manner as army units in Soviet Union .
 We have identified units and at proper time we would be prepared to give evidence of this military command before UN or elsewhere . We would give evidence to the UN, the UK or elsewhere. We are prepared to provide evidence before the UN .
 "We were convinced that introduction of these units and formation of this command was component of whole attempt to change nuclear balance by introducing nuclear weapons into Cuba," says Cuban president .
 They bore no relation to the defense of Cuba as such but were part of defense of Soviet missile batteries that have been installed in Cuba . The batteries were installed as part of the Soviet missile defense .
 There could be no hope of ""normalization"" of conditions in Caribbean as long as these units were there in this form and quantity . The units could not be "normalized" if they were there to normalize conditions .
 As long as they were there possibility of another surreptitious reintroduction of nuclear weapons into Cuba exists, exists .
 Soviet Union must understand our caution in regard to assurance against reintroduction of these weapons and giving of our own assurance against invasion . USSR must therefore understand our cautions, and give our own assurances against invasion, the UK says .
 McCloy emphasized we were not introducing any new conditions but were simply pointing out emphasis which we had to place on presence of these units and relation to matter of reintroduction of nuclear weapons .
 We are anxious as Soviet Union to wind up this transaction for there are number of things we ought to be discussing in order to keep this situation from arising again . We are quite as anxious as . Soviet Union as well as the United States .
 Today it's Cuba and combination of this bearded figure who is dictator in Cuba and certain miscalculation on part of Soviet Union that almost brought us to war . Today it is Cuba . It is Cuba and . combination of . this bearded . figure who was . dictator in . Cuba and
 McCloy says he is concerned about Chinese-Indian war . McCloy said he was concerned about the threat posed by China-India war .
 It could easily develop into something that would cause both of us trouble in future, he said . He wondered what thinking of Soviet Union was in regard to this .
 It may not be too soon for us to exchange some thoughts about it so that we would not have to act hastily and without careful prior thought if we were faced with some development there that again challenged peace of the world .
 Kuznetsov responded that this situation caused them some concern . To this, he said they were concerned about the situation .
 "Perhaps some time some discussion could be undertaken about it. That was a problem that troubled them," said the mayor . "That was a concern," he said .
 Said that this was his view but he could not speak for his government at this point . Said that he was not speaking for the government but for himself .
 He added that it was situations such as this that pointed to necessity for conclusion of Cuban affair promptly .
 Kuznetsov then repeated position of Soviet Union; namely, that they were prepared to consider removal of IL-28's but that this must be done in connection with solution of other problems relating to Cuba . This is said to be in the context of other issues relating to the Cuba
 He repeated that they had impression that we were merely putting up one obstacle after another . If IL-28 matter were solved we would have another precondition, he said . He said he repeated that .
 At this point he said that we should undertake at time IL-28's were removed to stop our overflights . He said we should do this at the time when the planes were removed from the system .
 McCloy said he was disappointed Soviets were still attempting to postpone dealing with bombers until all problems connected with verification and reintroduction were settled . McCloy: "I'm disappointed Soviets are still trying to avoid dealing with bomber bombers"
 This would take some time and we would have to have some consultation with other countries in this hemisphere before we could give all assurances against invasion that Soviet Union was seeking . This would be some time .
 McCloy again referred to need for clearing up this matter before President's Tuesday press conference . McCloy said need for clear up matter before Tuesday's press conference.
 Kuznetsov had no authority to accept proposal in regard to IL-28's which had been offered, he did ask McCloy to repeat what offer consisted of, which was done .
 McCloy stressed necessity if there was to be UN observation in U.S. there had also to be reciprocity UN . observation in Soviet Union . Kuznetsov came back to U. Thant's proposal for reciprocal UN observation .
 Kuznetsov said in regard to assurance against reintroduction he did not know what Soviet Union could do except to solemnly declare it was not going to reintroduce weapons and asked what other guarantees we had in mind .
 Kuznetsov also said he wanted to repeat that he was now authorized to say that no nuclear weapons were any longer on territory of Cuba .
 Please, he said, do not complicate situation by insisting upon interminable inspection on ground. Please, please, don't complicate situation .
 It would be impossible to go all over Cuba turning over every stone, looking into every cave and into every bathroom to determine whether nuclear weapons still existed there, says CNN.com.com .
 All nuclear weapons had been removed and that they were not going to reintroduce them . They were going to reaffirm that all nuclear weapons have been removed .
 McCloy said he wanted to have it clear that we were not in any way contemplating stopping of overflights in Cuba unless and until we were sure that there was not going to be any reintroduction of these weapons .
 We are doing utmost to keep overflights to minimum but in absence of any adequate verification this was only thing we could do . He repeated that overflights had probably saved us from war and they might do so again .
 McCloy made it clear that we would return fire if our planes were shot at . "We were going to do as we had been doing in past," McCloy said .
 At end Kuznetsov said that he was troubled about our position in regard to verification and assurances against reintroduction as he could see how discussions might go on interminably with our putting up obstacles .
 Kuznetsov said they would consider removal of IL-28's in connection with solution of verification and reintroduction problems . No understanding in regard to future meeting and with no indication that they would give way .
 Kuznetsov said he still had no definite word as to when he was coming back from the crash . Kuznnetsov: "No definite word on when he's coming back"
 Director McCone summarized the week-end intelligence/ 1/ and commented on orders issued to Cuban anti-aircraft units to fire on reconnaissance planes .
 Secretary Rusk initiated a general discussion of the need for overflights and the effect of such flights on the Cubans and the Russians .
 Secretary McNamara commented that the overflight problem is primarily a political one . McNamara said it was a political effort to solve it .
 General Taylor recommended six low-level sorties, some over the harbor of Mantanzas in order to watch incoming Soviet ships . Taylor recommended that there be six sorties .
 The planes would be over Cuba less than eight minutes and fly at tree-top level . They would fly over the island in less than 8 minutes .
 The President said the decision on flying low-level today is political . The decision was made by President Barack Obama .
 U.S. intelligence on the orders to the Cubans to fire on reconnaissance planes is "hard to guess," says U.N. State Dept. John Kerry says .
 Secretary Rusk was concerned by the effect on the OAS and NATO if it becomes public knowledge that the U.S. has flown no low-level mission since Castro threatened to shoot down our reconnaissance planes . Rusk: "Secretary Rusk is concerned that the effect will be on
 He asked that we examine military actions to be taken in retaliation for a shootdown . He asked for a possible next week, possibly next week .
 Plans call for armed air reconnaissance and then an attack on the offending anti-aircraft site . General Taylor said existing plans call for an armed air .
 Secretary McNamara noted that our plans call for two hours' advance notice before we attack Cuban territory . Secretary of State McNamara said the U.S. has two hours to prepare for the attack .
 The President made a comment, which was not clear, about photographs taken of our airfields by U.S. reconnaissance planes, the President said . The comment was made in reference to photos taken of the airfields .
 President asked what was the impact on Khrushchev of the Indo-Chinese fighting . President asked about impact of the fighting in Indo-China .
 Ambassador Thompson said we should keep the way open to a coexistence line . Ambassador Thompson, reverting to an earlier question, said the way should be open to coexistence .
 The imposition of the quarantine would be very hard for the Russians to take, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Mr Bundy noted that we have given Khrushchev every escape hatch for the IL-28 bombers . Mr Bundy also noted that the Russians had given him 'every escape hatch'
 If he does not now give in and remove them, there will be another serious Soviet miscalculation, he will be forced to give in . He says: "If he doesn't give in now, there is another serious mistake"
 Mr Nitze commented that the Russians wanted us to attack the Cuban anti-aircraft sites . He said the Russians were asking us to target the Cuban sites .
 We will wait today on the low-level flights and fly only when we believe it necessary for intelligence reasons, not as harassment . We are heading for a new showdown on Thursday or Friday 74/ or if the Russians refuse to withdraw the bombers .
 Mr Bundy said the scenario called for no action until tomorrow . He said he would seek to obtain OAS support for his demand that the IL-28 bombers be withdrawn .
 Under Secretary Ball commented on his recent briefing of the NATO Council in Paris . Ball spoke at a NATO meeting in Paris on Monday .
 He said our European allies would support us in finishing the job . He said there would be no objection to putting pressure on the Russians again via a blockade .
 The President said he was not sure that a quarantine is the right response to the shooting down of a plan or the refusal to pull out the IL-28 bombers . The President also said he did not think a quarantine would be appropriate .
 Secretary Dillon responded that Khrushchev could take the quarantine more easily than a U.S. attack on Cuba . Secretary Dillon said Khrushvic could take more easily if he quarantined .
 Mr Nitze said that under Communist doctrine a Communist state can back down in the face of the superior position of an enemy . Under Communist doctrine, the state is able to back down, he said .
 Mr Bundy pointed out that we would be acting not against the Soviets by hitting Cuba . Mr Bundy said the U.S. would not be acting against the Soviet Union by striking Cuba .
 The President was given a paper on proposed actions in the OAS involving conversations in advance with OAS powers with respect to our air surveillance . Mr Obama was given the paper by the President .
 The President said in the UN we could stress verification and in the OAS we could concentrate on the demand that the Russians withdraw the IL-28 bombers which are dangerous to other Latin American states . The President of the United States said in a statement that Russia should withdraw the bombers .
 President said we now have no inspection and no safeguards on the reintroduction of offensive weapons . In summarizing the present situation, the President said .
 Castro has rejected UN inspection and now he has concentrated his opposition on arrangements for national inspection . Castro has been in opposition to UN inspection but now he wants national inspection to be done .
 He asked that a statement be prepared for his use on the assumption that we have no Russian response to our IL-28 bomber withdrawal demand, he said .
 Castro rejected ground inspection, thus requiring the continuance of air surveillance . Castro's rejection of ground inspection should be emphasized . We should emphasize Castro's refusal to ground inspection .
 We should seek to get the OAS to re-enforce our right to continue air surveillance, says David Cameron . The OAS should be re-instituted, he says, to allow air surveillance .
 Murrow: Latin Americans are of the view that we are not doing enough against Castro . Mr Murrow commented that the Latin Americans want to see Castro removed from Cuba .
 The President requested that he be given a paper containing recommended courses of political and military actions . The paper may have to be taken this week if we have no reply on the IL-28 bombers .
 Ball said until tomorrow afternoon the President has to be in a position to say something in the way of a fairly full report to the American people . Ball told McCloy the general conclusion was that the President must wait until tomorrow .
 If he is not able to say the IL-28 s have been promised by that time, that obviously this going to make the pressure increased for some kind of drastic action . The pressure has been increased for the government to take action .
 McCloy's information-not to tell them-is we are going to get our telegrams this afternoon to bring both NATO and OAS countries up to date on this situation . The thing may get considerably heated up to the point where there may be substantial action as a result of
 We are putting the governments on notice so that they can't say that they are not consulted . We are also putting the idea that if anything leaks out of the European capitals, it will leak out of Europe .
 Gilpatric said we were preparing for armed reconnaissance on Wednesday and following because we have now been clearly warned that we will draw some fire . He said we will now be prepared in one way or another to return the fire .
 This will be at the low-level flights so that we won't counter any fire but go on tomorrow at high level . This is a precautionary measure to prevent any damage to aircraft .
 "Our story is we are continuing reconnaissance, high and low level, as required," says CNN.com.com . Our story is continuing, and we will continue to be able to find out more .
 We would try, pending resumption of low level, not to be put in any public position of having stood down in response to the threats from Castro . But Bob feels strongly we should wait until after the President's statement tomorrow before we put ourselves in a position where we may have to
 McCloy told Gilpatric that if he ran into these people he would indicate that we have to take more drastic action than we have taken in the past . McCloy said if he found them, he would say 'more drastic action' was needed .
 Ball suggested that he simply say the President is going to have to make a statement to the American people . Ball suggested he simply said the President should have made a statement . Ball said that the President would have to answer the question .
 "He hasn't made any kind of comprehensive statement for some time because he wanted to keep things as quiet as possible," he said . "Out of obligation to the public opinion, he has to say something," he added .
 He has set a press conference tomorrow afternoon/1/ where he will have to say there has been no indication of movement on the IL-28s . If there has not been no progress on this, he will be forced to say 'no indication' of movement .
 The result of this could very well be to increase American pressure for some kind of strong action . The result could be to increased pressure for strong action from the US .
 McCloy said he had gone over that three or four times yesterday and he feels he has put them on enough notice in this regard . McCloy: "I feel he has had enough notice and I feel I have had enough to do this"
 Unless he should bump into them he would be inclined to think it would be weakness to call them . He would rather call them if he ever bumped into them .
 McCloy: "If he should want another talk this afternoon McCloy will say that again. If he wants another talk, McCloy is ready to talk again" McCloy says he will talk again today .
 McCloy said regarding the President's statement, this has to be worked on . McCloy: "This has been worked on. This has been a problem for years"
 Sorensen and Johnson and Nitze are now working on that in another group . Ball: The three are working on another group. Ball: "They're working together to find out what's going on"
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with Georgi Bolshakov, reputedly one of the leading KGB officials in Washington and a direct link to Chairman Khrushchev . On the afternoon of November 19, 1962, Attorney General Kennedy met . Kennedy's first meeting with the Soviet Union Press Att
 The Attorney General warned Bolshakov that unless the Soviet Union withdrew its IL-28 bombers from Cuba, the U.S. was prepared to resume low-level reconnaissance of Cuba .
 President Kennedy, Robert Kennedy insisted, required an answer before his press conference on November 20 at 6.m. President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . President Kennedy insisted he had to answer the question before he was assassinated .
 Fomin requested this meeting on November 16 . According to a typed note on this memorandum, the meeting will be held on November 17 .
 Soviets willing to allow same kind of verification for exit of bombers as they allow for home shipment of missiles . Soviets are willing to . allow the same sort of . verification for . exit of bomber as they . allow for . home shipment . of missiles. Soviets were willing to. allow the
 Further on-the-spot inspection depends on U.S. negotiations with Cubans, not with negotiations with Soviets . Cuban ""sovereignty"" is involved now .
 All technicians connected to missiles already have gone home, he said . He claimed all technicians connected with missiles have already gone home .
 He professed to be ignorant of continuing stay of any missile technicians, particularly those whose past role has been to guard missile installations .
 Kennedy, he said, will lift the blockade today and is now drafting text of non-aggression pledge he promised to make . Kennedy said he will lift blockade today . He said he now plans to draft text of a non-aggress pledge he promises to make.
 Khrushchev has carried out all his undertakings with the President and is anxious for further progress in detente, says President of Soviet Union .
 He repeatedly asked what was next in President's priority, specifically returning to nuclear test agreement and non-aggression pact between Warsaw and Atlantic pact powers . The President also asked what is next in his priorities, including nuclear test deal .
 He implied repeatedly ""progress could be made"" in nuclear test agreement with compromise between number of on-site inspections suggested by West and number proposed by Soviets which he said was 3 .
 Nothing now seems to stand in way, he said, of Warsaw pact . Atlantic pact non-aggression treaty . Nothing now stands in way for Warsaw pact, he says .
 I replied that if I remembered correctly, the proposed zone proposed at that time was pretty lopsided in favor of Soviet Union . I said that if he remembered correctly the zone proposed was pretty . well . It was proposed at the time of the Soviet Union.
 He replied this whole area could be discussed again, perhaps with better results, perhaps better results .
 Russia wants to concentrate on building up its economy and thus is in great need for prolonged period of peace . Russia is in need of prolonged peace with Russia, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 There must be reasonable concessions on both sides, not just Soviet side, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Russia unhappy about this but at the present time can't do anything to stop it because the Chinese are being difficult . Russia is unhappy about the move but can't stop it .
 Chinese have been observers at all Soviet nuclear tests and they know power Soviets have . They don't approve of Soviet agreement with Kennedy because Chinese have watched all Soviet tests .
 Kennedy administration is much more reasonable, flexible and imaginative than Eisenhower administration was . Soviets realize Kennedy administration was much more flexible than Eisenhower was .
 Soviets realize there is now opportunity for reasonable agreements . Soviets realize that there are now opportunity to reasonable agreements. Thus, Soviets realize this is possible .
 President mustn't push what he believes to be his present advantage too far, lest it encourage ""hard-line"" group in Moscow . But President Mustn't Push what he thinks to be an advantage too much .
 Russia has to agree to effective on site inspection in Cuba; must also agree to pull all technicians out connected with missiles and bombers, and give satisfactory pledge not to reintroduce weapons or technicians . Russia also must pull out all technicians connected with missile and bombers .
 Only after this settled would there be any reasonable prospects for successful negotiations on testing, disarmament, and Warsaw-Atlantic pact agreements . Only after that settled would be possible talks on testing and disarmament .
 I said it wasn't true that Kennedy agreed to Adenauer's alleged suggestion that all negotiations with Soviets over Berlin be broken off . I also said that Kennedy hadn't agreed to the alleged suggestion .
 President believed close brush with war over Cuba made it incumbent on both Soviets and Americans to seize opportunity for at least limited start toward responsible eastwest agreements . On contrary, I said, President .
 For Robert Kennedy's account of how this message was delivered by Dobrynin, see Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy and His Times, 550. For more of the story, read Kennedy's book, "Robert Kennedy's Times"
 I have studied attentively your considerations which were forwarded through our Ambassador in Washington in the evening of November 15 . I wish first of all to express satisfaction with regard to your statement that the United States is also interested in the achievement of a rapid progress in untying the Cuban knot .
 It is good that you have confirmed that the United States commitment to give assurance of non-invasion of Cuba, which was agreed upon in the exchange of messages on October 27 and 28 .
 I fully share also the thought expressed by you about the necessity to act with caution, to take into consideration the position of others . I share my thoughts about the need to act responsibly and take into account others' views .
 "Now when we speak of eliminating the remnants of the crisis this is as important as at any of its past stages," says President Obama . "Now we have a chance to eliminate these remnants of our crisis," says Obama .
 I always believed and believe now that both of us are guided by the realization of the immense responsibility for the peaceful settlement of the crisis over Cuba being completed. "I always believed ... that both, and I believe now, both, we are guided ... by the . realization of . the
 The Soviet Union removes from Cuba rocket weapons which you called offensive and gives a possibility to ascertain this, says President Vladimir Putin . The Soviets removed the weapons from Cuba in order to prevent it being used in Cuba .
 The United States of America promptly removes the quarantine and gives assurances that there will be no invasion of Cuba, not only by the United States but also by other countries of the Western Hemisphere . The U.S. promptly removes quarantine .
 "Now, there may appear those who would wish to rummage in the wordings and to interpret them in different ways"
 "They were missiles. But you and we do know well what kind of weapons they were that set the forest on fire, they were missiles."
 "It was not accidental, indeed, that in our and your message of October 27 and 28 there was not a single mention of bomber planes and specifically of IL-28's," says CNN.com .
 At the same time those messages have direct reference to rocket weapons . The messages were made in reference to the use of rocket weapons in the past .
 I informed you that the IL-28 planes are twelve years old and by their combat characteristics they at present cannot be classified as offensive types of weapons . By their combat characteristics they at present can't be classified as offensive weapons .
 We took into consideration that you made certain statements and therefore the question of removal of IL-28 planes assumed for you as President a certain significance and probably created certain difficulties .
 Cuba has agreed to remove the planes from Cuba, the U.S. State Department says . The U.N. has informed the Cuban government of its consent to remove them .
 We have dismantled and removed from Cuba all the medium range ballistic missiles to the last with nuclear warheads for them . We have also removed all the missiles from Cuba . The missiles were removed from the Cuban territory with warheads .
 Soviet personnel who were servicing the rocket installations have also withdrawn . The Soviet personnel have also been withdrawn from the site .
 "We expressed our readiness to remove also the IL-28 planes from Cuba," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are ready to remove ... IL-27 planes" from Cuba .
 I inform you that we intend to remove them within a month term and may be even sooner . The term for the removal of these planes is not a matter of principle for us. It is not the issue of principle, it is a question of principle .
 We are prepared to remove simultaneously with the IL-28 planes all the Soviet personnel connected with the servicing of these planes . The Soviet personnel will be removed from the planes, the Kremlin says .
 "Proper consideration through the UN of the commitment not to invade Cuba-and it is the main commitment of your side-so far is being delayed," he said .
 Permit me to express my hope that with receipt of this communication of mine you will issue instructions to the effect that the quarantine be lifted immediately with the withdrawal of your naval and other military units from the Caribbean area .
 Your planes still continue to fly over the Cuban territory . Furthermore, your planes still fly over Cuba's territory .
 All this is taking place at the time when we have removed missiles from Cuba, have given you the possibility to ascertain it through appropriate observation and when we declare our intention to remove the IL-28 planes from Cuba .
 President Obama says U.S. will not fulfill its part of Cuba deal with Cuba . Obama: "We are too trustful with regard to the statements of the United States readiness to carry out its part"
 But in such an acute and delicate question which we face there cannot but exist limits beyond which the trust begins losing its value if it is not strengthened with practical steps towards each other .
 "All this should be mutually taken into consideration to sooner crown with success our efforts in settling the conflict. All this is mutually taken to consideration,’s the author says . All this must be taken into account .
 Some time is needed to formalize through the United Nations the agreement on the settlement of the conflict in the Caribbean area, including commitments of non-invasion of Cuba .
 This time should be measured by days, not by weeks and, of course, not months . But this time should not be measured as long as weeks, not as much as months .
 Of all the commitments based on the agreement achieved between us, you declare of your readiness to remove the quarantine immediately as soon as we agree on the term for the removal of IL-28's, without waiting for their removal .
 U.S. has grounds to count on similar understanding on your part also in the questions of the flights of American planes over Cuba, says President Obama .
 As for the discontinuance of flights of American planes over Cuba, you yourself can see better how this should be done, says the author .
 In my opinion, actual discontinuance of such flights over Cuba would already be a major step forward and would bring about a great easing in the situation, the author says .
 It is difficult for the American side to accept the form of a protocol we are suggesting in which the commitments of the sides are to be fixed . They say that so far as it is a matter of formalizing the commitments through the UN it is .
 It is the content of the document which is important and also that the commitments of the sides be formalized through the UN without delay . It is also important to formalize the commitments, says the UN .
 This is a good rule and if it is observed this promises a prompt settlement of the Cuban conflict . The rule is good for the Cuban people, but it is not always enforced .
 The conditions which you set forth with regard to carrying out the verification and measures of further observation. Now about the conditions . Now about . carrying out . the verification, you set out with . regard to carry out . out of the verification .
 UN representatives could ascertain removal from Cuba of rocket weapons which you called offensive . Yes, we really agreed to the effect of UN representatives to ascertain the removal of Cuban rocket weapons .
 Cuba must have the consent of the Government of Cuba to solve the issue, the government says . The Cuban government has not yet responded to the request, but it has said it would be necessary to solve it .
 Cuba could not take an obligation for the Government of Cuba, Mr. President says . "It does not reflect the real situation," he says of the situation .
 The main thing is that under agreement with you we gave you the possibility to carry out verification of the removal of our rockets in the open sea . We gave them the possibility of the . possibility of . carrying out . verification of . the . removal of . our rockets .
 You will agree that we took this step in the circumstances when no promise had been made by us with regard to this matter in our messages. We will not reveal how many of the messages were made in the messages .
 We did something more in comparison with what had been said by us in the message with regard to verification. We did more than we had said in the statement. We are not satisfied with what was said by them in the verification. It is not the first time we have seen such a
 It is clear that the said verification of the removal of the missiles conducted in accordance with the arrangement between us substitutes the verification of which you spoke in your message . The American side was observing the missiles we were shipping out, so to say, at the final stage of their removal .
 Even verification of the dismantling would mean observing only the first stage of their removal from Cuba . While even verification would mean that they were only part of the first phase of their dismantling .
 The U.S. had every opportunity to count missiles put on our ships, to photograph them and to ascertain their removal . The American side, as it itself so declared, had every chance to count the missiles .
 The question of the verification must, of course, belong to the past . Thus a way out was found and not a bad one, and the question of verification must belong to a past .
 No one can doubt that we have carried out our commitment with regard to the dismantling and shipping of the missiles from Cuba which were a subject in our correspondence . Now no one can . doubt that no one . can doubt the . commitment to dismantle and shipping the missiles .
 The fact of the removal of those missiles has been officially confirmed also by the United States Department of Defense . The removal of the missiles has also been confirmed by the U.S. Defense .
 The missiles may have been left in Cuba somewhere in the caves, one can say that we do not live in the cave-man age to attach great significance to this sort of rumors .
 If someone is spreading rumors of this kind he is doing that deliberately to create difficulties in the negotiations, he is said to be trying to create problems .
 "We do not see any problem here. As far as the question of the American side ascertaining our removing the IL-28 planes from Cuba is concerned," the Cuban government says .
 In this respect you and we have the paved way, let us take that way. Let us take it that way . We have paved the way and let's take the way .
 We have no objections against applying also to this case, the procedure agreed upon between us for observation of the removal of missiles . "Speaking frankly, speaking frankly, one could do without it," says Russian president .
 The IL-28 planes could spend several hundred tons of fuel sailing and somersaulting around our ships carrying them, the author says . But if you want your naval vessels and helicopters to spend . hundreds of tons of . fuel, let us then consider that such possibility exists .
 Some of the Cuban military personnel were not directly involved in servicing the rocket weapons now removed, still had something to do with guarding those installations . "We believe that we will do it at a proper time," says President Obama .
 "The strength of those groups in Cuba is not significant," says President Obama . "But I must say that ... ... the strength of that group in Cuba ... not significant"
 U.S. has agreed to remove weapons on the removal of which we have agreed are not brought back to Cuba . The Cuban government has said it will not allow weapons to be brought back into Cuba .
 "I believe that with respect to non-introduction of such weapons in the future you and I do not have any differences," says Putin . Putin: "With respect to the future, I believe that ... we have no differences. I believe ... we will not have differences"
 You now want some permanent supervision to be established, in Cuba or over Cuba . You want permanent supervision of the Cuban government, or in Cuba .
 U.N. Acting Secretary General U. Thant has proposed establishing U.S. posts in the Caribbean . The proposal would meet this task .
 This proposal of U Thant was also supported as is known by the Government of the Republic of Cuba, Cuba .
 "We believe it to be a reasonable basis on which it is possible to come to an agreement," the government says .
 It would be good if that idea was accepted by you and put into life. And it would be a good idea, I say . And it's good if you accept it and put it in life.
 I am somewhat surprised that in connection with the idea of ""presence of the U.N. in the Caribbean area you are talking for some reason about setting up observation posts at the ports of the Soviet Union . To tell the truth, I'm somewhat surprised .
 May be you have in mind the proposals which we submitted during the negotiations on the problem of disarmament and on the . problem of . prevention of surprise attack in 1955 and 1958 . May be . you have . been in mind .
 The proposals had nothing to do and cannot have anything to do with the question of Cuba since that question simply did not exist at that time . But those proposals had no bearing on Cuba .
 I have already told you that in our opinion it would be useful to get back to considering the proposals to set up on a mutual basis the observation posts at airfields, major sea-ports, railway junctions and auto routes . Incidentally, I have . already told . that in
 We have given our representatives at the negotiation on disarmament in Geneva the necessary instructions . We have also given our representative at the Geneva disarmament talks necessary instructions. We are prepared to discuss the situation in Geneva .
 I repeatwe would like to come to an agreement on this question . We would only greet that if you give such instructions to your representatives at the negotiations on disarmament we will only greet it .
 The Government of the USA in view of the agreement reached on the IL-28 planes should immediately remove the quarantine which corresponds to your own statement as well . The Government . of the U.S. should immediately removed the quarantine . The quarantine is a result of the deal reached on IL
 It is necessary to stick to generally recognized international norms and rules fixed in the UN Charter . It is not to violate the territorial waters and air space of sovereign states and stop the flights .
 I will tell you frankly, Mr President, that I met with some relief the report that during the last one-two days the flights of American planes over Cuba did not take place . Mr. Obama said he met with relief that the flights over Cuba were not reported .
 It is good if it promises maintaining of such wise decision in the future as well as maintaining it as well .
 As we see the matter this will require only a few days if, of course, all the sides want to have speediest liquidation of the aftermath of a tense and dangerous situation evolved in the Caribbean area, the situation that really brought humanity to the brink of thermonuclear war .
 V. Kuznetsov's report on his talk with A Stevenson from which I learned that the American side is going to give us a draft of its document stating the U.S. commitments of non-invasion of Cuba . I have read V . Kuznnetsov
 "Let us hope that as a result of the negotiations we will manage to formalize the achieved agreement so that it satisfies all the sides," says President Obama .
 In conclusion I wish to stress that much time has already passed since an agreement was reached between us and it is not in the interests of our countries to delay the fulfillment of the agreement that has been reached and the final settlement of the Cuban crisis .
 Castro wants to make a statement today concerning the settlement of the Cuban question . Castro is expected to speak at the end of his visit to Havana .
 Khrushchev believes that it would be good if the President in his statements at the news conference did not introduce elements of aggravation and did not make any statements hurting the national feelings of the Cubans . Khrushchev said that it was good if President in statements at news conference
 "Now it is especially important that the positive which has begun to show in the settling of the conflict be by all means supported and encouraged," says President Barack Obama .
 It seems to us that each side must display caution and restraint to avoid creating needless obstacles to the final elimination of the crisis which developed around Cuba .
 If Mr President could take this into account while conducting his news conference it would have a positive significance . It would correspond to our mutual efforts to come more promptly to a solution acceptable to all sides .
 Khrushchev's reply/1/ was read to the group, the President not having yet arrived . President not yet arrived at the time of the read-out .
 A statement to be made by the President at his 6:00 PM press conference was discussed and approved . A statement was also approved for the President to make at the press conference .
 The quarantine is to be lifted immediately and a proclamation revoking it is prepared . A proclamation is also to be prepared to revoke it .
 U.S. naval forces in the Caribbean will remain there for the time being and carry out exercises . United States naval forces will remain in the region for the next few days .
 Ships in the area will not be removed because it is normal for some to be always on station in the Caribbean . Ships will remain on station because they are not removed from the area because of their presence .
 Latin American ships which are in quarantine force will be asked to stay and participate in exercises . The quarantine force is being called a quarantine force by the US government .
 Secretary McNamara recommended, and the President agreed, that there would be no low-level reconnaissance missions flown tomorrow . The President agreed to the recommendation .
 High-level flights averaging not more than one a day will continue intermittently because of the importance of knowing that the IL-28 bombers are actually being removed .
 SAC air alert will be terminated and all other military forces will be put on a reduced alert basis . The SAC will be placed on reduced alert status .
 Secretary McNamara recommended that within forty-eight hours we announce that the air reserves called up for the Cuban crisis would be released before Christmas . The air reserves would be freed before Christmas, McNamara said .
 The State Department will call in the Latin American Ambassadors before the President's press conference to brief them on the Russian reply to the Russian response .
 Attention was called to the reference in the reply to Soviet ground forces . Attention was also called in the reference to Soviet forces in Russia .
 The President asked where the question of our no-invasion assurance stands, the President said . The President said it was not clear where the President's position stands .
 In the light of what Khrushchev has agreed to do, if he does not get our assurances he will have very little, he says . "If he does . get . our assurances, he will not get very little," he adds. "He does not have very much to
 ABC reporter John Scali given substance of Khrushchev's reply by a Russian source . Alexis Johnson returned to the meeting to report on the substance of the reply .
 Some of the group believe we should insist on the shipside inspection and others say this is not necessary . No clear decision was reached, but some said this was necessary .
 Attorney General expressed his opposition to giving the assurance informally . Attorney General said he was unhappy with the assurance .
 We would be giving away a bargaining counter because Khrushchev is not insisting on having formal assurances, says the U.S. State Department .
 The President restated his view that Khrushchev would be in a difficult position if he gave us something and got nothing in return . The President also said that he would be difficult to deal with the Soviet leader .
 "We do not want to convey to him that we are going back on what he considers our bargain," says minister . "We don't want to go back on our bargain. We want to make sure that we don't go back," he says .
 An instruction to McCloy and Stevenson/5/ is to be drafted which says that we will make no formal no-invasion assurance and explained why we declined to do so . The instruction will be drafted to explain why they declined to make the offer . An instruction is also being drafted
 The text was provided by the Russian Foreign Ministry and is an unofficial translation .
 I have a feeling we have to do something now on our own and we can't stall much longer. I'm not sure if we're going to be able to find a solution to the problems we face in the next few weeks .
 He was angry over the passage of words between him and Adlai yesterday . Well, I think he was all right on that, but he was angry that he had been angry over that .
 "We weren't talking SAM-sites, we were talking about getting all the troops out. We weren't going to talk about SAM sites," he says .
 "I was at the other end of the table and couldn't intervene," he says . "They were wrangling down at the end of a table," he adds . "I'm trying to help them," he said .
 "I'm going to call for a meeting right away. Now he called me up this morning," he said . "I said ""Don't do that. Don't call that," he replied . Now he calls me up and says he's going to meet right away."
 I believe that the time has come to expedite the conclusion of this thing and we ought to pretty quickly have a SC meeting. I think that the SC meeting should be held pretty quickly. I believe it's the time for it to be expedited .
 I would hope we could have another similar meeting to that which we had at Stamford and Glen Cove . I would like to see a similar meeting between the two sides again . I hope we will meet again at Stamford .
 "If there is any further exploratory business, I'm inclined to think that it isn't wise to have one of those formal meetings," he says .
 'If you can only get off this on-site inspection you are better off than if you keep talking about verification instead. My feeling is if you can . If you are only getting off this inspection you . You are . better off . than if if you . keep talking . about
 A memorandum that is coming down to you, the first one, was dictated by Stevenson and company, and the second one is the one that I showed Rusk last night . The first one was dictated . The second one, the one is a memorandum that I show Rusk, was
 I think you ought to sit down at this stage and draft the thing that we can say in the declaration and don't pussy foot on that any longer. I think it's time to draft the things that we need to say in that declaration . Don't 'pussy foot' on
 "Let's see what it looks like and send it up here so that we can get to work on it. Let's see how it looks . Send it up to the top of the list .
 A memorandum from Cleveland to Rusk, November 22, contains three drafts including the McCloy version as revised by Rusk . McCloy's version of the memo was revised after Rusk's request .
 We've got a meeting at 4m/6/ scheduled to go over some instructions . We might have some conversations on the phone in the meantime about what those instructions should be .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin should send a message to Kuznetsov, says Kremlin spokesman . Putin: "If the President goes off for the weekend it's going to be hard to hold" Putin: 'We should tell him something today'
 I think the Pentagon agrees with me on the general best safeguard business-removal of those troops . I would push that ahead as something we ought to do, and then draft a statement and get it up quickly as you can .
 I'll get hold of Dean and see if we can get something so that we can at least work something out with you on the phone to get approved at 4m. I'll try to get a bit of a deal with Dean .
 I have a feeling that we may be running down two somewhat divergent tracks here. I'm not sure what's going on here, but I'm sure we're running down a different track .
 I wonder if we shouldn't get Jack down here for 4m. and try to resolve this before we head into a long week where there can't be no resolution . I wonder whether we should try to get Jack to the ground for a 4m session .
 He says the Latins will die; they will come to a very bad conclusion- that we shouldn't give any kind of pledge except on a condition of adequate verification and safeguards which of course we are never going to get. He says .
 "What we did was reiterate our existing policy in return for which we got 30 bombers and 40 missiles out of there, etc. etc. What we did ... was to reiterate our ... existing policy," he said .
 Those who aren't satisfied with anything short of an invasion of Cuba aren't going to have their views changed by the character of the noises we make while we're not invading Cuba, either .
 Stevenson: "If we ask them without Stevenson, we create trouble" "I don't think there is any doubt what the USUN thinks," he says .
 "I don't think we would have difficulty with him on this, but I am not sure," says Obama . "I'm not sure. I don't know what I would say to him," he says .
 I think the President would like to or be prepared to trade a certain thickening of our assurance against their affirmation that they are leaving. I think it would be a good thing for the President to be prepared, he said .
 Kuznetsov is the sort of thing we could give him to chew on at the end of the day today . That is the kind of thing he could give to him at end of today .
 "Look, we can do this better if your people would do what you haven't been able to get them to do. Then there would be a hassle in which it would be clear that we say to him ""Look,  ", he said . "Then we would say to
 I am sure he would want the alternative because I think they have really given up on the first one . I think he would be keen to see the alternative . I'm sure he'd want the other one, but I'm not sure what he would prefer .
 It seems to be a question of if you spend a day on that or not. That's right and it seems to me, that's right . That's not a decision whether to spend that time on that, it's a decision .
 If trend line of Soviet presence in Cuba is downward, McNamara doesn't see much point in trying to bargain for something we are never going to get . McNamara would be willing to give something that perhaps went a shade beyond what the President actually gave yesterday .
 Three draft instructions, one written by McCloy, another by Stevenson, and a third by the State Department, discussed . The State draft was largely a restatement of the President's press conference statement .
 It made the point that we cannot ignore the necessity of ensuring the peace and security of the hemisphere . It made a point that . We cannot ignore . The need to ensure the peace in the hemisphere, it said .
 McCloy said McCloy's view is that we got from the Russians more than we expected . Mr Ball said that McCloy was disappointed with the Russians' response to the situation .
 We should not put so much stress on ground inspection now that if we don't get it, it is a defeat for us . Therefore, we should not be putting so much pressure on ground inspections now . We need to be careful not to put too much stress into ground inspection .
 President agreed that we could abandon insistence on ground inspection, but he felt that the proposed no-invasion assurances were too hard . The President agreed to abandon insistence that ground inspection be ground inspection .
 He said our objective is to preserve our right to invade Cuba in the event of civil war, if there were guerrilla activities in other Latin American countries or if offensive weapons were reintroduced .
 The pertinent sentence in the declaration which we would make to the UN Security Council was revised . The relevant sentence was revised to reflect the changes in the UN declaration .
 Secretary McNamara said he would be recommending to the President an aerial reconnaissance plan for the next few weeks . McNamara will be recommending the President .
 Low-level flights would be authorized only with Presidential approval, but he doubted that many would be necessary . He said he doubts that many such flights would not be necessary.
 High-level flights, two per day accumulatively, but not more than five in any one day, would be recommended . Flights should be limited to two or more flights per day .
 Secretary McNamara said that in the coming days we are going to have insufficient information out of Cuba but we can live with this rather than risk having one of our planes shot down and then having to retaliate .
 I have been glad to get your letter of November 20/1/ which arrived in good time yesterday . I have a good time to read your letter, which arrived yesterday .
 I was able to announce the lifting of our quarantine promptly at my press conference, on the basis of your welcome assurance that the IL-28 bombers will be removed within a month . As you will have seen, I was . able to . announce the lift of our . quarantine .
 I do not wish to confuse the discussion by trying to state our present position in detail in this message, but I do want you to know that I continue to believe that it is important to settle this matter promptly and on reasonable terms, so that we may move on to other issues .
 I regret that you have been unable to persuade Mr Castro to accept a suitable form of inspection or verification in Cuba, and that in consequence we must continue to rely upon our own means of information . Mr Castro has refused to accept any sort of inspection of Cuba, the Foreign Office says .
 There need to be no fear of any invasion of Cuba while matters take their present favorable course . But, as I said yesterday ,121 there need to no fear for no invasion of the island .
 Stevenson is prepared to go along with a draft that we worked out over the phone . Stevenson has still got some reservations, and he wants to think it over overnight and then talk again .
 He wants to get out of it any reservation with regard to our right to overfly or protect ourselves, he says . "I think that we really can't do it," he says. "He wants to ... protect himself," he adds .
 He has a feeling that actually we shouldn't insist on any kind of reservation of that kind; that we tell them orally we are going to have to do it, but that we don't put anything in any document because he thinks this doesn't give them enough . If we want to
 "It is really a question of where we start in this thing and where we come out," says President Obama . "We are going to have a long way to go," says Obama .
 "We probably ought to start with something not much different from what we arrived at tonight, and Stevenson himself agreed to that. My own feeling is that we probably . ought to . start with . something not . much different than what we . arrived at . tonight .
 I think Jack will in the morning, but he wanted to think it over a little further . Jack will decide whether to take a decision on the matter in the next day .
 The main crux of the argument is this business whether to include some such phrase as ""and the United States is in position to be satisfied on these points"" which is really a reservation of our right to overfly . It seems to me is essential if we are not going to get
 If you say ""is assured"" then the interpretation is that this means that the Russians have given them this assurance. You see, if you say "is assured" then this is the interpretation of this . It is not the first time that Russia has given them assurances, it is the
 Yes, the only question in my mind is whether your statement really is too limiting to us. Yes, yes, yes. Yes. Yes . Yes, I think we should be able to live in the United States .
 McCloy doesn't want any reference to the fact that we're protecting the right to overfly as a condition to the non-invasion assurance, and I really think we have to have it . But the problem with McCloy is that he just doesn't . McCloy just doesn
 The idea is that we talk the first thing in the morning. So that he is going to think it over overnight. He said: 'I'm going to talk to him first day of the morning . He said that he would think about it overnight and that he was thinking it over
 CNN will try to get something in the Russian hands say toward noon tomorrow . But we would like to get it in the hands of the Russian government .
 Khrushchev would like to get it behind him, Khrushov says . Khrushova: 'It is a nagging business as far as he would like it to be behind him. It is a long-running business'
 "I do think there is some value in not letting it drag out too long because I think the American people are never happy with a long, drawn-out negotiation," she says . "That gives the newspapers a chance to build up all the suspicions and doubts, etc. etc.
 The only thing is, I say, we don't want to get . . The wording of that is going to be important to us in the next two years, he says .
 There's nothing . . . you seemed to have more ""whereases"" in the meeting this afternoon . There's been more "whereases" in the meetings this afternoon.
 The only difference is that instead of saying ""if and so long as"" we say ""provided"— that's not really anything. No, I tell you, the only difference . Instead of saying "provided" we say "provided," that's "not really anything"
 The United States and other states of the hemisphere are in position to be fully satisfied, but that's not a significant change . And when we say ""and the United States is in position  to be satisfied""
 The reason we have written it this way, of course, is to bury it and to make it appear as subsidiary as possible . Well, the reason we are writing this way is to be buried it, and to be made as subsidiary .
 If they shoot down our planes, then you see under the language we have here, then we would say the whole deal is off, he says . "They have frustrated us from being in position to be satisfied," he adds . "Well, if they shoot . down their planes,
 It gives freedom of action because it is based on the assumption that a presence outside the western hemisphere is incompatible with the American system, you see . It gives . freedom of . action because . it is . based on . assumption that . a presence . outside the . western hemisphere . is
 By reserving our rights under the Rio Pact, it really permits us to do pretty much what we please . It really permits them to do very much what they please. We are not going to have to wait and wait to see what happens next .
 If he will go along with this draft, then he will deliver this draft to the Russians by noon . The draft is expected to be completed by noon on Monday .
 Well, I think what we can say is that this is the best we can possibly do for you. Well, it's not the best thing we can do for us, we said . Well, you can't say what it is for you to say, but it's for you
 "There is a reservation of our right to be satisfied. Now, the fact is that there is . Now, there is ... the fact that there are ... reservations," she said .
 I think you ought to say that constitutionally the President cannot make a comment that cuts across the Rio Pact . President cannot comment on Rio Pact, he says, but can't make that comment .
 I think you might get up a background sheet some time so that if we get assaulted we can show all the examples of where we can move . I think it might be useful for the first time . I'm not sure how long it will be .
 If I can get McCloy and Stevenson to agree with this in the morning I won't bother you, I won’t bother you. If you agree with me, I’m sure you’ll be happy to see you.
 No nuclear weapons or/3/ weapon systems capable of offensive use are present in or reintroduced into Cuba . Provided Cuba does not invade or support an invasion of any other country, the U.S. declares that it will not invade Cuba .
 This declaration/4/ does not alter any of the rights or obligations/5/ set forth in the UN Charter and the Rio Pact .
 A note in Ball's handwriting indicated that this was agreed to by Stevenson, read to the President at 8m., and McCloy would provide an answer on the morning of November 22 . Ball's handwritten note indicated that the President would provide a final answer .
 Drafted by Sisco and Cleveland; cleared with Executive Committee and Ball, and approved by Cleveland . Drafts were approved by Executive Committee, and cleared by Ball, Sisco, Ball .
 On Soviet side, on-site UN-supervised verification of removal of offensive weapons, and longer-term safeguards against their reintroduction . On Soviet-Russian side: on--site verification of removing offensive weapons from Soviet territory .
 Our interest lies in speeding the disengagement process, while avoiding the kind of commitment that unduly ties our hands in dealing with the Castro regime while it lasts . The Castro regime is not being dealt with by the British government, it says .
 On verification and safeguards, The Soviets have given no indication that they are prepared to press Castro regime as hard as would be necessary to get Cubans to agree to any acceptable inspection system . Cubans have consistently been adamant in objecting to ground inspection of any kind, and have rejected several
 It is not going to be possible in the short run to get a UN system of short-term verification or long-term safeguards on offensive weapons in the Caribbean . The UN system is not likely to be able to get the short-run verification .
 It is not to our interest to have the Soviets involved in creating, sponsoring, or administering such safeguards, it says . Assuming that it would be possible to develop a satisfactory arrangement for adequate long-term safeguards on basis of mutuality in the Caribbean area, it would not be to have
 Absence of inspection arrangements, while leaving part of original deal unfulfilled, does provide rationale for continued U.S. photographic reconnaissance over Cuba .
 There are distinct advantages to closing out this phase of the negotiations with the Soviets without delay, says President Obama . The U.S. has been in talks with the Soviet Union for decades .
 The Soviets would have the opportunity to disengage themselves from major military involvement in Cuba . The Soviet Union would have been able to withdraw from major involvement .
 We would be enabled to deal with Cuba largely as a Hemispheric problem and to consider next steps on long-range safeguards, without the intrusion of the Soviet Union .
 This would permit us to seek progress with the Soviet Union on wider subjects, such as nuclear testing, Berlin, disarmament and the election of the Secretary General . This would allow us to discuss nuclear testing and Berlin .
 U.S. and USSR want speedy wrap-up of current phase of negotiations . Soviets have in mind a Security Council meeting at which agreed declarations would be made by the United States and USSR .
 Soviets are not insisting on a formal protocol, nor do they seem to be insisting that Cubans be parties to this accord at this stage . Soviets do not seem to want Cubans to be part of this accord .
 The United States is quite prepared to work toward such a wrap-up meeting of Security Council, the U.S. State Department says . The U.N. is working to wrap up a meeting of the Security Council .
 In view of the non-fulfillment of important aspects of the original understanding, we cannot and should not declare the understanding fulfilled . We cannot, however, declare the agreement fulfilled, as well .
 US-Soviet crisis can be drawn under a 'line to be drawn' under the US-Cuba crisis . However, we can adopt a procedure which enables a line to be . drawn under the 'line' while leaving open questions that must be sorted out with Cuba in hemisp
 OAS retains full freedom of action as regards aerial surveillance and other means of keeping a close eye on Cuban behavior . OAS would have to make clear, both to Soviets and to general public, that KennedyKhrushchev understanding was never properly fulfilled .
 We would continue to remind world that declaration of intention must be independently checked in a world still so full of international mistrust .
 "We would avoid making our intentions on continued air surveillance manifest in a form or forum that would require Soviets to raise the issue of violation of Cuban air space. However, until after SC meeting, we would avoid continuing air surveillance . We would not comment on continued surveillance manifest, however,
 Cuban cooperation with the U.N. and the inability of the Soviets to induce the Cubans to cooperate . In the circumstances we will have to place conditions on our non-invasion assurance which are justified by absence of cooperation .
 This will leave the door open for regional arrangements for longer-term safeguards if Cubans cooperate . OAS air surveillance of Cuba, and military response to any Cuban aggression, if they do not .
 The Secretary-General would report on the steps he has taken, and in particular his efforts to secure UN on-site inspection to verify withdrawal and dismantling of offensive weapons and to safeguard against future reintroduction .
 The Soviet Union would make a declaration indicating steps it has taken pursuant to the United States -USSR understanding and containing assurances that all missiles and nuclear components have been removed . No offensive weapons would be reintroduced in Cuba in the future, and that no offensive .
 These declarations would be noted by the Security Council President in a ""summation"" which would have to be agreed ahead of time . The Security Council would then have to make a decision .
 A brief procedural resolution noting the declaration might be less difficult to achieve than getting UAR to agree to an acceptable summation . Alternatively a brief procedural . resolution noting a brief . resolution might be easier than getting a . acceptable summary .
 If a resolution is used, it should contain no substantive elements and should establish no continuing machinery . The resolution should not establish any continuing machinery, the author says . If used, the resolution should be used in a resolution with no substantive element .
 The draft was drafted by Cleveland, Sisco, Ball, and Ball; cleared by Ball; and approved by Cleveland . Sisco and Ball drafted by Sisco; Ball approved by Ball and Sisco .
 In letters of President Kennedy on October 27 and of Premier Khrushchev on October 28, 1962/2/ firm undertakings were made regarding the settlement of the Cuban crisis . In letters, President Kennedy said: "Firm undertakings"
 USSR would agree to remove from Cuba, under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision, all weapons systems capable of offensive use . USSR would undertake, with suitable safeguards, to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems into Cuba .
 The United States would agree-upon the establishment of adequate arrangements through the United Nations to ensure the carrying out and continuation of these commitments . The U.S. would agree to remove promptly the quarantine measures now in effect .
 The President expressed his confidence that other nations of the Western Hemisphere would be prepared to do likewise . The President also expressed his confident that other Western Hemisphere nations would be willing to do so .
 The United States notes the statement made by the Soviet Union that all medium and intermediate range missiles, all nuclear weapons and components have been removed from Cuba . The U.S. notes that all IL-28 bomber aircraft will be removed by December 20th, and that all sites for medium
 USSR has stated its intention to withdraw all military units and personnel placed there for the servicing or guarding of these weapons systems . It notes also that it has stated that the USSR has . stated that . it intends to withdraw .
 The United States notes further the statements of the USSR that no weapons capable of offensive use will be introduced into Cuba in the future . The U.S. notes further statements that the USSR said no weapons .
 The undertakings in the President's letter of October 27, that the United Nations would be enabled to verify the removal of missiles and bombers and the destruction of sites, have not been fulfilled, the President said .
 A minimum inspection procedure was arranged in cooperation with the USSR . U.S. naval vessels have verified that Soviet vessels leaving Cuba have carried out a number of missiles which the USSR had certified to the United States as having been in Cuba .
 The Soviet Union has also agreed to similar verification of the imminent withdrawal of all IL-28 bomber aircraft . Soviet Union also has agreed to a similar verification . The Russian-built aircraft will be withdrawn from the Soviet Union .
 The nations of the Organization of American States have no choice but to continue to be alert through their own resources to any possibility that offensive weapons systems remain or are reintroduced into Cuba .
 The quarantine instituted on October 23, 1962, has been lifted on November 20, 1962 . In consideration of the steps that have been taken by the Soviet Union to date, the quarantine was lifted .
 No nuclear weapons or weapons systems capable of offensive use are present in or reintroduced into Cuba . The United States declares that it will not invade Cuba or support an invasion of Cuba . Cuba does not invade or support any other country .
 This declaration does not alter any of the rights or obligations set forth in the UN Charter and the Rio Pact . This declaration is made on the representation of the Soviet Union here in the Security Council .
 Dear Mr President, I have received your message./l/ I express great satisfaction. I express very satisfaction. The message was delivered to Mr President .
 I fully trust the statement made in that message too that the United States confirms its commitment not to invade Cuba which you also confirmed in your statement at the news conference . The U.S. confirmed in that statement too .
 In confidential messages to you I have already laid down our understanding of the questions and of those steps which are needed to normalize the situation in the Caribbean area after the great and dangerous tension we and you have lived through. In my confidential messages, I have laid down .
 "No less important questions are facing us now, that must be solved to avoid recurrence of the situation which has just been eliminated through our mutual efforts," says President Obama .
 You say that I was not able to convince Prime-Minister Fidel Castro about something . You say he was able to persuade him about something? "Yes, yes," he replied .
 Cuban leaders are however young, expansive people-Spaniards in a word, to use it far from pejorative sense . But it should be taken into consideration that Cuba is a young republic, Cuban leaders .
 Cuba's leaders are in the position they are in as the leaders of Cuba . But one should understand their position as leaders, the Cuban leader says .
 The Republic of Cuba is a small country having for its neighbor a big and powerful state- the United States of America . The U.S. of America has been unfriendly to Cuba since the first day the Cuban revolution was born .
 "There was an invasion of Cuba. Moreover, one should not forget either that there was also a war in Cuba," he said .
 The state of mind of Cuba's leaders should be taken into account, says the Cuban president . That is what has to be considered in order to correctly assess and understand the situation, he says .
 Prime-Minister Fidel Castro may have looked upon some questions with a great sense of understanding . Fidel Castro probably also correlated his steps with the feelings of the Cuban people who are taken by a great patriotic upsurge .
 Of course, you and we have a different appraisal of the Cuban revolution and of the events which developed around Cuba and of Cuban leaders, says the BBC . "We have different views of the revolution," says the British PM .
 The different appraisal must not prevent us from finding agreed solutions in the interests of peace . The different appraisals must not after all prevent us finding a solution in peace .
 Cuba has chosen the way for its development in accordance with the will of its people . One should treat both sides with understanding and take into account the actual state of things- in this case .
 We have been doing with understanding and patience everything that was needed and that was within our power to ensure the achievement of agreement on the elimination of the remnants of the crisis . We are doing everything we need to do to ensure that the crisis is over .
 "We have given him appropriate instructions to this effect. Incidentally, he will come back soon," he said . "Incidentally he will return soon," the minister said .
 I understood your message in a sense that you yourself regard with understanding the difficulties that still remain. I understand your message, I said. I understood it, and I understand it, as well as the difficulties still remain,’s David Cameron .
 I would wish that we having accomplished the main thing, having given relief to the world public and having given orders to the armed forces contributing to the normalization of the situation-and we gave such order at once as soon as we learned that analogous steps were taken on your side .
 It would be necessary that appropriate instructions be also given to your representative, Mr McCloy, says the Prime Minister . McCloy is a representative of Wall Street, he says .
 Wall Street is not so terrible a thing as I imagined. True, he tried to convince me that Wall Street was not so bad a thing . But he said Wall Street isn't so bad as I imagine.
 "I do not lose hope that one fine day Mr McCloy will fulfil his promise, that is, will take me to Wall Street," she says .
 "We consider these proposals to be constructive, and we were guided by a desire to facilitate the completion of our agreement," says FIFA president Vladimir Putin .
 The main thing has been achieved indeed and at the final stage it would be necessary to create good, reliable relations so that, relying on common sense, on reason and on the understanding of all the responsibility that lies upon you and us, to reach a final solution on a firm reasonable basis
 In this message of mine, I do not raise any questions of substance since the questions that must be completed are known to you . In this . message, I don't raise any . questions of . substance since . since the . questions that . must be . completed are already known to
 Let us then make a joint effort to complete the remaining questions as well . Let's then make an effort to answer the remaining remaining questions .
 This may serve as a good omen for both sides in working out an approach for the solution of other not less important questions that we face . This may be a good sign for both our sides to work out a solution .
 After all the question that you and we are struggling with is, though important, but a particular one. After all, we are . struggling with . The question that we and . we are, though . we struggle with is an important one. It is important to be able to answer
 Questions must be solved in order to stabilize the situation and secure lasting peace on earth . Meanwhile there are questions of which are extremely important for destinies of peace .
 Sincerely yours, N Khrushchev/2/ /2/ printed from a copy that bears this typed signature .
 Bundy told Ball that "the President is prepared to fall back from this but he does not see any reason not to try it out" Bundy said the President was prepared to "fall back" from the decision . Bundy said he was prepared for the fall back but he did not want to
 The President asked Bundy, and Bundy gave him assurances, on the point whether we thought McCloy had it clear in his mind that we don't want to haggle it to a dead end up there . Bundy gave Bundy assurances that McCloy was not going to be haggled
 The President suggested an exchange of private messages with the Chairman . He even suggested a private message exchange with the chairman .
 Bundy told him he did not think the Secretary was ready to recommend this . Bundy told Bundy he was not prepared to recommend the move . Bundy said he was disappointed with the recommendation .
 You should begin by emphasizing our desire that this be wound up very promptly, a desire Chairman Khrushchev evidently shares. You should emphasize our desire to be wound-up very quickly, says Khrushnik .
 Ways and means of ending matter should be governed by this requirement . It should also govern how and how to end matter in the country .
 You should present SC scenario contained Deptel 1338/2/ give Kuznetsov our draft declaration,/3/ and explain it to him as the most we can do-and more than was originally promised— in light of Cuban refusal to permit UN verification or safeguards .
 At the same time you should indicate that we do not want a long and fruitless haggle in the UN over differences which undoubtedly exist between what they would like and what we would like . Some of these differences may wither away over time if things go well .
 If our statement is one which they could not live with in UN, we believe a satisfactory wind-up can be obtained by use of a Presidential statement, as in last press conference, which Soviets can readily interpret as promised assurance against invasion . Soviets can easily interpret as promises against invasion,
 We note with interest Chairman's last message/4/ which does indeed interpret President's last press conference in this way . Chairman's statement: "Chairman's last statement/4"
 You should emphasize that there is in fact no present danger of invasion of Cuba, but that we cannot be put in position of giving a blanket guarantee to a man who has refused to cooperate with UN to fulfill understanding of October 27 and 28 .
 We anticipate that these matters can well be discussed at Geneva in Geneva in connection with negotiation on surprise attack . The U.N. Security Council says it will hold talks on the attack in Geneva next week .
 This is obviously a complex problem going well beyond initial understanding, requiring long discussion . This is the first time the government has taken steps to address the issue .
 We should not hold up all exchanges of assurances pending such an agreement but should promptly do the best we can in the light of Castro's position and move on to other issues . Therefore we should do best possible possible in light of the Castro position .
 We of course have confidence in your ability to persuade Kuznetsov that our draft declaration is an ideal solution . We hope to persuade him to accept a draft declaration .
 The United States will continue to employ such other means of observation and verification as may be necessary . Cuba has refused to permit arrangements to assure the carrying out of the commitments .
 A note on the memorandum indicates that this was part of the President's weekend reading, November 25 .
 I talked to Jack McCloy about his conversation with General Eisenhower and have done the attached memorandum as a result . I talked about his conversations with general Eisenhower . I also have done a memorandum of his thoughts .
 I have sent him a copy and have asked him to make any amendment or correction so that the record will be accurate. I have also sent him an updated version of the record, he said .
 I have also sent a copy of the draft declaration to John McCone over CIA wires to his retreat in the Caribbean . I do not think he will raise objections, but I do think it is as well to have him signed on .
 The overtones of McCloy's report suggest that McCone may be in even closer touch with General Eisenhower than I, at least, have supposed .
 I talked to Mr McCloy about the language of the proposed declaration on Cuba . He agrees to stick with the wording which you approved yesterday on the first round .
 McCloy also told me that he had had an entirely satisfactory conversation with General Eisenhower . General Eisenhower seemed to share McCloy's view that we have a victory in hand and should now wind up promptly .
 General Eisenhower agreed that United States overflights and intelligence collection were a much better means of reassurance than some undefined UN inspection . He expressed the view that he had been worried that we might get tied on too hard to this kind of thing .
 Eisenhower said he would not only not criticize it, but would support it . He said that the declaration McCloy was planning to negotiate might meet with some criticism in the country .
 He suggested that Mr McCloy might want to check the proposed language with John McCone . But he later tried to do so but found that McCone was not available to discuss it .
 Mr McCloy told General Eisenhower that he had the feeling that McCone would not really be satisfied with anything short of an invasion of Cuba .
 General Eisenhower said that he himself had no such view, but thought McCone might have useful comments . Eisenhower said he thought that McCone had useful comments, but said he had no idea of his views .
 General Eisenhower did remark that a solution of this kind would still leave us with the Castro problem . But McCloy and McCloy agreed that nonetheless this seemed to be the best course available right now .
 General Eisenhower shared his view that a quick wind-up of the immediate negotiations was highly desirable . Mr McCloy reported that General Eisenhower agreed with him .
 McCloy paraphrased instructions, emphasizing desire for prompt windup and real efforts to present Kuznetsov with draft declaration carrying out spirit of October 27/28 letters, despite fact full compliance not possible due largely Cuban recalcitrance .
 Also suggested possibility avoiding long wrangle at UN by Presidential declaration if this seemed more compatible with their interests . Also suggested possible avoiding long . wrangle by Presidential declaration if it was more compatible .
 Nothing in document embodied matters that Chairman had brought up in correspondence with President such as stabilization and normalization of conditions in Caribbean . Kuznetsov immediately replied he was disappointed in it as it did not contain any suggestion of thinking .
 Kuznetsov referred to paragraphs in his protocol which are mainly rehash of Castro conditions . When McCloy asked him specifically what he had to say, he replied: "Yes, yes, yes"
 McCloy: Kuznetsov argued at some length but McCloy thought rather perfunctorily about this point . McCloy said: "I'm not sure what I think about it. It's a matter of principle."
 Kuznetsov seemed to seek some comments from us on willingness to discuss outstanding issues with Cubans . Kuznnetsov seems to want to talk to Cubans about their issues with Russia .
 McCloy replied that we always prepared discuss things with Cuba if they wanted . But no such conditions could be part of this transaction, he said .
 "Believe may hear again on this after Mikoyan arrives but believe it only matter of record. Believe may hear . Believe may . hear again in this week but believe may hear another on this . issue . Believe it may . come again on Tuesday .
 Kuznetsov objected to long statement of Soviet concessions sounding as if Soviets compelled to treat for ignoble peace . Next Kuznev objected to the long statement, saying it sounded like if Soviets were forced to treat .
 McCloy replied simply evidenced clear effort put things right with no inference of indignity involved . McCloy responded simply by saying: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 United States moved substantially from original position, particularly in abandoning quarantine before all conditions met . U.S. also abandoned quarantine before it was met .
 Kuznetsov's real objection was to overflight reservation, stating this simply put us back to where we had started from . He said that overflight reservations would simply put them back to what they had started .
 Referred to the same old insistence on-site inspection, which should now be discarded in light of their display of good faith . Referred to our same old . insistence on .site inspection , which should . now . be discarded, he said . referred to our . same old insist on-
 They had felt that if they agreed to take out their military units all further need for overflight would have passed . They felt if they had agreed they would have had no further need to overflight . But they had felt it would have been better if they took out the military units .
 This clause defeats Kuznetsov's hopes for rapid settlement and he did not know how to put his failure on this to his government . This clause is a clause that defeats his hopes for a rapid settlement .
 Overflights which pinpointed missile bases played large part in avoiding war . Airs were used to pinpoint missile bases .
 Inconceivable abandon them without thorough verification on ground though we prepared to seek more satisfactory method verification . Inconceiving abandonments is impossible, but we will not abandon them .
 "We intended reserve this precaution and wanted world know our commitments made in light of this fact, etc. etc. Simply stating in all honesty we intended . Simply stating, we intended to reserve this . precaution," the statement said .
 "Sure overflight paragraph considered unsatisfactory and objectionable and objectionable" "Number comments probably have number comments"
 Complained about references to unfulfilled obligations of Soviet Union . Complained that Soviet Union had failed to fulfill obligations .
 McCloy agreed to use phrase ""had not been capable of fulfillment"" in place of language of draft . McCloy said use phrase had not been able to fulfill its purpose in draft .
 Kuznetsov also stated withdrawal military units not part of original agreement . Kuznnetsov said withdrawal was part of agreement to withdraw military units from Russia .
 McCloy admitted this arguable but at any rate was to their as well as our interest to have it stated . McCloy said it was to be stated that it was in the interest of the public .
 Indicated this might not be point of issue if we agreed on other things and so long as they got military units out soon as possible . Indicated it might not not be issue with other things if they agreed to other things .
 Overflights however were essential and fundamental element of our position. We are committed to overflights over the next few years. We will continue to fly over the world.
 Kuznetsov kept coming back to this clause, pointing out its difficulties for them . The Russian president has been critical of the deal with the Kremlin .
 Suggested we accept what he called latest U Thant proposal which had some element reciprocity in it so Castro would have basis for giving us some on-site inspection . Suggested that he called U.S. President Barack Obama would have to give Castro Castro a basis for inspection .
 "It was to get on with declaration and move on to other important matters. Thing was to be done with declaration," says minister . "We're going to have to move on with other matters," he says .
 McCloy made usual reactions to Kuznetsov talk about U.S. not doing its share to Russia . McCloy also made usual comments about the United States not doing their share .
 Declaration not easy for U.S. local and hemispheric objections to thought United States providing sanctuary for Castro subversion of continent . Declaration not . easy for United States local and . hemispacial objections .
 We had made deal and prepared to live up to it and adopt all reasonable compromises necessary . We had already agreed to a deal with the French president and the French President . We are happy to accept a French President's visit to the French capital Paris .
 Conditions were clear and overflight paragraph though understandably difficult for them was necessary for us and essential for us to make it clear . Conditions were clearly clear and conditions were clear, overflight paragraphs were necessary for them to be clear .
 Kuznetsov almost pleaded with McCloy to take out this overflight clause, stating that we could made some reservation outside UN 72/ McCloy told him he had no authority to modify it . McCloy said he personally did not see how position adequately covered .
 Kuznetsov strongly requested United States give some further thought to this clause . U.S. should consider this clause further, he said .
 In essence he kept asking us to find a way to maintain our position without rubbing their noses in it . In essence, he said he wanted to maintain their position but not rub it in it.
 McCloy made clear United States not refusing to go to UN, but were merely suggesting some alternative . McCloy said U.S. not refusing go to United Nations, but was merely suggesting alternative .
 U.S. insisted United States would not sign any protocol or agreement such as Sovs had been in mind . Thought SYG would note declaration had been made, perhaps congratulating leaders involved for statesmanship in avoiding disaster, and no more .
 Kuznetsov seemed to feel no resolution of SC other than noting declarations necessary . Kuznnetsov said no resolution was reached .
 McCloy repeated possible advantages declaration outside SC but gathered Kuznetsov inclined toward UN record . McCloy said he was anxious confirm United States not refusing UN record and anxious confirm U.S. not refusing it .
 Kuznetsov repeated would in due course give us their draft and their comments on our draft . He said they would give us a draft of their draft .
 Kuznetsov sure overflight clause unsatisfactory. Then we discuss both together, then we discuss it together, but then discuss it again . Then discuss it all together. Then discuss the issue again, but discuss it further .
 Kuznetsov did not object specifically to use of word ""intend"" but Mendelevich picked it up . Mendevich picked up the line:   Kuznetov: "I don't like it"
 McCloy argued that constitutionally this best way for us handle it was the best way to handle it . Kuznetsov did not carry argument further . McCloy said that constitutionally, it was best way of dealing with the issue .
 McCloy believes it will come up again when we receive their full comments as will ""threat to peace and security"" phrase . McCloy says it is likely to be mentioned again in the comments .
 McCloy senses Sovs want declaration badly but overflight clause is bone in throat . McCloy: "Sovs want to declare declaration badly, but they want it badly" Overflight clause would be a key part of declaration .
 McCloy suggested that at appropriate time it might be well for Kuznetsov to see President, perhaps with Mikoyan . McCloy: At appropriate time, Kuznnetsov should see President Mikoyans .
 Kuznetsov did not know for how long a stay with McCloy was due back on Monday . Mikoyan due back in Russia on Monday but not how long his stay will be .
 Kuznetsov said he would very much appreciate opportunity of paying respects to President at appropriate time . He would like to pay respects to the Russian president .
 Message from the Director of Central Intelligence to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Washington, November 25, 1962 . Message from Director of CIA to President's special assistant for national security affairs .
 A covering note to Bundy indicates that this message was received from McCone, who was on vacation in the Caribbean, at 10:45m.m., November 25 . Bundy says he received the message at 10.45 a.m. on November 25.
 The proposed declaration meets condition for continuing surveillance of Cuba in the absence of U.N. inspection of Cuba .
 The total Castro problem should not disturb those who view Castro problem as most serious . Therefore feel such a declaration shouldn't disturb those . Those who see Castro problem most serious should not .
 If this declaration acceptable to USSR then door should be open to informal discussion with Kuznetsov as to future of SAM installations . SAM installations which we know are now under Soviet control .
 Large amounts of sophisticated ground equipment and missile launching boats. Same applies to large amounts of missile launch boats . Same equipment and launch boats can be used to launch missiles into space .
 OAS Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance would give us necessary latitude for action if Soviets replace Castro and his regime with their own people . Assume references to OAS treaty of . Reciprocatory Assistance would . give us . latitude for actions if Soviets replaced Castro and . his regime
 Sisco was drafted by Sisco, cleared by U Alexis Johnson and with Rusk in substance, and approved by Cleveland . U. Alexis Johnson was cleared by Johnson and cleared by Rusk .
 We understand further you preparing some textual changes for our consideration . We understand that you are preparing some changes for the consideration of this article .
 "We strongly believe that at your meeting with Mikoyan tonight you should continue to press Soviets on basis Deptel 1359/3/ and urtel 1941 . While concurring in your acceptance of phrase ""had not been capable of fulfillment,"" we strongly believe .
 Mikoyan has well deserved reputation of being hardest bargainer in Kremlin's stable of tough negotiators . He is known for his tough negotiating skills with the Kremlin .
 We should not consider any textual changes at least until Soviets have received a considered reaction from Moscow to our declaration, and we have been presented with draft of Soviet declaration . We have not considered any changes until Moscow has responded to our request .
 We assume that for bargaining purposes at least Soviets will submit draft declaration which includes some or all of Castro's demands . "We assume that . at least . some of the demands are unacceptable elements drawn from their protocol," writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Draft declaration is most we can do-and more than was originally promised-in light of Cuban refusal to permit UN verification or safeguards . We prepared for prompt wind-up in Security Council; Draft declaration most can do . Draft declaration was most we could do- and more than originally promised
 Soviet protocol categorically unacceptable; Question of discussing outstanding issues with Cuba is outside framework US-USSR transaction pursuant to KennedyKhrushchev correspondence . In absence of agreement on UN verification, UN verification of UN verification absolutely essential .
 We are concerned that he might include proposal he made to us on Caribbean security zone which he gave to Soviets, although it was unacceptable to us . We are also concerned that proposal made to them on Caribbean Security zone was not acceptable .
 Believes Yost should discuss this with Narasimhan with view making appropriate arrangements . Believe Yost . believe he should discuss it with Naranimhan . Believes he should make appropriate arrangements for the future .
 Drafted by Cleveland, copies sent to Thompson, Tyler, Martin, and Bundy Bundy . Bundy was drafted by the Cleveland Cavaliers .
 Mr McCloy called in at 2:15m. to summarize the results of the meeting which he and Ambassadors Stevenson and Yost had just completed with Mikoyan .
 These two motivations produced many references to the ""normalization"" of relations with Cuba . Cuba's relationship with the U.S. has been described as 'normalization'
 Mikoyan said our declaration was unsatisfactory, and represented a retreat from correspondences between the President and Khrushchev . Mikoyans said the declaration was 'unatisfactory' and 'unacceptable'
 He objected to making the non-invasion assurances an intention rather than an unequivocal commitment as it seemed to be in the President's letter of October 27th . He said the President seemed to make the assurances not an intention but an intention .
 Mikoyan also jumped on overflights and objected to U.S. subversive activities in Cuba . "Mikoyan" objected to United States subversive activities .
 Mikoyan seemed to attach a good deal of significance to Cuba being one of the signatories of a protocol signed by all three countries . He said the protocol should be signed by the three countries, including Cuba .
 He would like to have a resolution, not merely a collection of unilateral declarations, in the Security Council, he said . He said he would like a resolution not just a collection .
 Mikoyan's plea for Castro's conditions seemed more determined and comprehensive than in any of the Kuznetsov-McCloy discussions . Mikoyans' plea was more comprehensive than any other attempt to secure Castro's release .
 McCloy's guess is that this is still pro forma, but it was spelled out at great length and will undoubtedly be spelled out again for the President .
 On inspection, the emphasis was on reciprocity . Mikoyan lectured the American group on the importance of not being obstinate on this point .
 Mikoyan did not address himself to the United States gambit that inspection in the U.S. would require inspection in Soviet Union . This gambit was used again on this occasion .
 The Soviets mentioned Puerto Rico specifically, but the American negotiators said flatly that the inspection of any part of the United States was not in the cards . As a matter of reciprocity with Cuba alone, the inspection would not be allowed .
 Mikoyan said Cuba could not possibly accept a ""one-sided inspection" He said he had told Castro that his position was right on this point .
 Mikoyan said he did not expect us to withdraw right away but thought it would be reasonable for us to set a time at which we would begin to negotiate about withdrawal .
 Mikoyan pressed hard on the U.S. commitment to bring the other members of the Western Hemisphere into line . The United States is committed to bringing the other nations in line .
 The United States representative emphasized that it came with bad grace from the Soviets to put any emphasis on this point, since they hadn't even been able to bring into line the one Western Hemisphere country with whom they presumably had especially friendly relations with .
 Mr McCloy said he had read the Rio Pact and did not like it . He said he read it for the first time and didn't like it.
 The Americans said it was absolutely necessary to refer to the Rio Pact, since it was the basic document of Western Hemisphere security . "We owed it to our co-signers to make clear that we were not, in our arrangements with the Soviets, watering down our commitments"
 There was no detailed discussion of our draft declaration as such; Mikoyan said he would leave that to the negotiators . There were no detailed discussions of the draft declaration .
 The Americans did indicate that we were not wedded to the reference in the declaration to U Thant, but no other concessions were made . The Americans indicated that we did not agree to a reference to the declaration .
 McCloy's prediction is that Mikoyan will rehearse for the President the Soviet position on the non-invasion pledge .
 It is, indeed, not clear that Mikoyan expects to wrap this up personally, in which case they might look forward to a somewhat longer negotiation than we had assumed they wanted . It is not clear whether Mikoyans expects to end this personally .
 The Soviets should not take this moment to turn unreasonable just because they are having difficulty with the unreasonable Mr Castro . That there is a considerable record of conciliation and perform-ance on both sides, writes Andrew Keen .
 "We can't think of giving up overflights, which everybody in the Hemisphere now knows have played such an important role in maintaining the security of the Hemisphere," says President Obama . "Everybody in the hemisphere now knows" overflights have played a vital role in security, says Obama .
 A non-invasion statement is really the most that the President can constitutionally do, especially in the absence of verification and safeguards that were agreed to in the correspondence between the President and Khrushchev . The draft declaration is contained in our draft declaration .
 It would be useful on both sides to wind the matter up quickly and with maximum good will, without trying to make a bargain out of every word . That's what it would be if both sides wind up quickly .
 The Cuban problem will remain; if the Cubans want to normalize relations we are ready to talk with them about it, he says . The Cuban issue will remain, he adds .
 On the basis of today's conversation, it does not appear that there will be a quick wrap-up of the matter in the present negotiating framework .
 We will want to consider the possible alternative of sawing off the negotiations unilaterally if the Soviets stick to their intention to draw the Cubans into the windup arrangements .
 With benefit of hindsight, we have examined the timing of movements of various types of Soviet units to Cuba . The timing of these movements has been determined by the Soviet Union .
 We now believe that the primary purpose of the deployment of ground and surface-to-air units was to defend Cuba as a whole as a strategic base . We believe that . We now think that the . primary purpose was to . defend Cuba .
 "There was some apparent relationship in time between the deployment of these units and the MRBM and IRBM units," the authors say .
 MRBM and IRBM units at least had priority for protection . In other words, the IRBM and MRBM units had priority .
 It should be noted that our dates are approximate and that our timespan overall is quite short . It should also be said that the timespan is short .
 The Cuban operation began with the movement of SAM regiments and armored groups . The operation was launched in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 SAM battalions began with their departure from the USSR in midJuly and continued through August . The deployment began with the departure of their departure mid-July and ended mid August .
 The deployment of the armored groups began in late July and continued through the first weeks of September . The deployment began in July and began in September .
 The timing of arrival and the subsequent positioning of these units appear to have been phased with the closely following deployment of MRBM and IRBM units .
 SAM units and armored groups were first deployed to western Cuba in August . Construction of SAM sites began in early August, while armor arrived at its site about the middle of the month .
 The initial deployment of MRBM and IRBM units was also to western Cuba . Construction equipment arrived in midAugust for the IRBM sites, and in mid-September for the MRBM units .
 SAM and armored group deployment was to central Cuba, where the units were in place during the first week in September . The units were deployed in Cuba's central Cuba .
 The second group of MRBM and IRBM units also went to central Cuba . Equipment arrived at the sites in the last two weeks of September .
 A third group of SAM sites and an armored unit were established in eastern Cuba toward the end of September . The Cuban government has established a third SAM site in the country's capital .
 SAM units were deployed two to three weeks later to fill in gaps, thereby providing full coverage of the island . Finally, a fourth increment of SAM units was deployed to fill up gaps in coverage .
 Three of the four Soviet armored groups known to be in Cuba were positioned where they could give rapid ground protection to IRBM and MRBM sites . The Soviet forces were positioned in Cuba to protect IRBM sites, according to the report .
 The fourth SAM site was located at Holguin, an IL-28 base within the third group of SAM sites .
 The deliberately phased west-to-east sequence is consistent with the orderly military development of a base in the presence of the enemy . It should be noted that the deliberately phased east-west sequence is .
 The detected deployment of strategic missile units, however, was asymmetric . Russia says the detected deployment was "asymmetric"
 We have found no evidence to suggest that additional units were programmed, except for the missing IRBM site at Remedios . We are re-examining available evidence to see if any indications can be found of preliminary work for such installations .
 We are not able to determine whether the USSR intended to establish a submarine base . We have not been able to find out if the Soviet Union intended to set up a base .
 Four Soviet ""F"" class long range conventional submarines, which left Northern Fleet bases about 1 October, were in waters south of Bermuda by about 22 October . We do know that four Russian ""F" class long-range conventional submarines were in British waters .
 Construction begins on SAM sites at Matanzas, Havana, Mariel, Bahia Honda, Santa Lucia, San Julian, & La Coloma . Eastern Cuba: Date: 1-5 August . Western Cuba: Construction begins at SAM sites on 1-4 August .
 Construction begins on SAM sites at Sagua la Grande, Caibarien, & Sancti Spiritus . SAM sites will be built in the next phase of the SAM project .
 Soviet armored group arrives at Remedios. Date: 5-10 September . Western Cuba: Central Cuba: Soviet forces arrive .
 Upsurge of Soviet arms shipments begins arriving in eastern Cuban ports . Cuba has been hit by a wave of arms shipments from the Soviet Union .
 Construction of the remaining SAM sites began in late September or early October . The remaining sites were considered less vital to the protection of offensive missile bases in Cuba .
 President of Cuba lifted maritime quarantine of Cuba in response to Soviet agreement to remove IL-28s from Cuba within a period of about 30 days . We are entering a new phase of the Cuban situation, the President said in 1962 .
 The new phase has been highlighted by the termination of the 1/8 airborne alert . The return of B-47 aircraft to home bases, except for those in Florida, has been lifted . The authorization for commands to return to DEFCON 5 status except where specific situations dictate otherwise .
 In this new situation, we must recognize the need for highand low-level aerial reconnaissance over Cuba and over Soviet shipping . In order to ascertain whether the Soviet commitments are in fact fulfilled, the U.S. must recognize this need .
 At the same time, we must recognize the maintenance needs of our forces and the personnel hardships which high alert levels have imposed . We must recognize maintenance needs, and personnel hardships .
 High-Level: Alert posture which will permit an average of two U-2 flights per day in any 10-day period . Not more than a maximum of five U.2 flights on any one day . Overflight reconnaissance: High-level: Alert .
 Resume normal posture except for those units which may be needed to increase the air defense of the Southeastern U.S. on a permanent basis .
 CINCLANT and component headquarters will maintain the presently activated communications net . The communications net will be maintained by the component commanders of the CINCOMENTENT .
 CINCARLANT and CINCAFLANT headquarters elements can be returned to home stations except for reduced staffs maintained at Homestead . Headquarters elements will be returned home stations .
 The reaction times provided permit the return of all units, less those required for conduct of and combat support to reconnaissance missions, to home bases and resumption of normal training .
 War reserve materiel and selected support and control personnel will remain at Florida bases . The U.S. military will remain in Florida for the duration .
 All West Coast units less 3d LAAM Battalion will be returned to home stations at once . The move is part of a U.S. commitment to the President .
 The FMF Atlantic units which are presently part of the recent Guantanamo defense augmentation will remain as presently deployed with a goal of returning these units to home stations by 20 December 1962 . 5th MEB shipping should be utilized insofar as practicable in returning the 2d Battalion, 1st Marines
 All Army units can be returned to home stations except those required to meet the provisions of paragraph 5a above . The 159th Boat Battalion will remain temporarily at Fort Lauderdale pending completion of studies to determine a suitable location .
 One CVA Group will be retained temporarily in the Guantanamo sea area to support the defense of Guantanamo until 20 December 1962 . The Guantanamo Sea Area was established in 1962 .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff propose to review situation on a continuing basis in order to determine whether the criteria of paragraph 4, above, should be relaxed to permit a continuing phase-down to an approximately normal posture by about 20 December 1962 .
 Should continued phase-down be warranted, the remaining units can be returned to home stations, and dependents can begin to be sent home prior to Christmas .
 An immediate reduction should be effected to the readiness levels reflected in paragraph 4, above, proceeding at a rate commensurate with optimum administrative efficiency . A reduction of readiness levels should be made at an 'immediate'
 A reassessment of the situation should be conducted on a continuing basis in order to ascertain whether IL-28 withdrawal warrants continued relaxation to approximately normal readiness levels prior to Christmas .
 Your approval of the foregoing program is requested as a basis for further action by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Your approval is requested .
 Cuban refugees on the existence of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba . There followed a discussion of reports appearing in the press quoting Cuban refugees .
 President asked again how we can control such reports and how to deal with them publicly . The President asked for answers to the questions raised in Parliament .
 He asked that further efforts be made with news media to relate the refugee reports to the hard evidence available to us . He said further efforts should be made to relate reports to hard evidence .
 Mr Helms and Mr Salinger were to be asked to see if some system could be worked out to deal with this problem .
 The President commented that the Russians won't take out their ground forces until we give a no-invasion assurance . The President said that Russia will not take out its ground forces unless we give the Russians a 'no invasion assurance'
 It is better for us to have the Soviet units in Cuba than to give a formal no-invasion assurance . It was better to have them in Cuba rather than give an assurance of no invasion .
 Secretary Rusk said that the Soviet troops were there not to defend Cuba but to guard the Soviet strategic missiles . Rusk: "It was not only for defense but for the sake of the Cuban people."
 So long as the Soviet forces are there, we must be suspicious about what weapons are on the island and what weapons might be introduced . We must also be suspicious of what weapons may be introduced, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Secretary McNamara raised the question of overflights and recommended that in general low-level flights should only be flown when necessary to clarify high-level pictures revealing suspicious activity .
 He said that high-level photography was very good and there was no need at present to fly low for several days . He said there is no need for low-altitude photography to take place .
 There are five types of wicked looking Soviet defensive missiles . The presence in Cuba of probably one thousand of such missiles undoubtedly gave rise to some of the refugee reports .
 General Taylor and Secretary Rusk agreed that no low-level flights were necessary for a few days, but thereafter suspicious sites should be photographed at low level . The decision was made to photograph suspicious sites .
 Attorney General calls attention to reference in Khrushchev letter to the cave rumors . Attorney General called attention to the reference in the letter .
 The President asked the State Department to prepare a plan which would keep the heat on Castro . The plan would bolster other regimes in the Caribbean .
 A recommendation should also be made as to when the plan should be implemented . A recommendation is also needed to be made for when it is implemented .
 He recommended implementation of the plan be delayed as long as Soviet bombers and Soviet personnel are moving out of Cuba . The plan should be delayed until the Russians leave Cuba .
 The President called attention to the Knabel post mortem of the Cuban crisis and another by Daniels of Reader's Digest .
 He mentioned Senator Keating's line, i.e., he has details of Soviet offensive missiles being hidden in Cuba which the Government does not have . Mr. Keating said he has information he has about the missiles in Cuba .
 The importance of limiting discussion of the Cuban crisis was reemphasized by the President who reminded the group that press contacts should be strictly restricted to authorized White House sources .
 DCI emphasized in discussion that it was quite impossible to prove that offensive missiles had not been in caves, however all intelligence of every kind-photographic, agent reports, refugee reports, etc. -convinced DCI that this was most improbable .
 DCI and McNamara both commented on the various types of missiles remaining in Cuba and stated that without doubt some of them are in caves . Some of the missiles are believed to be in caves in the country .
 Rusk reported on the Mikoyan attitude as covered by the attached memo addressed to the Secretary of State/5/ . Rusk indicated that State felt that State . felt that . State felt . that State thought that State would take about the same position with the President in the afternoon
 McNamara requested Committee authorization of two high-level flights per day . McNamara asked Committee approval of two flights a day . Committee also approved authorization for two high level flights a week .
 Rusk argued for low-level, principally for political reasons and fear that failure to fly would give Castro an opportunity for propaganda . Rusk: "Failure to fly gives Castro a chance for propaganda"
 McNamara indicated that the COMOR paper passed by USIB on November 21st/6/ demanded excessive coverage in the light of conditions which have developed in the last week or ten days . McNamara said that the ComOR paper was passed by U.S.IB on Nov 21
 Bundy proposed to write a memorandum expressing the Committee's requirements for reconnaissance and then the DCI would use this as a directive to the COMOR Committee and USIB for guidance in developing a new reconnaissance program designed to meet Executive Committee needs . Bundy proposed the memorandum to be written by Bundy and
 DCI suggested to General Carter that CIA study this problem and develop a draft of an Executive Committee Directive and a reconnaissance program which would meet the directive and submit both to me .
 State indicated that such papers had been prepared and would be put in form for submission to the Executive Committee . State indicated it would be prepared to submit such papers to the committee .
 The President brought up the question of publicity and various articles which are being written on the Cuban episode, referring to an article in Reader's Digest .
 Daniels is following the Keating line that considerable volume of information was in the hands of the Administration prior to October 22nd and that the Administration refused to accept positive information on offensive missiles .
 There followed a discussion of the over-flight policies in Cuba . An emphatic denial was expressed by various members of the Executive Committee that any flight requested by CIA or NRO during September had been denied .
 CIA and COMOR Committee to program September flights so that planes would not be engaged by operational SAM sites . This caused September flights to avoid being engaged by SAM sites.
 McCone stated that this was, in his opinion, an error as those responsible for planning reconnaissance should have insisted upon over-flying areas protected by SAMs in order to determine what was happening .
 He stated this was not done during September and, indeed, was not agreed upon until after a rather heated discussion at Special Group meeting on October 4th which was followed by a further meeting on Oct 9th, at which time the October 14th flight was authorized .
 DCI had some trouble defending September program before the Killian Board . Clark Clifford had brought out the difficulty of explaining the lapse of 40 days in programming an aerial photography .
 It was decided that all press contact with feature writers should be confined to Bundy and Attorney General .
 DCI felt future activity should be restricted to intelligence gathering but this should be carried on in a most intense manner . CIA was prepared to present an operational plan which would involve refugee interrogation at Opa Laka, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]
 It was decided that Mr Helms should present this program at the earliest moment and DCI was asked to call the meeting . DCI called the meeting to discuss the program .
 DCI also stated that the form of Mongoose organization should be modified and this was agreed . This was agreed, but no new organization form was discussed . DCI said that this was not the first meeting of the Mongoose board .
 Department of State, S/S Presidential Memoranda of Conversations: Lot 66 D 149. D 149 . Secretary of State Hillary Clinton made a speech at the White House in 2009 .
 Drafted by Edmund S Glenn of Language Services and approved by the White House on December 13 . White House approved by Language Services .
 State prepared a briefing paper with seven attachments for the President in anticipation of this conversation . The Department of State prepared the President's meeting .
 President asked Anastas I Mikoyan how he had enjoyed his stay in Cuba . After a few brief remarks about lung cancer, the President asked him how he'd enjoyed his visit .
 There is also an older brother who was at one time against the Cuban revolution but now approves of it . He was once against the revolution, but now supports it .
 He told his brother Fidel that if he had known how history would develop he would have joined the revolutionary cause sooner . As a matter of fact, he told Fidel that he told him he would join the revolution sooner .
 Their mother has retained one-half of her holdings to pursue the family tradition . But she has given up the other half of her fortune .
 Fidel Castro was not yet a Marxist and the flag under which he waged his revolution was that of liberalism . At the time of the first visit of Mr Mikoyan, Fidel Castro had not yet been Marxist .
 He became a Marxist more recently under the influence of the Cuban people, he said . He said: 'I became Marxist after I was born in Cuba'
 Raoul Castro, Che Guevara, and the eldest Castro brother /l/ were Marxists already before the revolution . Raoul . Castro was born in 1961 .
 Fidel Castro was moved towards Marxism by the play of the revolution itself . Not so so Fidel, who was moved to Marxism . Fidel Castro's son Fidel was born in Cuba and died in 1961 .
 Castro is doing a lot personally to mechanize agriculture and he is personally known by most of the farmers . Castro says he wants to help farmers mechanize their agriculture .
 He also saw a national cattle breeding farm with 12,000 cattle and 65 pure-bred bulls . The farm also has a national breeding farm of 12,500 cattle .
 Within five years this farm expects to increase the cattle herd to 70,000 cattle . The farm plans to grow the herd to 80,000 cows in five years .
 Mr Mikoyan also saw rural schools; one has 1,000 students fully supported by the government . He expects within three years to increase the number of students to 20,000 .
 There are in Cuba 70,000 students fully supported by the government . The enthusiasm of Cuban youth is impressive, says the Cuban government .
 The mansions of capitalists who have left Cubawhich the Cuban Government permits them to do-have been made into youth hostels .
 During the recent events the militia has been mobilized though on an entirely voluntary basis . The militia was mobilized by members of the public on a voluntary basis during the events in Ukraine .
 The places of the men on the jobs were taken by the women who managed to fulfill their work quotas in all cases . The women managed to meet their quotas in order to get their jobs .
 President said now he understood why Mr Mikoyan had liked his travels in Cuba . The President said he now understood why he had liked visiting the island .
 Mikoyan said that indeed his visit to Cuba reminded him of his youth when he also was working for the cause of the revolution . He also said that he also worked for the Cuban revolution .
 He also made speeches at several universities and felt that the students greatly distrusted the U.S. He also spoke at universities and said he felt that students greatly disliked the United States .
 It is expected that the exchange of correspondence between Chairman Khrushchev and President is to be registered with the United Nations . It is possible that the fears of the young Cubans will be calmed by such a recording of this memorable correspondence .
 The President said that the relations between the United States and Cuba are bad . The President also said that relations between Cuba and the U.S. are bad. The relationship between the two countries is bad.
 What Mr Mikoyan said about Cuban internal developments may be quite interesting, however, this is not the part of Cuban events which is of primary concern to us .
 What we are concerned with is the use of Cuba as a springboard for subversion, says CNN's John Sutter . Castro's own efforts in that direction were in the direction, he says . Sutter: "What we're concerned about is ... subversion"
 The U.S. could have invaded Cuba any number of times beginning with April 1960 but did not do so . Yet this is hardly necessary since it is obvious that the United States could've invaded Cuba many times .
 President trusted official statements by the Soviet Union, continued to affirm that there was no danger to the United States from an arms build-up in Cuba .
 It is difficult for the President to say at the present moment that the situation with Cuba is in any way satisfactory . It is not known what will happen next month or what the Chinese will do, he says .
 Maybe the Chinese Communists will start an arms build-up in Cuba in January, or maybe the Soviet Union itself will start again such a build up . The Chinese Communist Party may have started an arms-building program in Cuba .
 No one could blame a certain feeling of mistrust on the part of the U.S. after what had happened . After all, what the Soviets did once they could do again and what they did again . After what happened, the Soviets were able to do again, and no one could
 Mr Mikoyan stated that what the President had said presents an extremely serious matter . He said the President's comments present a serious issue .
 The United States would be told about the arms build-up, in every detail, by the Soviet Union at an appropriate moment . It had, in fact, been decided as early as June, by Chairman Khrushchev .
 The United States does not inform the Soviet Union of its military moves . The Soviet Union was not obligated to do this since after all, the U.S. doesn't inform them .
 The decision was made to inform the United States after the elections so as to avoid influencing in any way the political campaign in the U.S. The decision had been made to .
 Even if a disclosure had not taken place the Soviet Union would have brought the entire build-up to the attention of the U.S. on November 8th or 10th, immediately after the elections .
 The President said that the problem was not due to the fact that the Soviet Union did not make a statement to the United States about the arms build-up- as it obviously has the right to proceed with any such measures without announcing them to the U.S. The Soviet Union had
 Mr Mikoyan said that obviously the two speakers had a different interpretation of the recent events . Mr Moyoyan: Obviously the two . speakers had different interpretations of recent events.
 The purpose of the arms build-up in Cuba was defensive and not offensive, the Cuban government says . The fact remains that the purpose was to protect the Cuban people, not to attack, the president says .
 They were sent there to defend the island against invasion and for no other purpose . The islanders were sent to defend themselves against invasion .
 President spoke in exchange with Chairman Khrushchev of a United States pledge of non-invasion . On the other hand, the President had spoken of a U.S. pledge of not invasion .
 The United States is making this pledge conditional on the conduct of Cuba it is departing from its previous position . Now, when the U.S. is making the pledge conditional, it's departing from previous position, he says . The U.N. is leaving Cuba, he adds .
 Mr Mikoyan said he was reminded of conversations he had with President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles .
 Secretary Dulles had replied that he did not think that the Government of the Soviet Union in power at that time wanted to attack . Dulles said he didn't think that any of the Soviets in power in power would want to attack.
 Secretary Dulles asked Mikoyan whether he thought the U.S. wanted to attack the Soviet Union . Dulles then asked Mr Moyan if he thought that the United States wanted to go on the attack . The Soviet Union was defeated in the war of the Cold War in
 Mr Mikoyan replied that he did not think so but that he had some doubts in the matter . He said he had doubts about the possibility of the vote .
 The United States says the Soviet tried to establish an offensive base in Cuba . The U.S. says the Soviets tried to set up a base in the Cuban territory .
 President Mikoyan asked whether the President thinks that the Soviet Union wishes to attack the U.S. President. He said the President would like to ask once more .
 There were no indications whatsoever at the time when, in June, Mr Mikoyan said a decision had been taken by the Soviet Union, that any aggressive moves by the U.S. were contemplated .
 President would have been glad to say then as he says now that no invasion of Cuba is intended . Had the question been addressed to the President by Chairman Khrushchev at that time, the President .
 Mr Mikoyan said that a statement about the build-up would have been made in November .
 "The entire episode cannot be interpreted in any other way as a major attack against the present Administration and the Government of the United States," says President Obama .
 The question is now how the lack of understanding between the two governments can be transformed into mutual understanding . The two governments should be able to work together to overcome the problem .
 The two countries have come very close to the edge of the abyss in recent years . Already in the recent past in the question of Laos and then again in that of Cuba, the two nations have come close to .
 Mikoyan said that he would first speak about the President's concluding remarks .
 President says he fully agrees that agreement is necessary for peace and that lack of agreement between the two great Powers may lead to disaster .
 As to the President's first remarks, he must emphasize that the Soviet move into Cuba had for a purpose only defense and deterrence, he says .
 The Soviet Union acted in order to facilitate an agreement leading to peace . The USSR acted to facilitate a peace agreement .
 Counter-revolutionary gangs were being trained in camps in the United States and on the territories of other countries of the Western Hemisphere allied with the U.S. After all, it is well known that gangs are being trained .
 Nixon spoke in favor of an invasion of Cuba, so did Pentagon generals . Nixon spoke out against the invasion, but Pentagon generals opposed it .
 Under such circumstances, there was good reason to prepare deterrents and defense . The U.S. has a long history of defending itself against terrorism in the past .
 It is quite clear that such was the purpose of the Soviet Union, which was going to inform the United States that what it intended through the build-up in Cuba was the defense of that island and not an aggression against the U.S.
 The Soviet Union has more than enough long-range missiles emplaced on its own territory to need anything else . After all, the Soviet Union is more than ready to defend itself from Russia .
 The missiles remained in the hands of the Soviet military and could not have been used without signal authorization from Moscow . Moreover, these missiles were kept in Soviet hands and were not used without permission from Moscow.
 Soviet legislation makes it illegal to place nuclear or thermonuclear weapons under non-Soviet control, says Mikoyan .
 Mikoyan also feels that the threat of war is not Cuba but the relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . He says misunderstandings and threats must be eliminated from those relations .
 Mr Mikoyan remembers a conversation with Secretary Cordell Hull, back in 1936 . He says Cordell was a very wise man, and that he spoke to him about the war .
 Hull had said that German fascism and Japanese militarism were preparing for war . At that time, Secretary Hull said that Germany and Japan were preparing to war . Hull died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 Only the United States and the Soviet Union were in a position to defend peace . Only the U.S. and Soviet Union could defend peace, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Both countries have terrible weapons and therefore both have an overwhelming responsibility before the entire world . "Both countries have a terrible responsibility," says CNN's John Sutter .
 An understanding and agreement between Chairman Khrushchev and President Kennedy must be obtained in order to prevent war . An agreement must be reached to prevent a war, says President Kennedy .
 The President said that he did not know what exactly Mr Nixon had said .
 Mr Mikoyan was not in a policy making position during the Nixon administration, he says . What is clear is that during the period to which he alluded Mr Nixon was not a policy maker, he adds .
 Pentagon generals are under the control of the Administration and there certainly had been no statements on their part calling for aggression . As for Pentagon generals, there were no calls for aggression, the Pentagon says .
 Once again, if the U.S. had wanted to invade Cuba it could have done so much earlier . The United States could have invaded Cuba earlier, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There were no U.S. forces at the time of the attempt at landing made by Cuban patriots .
 There were no statements by any people in positions of responsibility in the U.S. which might have led to the belief that an invasion was being contemplated .
 After all, the Soviet Government does not like the present Government of Albania . The Soviet Government did not want the Albanian government .
 This does not mean that the Soviet Union will invade Albania, as in such a case as well as in that of a hypothetical invasion of Cuba, international consequences could be very grave . In such an invasion of Albania, the international consequences of such a Soviet invasion could be grave .
 "What he is interested in, once again, is the attitude of the Soviet Government," he says . "Once again, he's interested in ... what he is ... interested in," he adds .
 The President hopes that the Soviet Government will understand that its main duty should be the defense of the interests of the Soviet Union, not pushing the world from one small crisis .
 Chairman Khrushchev shared the President's opinion that an understanding between the two governments is necessary for peace . Mr Mikoyan said that Chairman Khruschev shared his opinion that the understanding was necessary .
 Much has been done in that direction, but unfortunately, no final situation has yet achieved . Much was done in the direction of the project, but no final solution has yet been achieved .
 Once the Cuban crisis is resolved, the next steps might well be a non-aggression pact between the Warsaw Pact organization and NATO . NATO, the cessation of nuclear tests, disarmament, and Berlin . Berlin .
 The Cuban crisis has been largely resolved, President Obama has noted . The President himself has noted that the fact that the Cuban crisis is largely resolved proves the necessity of talks and negotiations .
 The exchange of correspondence between the two heads of state provides a basis for such a solution . It is hoped the two countries will be able to reach an agreement .
 A good way to carry it out would be to place this exchange of correspondence within an agreed protocol . A good idea to carry out is to place it within a protocol .
 Such a draft protocol, which would also include the position of the Cuban Government, was drafted by the Soviets . The draft protocol was drafted in the Soviet Union .
 President asked whether Mikoyan meant an approval by the Security Council or a recording of the declarations with the Secretary General . The President also asked whether he meant a Security Council recording .
 U.S. representative in the Security Council cannot be expected to vote in favor of Mr Castro's declaration . After all, the United States cannot expect to vote for Mr Castro .
 Mr Mikoyan said that after all, the Cuban question is on the agenda of the United Nations and, therefore, must be discussed there . The Cuban question should be discussed at the U.N.
 The lack of an agreement would amount to keeping alive an international dispute . The latter, however, cannot be avoided, and the lack of a deal would be keeping alive the dispute .
 As for such points which are not agreed, they might be the object of separate statements . As for those points which may not be agreed, there might be separate statements, says the PM .
 The President said that the Cuban Government must be left out of the negotiations . The Cuban government must be kept out of negotiations .
 The problem now may be whether there would be agreement on one or two separate declarations . The problem is whether there is agreement on separate declarations, say experts .
 Mr Mikoyan said that there should be two declarations, one by each Government, however, that the texts should be agreed upon by the two Governments .
 The Security Council could then approve those two declarations and could call on the two Governments to resolve the remaining points of difference . Security Council then could call upon the two governments to resolve any remaining differences .
 What is necessary is a preliminary agreement by the two Governments on the texts of two declarations . What is needed is an agreement on the text of two declaration declarations .
 Mikoyan said that the President guessed correctly the opinion of the Soviet Government . Mr Mikoyans said that he guessed correctly .
 The President said that Soviet missiles have been removed from Cuba and that he expects that Soviet bombers will likewise be taken out of Cuba . The President also said he expects the Soviet bombers to likewise be removed from the country .
 He also hopes that the same thing will apply to the other military units and weapons covered by his correspondence with Chairman Khrushchev .
 Mr Mikoyan said what Mr Khrushchev has promised to do has either been done or is being done . He said that what he had promised was either done or was not done .
 No other weapons, however, beyond those covered by the correspondence, will be removed from the site .
 Agreement covers missiles, bombers, and in due course, other units destined to service or guard the strategic offensive weapons . President said that the Agreement covered missiles and bombers .
 There is, of course, in Cuba, other military materiel about which, however, the President was not speaking about .
 Mikoyan said the correspondence between the two heads of State is clear on that point .
 The United States draft declaration also contains a condition which applies to its non-invasion pledge . Unfortunately the U.S. draft declaration does not include an invasion pledge .
 This conditional clause gives to the United States the right to judge the actions of another government and invade Cuba as it pleases . The U.S. has the power to invade Cuba and judge its actions .
 The President said that it is Mr Castro who is asking for guarantees and not the U.S. President Obama said it is not the United States . Obama said Castro asked for guarantees from Castro, not the US, in order to get guarantees .
 Castro's demand that the agreement cut both ways is reasonable and in agreement with international law is reasonable . Castro: "It's not just about cutting both ways, it's about cutting the deal both ways. It's a matter of principle"
 President Obama's demands for the liquidation of an economic blockade and the abstention from piratical acts are reasonable, he writes .
 His wish for normalization of relations between the two countries is his own . So is his wish to normalize relations with the U.S.
 Mr Castro does not ask for the immediate elimination of the Base but only for the opening of negotiations to determine the time when it would be surrendered . Even there, however, he does not want the Base to be eliminated .
 Such actions are unimportant and only the sporadic exploits of publicity seekers. Such actions should not be taken seriously by the public, says the author .
 Any official written document must be so drafted as to recognize the international responsibilities of the U.S. Any official document, however, must be drafted to recognize that .
 "We can neither forget or disregard the fact that Castro is not a friend of this country. After all, we can neither forgotten or disregard . After all of us, we are not a good friend of the country. We can't forget the fact he is not our friend," says
 The only thing that can be done is to make U.S. surveillance as unobtrusive as possible . "The only thing I can do is make the U.K. surveillance of the United States less intrusive"
 President showed President Mikoyan a press clipping containing a statement that there are Soviet missiles hidden in Cuban caves . The President showed the clip to the President .
 Mr Mikoyan reiterated that the agreement between the two Chiefs of State in regard to weapons has been reached .
 U.S. press and attitude of United States military constitute an obstacle to resolution of the crisis, says CNN.com.com . However, articles in the United States press and the attitude of the . United States . constitute an . obstacle to the final resolution of . the crisis .
 The United States is stating that it intends to continue overflights of Cuban territory . Now the U.S. says it will continue its overflights to Cuba .
 The United States has aerial cameras which make it possible to photograph Cuba from outside Cuban airspace . After all, the U.S. has aerial .
 The U.S. insists on violating Cuban airspace . The Cuban government says it will not allow it to violate Cuban airspace again .
 The President said that there are no such cameras . The angle at which photographs can be taken from outside the three-mile limit makes the photographs untrustworthy .
 The U.S. endeavors to keep overflights inconspicuous by carrying them out at high altitude and avoiding low altitude flights . The United States has overflights at high altitudes and avoids low altitude .
 Castro is right when he says that he will have to deal with such overflights by his own means . Castro says he will be forced to use his own way of dealing with the overflights .
 The President said that this is not a question of great concern to the United States. President Obama said it was not a great concern for the country .
 Mr Mikoyan stated that such overflights violate the principles of the U.N. and Cuban sovereignty .
 Any country would protest against a state of affairs which hurts the legitimate pride and self-esteem of the Cubans, says CNN.com.com . "Any country would ... protest," says CNN's John Sutter .
 He only insists that such a control apply to all the parties concerned and not be strictly onesided . He insists such control should apply to the parties involved .
 "What makes the situation more difficult is the insistence of the United States to place a statement on this matter in the declaration," says CNN's John Defterios . The U.S. has not responded to the request for a statement .
 The declaration that a non-invasion pledge is conditional on Cuba's abstention from subversive activities cannot be reconciled with international law as it gives to the United States the right to determine by itself whether an invasion should take place . Furthermore, the statement in the declaration is . cannot be
 If there are any measures to be taken for the control of the subversion, they should apply equally to Cuba, to the other Caribbean nations and to the United States . The U.S. should also take measures to control subversion in Cuba, the author says .
 The President quoted the text of the proposed draft stating that provided no nuclear weapons or weapons systems capable of offensive use are present in or reintroduced into Cuba, the U.S. declares that it will not invade Cuba or support an invasion of Cuba .
 Mr Mikoyan said that it might not be impossible to express the fact that no nuclear weapons should be emplaced in Cuba .
 Draft says Cuba might ""support" the invasion of other countries . In this draft it is said that Cuba might 'support' the invasion . Cuba might "support" other countries.
 The President said that he understands Mr Mikoyan's concern on the latter point . The President also said he understands his concern about the issue .
 If nothing were said beyond the point of the exclusion of offensive missiles and nuclear weapons from Cuba, that would mean that Castro would be free to do anything else he chose to do, and that the U.S. would be prevented from reacting against it . The United States would not be
 The U.S. does not intend to invade Cuba, but the problem is that of avoiding giving Castro a blank check for a number of actions against which retaliation would be prevented by the declaration .
 If Castro wants peace, that's fine, because that's what the U.S. wants and what the United States is saying . Castro is fine, but that's not what Castro wants, he says . Castro has a right to peace, Obama says .
 Mr Mikoyan said that the United States declaration means that the U.S. intends to control the actions of Cuba .
 His position is fully in agreement with the spirit of the exchange of letters between the two Chiefs of State . He said: "His position is ... fully in . agreement with . the spirit"
 The President said that Castro is an enemy of the United States and that the U.S. is going to terminate its blockade only under certain conditions . On the contrary, the President said the President .
 The United States is moving back from the position agreed upon in the exchange of correspondence . This means that the U.S. is moving away from the agreement agreed upon . This is the first time the United States has moved back from its position .
 The U.S. is to be free to continue its anti-Cuban policies but that Castro would be prevented from doing anything without the permission of the United States . The United States would be able to continue to do so, but Castro would not be allowed to do anything without permission
 Multilateral control can be accepted, but a situation according to which one government would be in a position to judge the actions of another government is not acceptable . Multilateral controls are not acceptable in the world, according to the EU .
 The fact that the United States has responsibilities under the Rio Treaty does not need to be included, as this is of no concern to the Soviet Union . Furthermore, as the U.S. and its Allies have pushed Cuba out of the Rio treaty organization, this is not of any concern
 President said Mikoyan had accused the United States of retreating from the position expressed in the exchange of correspondence . The President said that Mr Mikoyans accused the U.S. of retreating .
 It is on the contrary, the Soviet Union which is moving back from its position, as the correspondence specified inspection by the United Nations was not allowed . The Soviet Union is now saying that no such inspection was allowed .
 Mr Mikoyan had said that the declaration should not contain any suggestion that one government might judge the actions of another .
 The hands of the U.S. would be tied even while the policy of the Soviet Union would be free to change . However, some safeguards are necessary since otherwise the . hands of . the United States would not be able to change its policy .
 Mr Mikoyan suggests that the United States as well as Cuba submit to control . He says no control would be exercised over the territory of the Soviet Union .
 If the Soviet Union prefers it, however, it may be possible to make the United States intent known in a way which would be quite clear though not imply the same legal complications .
 If an official declaration is called for it must include references to all aspects of the problem . An official declaration must also include reference to all of the aspects of that problem .
 The precise language of the precise language could be worked out between Messrs. Messrsrs. and Mrs. Obama . Thus there is a choice between either an official declaration or a declaration .
 McCloy, Stevenson and Kuznetsov, or a simply verbal statement by the President at a press conference . McCloy and Stevenson have been involved in the Ukraine crisis since March .
 If the first alternate is chosen it would have to contain references to the Rio Treaty, of which the United States continues to be a member, and a clause referring to the possibility of the U.S. satisfying itself that Cuba and the Soviet Union are respecting their side of the bargain .
 The other solution might be a simple statement that the U.S. does not intend to invade Cuba, with the hope that Castro will not undertake any provocative action and that the Soviet Union does not reintroduce a military threat .
 If Mr Castro wishes to carry on the activities described by Mr Mikoyan, well and fine, well, fine . Mr Castro wants to continue the education of Cuban children and the mechanization of Cuban agriculture, he says .
 Mr Mikoyan asked if the President's statement at a press conference would be instead of or in addition to the formal declarations .
 The President said that if no agreement can be reached on formal declarations, then it might be possible for him to clarify the position of the United States by means of a statement .
 President Obama has said that the United States does not intend to invade Cuba . The President also said the same applies to the other nations of the Western Hemisphere .
 The President also expressed part of what he thinks about Mr Castro, but this is not the same thing as an invasion . Mr Castro is not an invasion, says the President .
 "A lot of progress was accomplished on the most difficult and important elements of the crisis," says President Obama . "The most important elements were accomplished on this issue," says Obama .
 Let us hope that progress will be possible also on its remaining formal aspect through agreed declarations registered with the U.N. We hope for progress on the remaining formal aspects .
 If not, the President is ready to make an adequate statement at a press conference, he says . "If not, he will make a sufficient statement," he says. "I'm ready to ... make a statement"
 Either agreed statements registered with the U.N. or a unilateral statement by the President at his press conference . Either agreed statement registered with United Nations or by unilateral statement .
 Mr Khrushchev, of course, can also wish to make a statement in either case . The former leader of the Soviet Union can also make a political statement .
 The President wants to cool off a burning situation, while keeping the fire alive, Mikoyan says . The Soviet Government wants to put the fire out for good before passing on to other questions .
 President said the interpretations of the two participants in the conversation obviously differ . The President said that the interpretation of the conversations obviously differ.
 Mr Mikoyan suggested that if agreement could be obtained on a part of the items to be included in the declarations, such declarations could be registered with the United Nations .
 Any points on which there would be no agreement would then be the object of the statements outside of the United Nations . The statements would be made outside of United Nations.
 What should be included in declarations is what was included in the exchange of correspondence . The declarations should be based on the correspondence between the two parties .
 The President said that he wished to make it quite clear for the record that the United States is not moving back from any position agreed to in the correspondence . President Obama said that the U.S. will not move back .
 The removal of missiles and other strategic weapons and military units would proceed under the control of the United Nations . The President quoted from the exchange of correspondence to the effect that the removal of missile missiles would proceed .
 If the Soviet Union can manage to abide by the exchange of correspondence to the letter, then the U.S. will abide by that exchange . The United States will abide with that exchange, the author says .
 If not, the President can only act in the best way the situation permits, he will only act if necessary . The situation requires the President to act if not, he says .
 Mr Mikoyan stated that the Soviet Union fully abides by the exchange of correspondence . The Soviet Union is fully abided by the correspondence .
 The permission of the government on the soil of which the missiles were placed still remained necessary, and this is something over which the Soviet Union has no control . The permission for the missiles was still necessary, according to the Russian government .
 At the point where the entire deal is about to be finalized, the U.S. refuses to move forward but takes a step backwards . The United States is refusing to take a step back .
 President said nothing was said in the correspondence about any formal declarations . The President said that nothing was discussed in the letter .
 The only thing mentioned was an affirmation of U.S. intent in regard to the question of a hypothetical invasion of Cuba . "Only thing mentioned" was the affirmation of United States intent in . regard to question of the . question of hypothetical invasion .
 This is something which the United States continues to be ready to do, and as a matter of fact, which it has done and is doing again, says President Obama . The U.S. is ready to take on the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 The draft declaration is not to the liking of the Soviet Government . As for the draft declaration, it seems that the U.S. draft declaration .
 Mr Mikoyan said that Castro has stated that his intentions are peaceful . Castro said to have stated his intentions were peaceful .
 Mr Mikoyan said that this pledge of non-invasion is made subject to a condition placed unilaterally on Cuba and to be enforced unilaterally by the United States .
 The President said that we cannot be expected to let this assurance stand if someday missiles or other similar weapons are introduced by Communist China, or once more by the Soviet Union .
 Mr Mikoyan said that the pledge of non-invasion should be stated in the terms in which it appears in the correspondence .
 The President would like to suggest to leave questions of precise drafting to Messrs. Mr. Johnson and Mrs. Johnson .
 McCloy, Stevenson and Kuznetsov say declaration must include references to obligations of U.S. under Rio Treaty . In absence of United Nations inspection, they must refer to alternative system of guarantee and control .
 The United States is preparing to consider any draft which the Soviet Union might submit and which would satisfy those points . The U.S. is also considering a draft that would satisfy that points .
 The draft protocol contained all the necessary points but was not accepted by the United States . Mr Mikoyan said the draft protocol was approved by the Soviet Union .
 The United States does not intend to invade Cuba and never intended to invade it . The U.S. has never been to Cuba, the president says .
 The only threatening situation was the one created by the introduction of Soviet missiles into Cuba . The only threat to Cuba was created by Soviet missiles in Cuba, he says .
 If not, a statement on the part of the President may be a step along the way .
 Mikoyan said he fully agreed with the spirit of the President's statement . Mr Mikoyans said that he agreed with President's words .
 He is concerned with the proposal to replace action within the U.N. by a simple statement at a press conference .
 In fact, there is no reason to keep it alive as the carrying out of its obligations by the Soviet Union has been verified, says Simon Tisdall . "There are no reasons for keeping it alive," he says .
 The President said that he had made a statement to that effect already at the preceding week's press conference . President said he had already made a similar statement .
 At the present moment, the only question is that of formal documents . At the moment, only question that remains is the issue of formal papers .
 The Soviet Government has now come up with a proposal of a formal protocol to be signed with Cuba . The proposal has been proposed by Soviet Government .
 A statement at a press conference would be a simple manner of resolving the question . A statement is a simple way to resolve the question. A statement would be simple, says CNN.com .
 An official document signed by all the parties induces legal complexities . It is not the first time a legal document has been signed by the parties .
 Mikoyan said that he liked what the President said at his last press conference . Chairman Khrushchev also liked what he had said, so did Chairman Khruschev .
 Mr Mikoyan said he would be able to remain longer if this could help to discuss these questions more fully and obtain a greater degree of agreement .
 Department of State, S/S Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149 . The State Dept. Dept. of State says the document is a collection of memoranda documents .
 To return to the question of Cuba, it is possible that a solution as to form may be found provided there is no difference as to substance . Anastas I Mikoyan, First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR Ambassador Anatoliy F Dobrynin,
 "Every six months another crisis seems to arise. What concerns him is that every six months seems to be another crisis," he says . He says .
 President said it is strange that there are two countries such as the Soviet Union and the United States which are powerful and wealthy, and which have no direct conflicts of interest to separate them .
 In spite of that, they find themselves in a state bordering on conflict . "In spite of this, they still have a state of conflict," says President Obama .
 At the same time many other parts of the world are facing problems of hunger and underdevelopment . The world's hunger crisis is the result of under-development .
 It would be good if the Soviet Union were to devote its effort to the pursuit of its own interests . The U.S. should devote its efforts to the same way in which the United States devotes its efforts, writes Robert Greene .
 It is not the Soviet Union which was the cause of the Cuban revolution, he says . The Soviet Union knew much less about this revolution than did the U.S. He says .
 The President said he did not accuse the Soviet Union of having fomented the Cuban revolution . President said that he didn't accuse the Soviets of fomenting the revolution .
 Mr Mikoyan said that there will be revolutions regardless of what either the Soviet Union or the United States do .
 The President said that this may be true, but that it was still important for the two countries to understand each other better .
 Mr Mikoyan said that there are United States missiles in Turkey very close to the Soviet Union . He added that the missiles are located in Turkey .
 Soviet citizens may sleep with tranquility, as long as the missiles in question are in U.S. hands . In spite of that, he feels that Soviet citizens can sleep with . tranquility .
 The President said that he has always been of the opinion that American missile bases such as those in Turkey do not make sense . The President also said he has also said that U.S. missile bases in Turkey make no sense .
 This is why the emplacing of Soviet missiles in Cuba has come as such a shock . This is despite the fact that the Soviet missiles have been placed in Cuba .
 This is a type of misjudgment which neither they nor the world can afford . Neither the world nor the country can afford to let it slip up . This is not the first time they have made such a mistake .
 Mr Mikoyan said that he liked the spirit of what the President just said . He said he liked what he said .
 It would be better perhaps if-as in the case of Laos-the Soviet Union would not always insist that it is fulfilling its obligations . The Soviet Union has not always always insisted that it has fulfilled its obligations.
 It would be better if the U.S. were ready to admit its shortcomings as the United States is ready to work harder to correct them . The U.N. should admit its own shortcomings, and work harder, to correct it .
 President said that in doing so it must be remembered that the two countries have very few genuinely divergent interests, and yet there are many conflicts between them . The President said in doing .
 The source text is a copy of a copy from Moscow and contains no drafting information . It is not the first draft of this article's article .
 Mikoyan said Soviet government, anxious terminate Cuban matter, believes draft protocol best form for termination . Draft protocol best way for termination, but since U.S. doesn't like it, is prepared accept declarations which will be presented to SC for approval .
 Argued that according United States draft, if Cuba takes any act which United States considers jeopardizing security of Caribbean, United States obligation against invasion would lapse . Argued this is direct retreat from statement in President's letter .
 Castro supported by USSR proposes that subversive activity be stopped by all countries . Complained that there was no word in declaration about subversive activity against Cuba . Complaining that there were no word about subversive activities against Cuba. Complained there were .
 U.S. has right to ask for inspection in relation to non-introduction of weapons, Cubans also have right of inspection against invasion preparations . Contended that while United States has right of asking for inspection for non-invasion of weapons .
 Said whole of United States would not be inspected but only certain parts, including Puerto Rico, where camps of invasion bands are located . Whole territory of Cuba would be subject to inspection as well as certain neighboring countries .
 Supporting Castro proposals, argued U.S. need not once abandon Guantanamo but enter into negotiations with Cubans about its disposition .
 If U.S. not prepared normalize relations with Cuba at present, at least should say we're prepared negotiate later . Also argued that if United States . not . prepared normalizing relations with . Cuba, it would be easier to negotiate later, he said .
 Referred to statement President's letter October 27/1/ not only U.S. would not invade but was confident other states would give similar assurances . Referred to statements President. not only . not only United States would not invasion but was . confident other . states would provide similar assurances.
 Stevenson replied U.S. eager to have Cuban affair settled and hoped receive Soviet draft declaration soonest . Stevenson replied United States eager to settle affair settled .
 Said it appears principal points outstanding between us are Castro's five points; we cannot discuss them and it is better adhere to US-Soviet terms of agreement . Said it appeared principal points of disagreement between the two countries were Castro's 5 points .
 If new matters introduced into negotiations, doubted they could ever be concluded said we understand Soviets feel obligated to support Cuba's demands . We also have numerous demands from other American republics which we also have .
 President's letter October 27 said UN observers were to be delegated to UN observers . Since such observation in Cuba has not been possible, we have to use our own means . We do not ask Soviets to agree to our unilateral means and inspection but simply point out to them we have no other
 Pointed out United States has gone further than exchange of correspondence by saying not only that we would not invade Cuba, but that U.S. would not support such invasion . United States says it would not back any invasion of Cuba .
 As to assurances other American republics against invasion of Cuba, said President merely expressed opinion they would be willing to give such assurances . President: "I just expressed opinion that they would not be willing give any assurances"
 If declarations cannot be fully agreed, they could be presented separately to Secretary General to be submitted to SC and have Cuban affair concluded in this manner .
 McCloy urged should try to finish this crisis promptly and proceed to other problems to avoid other crisis . McCloy: "We need to end this crisis quickly and avoid other crises"
 Pointed out United States had gone beyond letters of agreement in raising quarantine before safeguards worked out and in demobilizing and sending back to their bases United States forces .
 U.S.-Soviet agreement would not involve settlement with Castro . Emphasized US-Soviet agreement with Castro not involved in Castro settlement .
 Other American republics are threatened by Castro's activity in this field, he said . There are camps in Cuba training men for subversion in Latin America, he added .
 When Castro eventually ceases to be a threat to the western hemisphere, we are willing to normalize relations with him and help Cuba economically . Said when Castro eventually ceased to be threatening to the west hemisphere .
 U.S. cannot waste time talking about Castro's conditions when United States and USSR have much important matters of common concern to settle between themselves . Added: "U.S., USSR must settle their own issues between themselves" Added added: "United States and Soviet Union must not waste
 Noted that inspection of U.S. and Puerto Rico would be comparable to inspection of Soviet ports to detect offensive weapons being dispatched to Cuba . Noted inspection of United States and Puerto Rican ports would be similar to Soviet ports .
 Meeting concluded with mutual assurances of desire to finish matter quickly and to study points made on both sides . Meeting was concluded with repeated mutual assurances that the matter would be finished quickly .
 McCloy is seeing Kuznetsov at 1 1:00 am. Ball-I just had a call from McCloy and he is seeing McCloy . McCloy says he's not sure if he'll play for McCloy or not play for the Russians .
 The article claimed that Stevenson wanted to trade Turkish, Italian, and British bases for Cuban bases . Stevenson advocated a new ""Munich"" appeasement settlement .
 A December 2 memorandum from Schlesinger to President Kennedy refutes the assertions of Alsop and Bartlett . The memorandum was written by Schlesingers to Kennedy on December 2 .
 BallJack is against trying to do business on the other fellow's drafting drafting . BallJack says drafting is a form of form of business in the world .
 He wanted to see what kind of instructions he could get that would enable him to make some progress this morning . He was trying to get instructions that would allow him to get some progress .
 Ball— He says there are only three problems and he thinks if we want to settle we can get a quick deal and on plenty good terms . Ball: He thinks if he wants to settle, he thinks he can do so easily . Ball says he has a "quick deal" with
 He should stand on the reasons of the President and Secretary of State and listen hard . We can't give him a mandate. He should listen hard and we can't .
 Ball-I got the impression that he had a kind of telephone conversation on the areas of where the differences lay . Ball said: "I got an impression of him having a conversation about the differences between us"
 One is on the overflights and there is a question of how we can state it as not to tie Kuznetsov to it . The Russian president has been accused of corruption in the past .
 The second was Kuznetsov's thinking this threat on security language was too rough . The first was that he didn't want to use the language of the Russian language .
 Kuznetsov and McCloy are to meet again at 1 1 1:00 AM/1/ when it is expected that a Soviet paper will be presented to us . Kuznnetsov is expected to meet with McCloy at the time .
 He noted that Khrushchev had taken a very belligerent position with Canadian Ambassador Roberts on Berlin . He said he was surprised by the reaction to the incident .
 The reference to the Rio Pact can be in or out because the keys to the present negotiation are the no-invasion assurance and the peace and security of the Caribbean reference . The key to the negotiation is the no invasion assurance .
 Ambassador Stevenson says present thinking is that there would now be no U.S. statement made before a Security Council meeting . Ambassador Stevenson said present thinking was that no United States statement will now be made .
 The Secretary General could circulate a Russian statement and a U.S. statement to the UN members . The Russian statement could be circulated to the United States .
 We could reduce the elements of disagreement because two papers would be filed . We could thus reduce the element of disagreement by filing two papers .
 The President said we were not going to rat on an agreement with the Russians, but we weren't going to tie on to a no-invasion pledge in a way which allowed Castro to operate from an invulnerable base . Castro was able to operate in Cuba without being hit by the
 Ambassador Stevenson said that as soon as the Cuban problem was settled, the Russians could heat up the Berlin situation . Ambassador Stevenson: As soon as Cuban problem is settled, Russia will heat up situation .
 We would keep the Cuban problem in the UN as long as we possibly could, says President Obama . "We would keep it in the U.S. in Cuba," says Obama .
 McCloy and Ball discussed the conversation over a secure telephone, December 3, 4:45m.m. In addition to the conversation, McCloy also discussed the discussion over the phone .
 The memorandum of the Ball-McCloy telephone conversation is in the Supplement . Lot 74 D 272, Telephone Conversations-Cuba)
 Sovs took even stronger position than formerly against 3 points in United States declaration: ref to Rio Pact,/2/ ref to overflights, and condition that Cuba does not take action to ""threaten the peace and security of the Western Hemisphere"" attached to our noninvasion assurances
 Sovs attach importance to presentation to SC of documents agreed on main points, if not all details, which would lead to action by SC expressing satisfaction with work of parties .
 Kuznetsov favored working rapidly toward conclusion of this kind which he said repeatedly would create more favorable prospects for solution of other international problems . He said he favors working rapidly .
 Kuznetsov said he ""hoped" to have Sov draft declaration in couple of days . But it was left that, unless some new ideas occurred, we would await completion of draft before holding another mtg.
 On points listed above to which Sovs strongly objected, they claimed ref to Rio Pact is part of United States attempt to give United States commitment conditional character and hence is unacceptable . Sovs claim that Rio Pact part of U.S. attempt to . give . United States . commitment conditional
 It was part of effort to give United States free hand so it will not have to keep its obligations . U.S. was given a free hand to keep obligations .
 It would authorize U.S. to take action against Cuba under Arts 6 and 8, including use of armed force . It would allege Cuba had undertaken aggression not involving the use of . armed force including subversion . The bill would authorize United States to take actions against Cuba .
 Kuznetsov also claimed Rio Pact violates UN Charter/3/ in that it authorizes armed response against non-armed attack which is not in accord with Art 51 . Rio Pact also authorizes use of armed force without approval of SC as provided in Art 53 .
 Reference to Rio Pact in U.S. declaration would be illegal since pact in conflict with UN Charter . Therefore reference to Rio pact in . United States declaration would not be allowed to reference Rio Pact . Rio Pact is a violation of UN Charter.
 Ref to UN Charter itself in U.S. declaration should be sufficient for our purposes . United States declaration of intent to use UN Charter is sufficient to our purposes, says White House .
 As to overflights Kuznetsov said this ref unacceptable and reiterated usual arguments about unilateral actions violating sovereignty of Cuba, norms of international law and UN Charter . He said overflights are unacceptable and that they violate Cuba's sovereignty .
 He claimed U.S. desires overthrow whole set of legal norms covering relations between states . He claimed United States desires overthrow legal norms . He said United States wants to overthrow whole . set of . legal norms covered relations between . states .
 Only Sov obligations concerning non-reintroduction defensive weapons and United States obligations regarding non-invasion are outstanding . U Thant plan of observation in Caribbean can be met by U.S. plan of observing in Caribbean, says U. Thant .
 Sovs not opposed this kind of observation but must be in accordance with Charter and on basis of equality applied not only to Cuba but to all parties . Cuba must have equality applied to Cuba and all parties, says Cuban president .
 Kuznetsov objected to phrase in United States draft U.S. draft reading ""provided Cuba does not take action to threaten the peace and security of the Western Hemisphere"" on grounds this is new subject not covered in exchange of letters .
 President's letter of Oct 27 offered invasion assurance in return only for actions by Sov Union . President offered invasion guarantee in return solely for action by Soviet Union . U.S. offered invasion assurances only in return for actions against Russia . Russian President Vladimir Putin has been accused of being a Russian
 This condition would render valueless U.S. commitment not to invade Cuba . United States or other Western Hemisphere country could easily undertake provocation against Cuba and then claim Cuba had threatened their security .
 Kuznetsov reiterated earlier claim that Khrushchev had not agreed to on-site inspection except with consent of Cuba . He also said dismantling and withdrawal had been fully inspected by agreed shipside procedure .
 He also spoke again of guarantees against invasions by other states of Western Hemisphere and quoted Pres' letter on this point .
 U.S. draft contains no provision for United States implementing this obligation, he said . He claimed United States draft contained no provision to United States implement this obligation .
 Khrushchev claimed only weapons envisaged in correspondence were those present in Cuba at time of crisis . He claimed they were only weapons that had been referred to as weapons you consider offensive .
 There were only medium range missiles with nuclear warheads and IL-28's . Only medium-range missiles had nuclear warheads . There were also IL-29's .
 These had also been only weapons referred to in Pres. Obama's press conference of Nov 20 .
 Phrase used in U.S. draft would give grounds for arbitrary and expanding definition in future which could be applied to all sorts of other weapons . Phrase was used in United States draft which would be used in future .
 Kuznetsov asserted this need not be referred to in U.S. declaration since it had not been covered in original exchange of correspondence . As to withdrawal of Sov military personnel, Kuznnetsov said this need .
 Govt had mentioned this as gesture of good will and not part of agreement . Sov Govt said it was a gesture of goodwill, not a part of deal .
 United States side had made clear in negots that it did not consider this to be ""condition"" of final settlement . United States team made clear that they did not want it to be a condition of any settlement agreement .
 Kuznetsov repeated very briefly in support of Castro points included in protocol, mentioning specifically only economic blockade and Guantanamo . The Russian diplomat was speaking at the start of the protocol .
 He mentioned new point, asserting that, even if agreed declaration made by 2 parties in SC, much would remain outstanding, including reestablishment diplomatic relations and economic relations .
 He hoped draft declarations would refer to continuing negot to clear up these matters . He said draft declarations should refer to continued negotations to clear matters .
 He mentioned U.S. ref to medium and intermediate range missiles . Suggested omission of latter since only former were in Cuba .
 He also objected to use of word ""minimum"" applied to shipside inspection procedure . He claimed there had been agreement that this procedure was satisfactory .
 He said U.S. had made substantial step backward from exchange of letters and introduced many new requirements which made it appear United States wishes to delay concluding negots .
 If one side wished to introduce new questions other side will of course do likewise . "If one side wanted to introduce questions, the other side would do likewise," says BBC presenter .
 Sovs wish to confine questions to those covered in exchange of letters . Sovs hopes United States declaration will be redrafted in this sense. Sovs wishes U.S. declaration to redraft this sense .
 McCloy replied that there seemed to be very little left in U.S. draft that was acceptable to Sovs . McCloy said that there was little left to be acceptable to the Russian government .
 He pointed out United States draft designed to move forward and bring about rapid settlement . U.S. draft is designed to help settle the dispute, he said .
 U.S. introduced words "supporting invasion" in non-invasion assurance . "Substantial and positive change in wording" in wording .
 If we have inserted additional points in declaration it is only in order to clarify matters not foreseen when letters were exchanged . We are happy to clarify that the letters were sent from letters exchanged in the past .
 McCloy said he did not understand distinction between medium and intermediate missiles since we had identified both types on sites . McCloy: "Satisfactory nomenclature could be worked out"
 Sovs considered as offensive only particular weapons which had been removed from Cuba in this instance . He was alarmed by thought he considered only certain weapons to be considered offensive .
 'Other types of missiles such as ICBM's or other types of bombers' were equally offensive . 'Obviously other missiles such a bomber's or ICB's are equally offensive' says author .
 This might also be matter of language which could also be cleared up . However this might also matter of . language which may also be . cleared up.
 McCloy: "We repeat once again that we do not accept these conditions and cannot deal with them in any way in our declaration" McCloy reiterated that the U.S. does not suppose either Castro or the Soviet Union will abandon the conditions he has put forward .
 McCloy: U.S. relieved when Khrushchev indicated they might be considered almost as component of missile complex and hence would be withdrawn . McCloy agreed their withdrawal was not considered condition of settlement .
 McCloy also repeated again that in referring to non-invasion assurances which might be given by other Western Hemisphere nations that might give . He said Pres. McCloy was merely expressing an opinion, that while we do not believe other LA countries have any intention of attacking Cuba .
 He emphasized ref to non-support of invasion in our draft declaration . However he emphasized again ref to not support of invasion .
 McCloy expresses usual objections to so-called U Thant proposal for reciprocal inspection . McCloy expressed usual objections . McCloys expressed usual objection to U.S. proposal for reciprocity inspection .
 He repeated at length reasons why we must have right to use our own means of inspection in absence of acceptable international arrangements . He then repeated his reasons why he must use his own means to inspect the country .
 This does not amount to any change in international law or norms of relations between nations but is merely statement that we are going to take this precaution until satisfactory international inspection system is set up . The move is not a change of international law but a precaution until a satisfactory inspection system has been set
 He does not expect the Union to agree with what we are doing but we cannot omit mention in our declaration . He says he expects the union to agree, but it is not expected to agree .
 The overflights would not continue for all time, but would have to continue until certain composure had been restored to area . This part of price that has to be paid for false assurances which had previously been given to United States .
 McCloy recognized there was fundamental difference between us and Rio Pact . As to Rio Pact McCloy said there was a fundamental difference .
 If proposed U.S. declaration is incompatible with Rio Pact Pres, it would have to go to Senate and seek amendment to that pact . Kuznetsov is correct that proposed United States declaration is not compatible with Rio pact Pres .
 Rio Pact is principal international instrument dealing with security of Western Hemisphere . Rio Pact cannot be omitted from our declaration. Rio Pact can't be omitted, says President Obama .
 McCloy urged that we not haggle interminably over language but agree to close out this transaction as quickly as possible . McCloy concluded by urging that we . not . haggling over language, McCloy said, but closing out this . quickly as soon as possible.
 McCloy would almost despair at reaching agreement on 2 declarations . If Sov Union maintains all points Kuznetsov has put forward, it will almost despair . McCloy: 'If Sov Union maintained all points, it would be almost impossible'
 Kuznetsov urges U.S. draft pick to take less jaundiced look at United States draft . Russian star says he will consider points Kuznnetsov raised .
 Yost said it hardly seemed possible for 2 sides to reach total agreement on 2 declarations . Yost added that it hardly seems possible for two sides to agree on 2 declaration declarations .
 "What was important was that they be compatible and as close together as possible," says Drexler . What was important is that the pair be compatible, he says .
 A note on this memorandum indicates that McCone took this paper to the White House on December 3 and stopped by the President's office to drop it off after lunch . McCone's office says he dropped the paper at the President after lunch in December 3 . The White House says McCone
 This memorandum was attached to McCone's memorandum of the Executive Committee meeting at 10m. on December 3 .
 Soviet communications equipment as part of the air defense system . Detection of the presence of new and more sophisticated communications equipment . More sophisticated Soviet communications system .
 This would suggest that we soon would face the prospect of operational SAM sites manned by Soviets . This would be the first time we have seen the possibility of an operational SAM site .
 Che Guevara said that peace has been assured and that Cuba will pursue the arms struggle already taking place in a number of Latin American countries such as Venezuela, Guatemala, Paraguay and Colombia .
 This would indicate no intention to halt Castro subversion in Latin America . Castro subverted in Latin American . This would be no indication of an attempt to halt subversion, says Castro .
 Mikoyan's public statement in Moscow that he had achieved Soviet objective of maintaining a Communist regime in the Western Hemisphere . Mikoyans' public statement was made in Moscow . It was made that he achieved Soviet objectives of maintaining Communist regime .
 The U.S. should not give Castro and the Communists a sanctuary, it has been suggested . Castro's statements would prompt extreme caution on the part of the United States in any agreement .
 The last low level reconnaissance mission was performed on November 15 . The mission took place over Cuba .
 Light, scattered ineffective anti-aircraft fire was received, but no damage was sustained by the planes . The planes were hit by light, scattered anti-fire fire .
 Low level missions were also performed on November 11, 12 and 13, although no resistance was encountered . Low level operations were also carried out in November .
 The record of action of the NSC Executive Committee reflects that the low level missions were author-ized on a day-to-day basis by the President .
 Low level reconnaissance was performed on November 11 and November 12 without specific authorization by the President . This normally took the form of an action of the NSC Executive Committee . In other words, low level reconnaissance took place without authorization .
 It is possible and probable that the missions were authorized as a result of personal discussions between Secretary McNamara and Mr Bundy with the President . The missions may have been authorized by personal discussions .
 Subsequent records of actions of the NSC Executive Committee reflect discussion of high and low level reconnaissance with authorization being granted for high level flights only . Subsequent reports reflect discussions of high level reconnaissance .
 On November 21, Mr McNamara presented a plan for regular high level reconnaissance, but left low level flights to be authorized specifically by the President .
 The above pattern of events suggests an evolution of low level reconnaissance in the Cuban operation . The Cuban operation was a low-level operation .
 "To suspend these flights is to eliminate one principal source of very precise intelligence," says CNN.com .
 The provocative and psychological aspects against the Cubans of aircraft at near sonic speeds and tree top height are eliminated . At the same time the psychological aspects are eliminated from the Cuban threat .
 The risk of loss to conventional anti-aircraft fire is eliminated, but the risk of high flying aircraft being hit from missiles remains . The risk is reduced to less likely to be lost to conventional aircraft from missiles .
 An incident resulting from the loss of aircraft is perhaps proportionate to the number of flights being made . In this sense, an incident resulting . from an aircraft loss is perhaps . proportionate . to the amount of flights made .
 The basic issue remains the relationship between necessity for surveillanceand on the other hand- our willingness to accept losses in gaining this information .
 The U.S. must be fully prepared and organized to invoke predetermined countermeasures, and in the aftermath to justify its actions . The United States has announced its intention to continue surveillance, the author says .
 Neither the action to be taken if another plane is shot down, nor policies relating to explanation of the action, has yet been clearly delineated .
 Mr Bundy reported that Kuznetsov was telling Ambassador Stevenson the numbers and ports out of which the IL-28 bombers were leaving .
 There was a discussion of a Miami news story reporting the presence in Cuba of an armed Soviet division . The story was reported by a Miami reporter .
 In fact, there is merely a mechanized regiment which is part of four Soviet task forces in Cuba .
 Defense Department would release factual information about Soviet troops in Cuba . It was decided to release to the press factual information .
 CIA would engage in intense intelligence gathering in Cuba in the next four months, while avoiding provocation until we know whether the Russians are withdrawing their military forces or building them up .
 McCloy and Stevenson believe it is very much in United States interest, if possible, to bring US-Sov negots on Cuba to rapid and mutually acceptable conclusion . They have growing impression that effects of victory in public mind are being gradually effaced by prolonged and inconclusive negotiation .
 If public presumes this objective is on-site inspection, more and more importance will be attached to such inspection as negotiation continues . More and more important will become more important as negotiations continues .
 If and when we emerge from negotiation without achieving that objective, even though it may have been otherwise successful, we will risk seeming to have failed rather than have succeeded . We risk appearing to have succeeded rather than having succeeded. We need to find a way to achieve that objective .
 Second consideration is that there may be some substance in Kuznetsov's frequent reiteration of assertion that whether or not we agree on Cuban settlement will have most important effect on possibility of agreement in other fields .
 This may be bluff but there also may be element of sincerity in it . Real effort on our part to reach prompt and agreed settlement could have substantial effect on Berlin, nuclear testing, etc. If so, real effort on Berlin could have impact on Berlin .
 Cuban SC declaration/2/ creates new, though not unforeseen complication . Either some way must be found to handle SC mtg harmoniously, or alternative of separate declarations outside SC must be pursued .
 We think prompt determination should be reached as to what changes could be made in our draft declaration for use as soon as seems appropriate .
 We believe suggested changes would not jeopardize or weaken essential U.S. positions . We believe the suggested changes are largely verbal rather than substantive .
 Sovs might provide accommodation on some of points to which Sovs have most seriously objected so that latter could take amended declaration as basis for agreed settlement . They might also provide sufficient accommodation for some of the points that Sovs most serious objected .
 If we put forward these amendments before receiving Sov draft declaration we would have to make clear that unacceptable draft would necessitate withdrawal of our proposed declaration .
 "We are inclined to feel that more acceptable proposal on our part might produce less objectionable draft draft and hence substantially reduce period of negotiation. However, we are not sure if the draft draft will be less objectionable than the current draft draft .
 In putting forward our amended draft draft we would certainly state unequivocally that it was as far as we could go and there was no use wasting time in attempting to negotiate our declaration further . We would say unequivocally that the amended draft is as far away as it could go .
 Omit word ""minimum"" in second sentence para 6; In ninth para substitute for ""other weapons capable of offensive use"" more exact and less sweeping language which could not, as is case with present language, be applied to rifles and pistols . In 9th para substitute word ""other
 We have several other drafts of this para if the Dept. finds above unsatisfactory . We have other drafts for this para .
 Rio Pact 'remains in full effect' and 'does not impair' Rio Pact . Rio Pact declared in SC on this occasion does not and cannot impair it, it is not necessary to mention it .
 President in subsequent press conference might make statement along lines final para present draft declaration . Alternatively President in later press conference may make statement . Draft declaration could be made public by President Vladimir Putin .
 I think there is a misconception as to what our position is, and it is very serious . I think it's very serious, and I'm very serious about it,’s a serious matter .
 "What I would do is tell him, in the first place he didn't like that word ""minimum"" inspection," she said . "I would do that," she added .
 "We aren't talking about every kind of weapon that is capable of offensive use," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "The Rio Pact" exists anyway, and the President could say it on the side . Furthermore, I am ready to strike out ""the Rio Pact"" in this thing, because the Rio Pact exists anyway .
 Nothing he says in connection with this in any way irrigates from the obligations and rights of our existing treaties . And of course, nothing he . says in . connection to this in . any way, he said .
 "We reserve our intent to use such methods as we feel necessary by way of observation and verification pending the adoption of other means that are satisfactory to us," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 "Our intent is to continue the ordinary precautions. So we just have to reserve the fact that our intent is not to continue to be ordinary precautions," says CNN.com chief executive .
 Thompson introduced the word ""threat"" that Thompson introduced, I would go back to ""attack"" or ""commit aggression" or something like that, because I do think that with ""threat" security is rather illusory . Then on the word 'threat' security is also illus
 " Castro could make a speech and could say we're off the hook then," Castro says . Castro could say that he's off with Castro's speech then, but that's not true .
 "I believe it is good tactics to tell him irrespective of his declaration," says Nairobi politician .
 Cuba's reputation of Cuba will be at risk of a wrangle with the U.S.-Cuba relations relations with the West . President Obama has declared that Cuba will not be allowed to leave the island nation .
 "If he thinks that we are really trying to meet him, I believe he will come part way," he says . But if he thinks he will, he says, "he will come back part way"
 "We may very well wind this thing up with a something less than transigent wrangle on both our parts," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 His feeling, and this is I am sure the President's feeling, is that if we were really anxious on our part to close this thing up, what you are suggesting would be the thing to do it .
 The President doesn't want to close it up right now, unless it were closed completely on our own terms, he says . But quite frankly, the President doesn’t want to . Close it up, he said, "but quite frankly the President . doesn't."
 I think we can close it out, but we have a chance of closing it out on our terms if we do this . I don't agree, but I'm telling you, what I think is that I think . What I'm saying? I think it's a good idea,
 I think we are petering away the victory, and I believe we have a reasonable chance by giving away nothing in this thing in consolidating the victory . I'm not in doubt when I am saying that. I think it's not in a doubt that we are not going to win
 I do think we have to hold onto the word ""intend"" and would intend to hold on those words . But I would also hope that we could put into the operating clauses that there is nothing here in any way interrogates our intention to use all the observation and clarification facilities we have
 If we don't get the on-site inspection, which we want, it's going to be thought around the country we're losing . "We don't want," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz says he's worried about the impact of the inspection .
 If we say that pending getting such an inspection as satisfies us we intend to use the facilities we already have, we will use the existing facilities . Yet if we say we want such a inspection as satisfying us we will still be using the facilities already there .
 "We've come a long way here toward meeting you on this business. I would say to Kuznetsov, "Now, look, if you . . . If you . would like to meet you, we would say, "Look, we've come long way to meeting
 We have some language up here-it doesn't amount to anything but that, and I think he would take it as being an indication that we were not trying to welch or to introduce new conditions . We were holding out on one thing that Khrushchev is anxious to get.
 I've got to get this back up to the President; because right now the posture of this thing that has come back from the White House cleared out, and I am going to have to let it go tonight with the idea that before you act on them we can have another look at
 I will see if we can get the Committee together in the morning if I can, I said . I'm not sure if we'll get together again, but we'll try to do it, he said .
 I have spelled this all out to Ros./l/ He tells me he agrees with it. Now, I've spelled this out to him. Ros/l/ Ros/L/ He told me he agreed with it .
 "major offensive weapons" can be used to refer to 'major weapons' or 'major' weapons . "Major' weapons are not limited to the weapons taken out of the country .
 I do this purely on the conviction that I have that we are not gaining ground now— that I think if we do close it up on that basis the President has nothing to fear . I think that if we did, we would be closing it up, the President would have nothing to
 "We may have a better atmos-phere for stuff that may be coming up in the future. And I think we may have to have it," he says .
 In the meantime, I'll get hold of the WH and see if we can set something up. I'll call the White House to set up a meeting .
 "I've been postponing meetings with clients of mine for 60 days, so I just have do that then," she said . "I just have to do that," she added .
 At the close of the Executive Committee Meeting last night,/ 1/ I raised the question of courses of action we should follow if the Cuban SAM sites are made operational and a U-2 is shot down .
 This question has been considered and the consensus seems to be that in such an eventuality, we will be obliged to take out the SAM site or perhaps several SAM sites . This question was considered and it is not clear if the government will take out a SAM site .
 "There appeared no difference of opinion among those in attendance at the meeting last night or previous meetings when I raised this question concerning the policy," says mayor .
 Perhaps it would be more difficult to ""seize the nettle"" in such assumed circumstances than it is to agree among ourselves as to what should be done . However, as you said, the implementation of the ""policy"" was another matter .
 I continue to be disturbed over this situation as I feel that there is a strong possibility of such a confrontation as soon as the IL-28's are all removed from the country . I feel the possibility of a confrontation with President Obama if he is forced to step down .
 Kuznetsov advised Governor Stevenson with regard to the number of IL-28's to be shipped on each of several ships, ports and the dates of departure .
 I also reported that we had detected a continual improvement in Soviet-controlled communications systems throughout the Island . I also said that we also detected that we . detected that . we had . detected a . continual improvement . in Soviet communications systems .
 Watch Committee reports more extensively on communications developments . Report appears as an Annex to this week's Watch Committee statement, is attached .
 There is a very strong possibility that we will soon face a situation where the Soviets will warn us against further overflights, indicate that their SAM sites are in operation, and if we persist will destroy one or more U-2's . If we persist, we will destroy a U-
 Action by us of a type planned and mentioned last night could, therefore, involve a military operation against Soviet soldiers . Action could, however, involve an action against Soviet troops, it has been suggested .
 It will not be action against ""Cuban forces"" in disguise, it will be action against Soviet forces, it says . This may possibly be announced to us in advance, says the president .
 I bring this up because I think the possibility must be given serious thought at this time and we might devise diplomatic moves which would either forestall such a confrontation . Alternatively, a pronouncement made now might so indicate our intentions that the confrontation will not occur .
 John A McCone/5/ Director /5/ John A. McCone .
 IL-28 bombers had been located at Cuban ports or on ships leaving Cuba . Director McCone reported that all IL-27 bombers were located in Cuba .
 He called attention to a buildup of the Soviet communications system in Cuba . He referred to the existing SAM sites and to the Soviet air defense capability .
 Castro refused to see Mikoyan for nine days, and when he threatened to leave, Castro said he was prepared to make an arrangement with the Chinese Communists . According to that account "Secretary Rusk reported that Mikoyans stated he had extreme difficulty in Cuba"
 He read the proposed changes in a draft declaration on the Cuban problem which we would make and recommended that we give to the Russians a draft, as revised in his telegram,/3/ before the Soviet delegation received its draft .
 "If our draft was not accepted by the Russians, then we should return to our position of circulating our own original draft declaration to the Security Council," says the UK .
 We cannot haggle too long lest the Russians get tougher on Cuba and insist on discussion of other issues . The U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for more than a decade .
 The United States has achieved a victory, i.e., the strategic weapons have been removed . U.S. President Barack Obama has declared victory in Iraq .
 The longer we prolong the negotiation over minor issues, the closer we come to appearing to have failed, the longer we continue to appear to have . We are not going to be able to find a solution to the problems we face .
 Russia may accept a one-shot inspection scheme which we don't want but which would be difficult for us to oppose . In addition, the Russians may accept an inspection scheme that would be hard for them to oppose, he says .
 Senator Russell had already said that we had made a mistake by not invading Cuba . Senator Russell said that the U.S. did not want to invade Cuba .
 McCloy said we should stick on our statement about aerial reconnaissance . He opposed on constitutional grounds any statement of a declaration of our intentions on invasion .
 We should not chip away at our statement but wait until the Soviets produce theirs . We should wait until they produce theirs. We shouldn't chip away with our statement, but wait for them .
 The President commented that the hardening of the Soviet posture is not due to our action in Cuba . The President also said that Russia's hardening posture in Cuba is not the result of our actions in Cuba.
 Secretary Rusk said we could not allow a Soviet takeover of Cuba similar to that which occurred in Hungary . Secretary Rusks said we couldn't allow a . Soviet takeover .
 He asked whether the Chinese Communists would come into Cuba if the Soviets phased out . He asked if they would be able to enter Cuba if they were phased out of the country .
 He concluded by saying we should put in a revised draft declaration and tell the Russians they could take it or leave it . The draft declaration should be put in place of Russia, he said .
 "If they decide to leave it, we will rewrite our declaration entirely, taking a tough view," he says . "We will rewrite it entirely," he adds .
 Secretary McNamara said if we rewrite the declaration we should take a firmer stand on the no-invasion course so that we would not guarantee Castro sanctuary . McNamara: If we rewrite it, we should be tougher on Castro .
 Bundy favored rewriting the declaration so that we could back away from a no-invasion guarantee . Bundy: "I'm not sure what I want to do, but I'm sure I'm not going to do it"
 Ambassador Stevenson said we should be ready with a revised draft in the event the Russians rejected a new proposal . Ambassador Stevenson: "We should be prepared to be ready" with a new draft .
 There followed a discussion of whether we should tell the Latin American Ambassadors where the negotiations now stand .
 Secretary Rusk preferred to inform the OAS representatives here first, but preferred to hold off for a day or two . Rusk: "Secretary Rusk prefers to inform [OAS representatives] about the situation first"
 The President suggested that we wait until tomorrow to see if we get an agreement from the Russians before we put out our statement . The President said that we should wait to see until tomorrow before putting it out .
 Mr McCloy pointed out that there would be no time to get an agreement tomorrow .
 Secretary Rusk recommended that we do not put out our statement before we get the Russian draft because our statement would cause anxiety . The Russian draft is expected to be released by the end of the month .
 Murrow stated that if we are going to give up our demand for on-site inspection, then we should make a louder noise about aerial surveillance . Mr Murrow said if we were going to . give up on site inspection, we should . make a loud noise .
 The status of the proposal to create the nuclear-free zone in Latin America was in doubt . Ambassador Stevenson reported that the status of . the proposal was in . doubt because . if we could not get the concurrence of all Latin American States we would have difficulty putting the proposal forward .
 It noted McCone's intelligence briefing, the recommended revisions to the United States draft declaration, and the President's approval of those revisions .
 "Future Policy toward Cuba"71/ was discussed in the Executive Committee on Tuesday, December 4th . We agreed that I would send you a summary of the informal comments made on the draft memorandum .
 First, it was generally agreed that there should be a reorganization of our machinery for Cuban action . The U.S. should reorganize its machinery for Cuba action, says President Obama .
 There seemed to be general support for the idea of an Office of Cuban Affairs which could be public and above board, and which might do a more effective job with free Cubans and others concerned .
 You and I agreed after a meeting that you would explore the availability of a particularly well-qualified individual to head this office. You and me agreed after the meeting, I agreed to look at the possibility .
 The memorandum is correct in recommending that no general policy be approved or set in motion until the current discussions with the Soviets on Cuba have developed somewhat further . No general policy should be approved, set to be set to go into effect until the Soviets have developed further .
 The proposed action in the OAS should not be framed sharply until we know more clearly what kind of resolution is likely to obtain unanimous or nearly unanimous support . The proposed vote should be considered carefully carefully .
 "Our current posture in the OAS is so strong that we should not weaken it for marginal advantages," says President Obama . "We need to strengthen our position in the U.S. in the world," he says .
 The draft statement seemed correct, but needs further work, the author says . Paragraphs 9 and 10 need to be spelled out carefully in cooperation with the other agencies .
 The covert annex was considered only very briefly, but the preliminary sense of the meeting was that covert activities should be concentrated upon improvement in the collection of intelligence for the immediate future .
 Our ultimate objective with respect to Cuba remains the overthrow of the Castro regime and its replacement by one sharing the aims of the Free World . The U.S. will continue to pursue its policy on Cuba .
 A policy of containing, undermining, discrediting and isolating the Castro regime through the exercise of all feasible diplomatic, psychological and other pressures will achieve these immediate objectives . The Cuban government could create propitious conditions in Cuba for further advance toward its ultimate objective .
 Caribbean security arrangements through ministerial level meetings of the Caribbean countries for the purposes of reaching agreement on increasing the intensity of surveillance of coastal and international waters . Increased surveillance and control of land boundaries; increased control over subversive activities within national boundaries .
 NATO of Cuba on the list of countries to which shipment of COCOM list items is prohibited . Cuba is also included in the NATO list of nations to send items to the U.S. list of prohibited items .
 Free World industrial nations from shipping crucial spare parts and equipment to Cuba, not on the COCOM list . Discussion of Free World . industrial nations not allowed to ship spare parts to Cuba . Free World. industrial nations .
 Non-Bloc nations were pressured to limit their airlines service to Cuba . Persuasion was used to withhold transit rights to Soviet aircraft serving Cuba . Soviet aircraft served as Soviet aircraft .
 Latin American nations to limit the travel of their nationals to Cuba . Persuasion of Latin American countries to limit their nationals .
 Persuasion of appropriate OAS organs to study urgently the transfer of funds to the other American Republics for subversive purposes, the plan of subversive propaganda and the utilization of Cuba as a base for training in subversive techniques .
 VOA has adopted a more aggressive line toward Cuba . VOA medium wave facilities beamed to Cuba will be beamed into Cuba .
 Cuban exiles' entry into the U.S. Armed Forces for training, and formation of reserve units thereafter . Facilitation of Cuban exile' entry to the United States Armed Forces .
 We should surface our program of isolating and weakening Cuba when it becomes clear that our discussions on Cuba with the Soviets are unlikely to be fruitful . Timing should be timed to coincide with the end of our discussions with the Soviet Union .
 Actions with respect to Cuba may contribute substantially to creating a situation calling for U.S. military action should be withheld until the Soviet combat units have been removed from Cuba or efforts to persuade the USSR to remove them have failed .
 Continue to support the Cuban Revolutionary Council in its efforts to maintain a degree of order and unity in the Cuban exile community .
 Assist selected Cuban exile groups to encourage the Cuban people to engage in minor acts of sabotage . Assist selected exile groups with the help of Cuba's Cuban people .
 Utilize selected Cuban exiles to sabotage key Cuban installations in such a manner that the action can plausibly be attributed to Cubans in Cuba . Use the CIA to sabotage Cuban installations such as those of Cuba .
 Sabotage Cuban cargo and shipping, and Bloc cargo, shipping to Cuba, is banned in Cuba . Sabotages are prohibited in Cuba and Cuba .
 Cuban diplomats, officials and delegates abroad. Encourage the defection of Cuban diplomats and officials abroad .
 Cuban exiles in their radio broadcasts to Cuba . Continue to assist and guide Cuban exile in radio broadcasts .
 Cuban exiles should develop capability to launch balloons carrying leaflets and other propaganda materials from international waters to Cuba, officials say .
 Develops more fully a clandestine ""Voice of Free Cuba"" radio capability either in Cuba or from a submarine in international waters . Develops clandestine radio capability from Cuba or a submarine .
 Develops capability for covertly intruding upon Cuban television broadcasts . Develop more fully a capability to covertly . intrude upon Cuban TV broadcasts .
 Non-Bloc importers of Cuban sugar to find alternative sources of supply . Assist, through subsidy if necessary, if necessary. Find alternative sources to supply .
 Information copies were sent to the other members of the Executive Committee . Information copies of the documents were sent .
 The President has approved the attached Guidelines for the Planning of the Cuban Overflights . He would like to have an estimate of the adequacy of such a system of intelligence collection .
 The United States has a priority need for continuing and reliable information with respect to the general order of magnitude, deployment and state of readiness of Soviet military units and installations in Cuba .
 A note on the source text indicates it was passed to the White House at 10:15m . The White House passed the text to the president at 10.15m.
 Sovs presented drafts of their short declaration and SC res, text of which being transmitted immediately fol tel tel tel . Text of text of text to be transmitted immediately, fol tel .
 At outset of mtg McCloy referred briefly to complications caused by Cuban declaration/3/ and probability acrimonious squabble in SC resulting therefrom. McCloy said .
 He then said in attempting to meet points in United States draft declaration that Sovs had raised, he had some new language to propose . Sovs said he was trying to reach more or less agreed position .
 He emphasized that if a declaration which we had not received proves unacceptable, we would have to withdraw our new proposals and simply content ourselves with two separate statements drafted as we thought fit .
 He then went over changes authorized first five numbered paras Deptel 1511 . The changes were made in the first five of Deptel's new rules .
 Sovs objected strongly to phrase ""offensive weapons systems" claiming it was as loose and as subject to expansion and misinterpretation as original phrase had been . Sovs continued to object to phrase 'offensive weapons system'
 He insisted weapons concerned were only those about which agreement had been reached in exchange of letters between Pres. and Khrushchev . He insisted that weapons were not weapons that had been exchanged in return for letters .
 McCloy replied that this was impossible since there are four types of missiles and of bombers as well as submarines, which are clearly offensive weapons systems .
 It finally appeared Sovs might accept some language referring to other weapons ""similar"" or ""comparable"" to weapons agreed upon between Pres and Khrushchev . But they continued to maintain new United States language was unacceptable .
 As to overflights, Kuznetsov declared it maintains same idea and not acceptable . McCloy's statement that new text removed any implication Sovs are approving overflights .
 U.S. does not want any arrangements for international safeguards since it has turned down U Thant plan . U. Thant claims United States wants international safeguards .
 He objected strongly to any reference to overflights in declaration and declared it also unacceptable . He also declared it was also unacceptable to use overflights .
 McCloy countered with clear exposition why it was essential in United States point of view that this reference be maintained . McCloy said the reference was essential to the United States to maintain .
 As to proviso that ""Cuba does not commit aggressive acts against any nation in the Western Hemisphere"" Kuznetsov said this proviso is not in exchange of letters . As to the proviso, KuzNETsov said it is not to exchange letters .
 McCloy said he could not possibly say he would stand by if Cuba attacked another country with which we have a treaty obligating us to come to its defense . McCloy replied Pres. Pres. Eisenhower said he would not stand by .
 Kuznetsov replied Cuba has offered in protocol not to attack anyone else . Russia says threat is not from but against Cuba, citing Dec 4 attack on Cuban soil by boat containing exiles .
 Kuznetsov did not object seriously to new language in regard to U.S. treaty rights . After inquiring whether we really had to put it in, he said, "I don't think it's OK"
 Kuznetsov: U.S. draft changes have not removed main obstacles to Russia's sovereignty . He said that the draft changes were not enough to remove main obstacles . The draft was discussed in Russia's first meeting with the United States this week .
 McCloy: 'If we cannot agree on this we must agree to disagree. McCloy thought we had sincerely tried to meet Sovs half way but that this is best we can do'
 Kuznetsov thereupon put forward new suggestion reported in opening para this message . He then suggested a new suggestion for the opening para of this message.
 He proposed we make our declarations very brief and limit them to agreed points . He proposed that we should make our declaration very brief .
 U.S. draft suggested what might be omitted to make it acceptable to Sovs if we adopted suggestion of shorter form . He then went over United States draft .
 Kuznetsov reiterated argument that new procedure he proposed would raise both sides of difficulties in reaching agreement which had emerged from discussion United States draft . U.S. draft draft was discussed in U.N. draft .
 This procedure would also take care of Cuban declaration which he understood would not be agreed . This procedure also takes care of the Cuban declaration .
 McCloy concluded by saying he was disappointed in response to our new proposals . McCloy: "I'm disappointed with the response to my new proposals"
 He emphasized again that they were in any case dependent on reaching agreement . He said they would have to be withdrawn if there is no agreement .
 He pointed out we were going far in giving our assurance against invasion without any arrangements for on-site inspection . He said it was going far too far without any plans for inspection .
 Kuznetsov indicated that new Sov suggestion had been put forward by Khrushchev with view to making settlement easier for both sides . Also in conclusion, new Sov proposal had been suggested by Khrrushchev .
 He thought SC should adopt res and that mere consensus statement by Chairman would not be enough . He thought however however SC should adopted res . He said that just a consensus statement is not enough .
 It was important for peace of world that we go as far as possible in settlement of Cuban question . Parties therefore continue negotiations normalize situation .
 McCloy says he would negotiate with Castro if he showed signs of wishing to live in peace in this hemisphere . McCloy: "We do not intend to negotiate" with Castro in framework this transaction .
 U.S. and Sovs had achieved good momentum in talks, he said . He urged it to be maintained and carried forward to other problems .
 All weapons, regarding the dismantling and withdrawal of which from the Cuban territory an agreement was reached between the Government of the USSR and the United States with the consent of the Cuban government, have been removed from the territory of Cuba and returned .
 Such weapons shall not be introduced by the USSR in the territory of the Republic of Cuba . The USSR would not introduce such weapons in Cuba, Cuba .
 The USSR Government proceeds from the premise that negotiations will continue between parties concerned on the questions connected with further normalization of the situation in the Caribbean with the purpose of working out mutually acceptable solutions .
 While new Soviet texts need important revisions, we believe basic idea of short agreed declarations by U.S. and USSR in SC plus fuller unagreed statements, either in SC or outside has much to commend it .
 We do not believe, however, we should agree to Cuba making an agreed declaration since this would complicate negotiations greatly and provide status as third party which we have refused for good reasons so far .
 We should ask USSR to provide United States copy of U.S. copy in advance to assure it will not be too obnoxious . U.K. should also ask USSR for U.N. copy of USSR copy of this article .
 This procedure would meet objective of closing up transaction on relatively harmonious note, and thus maintaining momentum for possible subsequent agreements on other subjects .
 U.S. should be prepared to do likewise, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Cubans and Soviets will be making their unagreed statements in SC rather than outside .
 Soviet draft declaration would seem to be too narrow definition of weapons which will not be reintroduced, and indications that ""parties concerned" including both Soviets and Cuba, will continue negots for ""normalizing" situation in Caribbean .
 We would much prefer end SC exercise with consensus statement by SC Pres, though Soviets have so far insisted this is not enough . We would rather end SC exercises with a consensus statement, though .
 Believe we should argue this point, possibly being willing to concede to res in last analysis, trading this for satisfactory substance . Believe it is possible to argue that we should be willing to trade res for substance .
 If we accept short declaration idea, we could relegate to our separate unagreed statement in SC some of points to which Sovs object, such as references to overflights and military personnel .
 Provisos attached to non-invasion assurance, as well as treaty obligations, would have to be retained in our agreed declaration . However others, such as provisos attaching to noninvasion assurances, would need to be kept .
 Commander of Atlantic Fleet, Commander of the Air Forces, Atlantic, and Commander of Army, Atlantic. Repeated to Commander of . the . Commander of. the . Atlantic Fleet . Repeated .
 This telegram, not found, was apparently a request for planning for the use of nuclear weapons .
 The JCS concur that planning should proceed for employment of nuclear weapons for limited war operations in the Cuban area .
 In developing these plans the application of force must be selective and discriminating in relation to the objective to be achieved . Application of force to be selective must be discriminating and discriminating, says police .
 Collateral damage to nonmilitary facilities and population casualties will be held to a minimum consistent with military necessity . The U.S. military says it will not tolerate civilian casualties in the region .
 In view of the above, the recommendations contained in paragraph 3 of reference message are approved for planning purposes .
 Request the JCS be advised promptly of any case where these limitations with respect to weapon yield or height of burst prevent the accomplishment of the military objectives . Request that these limitations are not necessary to achieve the objectives of the mission, request the request be made promptly .
 Preliminary United States draft declaration, revised Sov declaration, elements of supplementary United States statement including essentially sections taken out of present text United States declaration . Draft consensus statement by SC Pres in accordance mytel 2183 .
 They suppress references to exchange letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev in preference for references to subsequent agreements worked out in negotiations . They also seek to revise our declaration to imply that verification has been complied with .
 They are seeking to write Cuba into picture as much as possible, including support for future negotiations on ""normalization"" of Caribbean . They also want to write Cuban into picture .
 Sov draft res, by approving declarations, but with no notice taken of supplemental statements, would leave us in a difficult future situation on overflights, military personnel in Cuba and other problems .
 It seems to us our objective should continue to be to draw line under current crisis but only on contingent basis, and retain statement in our declaration that USSR has not fulfilled all undertakings . This is justification for our continued overflights and for qualifications we place on no invasion assurance .
 Draft consensus statement we have prepared therefore is only expression of attitude of SC and not of approval or decision . Draft statement we prepared therefore means expression of opinion of SC, not approval of decision . SC has not approved or approved any decision .
 We have deleted references in Sov declaration and in res to continued negotiations to normalize situation in Caribbean . We have also deleted references to continued talks with Caribbean nations .
 We have done this on assumption USSR means Castro's five points and that negotiations on political settlement in Caribbean is unacceptable either with Russians or with Cubans . We have assumed USSR meant Castro's 5 points, which are unacceptable to Russia or Cubans.
 Cuban military presence will continue in Cuba even after present crisis is settled, says CNN.com . Further negotiations of some sort around this issue might be foreshadowed, he says .
 In letters of President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev and President Kennedy on October 28, 1962/2/ firm undertakings were made regarding the settlement of the Cuban crisis . United States draft declaration: U.S. draft declaration .
 The United States notes the declaration of the Soviet Union today that all weapons, on which agreement was reached in accordance with the agreement, have been removed from Cuba and returned to Cuba . The sites have been dismantled .
 The United States notes further the declaration of the USSR that no weapons of this nature, that is, offensive weapons systems, will be introduced by the USSR in the territory of the Republic of Cuba .
 The United States has verified that Soviet vessels leaving Cuba have carried away the number of missiles and IL-28 bombers which the USSR certified as having been in Cuba . The U.N. has not been able to verify the removal and destruction of sites .
 The United States lifted the quarantine instituted on October 23, 1962 . The U.S. gave assurance that, provided no nuclear weapons and no offensive weapons systems are present in or re-introduced into Cuba, it does not intend to invade Cuba or support an invasion .
 The undertakings stated herein do not alter or impair the rights and obligations under all existing treaties to which the United States is a party to .
 All weapons had been removed from Cuba and returned to the Soviet Union, and all the sites dismantled . All weapons regarding the dismantling and withdrawal from Cuba agreement was reached in accordance with the undertakings between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev .
 Weapons of this nature shall not in the future be introduced by the USSR into Cuba, says the Soviet Union . The weapons will not be introduced into Cuba . The USSR will not again introduce weapons into Cuba in the near future .
 The United States would agree-upon the establishment of adequate arrangements through the United Nations to ensure the carrying out and continuation of these commitments- to remove promptly the quarantine measure now in effect .
 The United States takes note of the stated intention of the USSR to withdraw all military units and personnel placed in Cuba for the servicing or guarding of these weapons systems . In addition to the removal of those weapons systems capable of offensive use to which I have already referred, the United States.
 The United States regrets that the undertakings for United Nations verification of the removal of missiles and bombers and destruction of sites have not been fulfilled . The U.S. regrets that U.N. safeguards against further introduction into Cuba of weapons systems capable of offensive use were not fulfilled .
 The United States will use other means of observation and verification as may be necessary to ensure that no such weapons are present or introduced into Cuba .
 We earnestly trust that this session of the Security Council marks the achievement of a peaceful solution of the crisis caused by the introduction of offensive weapons systems into Cuba .
 The Cuban crisis gave rise to the Security Council meeting of October 23, 1962 . Members will have taken note of the declaration and statements made by the representatives of the United States of America and of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics .
 I am confident that all members of the Council will join me in an expression of satisfaction that the crisis the world has recently faced in the Caribbean has been terminated through direct negotiations with the active participation of the Secretary General .
 "It seems to me they have gone directly contrary to what we agreed at the Ex Com meeting also," he says . It seems to be that they've gone directly opposite to what they agreed at Ex Com also .
 There is a message in from the President to that effect-which Brom Smith was going to pass on to you . As a matter of fact, there is a . message in . from the . President to . that effect .
 He had already drawn up some instructions, which attempted to water down reservations, he says . McCloy: "A move ought to be made now to fold this up as quickly as possible on a basis of unagreed statements, preferably filed with the Security Council"
 I would take one and three against two, because the meeting of the SC would almost certainly mean the Cubans would come in and it would be out of control . I would say 'one and three' against two' would be better .
 I would propose to try to get out this afternoon to the Ex-Com some suggested draft instructions in the hope that those could be the subject for the discussion at the meeting Monday afternoon .
 "I don't think McCloy will be here; but I think we just have to go ahead," says McCloy . McCloy says he doesn't think he will be at the helm of the team . "It's a great opportunity to get back on the field," he says
 I was rather surprised, because I thought Jack was so clear that no matter what happened to put in the proviso about overflights and that if we couldn't make any progress with the Soviets on restatement with the changes he had in mind, we would go on other basis .
 "I know he is getting impatient and wants to get back into law practice. I know he's getting impatient," she says .
 I can well understand his feeling, and I think he would like to feel he had folded the thing up now . I can't understand his feelings, but I'm sure he'd like to see it folded up now.
 "We all like to draw lines under things, but this is one where I don't think we're doing any good for ourselves," he says . "This is one of the things I'm worried about," he adds .
 If it meets with your and Bob's approval, then we will try to circulate something so that you will get it Monday morning . And this is the line which Dean and I are prepared to take, and Dean and Bob .
 It emerges clearly that Soviets will not agree to procedure in Security Council which would associate them in any way with our determination to continue overflights in absence acceptable international verification arrangements .
 Soviet objections to our declaration, unacceptable Cuban declaration, and Soviet rejection our final position on U.S. declaration all attest to this . Numerous Soviet objections .
 We believe there is no further advantage to us in attempting to reach for 'agreed' statements by further modification of our position, or by prolonging further an essentially sterile negotiating process . We believe that there are no further advantages to our negotiations .
 Soviet tactics seem designed to obtain formal U.S. and Security Council acceptance of concept that Khrushchev has fully discharged his obligations under agreement reached in exchange of letters with President October 27, which he has not .
 Soviets obviously hope to squeeze out one more drop of blood from us in form of elaboration of non-invasion guarantee . In addition Soviets obviously want to squeeze . from us, it is hoped that we will not be invaded by the West .
 As far as we are concerned, the bargain on Cuba has already been struck on the basis defined in the President's November 20 press conference statement . "As far as it is possible, the deal is already struck," says President Obama .
 In return for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles and IL-28's, we have lifted the quarantine . The quarantine was lifted in return for withdrawal of the Soviet missiles .
 "We have also made the declaration of non-invasion in President's press conference of November 20," says President Vladimir Putin . "We've also declared noninvasion," says Putin's spokesman .
 We do not intend to go any further on substance without acceptable safeguards arrangements assuring compliance with Soviet promise not to reintroduce offensive weapons systems into Cuba, which have not been obtained and may be unobtainable .
 If differentiation between two kinds of declarations, agreed and disagreed, is designed to be a matter of substance, it would obviously be very bad from U.S. standpoint .
 If the split into two different kinds of declarations is intended to be merely matter of form, then there is no point in having two different kind of declarations . If, on the other hand, the split is meant to be just form, it is not form, but form is form .
 You should seek meeting with Kuznetsov with a view to settling on one of the following procedures for wrap-up .
 Unagreed statements filed by U.S. and USSR with SYG, who will distribute them to members of SC for information . Unagree statements are filed by United States and USSR .
 Unagreed statements are made by U.S. and USSR separately in whatever public manner they choose . United States and USSR separate statements made by both sides in whatever way they choose.
 In none of these cases should a Cuban declaration be a part of the scenario . The Cuban declaration should not be part of any of these scenarios .
 Disadvantage of SC meeting is that it would be impossible not to seat Cuba or to permit Cuban Representative to be heard, presumably at length, on all sorts of matters that are not germane to understanding .
 If SC route were taken, Soviets would have to agree at minimum not to take up cudgels on behalf Cuba . Soviets would also agree to agree not to carry out military operations .
 This would enable Cuban speech to be made, but not other member of SC would comment on it . It would not be regarded as part of the IR-USSR discussion .
 If we are sufficiently sure Soviets would turn down proposal in urtel 2189, it has been suggested that it be given to Soviets on take-it-or-leave-it basis, in order to demonstrate .
 We should soon reach a decision regarding the use of Cuban exiles in broadcasts beamed to Cuba . The decision is expected to be made soon .
 U.S. policy toward Cuba will continue to be one of exerting economic pressures and making Soviet support as expensive as possible . Cuban exile broadcasts urging economic sabotage and passive resistance could play a valuable role in Cuba .
 This recommendation also assumes that CIA can exercise a certain guidance and control over these broadcasts . The recommendation is based on the fact that CIA has control over the broadcasts .
 The Cuban individuals and groups doing the speaking should be carefully selected for their reputation and credibility with the people in Cuba . The Cuban people should be careful to carefully select their reputation .
 Students should do the speaking to students, labor leaders to labor, teachers to teachers, etc. etc. Students should speak to students . Labor leaders should also speak to labor leaders, labor workers to labor .
 Cuban audience urged to act with care and cautioned against open rebellion . Cuban audience should be urged to be wary of open rebellion against the government .
 The program would be based upon work slowdowns, purposeful inefficiency and purposeful waste, and relatively safe forms of sabotage . The program is based on work slowdown, purpose-inefficiency, and purpose-ful waste .
 Specific examples of the activities urged would be putting glass and nails on the highways, leaving water running in public buildings, putting sand in machinery, wasting electricity, taking sick leave from work, damaging sugar stalks during the harvest .
 The program would be strictly attributable to the Cuban exiles with no open participation by USIA or other government agencies . USIA would not participate in any of the program .
 If real results were achieved, the Voice of America could report these as evidence of opposition to the Castro regime through interviews with refugees and extracts from letters .
 Ambassador Stevenson reported that the Soviet proposals had been put in at the same time as ours . Ambassador Stevenson: "The Soviet proposals were put in the same way as ours"
 He handed to the President a paper listing the advantages and disadvantages of several courses of action . He handed it to him .
 President said the key part of any statement is the no-invasion assurance . The President said he wants to make sure that the government does not invade .
 If we could put in no more than a reference to the November 20th press conference statement, this would be acceptable . This would be the only reference to that statement, which was published on November 20 .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that both sides make a full statement in the Security Council, revealing their differences, then introduce a separate paper containing agreed sentences .
 Under Secretary Ball argued that we were not anxious to end the Cuban affair because the Cuban problem will continue to be with us . Ball said he was not anxious about ending the affair .
 He thought an agreement would make it easier for Khrushchev to remove the remaining Soviet troops . He thought a deal would allow him to remove troops from the Soviet Union .
 Secretary Rusk noted that all we were doing was ending the offensive weapons phase of the problem . The U.S. military says it is ending the "offensive weapons phase" of the issue .
 The President asked why we had to take the overflights problem into the Security Council . President Obama asked why it had to be taken into account for overflights .
 Mr McCloy replied that we must cover our no-invasion pledge by stating the exception, i.e., our continuance of overflights . The United States must cover the exception by stating that overflights are allowed .
 Rio Treaty makes overflights legal, as spelled out in the OAS Resolution . Secretary Rusk noted that the Rio Treaty is the basis for overflights in the United States .
 Ambassador Stevenson predicted that the Russians would reject our statement, but we should go back to them again, he says . Ambassador Stevenson predicts that the Russian government would reject the statement . The Russian government has not yet responded to the request .
 If the Russians again rejected our position, then we could go the route of filing separate statements . If the Russian government again rejects our position then we may file separate statements, says the UK government . The U.S. government is considering filing a separate statement from Russia .
 Secretary Rusk said it was important to us in Latin America and for our domestic public to get out our full statement . The secretary of state said the statement was important for the public to know about it .
 Once we have done this the Soviets could point out what they disagree with. Once we've done this, they could point to what they disagreed with. This is a good example for the U.S. to show it to the Soviets .
 Ambassador Stevenson read the statement which the Security Council President hoped we and the Russians could accept . Ambassador Stevenson said he hoped the statement would be accepted by both sides .
 Mr Bundy said that if the Soviet presence in Cuba was important to us, we do not want to draw a line under the crisis .
 The President said we do not want to have the Soviets restating our no-invasion statement . President said he does not want the Soviets to restate our no.invasion stance .
 Secretary Rusk said we should be careful not to paper over our disagreement . Rusk: We should not paper over disagreement .
 Mr Ball noted that if a Security Council meeting were held, Cubans would be given a chance to voice their complaints . Mr Ball said a meeting of the Security Council would be held .
 We should avoid a Security Council meeting and we should abandon any attempt to get a consensus in the Security Council because this would be misleading . We should abandon attempts to get consensus in Security Council, says the Foreign Minister .
 Secretary Rusk said others might try to force us into the Security Council, but they might not if they know we will be unable to agree with the Russians .
 The President said our best position is to go for separate statements filing it with the UN, but without a Security Council meeting . President said the best position would be filing separate statements filed with UN .
 Council could live with agreed/disagreed statements without a Council meeting . Council meeting could be held without the need for a meeting, council says .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that we do not break up the negotiations this week during the plenary session of the Communist Presidium in Moscow . Secretary Rusks suggested that the negotiations should not be broken up this week . The talks are expected to take place in Moscow this week, according to the
 Ambassador Stevenson said that if we told the Russians we could not agree on a statement with them, the Russians would not want a Security Council meeting . Mr McCloy hoped that we could record an agreement and Ambassador Stevenson .
 The President expressed his concern that the OAS States and the domestic public opinion, including Congressional opinion, will exert great pressure on the Government in the next few months .
 Ambassador Stevenson summarized his view again . Secretary Rusk made clear that our position was to discuss our proposal as well as theirs . Ambassador Stevenson: "Ambassador Stevenson summarized the view again and Ambassador Stevenson said it was clear that we would discuss our position"
 President concluded the discussion by saying we could discuss the Russian plan but we should keep the negotiations out of the Security Council . The President concluded .
 President authorized CIA, in coordination with USIA on policy matters, to resume broadcasts by Cuban refugees on transmitters under Agency contract .
 Such broadcasts had been forbidden during the earlier phase of the missile crisis .
 All Present plus Stevenson and McCloy McCone covered most recent intelligence, indicating no developments, continuing . Then reported on the telegram covering the interview with Ricardo Nunez .
 We should consider ways and means of playing this up on radio and further news media . We need to consider ways to play this up in radio, further media, and more .
 Rusk, Ball, Johnson and Martin discuss negotiating procedures with Kuznetsov . There followed a long discussion which involved a sharp difference between Rusk and Ball .
 Stevenson and McCloy wanted to draft a statement in which the areas of agreement were pointed out, and in a second chapter, would be set forth . The two men would then draft a second statement of disagreement .
 The consensus was that this would be a wrong procedure; that it would down-grade the importance of on-site inspection and continued aerial inspection . It would be misunderstood by the public and Latin American states and therefore was undesirable, the consensus said .
 The President expressed himself as favoring a presentation of our position with a unilateral presentation by the Soviets with their position, and let the Secretary General or public reach their own conclusions .
 At the end of almost two hours of discussion the disagreement seemed to prevail . It was a conclusion that in the actual execution of the agreement or the talks with Kuznetsov in the next couple of days there will evolve a procedure favored by Stevenson and McCloy and opposed by the Secretary
 Mr Murrow brought up the question of resuming the clandestine radio broadcasts which had been sponsored by CIA and carried on by the Cuban refugee community .
 He pointed out to the President that these efforts had been ""stood down"" following the October 22nd speech and during the complicated negotiations .
 The President and the Executive Committee approved and instructed CIA to reinstitute the broadcasts or to permit the Cuban refugee groups to go right ahead . The President also instructed the President to reinstate the broadcasts .
 CIA should act upon this question at once and should report to me as to the actions taken so that I in turn can report to the President . CIA should answer this question immediately, says Obama .
 In the evening at the White House I discussed the meeting with the President and the Attorney General. In the night, we discussed our meeting with President and Attorney General . We are happy to clarify that this is not the first time we've had a meeting with them.
 Both were amused by the argument but obviously disturbed that such a difference should be brought before the Executive Committee . Both were annoyed that the debate was brought before an Executive Committee.
 Undoubtedly the President ""heard"" Stevenson because of recent publicity . Undoubtedly he ""heard" Stevenson .
 I continue to be concerned over the danger of placing undue reliance on photography . I'm concerned about the danger over the use of photography in the future .
 We seem to be drifting into a frame of mind that high-level photography is all we need, that it will show everything that must be seen, that is preferable to on-site inspection . On-site inspections is undesirable because it would be impartially conducted, and that there is
 I wish General Carter and appropriate members of the staff to consider this very seriously and to discuss it at the level of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and NRO . We are not becoming overly dependent upon aerial photography and so run the risk of making a serious error .
 I would like this taken up at once and reported back not later than Monday, December 17th . I would also like this to be reported back as soon as possible . I'm not sure if this is true .
 "I would like to personally discuss this with the Joint Chiefs and the President prior to leaving for the West Coast on December 21st," says President Obama . President Obama is scheduled to travel to West Coast this month .
 U Alexis Johnson and McGeorge Bundy approved by U. Alexis Johnson . Bundy cleared by the U.S. Attorney General . Bundy also cleared by Bundy .
 The Soviet Union, in cooperation with the United States, arranged a procedure whereby substantial verification was afforded the U.S. of the fact that 42 missiles, which the Soviet Union declared was the total number of such missiles introduced into Cuba, have been removed from that island .
 The Soviet Union likewise has stated that it has removed 42 IL-28 bombers from Cuba, that being the total of such bombers which the Soviet Union states it introduced into Cuba . U.S. has made possible a similar means of identification by the United States .
 The Soviet Union has also stated that it has removed all nuclear weapons which it previously introduced into Cuba, as well as the components of such weapons . Soviet Union says it has also removed all weapons from Cuba as well .
 The Soviet Union has stated that it will not reintroduce into Cuba those or other weapons systems of a similar or comparable offensive character . In connection with the removal of the above-mentioned missiles, bombers, and nuclear weapons, the Soviet Union says it won't reintroduce those .
 As of November 20, 1962, the U.S. lifted a quarantine around the island of Cuba . The quarantine was lifted on October 24, 1962 . The United States lifted the quarantine around Cuba on November 20 .
 This has been done upon the basis of the statements and acts of the Soviet Union above referred to . This is based on the statement and acts made by the former Soviet Union .
 It was contemplated by the . above mentioned exchange of letters between the President and the Chairman that there would be created an effective system of international inspection on the island of Cuba . Cuba .
 It has not been possible thus far to effect an international verification system on the ground, particularly one such as would provide the safeguards against the future maintenance and introduction of such weapons in the island of Cuba .
 The President of the U.S. has stated in his press conference of November 20 that it was not the intention of the United States to invade Cuba provided all offensive weapons are removed from Cuba and kept out of the hemisphere in future, and provided Cuba itself commits no aggressive acts .
 The President of the United States reaffirms his previous statement in this regard and repeats his assurances that the U.S. has no intention either to invade or support an invasion of Cuba on the above conditions .
 The U.S. intends to employ all necessary means of observation and verification of its own in order to insure against this eventuality . The United States wishes to make it clear, however, that, pending the installation of an adequate system of international or other effective verification on the island of
 The Soviet Union, believing that it has substantially complied with the spirit of the exchange of communications between the President and the Chairman above referred to, believes that any further inspection, observation or verification is unnecessary and unjustified .
 Nothing herein affects the rights and obligations of any treaty or existing agreements to which either the United States of America or the Soviet Union is a party to .
 It is hoped that, in negotiating this, it would be possible for you to obtain affirmation, even though not expressed, of the Soviet intention to remove all Soviet military units .
 It informed the mission the United States could not agree to a Security Council resolution and would prefer to avoid a consensus statement . The U.S. told the mission that Stevenson and McCloy shouldn't agree to consensus statement without further instructions .
 Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy Moscow, December 11, 1962 . Message from Chairman Khruschev to . President Kennedy: "We will never forget what happened"
 Department of State classified the message Top Secret and Eyes Only . No classification marking, but the message is Top Secret .
 A note on the source text indicated that copies were sent to Ball, Thompson, Robert Kennedy, and U Alexis Johnson . A copy of the text was sent to four of the authors .
 This document was sent to the Soviet Embassy at 2:15 Moscow time, December 10 . This document is sent to Moscow time of December 10.
 All those means placed by us on the Cuban territory which you considered offensive are withdrawn . Our relations are already entering now their formal course since all those means .
 We appreciate that you just as we approached not dogmatically the solution of the question of eliminating the tension which evolved and this enabled us under existing conditions to find also a more flexible form of verification of the withdrawal of the above mentioned means .
 U.S. policy in Cuba created conflict with Cuba created by policy of the United States, says Cuban leader . "We criticize American imperialism," says Fidel Castro .
 I believe that you already had an opportunity to familiarize yourself with the text proposed by us/1/ of a brief declaration of the Soviet Government in which the Soviet Union's main commitments resulting from the exchange of messages between us are formulated .
 "The basic goal has been achieved and tension removed. But notwithstanding what the agreement on the concrete texts of our declarations at this concluding stage will be, anyway, anyway the basic goal was achieved," says President Vladimir Putin .
 I will tell you frankly that we have removed our means from Cuba relying on your assurance that the U.S. and its allies will not invade Cuba . The United States has removed its means of Cuba from Cuba, President Obama says .
 "I already told you that our friends especially those of them who regard us with certain lack of understanding are trying to convince us that imperialism cannot be trusted, that is that you cannot be trust, as a representative of such capitalist state as the United States of America"
 "It goes without saying that you and I have different understanding of these questions," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's not surprising that we have different understandings"
 I shall not go into details as to what my understanding is because you and I cannot have common opinion since we are people representing different political poles . I won't give details of my understanding of what I believe to be the case .
 There are things that require common understanding on both sides of the fence . But such common understanding is possible and even necessary, even necessary .
 "Within a short period of time we and you have lived through a rather acute crisis," says President Obama . "We are not going to be able to come back from this crisis," he says .
 The acuteness of it was that we and you were already prepared to fight and this would lead to a thermonuclear war . The acuteess of this was that . This would be that we . and you would already . fight .
 We took it into account and, being convinced that mankind would never forgive statesmen who would not exhaust all possibilities to prevent catastrophe, agreed to a compromise . We understood-and we state it now-that your claims had no grounds whatsoever, had no legal basis and represented a manifestation of
 We agreed to a compromise because our main purpose was to extend a helping hand to the Cuban people in order to exclude the possibility of invasion of Cuba so that Cuba could exist and develop as a free sovereign state . The Cuban people were not allowed to be invaded by the Soviet Union .
 "We did not and do not pursue any other purposes. This is our main purpose today, it remains the main purpose for tomorrow and we did not," says the team . This is the main goal for tomorrow, it is not to pursue other purposes .
 Everything-the stability in this area and not only this area but in the entire world-depends on how you will now fulfill your commitments taken by you. Therefore, Mr President, Mr . President, said .
 It will be now a sort of litmus paper, an indicator whether it is possible to trust if similar difficulties arise in other geographical areas . Furthermore, it will be an indicator if similar problems arise elsewhere in the world .
 I think you will agree that if our arrangement for settling the Cuban crisis fails it will undermine a possibility for manoeuvre which you and we would resort to for elimination of danger, a possibility of compromise in the future .
 You, Mr President, do not want to agree with the five conditions put forward by Prime Minister of the Republic of Cuba Fidel Castro, Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro is the prime minister of Cuba .
 Mr President, we who occupy such responsible position in the world, have to overcome those difficulties. But, Mr President says, we . occupy such . responsible position, we have a responsibility to overcome difficulties, he says .
 The peoples will appreciate that because for them it means insuring lasting peace on earth . For them, it means they will be able to live a long life in peace .
 We read now various articles by your columnists and correspondents and we are concerned that in those articles they are widely commenting on the confidential exchange of opinion and it is being done by the people who as it would seem have .
 Judging by the contents of these articles it is clear that their authors are well informed . We get an impression that this is not a result of an accidental leak of the confidential information . This is the result of benevolence for those people .
 This evidently is done for the purpose of informing the public in a one-sided way . This is not the first time this has been done, it has been revealed .
 If we use the confidential communications this way, it will not facilitate confidence in those channels . Frankly speaking, if we use it this way it will be far from facilitating confidence in that channel .
 "You yourself realize that if your side begins to act in the way that our exchange of opinion by way of confidential channels will leak through fingers these channels will cease to be of use and may even cause harm," she said .
 If you consider that those channels have outlived themselves and are of no use any longer, then we also will draw appropriate conclusions in this respect . We will also consider that the channels are no longer used any longer .
 I tell you this straightforwardly and I would like to know your opinion on this matter. I tell your opinion, and I ask you to share it with me. I would be happy to hear your opinion of this matter,’s your opinion .
 A minimum of personal trust is necessary for leading statesmen of both countries, says Putin . But on the other hand I consider it useful for us to continue to maintain the possibility of confidential exchange of opinion . This corresponds to the interests of our countries and peoples, to the interest of peace
 President Obama should eliminate the consequences of the Cuban crisis and get down to solving other questions, and we have them in number. Let us, Mr President, eliminate promptly .
 I believe as before that a frank and straightforward exchange of opinion is needed to avoid the worst . Please, excuse me for my straightforwardness and frankness .
 "Please convey to your wife and your whole family wishes of good health from myself, my wife and my entire family"
 Fol is report of three-hour mtg this afternoon Stevenson, McCloy and Yost with Kuznetsov, Mendelevich and Counselor of Sov Emb in D.C.
 "Sovs firmly rejected single joint document on grounds that it contains certain elements, particularly provisos on our no-invasion assurance and reference to overflights" "They cannot in any form lend their name, and that Cubans would not be participants in this declaration," he said
 Stevenson opened meeting by saying that he thought it was in interest of both sides to reach maximum possible agreement and to demonstrate to public that we are doing so . Stevenson: "I thought it would be in best interest of [both sides] to reach [maximum possible agreement"
 "It seemed preferable to present a single agreed declaration signed by both parties than separate declarations. To this end, after further consideration, it seemed preferable"
 "It also seemed decidedly preferable to submit such declaration to SYG for transmittal to SC Pres rather than to present declarations at SC mtg. It also seemed . preferable to . submit such . declaration to . SYG rather than present declarations to SC mg. rather than .
 "It seemed to us inevitable that latter would result in controversy and recriminations," he said . It seemed to be inevitable that the latter would end up in controversy, recrimination .
 McCloy continued by saying that he had just discussed problem thoroughly with President and Secretary . McCloy said that it is President's desire to end this affair by stressing note of agreement rather than of disagreement . President's wish to end affair with note-of-agreement .
 There is but one document strengthens impression of overall agreement. Therefore we have drawn up single document in which agreements and disagreements are equally frankly stated .
 If there were too many documents, one or two Sov, two U.S. and two Cuban documents, chance of misinterpretation and confusion in public mind would be great . "It's a great opportunity for the public to be able to understand what's going on and what's happening
 He too stressed dangers involved in SC meeting which we might not be able to control . Some Cubans as well as some SC members would become involved in acrimonious controversy, he said .
 Indication agreement between President and Khrushchev on verification and future safeguards have not been fulfilled, provisos attached to non-invasion assurance, and our determination to apply own means of verification pending agreement on international arrangements .
 He also rejected implication in draft drafts that we are entering into an agreement with Cubans to normalize our relations with them .
 He then went over draft joint declaration transmitted Deptel 1593 modified as indicated ourtel 2291/2/ emphasizing that this draft based on instructions from Washington, it is informal document prepared here .
 McCloy emphasized President's strong feeling that agreed and disagreed elements of our position must have same status . McCloy said this as further reason for single, joint document or at least single document on each side .
 If there should however be SC meeting in which Cubans spoke there would almost certainly be LA and probably U.S. replies, which would be likely to support Cuba . History of Cuban crisis would be rehashed and atmosphere of agreement would be destroyed .
 Kuznetsov replied that he would of course report our new proposal to his govt . But he said he was convinced idea of single document would not be acceptable .
 You have your problems, he said, but you should also take ours into account . You have to take our problems into account. You have our problems, but also take our concerns into account, he added .
 If there is a joint declaration without Cuba, this will not be understood, he says . "If there is no Cuba without Cuba this will be understood," he says. "This is not the same thing as Cuba"
 If there is to be joint declaration it must be on behalf of all three govts, says minister . If there are to be a joint declaration, it must have been made by all three governments, he says .
 Kuznetsov continued by stating that though our joint draft contained some changes in wording and some new paragraphs, it still contains many points with which Soviet Union does not agree .
 "It would be impossible for Sovs to put their signature on this document since our viewpoints on certain elements differ radically," says Sovs . Sovs: "We would not be able to sign this document because our viewpoints are radically different"
 He claimed sentence commending ""it was contemplated by the above-mentioned exchange of letters"" was inaccurate insofar as Sovs concerned since Khrushchev in his letter of Oct 27 had made on-site inspection dependent on Cuban agreement .
 Kuznetsov: Issue is closed and he hopes we will not have to come back to it . This point had been made many times, he said, but issue is closed . He hopes it will not happen again .
 Soviet Union has supported U Thant plan for inspection throughout Caribbean . As to verification for future, Soviet Union is not opposed provided obligations are reciprocal . Soviet Union not opposed .
 Kuznetsov also repeated his objections to provisos attached to non-invasion assurance, claiming that they would give us excuse for violating this assurance whenever we desired . The Russian leader also said they would be able to violate the assurance whenever they desired .
 As to overflights, he said Sov Union cannot agree to statement of this kind being presented to SC for approval in Soviet Union's name . He said he would not agree to issue a statement that would be presented to the SC .
 He claimed paragraph in which it was stated that Sov Union believes any further inspection, observation or verification unnecessary and unjustified does not represent Sov Union's position .
 Kuznetsov then returned to the draft declaration and resolution submitted to us Dec 6/3/ and asked why these were not acceptable . He then asked why they weren't acceptable and why they should not have been rejected .
 There would be agreement, he said, on short drafts and supplementary disagreed statements could be shown by each side to other in order to minimize SC debate .
 His govt. feels it more expedient that declarations be presented to SC rather than to SYG since subject was raised with SC at beginning of crisis . His government feels it . feel it more . expedient to . present declarations to SC than SYG .
 He was disturbed at McCloy's statement that if we cannot agree on joint declaration, U.S. will go back to earlier and worse wording in separate declarations . He said McCloy said if we can't agree, United States will use earlier wording .
 He urged negotiations to be carried on sincerely and on the basis of the greatest possible degree of mutual agreement .
 Our two countries face many important international problems on solution of which destiny of peace depends . The manner in which we deal with Cuban problem will affect solution of all others, he said .
 President and Khrushchev have shown wisdom and patience in solution of this dangerous crisis . It is most important it be wound up in same spirit. It is also important to see a similar spirit of unity in Russia .
 If we should go to SC he foresaw great difficulty of working out res acceptable to both sides . Suggested consensus statement would be preferable .
 Kuznetsov reiterated his objection to joint declaration and argued for two separate declarations as closely agreed as possible . He argued in favor of two separate declaration .
 He agreed again whether SC meeting or more filing of declarations with SYG would be preferable . He agreed to consider again whether meeting with SC would be better .
 McCloy emphasized Sovs had no need to worry about United States not fulfilling its obligations . McCloy: Sovs should not worry about U.S. not fulfilling their obligations .
 It would certainly do so and that's why it was insisting on citing them fully and clearly . It would be the first time the government would cite them, it said .
 It was impossible for U.S. to give assurance against invasion without provisos which we had included . "It is impossible for United States to give assurances against invasion," she said .
 He said he had previously made it clear we would feel free to revert to some of our earlier language . As to going back to earlier language in case there is no agreement on this document, he pointed out he had been authorized to modify our language in some cases .
 McCloy said he would consider whether the word ""offensive"" could be dropped leaving the words ""similar or comparable"" but said he could make no commitment on this score . McCloy would consider dropping the word 'offensive' leaving the word similar or comparable'
 McCloy referred at some length to dangers of aggressive acts by Castro . Che Guevara interview in London Daily Worker/4/ underlined necessity for second of our provisos on non-invasion assurances . McCloy also referred to dangers by Castro in recent interview .
 Sovs continued to express preference for SC meeting but were less strong on this point . Sovs expressed preference for meeting with SC meeting .
 United States side made it clear that if there were SC mtg it could only end in consensus statement more or less along lines of that proposal shown to them . U.S. side showed it was not clear if there would be a consensus statement on the proposal .
 Meeting concluded with understanding that Soviets would get in touch with us when they had obtained Moscow reaction to our latest proposals . Meeting concluded by understanding that Soviet Union would get involved .
 McCone said that the negotiation of Donovan seems to be coming to a head . McCone: "The negotiation of the deal is coming to an end"
 The President wants the Attorney General to go down because he now has commitments to cover the Castro list . The Attorney General is now in charge of covering the Castro List .
 McCone said that this raises a problem of how to get down there because there is no transportation . McCone further said that the problem of getting down there raises a question of how .
 McCone suggested, last night, that his Sanchez, head of the Family Committee, call Beratta, a close adviser of Castro's . Beratta is described in various reports as being his advisor, his secretary or his mistress .
 McCone said that if he comes down, they would allow him in and then we would have him charter a Pan American plane and fly down there . McCone: "We would have to charter a plane to get him down there"
 McCone doesn't know how this will work out, but it is about the only way to do it . McCone: "I don't think it's the right thing to do" McCone says he's not sure how it will work .
 McCone said that he thinks this should be done rather overtly . Last time it was done very secretly, and Ball had no objection to it being done overtly . Ball said he thinks it should be more overtly .
 McCone said the reason he thinks it ought to be done overtly is because there is no government involvement here . McCone: The reason he wants to do it is because it's not government-backed .
 Three Cuban defectors have been frozen by the U.S. government, officials say . "There have been some very significant reports. The second thing is that we have been freezing the three defectors," they say .
 McCone said that an appraisal of Soviet intentions had been made which he would like Ball to take a look at . McCone wants Ball to look at the Soviet intentions .
 McCone thinks that some place along the line, they are either going to take a shot at one of our birds or threaten to do so . McCone: "Some of the birds will either go to kill one of them or threaten it"
 "We have to carry this on and if they take a shot at one of those birds, we are going to have to take such action as is appropriate"
 Message from President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev was sent December 14, 1962 . Message was sent to President Kennedy from the White House .
 I was glad to have your message of December 1 1/1// and to know that you believe, as we do, that we have come to the final stage of the Cuban affair between us . The settlement of this will have significance for our future relations and for our ability to
 I wish to thank you for your expression of appreciation of the understanding and flexibility we have tried to display. I wish I wish we could be more flexible and more flexible,’s minister says .
 In these negotiations we have tried to understand your position and I am glad to note that Mr Kuznetsov has also shown effort to understand our problems . The Russian president has shown an interest in talks with the Russian president .
 It is clearly in the interest of both sides that we reach agreement on how finally to dispose of the Cuban crisis, says President Obama .
 Ambassador Stevenson and Mr McCloy presented on Wednesday a new draft of a joint statement which by now has certainly reached you . They wish to assure you that it is our purpose to end this affair as simply and clearly as possible .
 You refer to the importance of my statements on an invasion of Cuba and of our intention to fulfill them, so that no doubts are sown from the very start, says President Obama .
 I quite agree with you that the larger part of the crisis has now been ended and we should not permit others to stand in the way of promptly settling the rest without further acrimony . I agree . We should not allow others to . stand in . the way . of settling the
 I can assure you that I value them. With regard to your reference to the confidential channels set up between us, I can . I appreciate them, I said . I can also assure us that I valued them, he said .
 I have not concealed from you that it was a serious disappointment to me that dangerously misleading information should have come through these channels before the recent crisis . I have also said that I was disappointed that this information should not have come from these channels .
 Diplomats appear to have used a representative of a private television network as a channel to us . You may also wish to know that by an accident or misunderstanding one of your diplomats .
 This is always unwise in our country, where the members of the press often insist on printing at some later time what they may learn privately . This is often unwise .
 You may not be fully familiar with the practices of the American press . Because our systems are so different, you may not know how the press works .
 A number of competitors are not great admirers of my Administration, and perhaps an even larger number are not wholly friendly to yours . President Obama has been criticized for his policies in the past .
 There are 1200 reporters accredited to the White House alone, and thousands more in other assignments .
 It would be a great mistake to think that what appears in newspapers and magazines necessarily has anything to do with the policy and purpose of this government . The government should be careful not to rely heavily on the opinion of the public, he says .
 I am glad to say that I have some friends among newspapermen, but no spokesmen . I am happy to say I have friends among newspapers, but not spokesmen, he says . He says he has no friends with newspapermen or newspapermen .
 "We do indeed value these confidential channels. But let me emphasize again that we do indeed . But let’s be careful,” she said. “Let me emphasize that we value these confidentiality channels.”
 I believe that it is important to build the area of trust wherever possible . I entirely share your view that some trust is necessary for leading statesmen of our two countries . I believe it is necessary to build trust, and I hope that it will happen again .
 I shall of course continue to hold and to express my convictions about the relative merits of our systems of government, and I will not be surprised if you do the same . I shall continue to ... express my . convictions .
 President Vladimir Putin is returning to Moscow, says Putin . Bolshakov is a former Russian ambassador to the UK . Putin says he is "sorry to learn that he is returning home"
 It is our impression that he has made a real effort to improve communications and understanding between our two governments, and we shall miss him very much. It was our impression .
 I appreciate your writing me so frankly, and in return I have tried to be as straightforward, for I agree with you that only through such frank exchanges can we better understand our respective points of view .
 We are hopeful that once the Cuban crisis is behind us, we shall be able to tackle the other problems confronting us and to find the path to their solution . We also hope that once we have the crisis behind us we can tackle other problems we face .
 Thank you for your expressions of good wishes to me and my family . Let me in turn send you and your wife and family our personal good wishes for the coming year .
 On December 6, 1 wrote to you/2/ stating that I was of the opinion that two regularly scheduled U-2 missions per day would reasonably satisfy the requirements . With the understanding that postponed flights, because of weather, would be flown when weather permitted . Low-level flights would
 The U.S. Intelligence Board has considered the use of photography as a supplement to the collection of information .
 CIA is increasing its effort in a variety of ways, including expanded use of agents, legal travellers, refugee interrogations . CIA is also expanding its efforts in the U.S. through liaison arrangements with third countries .
 CIA prepared to insert additional intelligence collecting teams as soon as policy decisions are reached in this respect . CIA is prepared to endeavor to . insert additional . additional intelligence . teams .
 NSA will continue an intensive program in the SIGINT field which has during recent weeks added materially to all other intelligence . NSA says it will continue to continue to work on SIGINT .
 I think the combination of photography and other measures can give us a reasonably satisfactory body of intelligence . I think it can be a good body of information .
 "It will not, in my opinion, be totally satisfactory nor as dependable as an arrangement for well organized on-site inspection, which is politically not attainable at the present time."
 The repeated warning is to be done as a reminder of our position, not as if we were making a new point . The repeated warnings should not be made as if they are making a point, says the BBC .
 He asked whether there was anything that could be done about this but was told that the price was set by the world market and was not easily affected . He asked if there could be anything he could do about this, he was told there was nothing to do .
 The conclusions of the memorandum were that sugar market was tight and Cuba would benefit economically . Cuba would also benefit economically, according to the memorandum .
 Secretary Rusk summarized his recent meeting with the NATO Council in Paris . Rusk: "Secretary Rusk met with NATO Council members in Paris this week"
 NATO powers expressed great satisfaction with the way the Cuban missile crisis had been handled, he said . He said the NATO powers were pleased with the handling of the crisis in Cuba .
 Secretary Rusk said he had stressed the need for increased European continental forces . Rusk also said the need to increase NATO forces in Europe .
 NATO is marking time on organization problems and on nuclear questions pending the completion of the Common Market negotiations . NATO is also marking time for organization problems .
 The NATO meeting was so placid that reporters had to resort to sensationalized stories . The NATO summit was so calm reporters resorted to resorting to sensational stories .
 President Obama appeared to be heading toward separate statements on the Cuban crisis . The White House appears to be headed toward a separate statement .
 The remainder of the meeting was taken up with the discussion of a Congo plan and policy recommendations of the Subcommittee on South Asia . The Congo plan was discussed .
 The 37th meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council was held at 3:45m., December 17, 1962 .
 U.S. would make statement in event Soviets prefer two separate statements rather than one joint statement that includes both agreed and disagreed points . Following is approved text of statement United States would make .
 This text reflects changes suggested by McCloy to Cleveland to Cleveland December 16/1/ and changes agreed with Stevenson in Washington December 17 .
 The United States takes note of the statement of the USSR that it has dismantled all of the missile sites . The U.S. says it has removed from Cuba .
 USSR says it will not reintroduce into Cuba those or other weapons systems of similar or comparable character . Cuba takes note of the statement of the USSR that it won't reintroduce those weapons systems .
 The United States also notes that in connection with the removal of the above-mentioned weapons, the Soviet Union has stated its intention to withdraw all military units and personnel placed in Cuba for the servicing or guarding of these weapons systems .
 The United States lifted the quarantine which it had imposed around the Island of Cuba on October 24, 1962 . The quarantine was lifted on November 20, 1962, the U.S. said .
 It was contemplated by the President and the Chairman that there would be created an effective system of international inspection in Cuba to verify the dismantling of the missile sites and the removal of the weapons .
 A procedure was arranged between the USSR and the U.S. for verification at sea of the removal of missiles and bombers . The Soviet Union declared it had introduced into Cuba . The procedure was agreed between the United States and the USSR .
 It has not been possible thus far to effect on the ground the contemplated international system of verification and safeguards . However, it is not possible to effect a contemplated international verification .
 The United States is compelled to continue to employ the means of observation and verification it has found necessary . Pending the installation of such a system to insure against the maintenance and reintroduction of such weapons and weapons systems into Cuba, the U.S. will continue to use these means of
 The President of the United States stated at a press conference on November 20 that provided all offensive weapons are removed from Cuba and kept out of the hemisphere in future, provided Cuba itself commits no aggressive acts against any of the nations of the Western Hemisphere .
 The President of the United States reaffirms his previous statement and repeats his assurance that, subject to the above conditions, the U.S. has no intention either to invade or support an invasion of Cuba .
 The President of the United States expresses the hope that the action taken by the U.S. and the Soviet Union will lead to further constructive negotiations between the two countries to adjust the differences existing between them .
 U. Alexis Johnson approved by Alexis Johnson and cleared in substance with the President . Drafted and approved by U Alexis Johnson .
 At a suitable occasion in our negotiations with Kuznetsov, we should express our growing concern over fact Soviets are continuing work at and improve anti-aircraft arsenal in Cuba, says the Russian leader .
 "We are concerned that someone might have the motive of interfering with our reconnaissance. We are concerned," says a spokesman for the CIA .
 "We have made it amply clear to the Soviets that, in the absence of other safeguards, we must and will continue that reconnaissance. We have made clear that we will continue to do so," the UK says .
 We have no desire to return to the days of late October and assume this is also shared by the Soviets . We are not interested in returning to late October, and assume that this is the case .
 The Soviets must recognize that destruction of U.S. aircraft and loss of American life arising from this deliberate activity of the Soviet Union could well have such consequences .
 We hope Kuznetsov will understand that our motive in bringing this to his attention is simply to make sure that there is no misunderstanding on this point . We hope that we will make it clear that there are no misunderstanding about this point.
 In short, we feel it would be unwise to continue this buildup in view of the non-belligerent and non-provocative character and intent of our reconnaissance. In fact, the U.S. feels it would not be 'unwise' to continue the buildup in
 Stevenson, McCloy and YostKuznetsov, Mendelevich and Counselor of Sov Emb in Wash, presented new Sov proposal . Four letters, two from President dated Oct 27 and 28 and two from Khrushchev dated Oct. 27, be registered at UN and
 Cuban Rep. would follow same procedure and separately submit statement from his Govt. Rep. of Cuba would submit statement separately . Cuban Rep . of Cuba will submit statement on his behalf .
 No SC meeting would be held and no further action would be taken . No further action will be required or taken. No further meeting will be held .
 Kuznetsov opened meeting by recapitulating history of attempts to work out draft declarations . U.S. drafts of both separate and joint declarations had contained ""completely unacceptable" condition to non-invasion assurance which were not contained in exchange of letters between Pres and Khrushchev
 Kuznetsov: U.S. does not favor SC mtg. Noting that United States does not support SCmtg, Kuznnetsov then put forward proposal . Proposal summarized above .
 First, he pointed out Khrushchev's letter of Oct 26, not his Oct 27, which was referred to in President's letter . President of Oct 27 and formed basis of agreement, he said . First, pointed out it was Khrushvich's letter to Oct 26 .
 Second, he asked whether Sovs had draft of joint letter to SYG or whether it was purely letter of transmittal . Third, he also asked if Sovs and SYG had draft letter to each other or not .
 Sov proposal omitted any recitation of progress since exchange of letters, such as dismantling and removing of missiles and bombers, lifting of blockade and assurances in Pres's Nov 20 press conference . McCloy noted that Sov proposal omits any reference to points on which agreement not achieved, including UN verification
 Kuznetsov replied that President's Oct 27 letter does refer to Khrushchev's Oct 26 letter but also refers to its fifth para . Kuznnetsov: President's October 27 letter did refer to Oct. 26 letter, but also refer to the fifth para to Kh
 President's letter of Oct 27 in its substance dealt with points made in Khrushchev's letter, rather than in his Oct 26 letter, he claimed . Moreover he claimed President's . letter of October 27 in . its substance . dealt with . points made by Khrush . rather than
 He said joint letter of transmittal should be brief and formal and not set forth differences between us .
 SYG ask SYG to send letters to SC Pres for distribution to SC members as UN documents . SYG asks SC Pres to submit letters to SYG for distribution as UN document . SC Pres should send letters for distribution of UN documents, SYG says .
 If U.S. accepts proposal Sovs can then prepare draft letter of transmittal for discussion . If United States accepts proposal, Sovs will then prepare document to discuss . Sovs would then have to prepare document for discussion within one day .
 Kuznetsov said that if we attempt to include in letter of declarations points which have not been agreed, such as that United States will continue overflights, then we would be starting negotiations all over again . McCloy said if we tried to include such points in the letter of declaration
 Sovs cannot be party to any document containing such provision or give impression they approve it . Sovs are not party to such provision and cannot give impression that they approve .
 They cannot also agree in any way to making non-invasion assurance condition of Cuba's not threatening other states . Cuba must not threaten other states, they must not also agree, they say .
 New Sov proposal does not mean that all questions concerning Cuba will be settled, says CNN.com . The proposal is not the first time the proposal has been made to Cuba .
 Some points we would like to include would be omitted from the list . Some points would be added to the list of points they want to include . Some of the points we want to add would also be omitted . The list is a list of some of the most important points they would like
 Stevenson emphasized we had always understood agreement between us rested essentially on two letters, Khrushchev's of Oct. 26 and President's of . Oct 27 . Stevenson emphasized that agreement between . us and . presidents rests essentially on . two letters . which says Khrush . 26 letter provides basis
 It would be inappropriate to include in group of letters constituting agreement Oct 27 letter . U.S. never adverted except in connection with future disarmament, he says .
 Khrushchev's Oct 27 letter deals with proposal on concurrent action relating to Cuba and Turkey, which was never adopted and which was irrelevant . Khrushchen's Oct. 27 letter was written by the Soviet Union leader .
 The proposal omits all account of what has transpired since exchange of letters . Moreover it omits the account of the events which have taken place since the letters were exchanged .
 He welcomed efforts to end negotiations quickly but said his first reaction was troubled by difficulties he had mentioned . He said he would be troubled by the difficulties he mentioned .
 McCloy added that if only letters proposed were submitted there would be irresistible pressure to publish also Khrushchev Oct 26 letter which was referred to in President's Oct 27 letter . McCloy: If only letters were submitted, the pressure would be on the government to publish the letters .
 Khrushchev's Oct 27 letter of weapons in Turkey would disturb rather than tranquilize atmosphere . There is so much discussion in the letter that inclusion of this letter would disturb the atmosphere, says historian .
 He also repeated his difficulty with the omission of any statement of what has been accomplished on both sides . He said he has difficulty with any statement on what's been achieved .
 U.S. carried out all its obligations even though we have not had benefit of on-site inspection . He pointed out that . taking into account President's Nov 20 press conference, carried out . all its . obligations .
 If we register with UN our intent not to invade we must also register in document of equal dignity . Our intent continue observation by our own means until other means of verification can be established . Also if we register . with UN we must . register in documents of equal . dignity .
 He also pointed out that assurance we had offered in various drafts ""not to support invasion"" goes beyond what is set forth in exchange of letters and was offered in order to meet objections .
 Kuznetsov replied that he had listened attentively to objections but hopes United Nations will carefully study new proposal with view to reaching final solution . He said he hopes U.N. will carefully examine new proposal .
 We have negotiated for weeks and if we seek to include in documents all points United States wants and all points Sovs want, it will be very difficult ever to conclude . We have been negotiating for weeks, says President Obama .
 The idea is not to raise in these documents points on which we cannot agree, but to limit ourselves to letters which are already known to world as basis for settlement which has been achieved . The aim of the settlement is to reach an agreement which has already been reached in the past .
 They had selected only four letters which were concerned with settlement and which have been published . The letters have been sent to a number of people around the world .
 If United States thinks Khrushchev Oct 26 letter should also be published they would consult their govt whether do so . Khrushchen letter to U.S. should be published, says John Kerry .
 As to references to Turkey in Oct 27 letter, these are nothing new and nothing new, he says . Turkey's views in regard to foreign military bases around its borders are well known, he writes .
 Sovs, as concession to United States viewpoint, have given up idea of SC meeting and res. meeting . U.S. delegation to meet with U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in Washington .
 "Essence of their proposal is to avoid stirring up all of the moot questions we have been discussing for a long time and on which no agreement has been reached," says the BBC . Essence of the proposal is not to stir up all the mooted questions, says BBC presenter .
 World is already aware of what has been done since letters were exchanged and is reasonably well satisfied . World already knows what has already been done and is already well satisfied with what it has done since .
 Sovs are still interested in all of the points covered in protocol, normalization of situation in Caribbean, but are not going to insist on inserting them in these documents . Sovs still very keen on normalizing situation in the region, but not inserting them into these documents, he says
 As to overflights, United States creates vicious circle by repeating it will continue them until international arrangements are established, while at same time it does not state what sort of international system it contemplates and rejects that which has been put forward by U.S.
 In conclusion he repeated his appeal that U.S. think seriously about latest proposal .
 There has been attempt on each side to understand position of other side. There has also been an attempt to understand each other's position on the pitch .
 If U.S. insists on putting in documents reference to overflights and conditions as to assurances, it will be once again at very beginning of negotiations and solution will be far away .
 He would not want to give impression through this procedure that we had reached full agreement . However he would not reveal that we have not, he said . He said: "We have not. We have not reached a full agreement"
 "If the documents prove to be inadequate we might find ourselves in position of seeking SC meeting to expound our point of view more fully there. If the documents fail to be sufficient, we might seek SC meeting," says DPP .
 McCloy called to report on his luncheon with Kuznetsov today . Mr McCloy was in Cuba for a lunch with the Soviet Union leader .
 The discussion lasted from 11:15m. to 1:30m. and was held in Stevenson's office . A 12-page memorandum of conversation of this meeting indicates that the discussion lasted between 11 and 1m.
 Kuznetsov was ""intrigued"" with the idea of separate submissions to the Secretary General of the documents in the public record on Cuba since the last Security Council meeting, which was October 25 . The last meeting of the Security Council on Cuba took place October 25, 2013 .
 McCloy got the impression that Kuznetsov would favorably recommend our proposal to Moscow . Mr McCloy said he was impressed with the Russian leader's support for Moscow .
 We would be free to use any word we wanted to describe our submission . Assuming there are two separate submissions to the Secretary General, they would presumably use the word ""register"" in theirs .
 The problem is that the ""Prime Minister"" used the term ""register"" in ""his"" correspondence . The problem was that the Prime Minister used the word ""register" in his correspondence .
 Kuznetsov ""winced"" at the idea of the President's November 20 Press Conference being included in our package of documents . The Russian President is expected to hold a press conference on Nov. 20 .
 He conceded that there was much in the Presidential statement that was good from the Soviet point of view but said that 25% of it is bad"", notably the reference to overflights and the provisos on the President's non-invasion assurance .
 Kuznetsov said he didn't know whether the Soviet Government would want to publish the letter . He said he doesn't know if the Soviet government would want it published .
 Khrushchev had reread it and saw nothing discreditable in it, but as we probably tell, it had a rather special style and was in fact written by the former leader himself .
 McCloy explained we would have to show this letter to the Congression-al leaders on request, since it is referred to in the President's letter of October 27 .
 McCloy: 'We would not ourselves publish it unless the Soviet Government wants it published' McCloy added that we would not publish it if it was published .
 Castro referred to a document dated November 13 which we are still trying to identify here . He referred vaguely to an early statement by Castro (which might be his long television speech answering the President's original October 22 address) and a document .
 Kuznetsov said he appreciated that we were trying to wind this negotiation up without delay . This was also the desire of the Soviets, he said . The U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to make a visit to Moscow .
 Assurances to deliver $53,000,000 pharmaceuticals, medical supplies and foodstuffs and possibly some related products such as insecticides . Assurances that they will deliver pharmaceuticals and medical supplies, including medical supplies .
 Delivery of goods in Habana amounting to 20% of above value before prisoners released before prisoners were released . Delivery of items amounting . to 20 per cent of above . value before . prisoners released .
 American Red Cross acting in collaboration Cuban Families Committee has vessel now loading which together with air cargo now being prepared will deliver the 20% by December 23 in order begin airlift prisoners Miami area dawn December 23 .
 Three Cuban Red Cross representatives arrived Miami last night to inspect cargo being loaded . Red Cross officials inspect cargo in Miami .
 Goods donated by U.S. private companies to ARC now total about $45,000,000 . Contributions continue to be made .
 U.S. prepared to make available upon ARC request powdered skim milk from surplus stocks in amount not to exceed about $10,000,000 which represents less than 10% existing surplus this commodity .
 These donations by private companies are allowable under current tax legislation . These donations are allowed to be made under the current law .
 Rulings rendered by Internal Revenue re these donations conform to existing regulations, precedent . Internal Revenue Department rules are consistent with existing regulations .
 Private companies have choice under the law between paying taxes on this amount or making charitable contributions for tax deduction purposes . Private companies can choose whether to pay taxes or make charitable contributions to the charity .
 Inland and overseas freight, insurance, handling costs and labor have been donated by railroads, airlines, steamship lines, trucking companies, insurance companies and labor unions .
 Government role has been essentially to cut red tape in order expedite transaction . Government role is essentially to reduce red tape, cut it to speed up transactions .
 Since capture none has defected or publicly condemned the United States despite offers to reward them for doing so . None has publicly condemned U.S. since capture .
 Department does not believe transaction will materially affect stability Castro regime . Department believes transaction will not affect stability of regime .
 Reports indicate veteran Cuban communists opposed transaction while 26 July group favored . Veteran Cuban communist group favored transaction .
 Cuban normal annual imports pharmaceuticals alone over $60,000,000 . transaction involves substantially less than year's supply of any commodity . Cuban daily imports pharmaceutical drugs alone alone cost $60 million .
 Castro regime budgeted approximately $1,000,000 in foreign exchange for purchase pharmaceuticals . inclusion pharmaceuticals therefore releases only that amount of foreign exchange . Castro regime had budgeted about $1.1 million in foreign currency .
 Donovan reports Castro prepared review cases of twenty-four U.S. citizens now imprisoned with view clemency or amnesty . Donovan: Castro plans review of cases of . twenty-24 United States citizens . now imprisoned . Donovan reports .
 You authorized draw on foregoing except FYI portions in reply inquiries . Bearing in mind that last minute snags may upset transaction, you authorized drawing on foregoing .
 McCloy and Yost met this morning with Kuznetsov, Zorin, and Mendelevich . McCloy, Yost and Kuznnetsov met two-and-a-half hours with the Russian leaders .
 Sovs stood adamantly on their last proposal that only four letters exchanged between President and Khrushchev October 27 and 28 without any other documents be transmitted to UN/l/ No progress whatsoever was made .
 McCloy had impression from earlier conversations that Kuznetsov personally might have favored accepting our proposal that two sets of documents chosen separately be submitted but that Moscow had overruled him . Moscow overruled McCloy's request, he said . McCloy said .
 Kuznetsov: U.S. proposal to transmit along with President's letters of October 27 and 28 White House press statements of Oct. 27 and Oct. 28 was unacceptable . U.N. President's press statement of Nov. 20 was entirely unacceptable, he said .
 After careful thought Sovs see no need for additional documents since basic agreement between U.S. and USSR is embodied in four letters of October 27 and 28 .
 Reservations which U.S. put forward in unilateral fashion are after agreement between President and Khrushchev . Reservations were made in accordance with agreement between . President and President of Soviet Union in '60s and '70s .
 White House statement October 27 and President's press statement November 20 contain same reservations as in various United States draft declarations which Sovs had pronounced unacceptable . Sovs said the draft declarations were unacceptable .
 US is trying to undermine value of non-invasion assurances given in President's letters October 27 and 28 by introducing new conditions . US, Kuznetsov claimed, was trying to undercut value of those assurances given by President .
 U.S. changing position in trying not to reaffirm its obligations, says U.K. Russia . Russia removed offensive weapons, given United States chance to verify, and stated readiness to give assurances re reintroducing weapons, says Russia .
 It would appear U.S. wishes to get rid of these obligations and have its hands free not to observe non-invasion guarantee on pretext Cuba committing aggression against United States or other country .
 "It is clear U.S. seeking overthrow Cuban Govt and install old system," Cuban leader says . "We will not, of course, abandon . . Furthermore, from sentence in November 20 statement commencing, ""We will, of of course . abandon . ."
 This is a dangerous policy and pursuing this course could bring heavy consequences . This is dangerous policy, it is said. Pursuit of this policy could bring 'heavy consequences'
 Sovs cannot appear to agree in any form, directly or indirectly, to U.S. carrying on such policy . Sovs must not appear to . agree to United States carrying on . such policy.
 Kuznetsov touched lightly on October 27 White House statement, merely saying it was never considered basic document on settlement Cuban crisis and need not be included . He said it was not considered a basic document that should have been included in the document .
 U Thant asked why U.S. so reluctant to adopt UN system of inspection proposed by U. Thant . Thant: Observers in Caribbean area or observation groups stationed in NY with authority visit Caribbean from time .
 U.S. blandly rejects this proposal without even discussing it. United States blandly rejected this proposal . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton says it's a good idea to have a nuclear deal .
 U.S. maintains that since there is no international system, it must continue observation by its own means . United States maintains that, since there are no international systems, it has to continue observation .
 U.S. has said Soviet Union is not obliged to agree with what was said in October 27 and November 20 press statements . United States has said that Soviet Union not obliged with what it said in statements .
 It might appear Soviet Union had no objection to U.S. documents and had even agreed to them to certain extent . However, even if documents are transmitted to SYG separately by two sides, it might appear that Soviet Union agreed to the documents .
 Kuznetsov said position of U.S. side in negotiations in no way strengthens confidence between our govts . In summing up, he said position no way strengthened confidence between Russia and U.K. Russia .
 He urged United States reconsider its position and accept Soviet proposal to submit to SYG four letters exchanged between President and Khrushchev October 27 and 28 . He urged U.S. to consider Soviet proposal .
 McCloy replied had hoped we were close to agreement today but appears to have gone backward . McCloy said: "I had hoped I was close to agreeing today but I appear to be going backward"
 He had described previously how United States had already done or offered more than required by exchange letters between President and Khrushchev . He said he saw no use going over arguments once again .
 Each side must transmit whatever documents it wishes without disclosing in advance what it is submitting and thereby not implying there is any approval by other side . Perhaps best we can do is for each side transmit SYG whatever documents they wish .
 Exiles report heavy Cuban armament, of strong Soviet military presence, and camps for training guerrillas . It is still getting numerous reports from exiles of heavy Cuba armament .
 Satisfactory inspection system would have to be elaborate and it would take months to work out . Satisfactory inspections system would be elaborate, it would be difficult to implement .
 We do not think Cuban people are free and do not like Castro's social system, but that does not mean we are gong to invade Cuba . We are not going to invade the country, but do not want it to be invaded .
 If Sovs include Turkey letter with all its emphasis on Turkish bases, it would have to include October 27 press statement . If that's true, it will have to be included in the October 27 statement .
 United States is sincerely desirous of carrying out its obligations and believes it in vital interest both parties terminate this affair . United States believes it is vital that both parties terminated this affair. U.S. believes both parties should be terminated .
 Separate declarations but ours would have to include what we are going to do in our own defense; . 3. Separate declaration but not what we would do in defense;. 4. Sep separate declarations . 4.
 Separate unagreed statement outside UN by chiefs of state, Foreign Ministers or UN Reps, simply summing up, stating it had not been possible to reach full agreement but that crisis is terminated, and both sides hope for progress in future .
 McCloy concluded by expressing regret that situation cannot be terminated before reconvening of Congress when whole question likely subject of Congressional debate . McCloy: "We cannot't terminate this situation before . reconvenes" McCloy said .
 Kuznetsov expressed his govt's sincere desire to reach agreement and show two govts can do something together . The Russian government expressed its desire to find a way to reach an agreement .
 Sovs says only document he believes is necessary to submit is four letters October 27 and 28 . Sovs then reiterated that only documents he believes necessary are four letters to submit . He reiterated that the only document Sovs believed it necessary submit is October 27 .
 McCloy emphasized we are not asking Sovs to agree to documents we submit . McCloy: "We don't have to submit anything to the government. We're not asking them to submit any of the documents."
 Yost suggested that there might in separate letters transmittal be clear disclaimer by each party that it did not necessarily approve all documents submitted by other party . Yost suggests there might be a clear disclaimer .
 McCloy made it clear that while he would report Soviet views to Washington, he was convinced United States could not accept their proposal to submit four letters alone . McCloy: "While he would of course report [Washington] to Washington"
 It was agreed that while there appeared to be a total impasse, both parties would reflect and communicate later .
 Zorin announced that for reasons of health he is leaving his UN post and returning to Moscow to resume his duties as Deputy FonMin. At conclusion of meeting he announced he will return to Moscow .
 Kuzentsov mentioned that Zorin's successor is present Soviet Amb to Japan, has spent more than ten years in China, and is outstanding expert on Chinese affairs . Zorins' successor is presented Soviet Amb. to Japan .
 Following is text of new joint draft letters of transmittal proposed by Sovs . Sovs. proposed bySovs. Proposed draft letters .
 Khrushchev and the President of the United States of America John F Kennedy of October 27 and 28, 1962 contain the obligations assumed by the Soviets and the U.S. for the settlement of the crisis that arose in the Caribbean area .
 It is requested to transmit them to the President of the Security Council for circulating these messages as documents .
 Stevenson 257. "Resolution of the USSR Representative of the United States"" Stevenson 257 . The USSR representative of the U.S.
 Kuznetsov said Khrushchev placed great emphasis on inclusion of his October 27 Turkish Jupiter letter, explaining that he needed this domestically as he had used this domestically in defense of his action in Cuba . McCloy said that during the course of the conversation Kuznsov said that
 Kuznetsov also reiterated their objections to the inclusion of the President's November 20 press conference . The President's press conference is scheduled for November 20 .
 McCloy said he made it clear that he was at the ""end of his string"" McCloy had no further suggestions to offer . McCloy made the decision to step down .
 He said he also made it clear that we could not agree to any of the proposed Soviet procedures .
 McCloy said that he did not recommend or propose to take any new initiatives . McCloy would wait for Kuznetsov to get in touch with him . He did not say what he plans to do .
 Drafted and approved by U. Alexis Johnson, cleared by Martin, Cleveland, Thompson, Rusk, and in substance with President Kennedy . President Kennedy approved .
 I am transmitting true copies of the President's letters of October 27 and October 28 . In this connection, for the Council's record, I am . I am sending true copies .
 Other statements relating to the U.S. position in this matter are contained in a White House press statement dated October 27, and in the President's opening remarks at his press conference on November 20, 1962 .
 The President of the United States has asked me to express his hope that the steps taken by the two governments in this matter may lead to further constructive efforts on the part of the U.S. and the Soviet Union to adjust the differences between them .
 My Government is also grateful to you for your own part in assisting both parties to find the means to avert the serious threat to the peace which the Cuban situation then entailed .
 The substance of the foregoing joint letter could be incorporated into separate letters by United States and Soviet representatives . Alternatively, the substance of a joint letter by the U.S. and . Soviet representatives could also be incorporated in separate letters to each other by the United States .
 McCloy gave Soviets following draft of suggested separate letter to be given to SYG by US, on assumption Soviets would also give SYG a separate letter in form previously submitted to US, presumably accompanied by copies of Khrushchev's letters of Oct 27 and 28 and reference to any other
 McCloy pointed out United States draft merely referred to White House press statement Oct 27 and Nov 20, and did not submit them as UN docs, thus moving toward Soviet position . McCloy said U.S. draft just referred to the White House statement Oct. 27 and Presidential news conference
 Kuznetsov asked why the reference in the letter could not be limited only to the Presidential letters of Oct 27 and 28 since the White House press statement and news conference were matters of public record, and since the basic obligations of the two parties were contained in the four letters .
 McCloy said this was impossible and that he had gone as far as he possibly could in eliminating the submission to the UN of the press statement and news conference statement and merely referring to them . McCloy: "I have gone to the highest level possible"
 Kuznetsov said the letter was not acceptable, and that the Soviets could not agree to or approve openly or tacitly any reference to any qualifications or reservations to the United States obligations under the October 27 and October 28 letters . The Soviets were not allowed to sign the letter .
 McCloy pointed out that Soviets were not being asked to approve or agree to anything, and that the separate letter would presumably not contain any such intimation . McCloy points out that the Soviet separate letter from the U.S. would presumably do not contain such intimations .
 Kuznetsov repeated that Soviets could not approve any reference to over-flights over Cuba or intrusion into Cuban territorial waters or to Cuban behavior . The Soviet Union did not approve that any reference was approved .
 None of the foregoing had been referred to in Oct 27 and 28 letters or negotiations incident thereto. None of these had been mentioned in the letters or . negotiations incident to date .
 Presidential news conference Nov 20 was first reference to Cuban behavior as a qualification of United States obligation not to invade, and qualifying references to subversion, export of communism, Cuban aggression, etc. etc., so vague as to weaken and vitiate U.S. obligation . U.
 McCloy: Neither U.S. nor any other country could unqualifiedly and unconditionally agree not to invade another country . McCloy said that these were familiar Soviet arguments, and that he would not repeat United States counter-arguments . He said that neither United States nor any
 Kuznetsov objected to word 'offensive' as applied to weapons in United States draft . Kuznnetsov also objected to use of word "offensive" as used to refer to weapons .
 Khrushchev and the President of the United States John F Kennedy of October 27 and 28, 1962 contain the obligations assumed by the Govts of the USSR and of the U.S. on settling the recent crisis in the Caribbean area . The obligations were agreed by Khrushchchev
 It is requested to transmit them to the President of the Security Council for circulation as documents of the Council .
 The USSR and the U.S. hope action taken to avert war arising from the crisis in the Caribbean area will lead to further constructive efforts by the parties concerned .
 "We express gratitude to you, Mr Secretary General, for your efforts in the cause of a peaceful settlement of the crisis in the Caribbean area"
 The Representative of the USSR is the representative of the United States . End verbatim text.
 McCloy said he had done his best to meet the Soviet position in that the last U.S. draft merely referred to the White House press statement and Presidential news conference without submitting them . No country could give an absolute guarantee against invasion if it or its allies were attacked, McCloy
 He also pointed out that the Nov 20 press conference statement contained many provisions favorable to the Soviets, going beyond the Oct 27 and 28 letters . The Nov 20 statement contains many provisions, he said .
 He also pointed out that the statement was made before the weapons were removed, and that Khrushchev had publicly thanked the President for that statement .
 Kuznetsov said that Soviets had hoped that there could be an agreed text evidencing an agreement between the Soviets and the United States which would have provided a favorable atmosphere for the future composition of differences .
 Recent statements by United States officials gave the impression that the U.S. was continuing to do its utmost to overthrow the Castro regime . He further referred to the United States responsibility for the Bay of Pigs affair .
 He also referred to supposed U.S. support ever since World War II of reactionary groups such as Nationalist Chinese, South Koreans, etc. etc., and to United States unwillingness to consider U. Thant's suggested reciprocal inspection plan .
 McCloy said that perhaps new negotiations should be initiated for proper inspection of US, Soviet Union and Cuba, but that time was limited . McCloy, after appropriate rejoinder to Kuznetsov propaganda, said perhaps new talks should be started .
 McCloy said it might be possible to incorporate in such draft letter some of the language contained in the draft draft letter just submitted by Kuznetsov . McCloy: Any joint letter must indicate that there had not been complete agreement between the parties .
 Kuznetsov said he could not make a comment on the draft, but would consider it and report it to his govt. Kuznnetsov .
 We would like to think this meant we had scored a goal at basketball, but realize he thought he thought the game was tennis . We would rather think it was basketball .
 Kuznetsov gave impression he had firm, explicit instructions not to agree to any reference to White House press statement of Oct 27 or Presidential press conference statement of Nov. 20 .
 Kuznetsov said that he gave ""sincere examination"" to the first draft letter submitted to him on December 28, but it was still unacceptable . Kuznev said he gave a 'sincere' examination' to the draft letter .
 The two sides discussed the second joint letter, but neither side came to any final decision . Kuznetsov suggested some minor changes, but no final decision was made .
 Cuban Focal Point in the Miami Area . Joint Chiefs of Staff meeting at Palm Beach, Florida .
 Cuban brigade officers could be used at Fort Jackson, South Carolina, in helping train Cuban trainees . The question was how many of the Cuban officers might need a special officers' course for updating and retraining .
 There were no numbers involved, but it was agreed by all that some of them would end up at Fort Jackson . Some of the numbers involved was not known, but some of the soldiers were likely to end up there .
 The next question raised was whether this Cuban brigade would be a focal point for a new political groupment . The Cuban brigade was formed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The President pointed out that one of the tough problems in dealing with the 100,000 Cuban refugees in the Miami area is their lack of formalized party- he stated that there are four major parties and about one hundred splinter groups .
 The Chiefs brought up the future political problems in connection with future military plans for Cuba . What we actually need is the establishment of a government-in-exile, the Chiefs said .
 President's directive that in their future planning the political preparations would have to be carefully organized . This was in response to a directive from the President that in . the President of Nigeria .
 With all this as background, the question came up about how our government is going to deal with this 100,000 nucleus in the future . The question was asked about how the government would deal with the nucleus in its future .
 It was suggested that whatever we do in Washington it was essential that we establish a ""focal point"" in the Miami area . The Miami area is a key part of the US government .
 "Right now these various groups sit down there, stewing in their own juice, elect committees, become emotionally upset, and then finally call upon somebody in Washington to let off their steam," he says .
 If we are to get any benefit for future operations with this large group of people, it was suggested that we have a continuing office down in that area so that these committees could be guided and they would have a place to put in their requests .
 Katzenbach says the Department of Justice's future interest is primarily one of the immigration authorities . He would very much like to have immigration represented, both in Washington and in Miami .
 Mr McCone has some deep feelings about the whole process, and especially his future relationships with the Cubans . He wants to have General Carter sit in on any deliberations .
 He feels that if we establish a Miami ""focal point,"" the Agency certainly would have to work in coordination with them . The Agency would work with them, he says .
 The President then asked especially that I get the matter to your attention and he will await your early recommendations, including the advice of the Department of State, he said .
 All concerned felt that the Department of State should be the chief agency for the focal point, if it were established . The State Department would be the main focal point of the new initiative .
 There are 100,000 Cuban refugees down there and 60,000 of them draw money from the Cuban refugee relief program . The Cuban refugee program is the largest in the world .
 "They obviously would be very important in the Miami area and are going to be continuously involved as long as they are paying money out to these refugees," he says .
 It was his suggestion that any headquarters set up in the Miami area be set up at this location because the Cubans are already used to dealing with the government at that location . It was suggested that any Havana headquarters be located in Miami .
 On your oral instructions conveyed by General Clifton, I have met with an interdepartmental group to try to work out an improved arrangement for our handling of Cuban policy and action in 1963 . On this oral instructions, General Cliffton has met with a group of interdep
 Vance, Yarmolinksy and General Wheeler were delegates for McNamara and Gilpatric . Vance, . Yarmlinksy, . Wheeler, Nick Katzenbach and . Pat Carter from CIA; . Alexis Johnson and Ed Martin from State Department. Ed Martin .
 The following paragraphs represent my personal sense of what we have worked out together, and while there may be some small differences of point of view or need for revision, I think they are ripe for your consideration .
 Final policy responsibility should remain with you, working with the Executive Committee when necessary . The first guiding principle is that final policy responsibility is with you .
 There is no point pretending that major Cuban policy decisions can be made anywhere else than in the White House . The White House's own executive role, supplemented by the Executive Committee, is indispensable, he says .
 The more complicated matter is where to put day-to-day coordinating responsibility . "It's not easy to put the responsibility of coordinating responsibility on the shoulders of the president," says Obama .
 A Coordinator of Cuban Affairs will work as a deputy to Ed Martin in the State Department . He will also act as chairman of an interdepartmental group on Cuba .
 The Coordinator would be responsible to Dean Rusk and Ed Martin for departmental business, and, under their guidance, for interdepartmental coordination .
 Nothing in his authority would supplant the responsibility of other operating departments for management of their own assigned tasks, or their right to be consulted before their resources are committed . But it would be clear that you and the Executive Committee were looking to the Coordinator and his interdepartmental committee for
 In ordinary circumstances, the necessary coordination will be carried out effectively by good will and good sense on all sides . The necessary coordination is carried out in ordinary circumstances .
 When there is an honest difference that cannot be resolved it will, of course, have to come upstairs one way or another . "When there is a difference that can't be resolved, it will have to be resolved"
 The key to this administrative organization is, of course, the individual appointed as coordinator . The key is the person appointed as a coordinator .
 State Department recommendation is that Sterling Cottrell should be given this job . State Department says he should have been given the job . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his lack of experience in Washington .
 He has been doing a very solid and constructive job as head of the Vietnamese Task Force . He is due for reassignment to Latin American Affairs, which turns out to be his preferred professional field, both by experience and interest .
 "He has the necessary professional seniority in the Department, and high interdepartmental acceptance," he said . He has been selected for the position .
 If this arrangement should be approved, the Cuban desk of the Department would be absorbed in a new, higher level Office of Cuban Affairs under Cottrell . Bob Hurwitch as his deputy .
 Hurwitch has done a very able job within the Department, but he is a little junior for a major job of interdepartmental coordination, he says . Hurwitch's job is to coordinate interdepartmentsal coordination .
 Cottrell would be expected to appoint a deputy coordinator, to be based in Miami, to handle day-to-day relations with Cuban refugees and with interested agencies of Government .
 Bob Orrick asked to expedite effective interdepartmental administrative support, as necessary, for both the Coordinator and the Miami office . Orrick has been asked to speed up the necessary administrative support .
 If a Coordinator for Cuban Affairs is established, then we think the Mongoose office should be disbanded . responsibility for covert operations should be part of the work of the Coordinator and his associates from other departments .
 The Special Group would in turn be guided by broader policy as established by you through the Executive Committee . The Special Committee would be in turn guided by the Special Group .
 The covert aspects of our Cuban enterprise are not the most important ones, at present . They need to be handled in the wider context of an open Cuban policy, writes David Frum .
 Such a change would liberate General Lansdale for many other tasks in which his services are uniquely valuable, he says .
 The shipping orders and the broader question of economic pressure on Cuba are still unsettled . The shipping order and the question of how Cuba reacts to Cuba's economic pressure is still unclear .
 Executive Orders have been prepared along the lines of your press conference statement, but they are being held up, as I think Dean Rusk has explained to you, pending discussion with OAS and other Allies . Executive Orders are being prepared to be made, but are not being made, pending
 We need a much more open and continuous communication with refugee leaders . We need clarification of the opportunities to be offered to Cuban volunteers, whether or not they are veterans .
 "If we can manage it, we need to get a stronger process of representation of free Cubans," says D.C. citizen .
 We should intensify our investigation of ways and means of communicating with possibly dissident members of the Castro regime, perhaps including Fidel himself, perhaps even Fidel .
 Donovan, for example, has an invitation to be Castro's guest at the beach of Veradero . There is work to be done also in our relations with men like Manolo Ray, says Donovan .
 "We do not want Cuba to be a hemispheric training ground for Communists," says President Obama . "We have not exhausted our weapons here," says Obama .
 "We need to keep up a continuous and high-level barrage of public statements explicitly defending our rights of surveillance," the author says .
 You said on television that the camera will be our best inspector and this position should be energetically sustained . The camera inspector should be the best inspector in the country, he said .
 Juan Trippe should not be allowed to get away with poor-mouthing on the cost to Pan American, says Ed Martin . Ed Martin: It is probably to our advantage to have such flights, and that Trippe shouldn't get away .
 The Pan American franchise is of the highest importance to Pan American, and nothing I have heard about their marginal losses is very impressive . Over the long run this franchise is worth a lot of money to Pan America .
 If you approve, we could put the organization into effect at once . We could have a preliminary discussion of the substantive issues by Cottrell's people with the Executive Committee before the end of next week . It would help to have your general reaction to these matters by Monday .
 Meeting with the President in Palm Beach, Florida-9:45m. Saturday-5 January 1963 . The meeting was brief .
 Secretary Rusk was present during the latter half which involved Cuban program . Secretary of State Rusk attended the program in Cuba .
 McCone generally reviewed the Killian report,/l/ stated it was a good report . McCone indicated that it called the glass of water half full, not half empty . The DCI could not forecast a final Killian Board position .
 McCone stated that he personally felt the Intelligence Community had done a good job but looking back in retrospect he felt that they could have done better . McCone said that he felt the intelligence community had done well in the wake of 9/11 .
 Failure to press aggressively overflight program between August 29th and October 14th was due to timidity throughout the government, including the Intelligence Community for fear of a ""U-2 incident"" once SAM sites were detected in Cuba . Failure to push aggressively for overflight was caused by tim
 This foreclosed earlier detection of the existence of the . existence of . offensive missiles . It foreclosed . earlier detection . of the presence of offensive missiles.
 A conviction on the part of government officials and intelligence estimators that the Soviets would not accept the responsibility of a confrontation which would result from placing of offensive missiles in Cuba . Because of this conviction the estimators and others in Government failed to fully evaluate many indicators which, if carefully analyzed,
 President seemed inclined to believe estimators should not be criticized for their judgment as it was reasonable to assume the Soviets would not place themselves in an indefensible position militarily, they would assume we would find out and would respond .
 SAM sites placed the Soviets in an awkward position for if they used them against one of our airplanes we would be inclined to respond militarily and they could not defend the SAM sites . Furthermore he felt the Soviets placed the . Soviets in a awkward position .
 In general the President agreed with Sherman Kent's position that the Soviets made a bad guess as to our response .
 Only refugee or agent reports dealing significantly with offensive missiles came in on or after September 20th . At most there were only 8 or 10 out of a total of some 1200 reports, the Killian report says .
 The President asked if the 5412 Committee reviewed raw intelligence of this type and I responded that their doing was not within their province, that raw intelligence was circulated to the Intelligence Community . Such matters should be considered by the United States Intelligence Board .
 I maintained that handling of raw intelligence was not a problem for 5412 Committee . I maintain that handling . raw intelligence is not a . problem for the 5412 committee .
 The 5412 Committee should meet regularly and for a sufficient time for review of their responsibilities . Action papers should be sent to the members of the 5412 committee not later than Tuesday morning for consideration the following Thursday .
 President expressed concern over the welfare of the prisoners . He urged that arrangements be made to barracks them at Opa Locka or elsewhere .
 There followed an extended discussion of policy with respect to Pan American flights . Pan American Airlines is the largest airline in the world .
 The President wished them resumed but did not feel doing so should be in response to a demand by Castro . Castro is Castro's prime minister in Cuba .
 DCI would meet with Donovan and arrange for him to go to Havana and work out suitable considerations for the resumption of flights which would avoid the appearance of responding to a Castro demand .
 The President spoke favorably of the Cuban Task Force outlined in the recent Bundy memorandum/2/ which would be chaired by State with departmental representation . The task force would be chaired by State .
 The President also recognized the need for CIA to complete liaison arrangements with free countries . This should be pursued aggressively, even if it required DCI to visit several countries personally .
 DCI reported proposed meetings with the Chairmen of CIA Congressional Committees and later with the Committees themselves . DCI said proposed meetings would be held with CIA Congressional committees .
 Both McCone and the President felt that DCI line should not be defensive but rather should indicate that a substantial intelligence success occurred . Both felt the line should be not defensive, but rather indicate that an intelligence success had occurred .
 The President suggested that McCone prepare a briefing for the Leadership meeting on Tuesday afternoon . The meeting will be held at the White House .
 McCone said he had no verification of this and that he was convinced that Keating information had come from refugee sources . McCone: "I have no verification" of this .
 McCone concluded that the first offensive missiles reached Cuba between the 2nd and 9th of September . In answer to a question McCone stated that he had concluded that . He concluded that he concluded . that the . first offensive missile had reached Cuba .
 The material McCone used for the briefing of the Congressional leadership is in the Supplement .
 McCone advised the President that he expected an investigation by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee which would probably be initiated by a demand from Senator Lausche . McCone said he expected the investigation to be initiated .
 Kuznetsov handed McCloy a revised joint letter of which the second paragraph was substantially different from the United States draft . The second paragraph of the U.S. draft of the letter is substantially different .
 Plimpton met with Kuznetsov and Mendelevich at the Soviet Mission at 5m. on January 3 at 5.m. Plimpt .
 Kuznetsov deplored the omission of the reference to ""understanding"" in the new U.S. draft's second paragraph . The draft was released in March .
 Kuznetsov maintained there was an understanding and it was in the interests of both sides to include the word . The Russian president said the word was important to both sides .
 Kuznetsov pointed out that the Soviet draft closely followed the U.S. draft . The Soviet draft was closely followed by the United States draft .
 McCloy countered that he was disappointed that the Soviet Union did not accept the U.S. draft . McCloy said the draft was accepted by the United States. McCloy: "I'm disappointed that [the] Soviet Union didn't accept the draft"
 Both men agreed to minor stylistic revisions in the third paragraph of the letter .
 McCloy told Kuznetsov that he would consider the Soviet draft and let him know his answer . McCloy said he would be willing to consider the draft .
 McCloy made the call to Kuznetsov on January 4 . On January 5, the Soviets accepted the U.S. draft as conveyed by McCloy in the January 4 telephone call .
 The two sides agreed to sign and release a joint letter on January 7 . The letter is expected to be signed and released by the end of January .
 Copies were sent to Secretary of Defense, Attorney General, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare . Copies also sent to the Director of Central Intelligence, Director of U.S. Information Agency .
 President has approved the following organizational arrangements to facilitate the coordinated management of all aspects of our current policy toward Cuba . Final policy responsibility of course remains with the President, working with the Executive Committee of the National Security Council when necessary .
 Day-to-day coordinating responsibility will be vested in a Coordinator of Cuban Affairs in the Department of State, acting as Chairman of an Interdepartmental Committee .
 The Coordinator will be responsible to the Secretary of State for State Department business . The Coordinator is responsible for interdepartmental coordination .
 The Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee shall consist of the Coordinator and representatives of the Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency . The Committee will be the Coordinator of the Defense and Central Intelligence .
 Representatives of other departments will be associated with the work of this committee as necessary in particular cases . The committee will also work with representatives from other departments .
 Other departments may be requested to participate in the work of the Interdepartmental Committee .
 A White House officer will maintain liaison with the Coordinator and with his Interdepartmental Committee .
 The President and Executive Committee will look to the Coordinator for effective coordination of the execution of policy decisions, and for timely recommendations .
 The Coordinator will work through his assigned officers and with the Interdepartmental Committee in meeting these responsibilities .
 The Coordinator's authority will not supplant the responsibility of other departments or agencies for the management of their assigned tasks or their right to be consulted before committing resources .
 Differences which arise will be promptly referred to higher levels of resolution . Differences between the two parties will be resolved quickly .
 The Coordinator will assume the same responsibility for covert operations as he does for overt actions . He will be the Coordinator of covert operations .
 He will report on covert matters to the Special Group which will be guided by broader policy established by the President through the Executive Committee . However, he will be able to report covert matters .
 President Kennedy, Vice President Johnson, Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara met with bipartisan Congressional leadership from 5:30 to 6:35m.
 Attending were Senators Mike Mansfield, Hubert H Humphrey, George Smathers, Richard Russell, Everett Dirkson, Thomas Kuchel, Leverett Saltonstall and Bourke Hickenlooper . From the House of Representatives were Speaker John McCormack, Representatives Carl
 McNamara gave a briefing on South Vietnam "expressing an optimistic point of view" Rusk briefed the Congressional leaders on the Cuban negotiations at the United Nations and on the Congo . McCone drafted a brief memorandum for the record of the meeting .
 McCone noted that there were ""no significant questions"" from Congressional leadership . McCone said there were no significant questions" from the Congressional leadership. McCone also noted that no questions had been raised .
 McCone's January 8 briefing statement was attached to his January 9 memorandum for the record . McCone: "I don't think it's fair to blame for what happened"
 In it he stated that the Soviet Union had withdrawn 42 strategic missiles, 42 jet bombers and their related equipment and about four or five thousand military personnel . This left approximately 17,000 Soviet troops still in Cuba . In it it also stated that 42 strategic missile bombers and 42 jet-b
 Intelligence community believed, but could not prove, that these withdrawals represent all the strategic weapons placed in Cuba by the Soviet Union . McCone noted that the Intelligence community could not . prove by aerial reconnaissance that these . withdrawals were made in Cuba .
 Aerial reconnaissance would reveal if strategic missiles were reintroduced or reactivated . The U.S. military says it has no plans to reactivate any of the missiles .
 McCone stressed that there was still a substantial Soviet military presence in Cuba . McCone stresses that there were still a large Soviet military forces in Cuba in the 1950s .
 McCone finished his briefing with an overview of the current areas in Latin America in danger of subversion directed by Moscow and Havana . McCone: Latin America is at risk of being subverted by Russia and Cuba .
 Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. D 149 . D 149 is a collection of memoranda signed by the State Department .
 Guthrie, Thompson, Guthrie and Thompson drafted the bill . The White House approved the bill on January 14 . Guthrie's draft was cleared in draft by Thompson, Thompson .
 President Llewellyn E Thompson, Ambassador at Large John Guthrie, Director, SOV USSR Vasiliy Vasilyevich Kuznetsov, First Deputy Foreign Minister Anatoliy F Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador Lev Isaakovich Mendelevich, Assistant to
 The Soviet Government considered that this part of the negotiation has been completed and that it would therefore be useful to meet the President and pay his respects . The Soviet government considered that . that this . would therefore . therefore, meet the . President of the Soviet Union and Soviet President of Soviet Union
 Everyone in the USSR understands that Khrushchev's instructions played a crucial role in the troubled days of crisis in the Caribbean . The danger of a thermonuclear war had been averted by the Soviet leader .
 He was instructed by his Government to make certain observations on the situation and related matters . And so he had been instructed by the Government, he had to make some observations .
 The atmosphere of the talks had been business-like and they had clearly expressed the U.S. viewpoint, the president said .
 He agreed with the President that the results had not been everything that had been hoped for . But he agreed with him that the President had not achieved everything hoped for.
 He said that under instructions he wished to comment on the results of the situation in the Caribbean .
 The Soviet Government and people are constantly working to improve relations with the United States . In Moscow great significance is attached to the fact that throughout the Caribbean crisis the U.S. and the . United States and the United .S.R. acted on the basis of trust and mutual understanding
 Whether this basis can be maintained, including that personally between the President and Chairman Khrushchev, will determine whether other international problems could be settled in the future .
 The fulfillment of the agreements will be a touchstone of the ability of the two powers to trust each other's word and to avert a military conflict . The fulfillment by both sides of these agreements is the touchstone .
 The crisis in the Caribbean demonstrated with great clarity that both countries should act in accordance with the United Nations Charter concerning relations between all nations, large and small .
 Without this, there could be no guarantee that the United States and the U.S.R. will not confront each other again . Without this they could not be sure that the two countries would not clash again .
 Demonstrations like this revive the shadows of the past and leave their mark on the present . The demonstrative welcome by the President of the Cuban refugees could not be noted in Moscow .
 Chairman Khrushchev spoke of this in messages to the President and public speeches . Chairman Khrrushchev said it was a matter of national security . Khrushchev said he was concerned about the situation in the country .
 Two main problems to be solved are the question of the German peace treaty and general and complete disarmament . The two main problems are to solve are the peace treaty of Germany and general disarmament of the West .
 Without eliminating the remnants of World War II it will be impossible to achieve normal relations . Without eliminating remnants of WWII, normal relations can't be achieved, he says . Without trust such relations engender general and complete disarmament would be impossible .
 The Soviet Government will make every effort to move the 18 Nation Disarmament Committee ahead . The Soviet government is prepared to do everything that would contribute to the success of these negotiations .
 The President said he thought Kuznetsov knew from his talks with McCloy and Stevenson of the particular sensitivity in the U.S. to anything involving Cuba .
 "This is a delicate nerve in the United States stretching back to the beginning of our country," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "It's a very delicate nerve" in the U.S.
 President said he was anxious to maintain good relations with the Soviet Union . On the other hand, he said he wanted to keep good relations between Russia and Ukraine .
 He had noted before that these two most powerful countries have no national interests which bring them into collision . He had said that the two countries are not interested in each other .
 The President had spent a good deal of time defending this viewpoint prior to the Cuban crisis . He had spent most of the time defending his position prior to this crisis .
 Now that the matter has quieted down he saw no reason why the United States and the U.S.R. should be involved again in the same way .
 Kuznetsov asked him to explain to his principals American sensitivity over Cuba . He asked him how he would explain to them that the U.S. is sensitive about Cuba .
 President said the Soviet Government could understand how the U.S. felt about this if they could imagine a similar situation in Finland . The President said they could understand the United States .
 He was hopeful that Soviet policies toward Cuba, including personnel and armaments, would lead to a further relaxation of the situation .
 President said he had put them on the beach and felt responsible for them . As to the question of the Bay of Pigs prisoners, he said: "He felt responsible" for them.
 He had not said in his address to them that the U.S. would invade Cuba . He had expressed the hope for a change in the situation there there .
 All the United States forces which had been mobilized during the crisis were back in their camps . All the U.S. forces which were mobilized in the crisis are now in camps .
 If the Soviet Union can comprehend the sensitivity and difficult nature of the problems the U.S. faces in the Caribbean, this can lead to a solution of other problems . The Soviet Union should understand the sensitivity to the problems it faces, writes David Frum .
 In reply, Kuznetsov said that the Soviet Government will fulfill all of the obligations it undertook with the exchange of letters between Khrushchev and the President . In reply to the letter, Kudnetsov replied that the government will fulfill its obligations .
 All the agreements in the exchange of letters had been carried out, he says . As for the Soviet military personnel in Cuba, it seemed to him that all the agreements .
 This problem had been dealt with in the course of the exchange and there was a clear understanding on both sides concerning this matter . This is not the first time a player has been sent off the field .
 The Soviet Government will abide by all its agreements so there is nothing new in this problem . The Soviet government will abide with all its agreement so there are nothing new to this problem.
 He recognized that the latter was not the same kind of commitment since no time was specified . He said it was a commitment not to commit to a specific time .
 U.S. President Barack Obama made a speech at the end of his visit to Washington D.C. He said he wanted to mention this matter which occupied attention in the United States .
 Kuznetsov reiterated that he thought that there was no misunderstanding on this point . The Russian president said he thought there was a misunderstanding on the issue .
 The U.S.R. is not raising the question at this time, he said . However, he had no instructions on this point and said that the United States is not .
 The President replied that the United States had not introduced a new major base in any country such as Finland . The President said the U.S. has not introduced new major bases in Finland .
 He repeated that Cuba was a matter of great sensitivity to the American people . President Obama asked Kuznetsov to communicate this to his Government .
 Good relations between our two countries, the President said, will be made easier if the Soviet Government understands this . The President said that good relations between Russia and the UK will be easier if they understand this .
 Kuznetsov reverted to the question of the President's reception of the Cuban brigade in Florida . He said that this had created the opinion in Moscow that this brigade will be maintained, that others will be created .
 In a backgrounder which he had given in Florida he had said that the United States had no intention of invading Cuba and noted that our position remained .
 It would be easier for the U.S. if there were a reduction of the Soviet military presence in Cuba . Nevertheless, it would be better for the United States to reduce the Soviet presence in the country .
 The President noted that Castro makes many more speeches than the President does and in them calls for revolution in Latin America . The President said Castro makes much more speeches .
 The relations between the United States and the U.S.R. are more important and the President was anxious to lessen areas of disagreement between the two countries . The President is anxious to ease the tension between the countries .
 Normalization of relations required that something else should be done, he says . However, normalizing relations required something else, he adds .
 No one can agree that a situation is normal when a great power threatens a small one, and officially expresses a desire to strangle and overthrow the government of the smaller one . The situation is not normal, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The President reiterated that the U.S. was not concerned with Cuba but with the Soviet military presence there .
 Castro and Che Guevara have made speeches calling for armed struggle in Latin America . He said small bands of guerrillas would act as a catalyst in the process of taking power from the hands of the imperialists .
 Kuznetsov replied that he was not at all sure the quotes which he had made from the Cuban speeches were exact .
 It seemed to him that the Cubans had far more reasons to fear and worry than the U.S. than the United States .
 Cuba had been under various undermining pressures since the revolution began in 1959 . Cuba has been under internal pressure since the start of the revolution .
 The Cuban Government and Castro had made quite clear their willingness to negotiate with the U.S. regarding all points awaiting solution . The Cuban government and Castro have made it clear they are willing to negotiate .
 The United States could respond to these Cuban proposals in order to normalize relations . The U.S. should respond to the proposals .
 Meeting with the President— Cuba Aerial Reconnaissance . Mr Bundy said that we had evidence of greater participation of Cuban nationals in the air defense system of Cuba .
 The President asked why a plane should abort in the event of a radar lockon . The President said a plane would abort in such a situation .
 Mr Bundy replied that if the plane continued on its flight, it would be shot down . Mr Bundy said it was possible it would have been shot down by the plane .
 Secretary McNamara said he did not think we should permit ourselves to get into a situation where we would have lost a plane and not yet have decided how we would respond to such hostile action . McNamara: We should not have decided what we would do if we would lose a plane .
 "We could fly a reconnaissance mission, have a plane shot down, then decide how we would react," he says . We could fly reconnaissance missions, have planes shot down and then decide on how they would react .
 "We could fly missions equipped with our most sophisticated electronic countermeasures equipment," says the U.S. Air Force . We would be able to fly missions with the most sophisticated anti-aircraft equipment .
 The cost of using the ECM equipment would be the possibility of compromising highly advanced and highly classified instruments . The cost could be the possible compromise of highly advanced or classified instruments, experts say .
 Secretary McNamara said we did not have yet positive proof of a radar lockon on any of our planes . McNamara: We had evidence indicating radar tracking .
 The President said that he thought he thought the Defense Department should decide whether or not to use our sophisticated ECM equipment .
 He said he intended to believe that if it appeared that the Cubans were taking actions with a view to shooting down one of our planes, the plane should abort the first time this happened . He said that if the plane was shot down first time it happened, it should abort .
 There will be no change in the rules regarding aborts by reconnaissance planes this week .
 Director McCone said he favored using the U-2 in good weather, but if the weather were bad, he thought we should fly low-level missions . McCone: If the weather was bad, the U.2 should use it in bad weather . He said he favors using
 Secretary McNamara said he did not agree with low-level aerial reconnaissance in bad weather . He said the loss of a U.S. plane or controversy arising out of such flights would be all out of proportion to the value of the information obtained .
 The cargo of the Soviet ship/1/ probably did not consist of missiles, he said . He said that certain knowledge about it was not worth the complications arising out of low-level flights .
 In it he indicated that the ship being referred to was the Simferopol and that the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance had recommended it be subjected to round-the-clock photography at 4-hour intervals .
 The President authorized only high-level surveillance of the Simferopol, a January 17 memorandum from Chase to McGeorge Bundy . The memo was based on advice from Rusk and McNamara .
 CIA Director McCone said the CIA was trying to find out what was in the cargo and would continue to do so during the time the cargo was being unloaded . He said he was not certain that they would be able to obtain the information we wanted .
 He expressed a view that the cargo might contain armaments dangerous to us . The cargo may also contain weapons that could be dangerous to our country, he said .
 Mr Bundy said there were political problems immediately ahead of us, such as Donovan's proposed visit to Havana in connection with the remaining prisoners in Cuba .
 He said the group would return to the President at a later time when more information was available .
 Secretary McNamara said the Defense Department would be prepared to carry out low-level missions on very short notice if the President so decided . McNamara: The Defense Department is prepared for short-notice missions .
 Kennedy Library, Countries Series, Cuba, Intelligence Material, 1/62-9-62 . Kennedy Library: Cuba, Cuba and Cuba . Kennedy library: Cuba .
 The President has mentioned again his interest in maximizing the information we get from Cuba by other sources than air surveillance, the President has asked me to report this interest to you .
 He would like to know what we are now doing to encourage visits to Cuba by knowledgeable and friendly observers of other nationalities, and also whether our arrangements with friendly countries having embassies in Havana are as effective in this respect .
 He would like to know what additional measures are being taken in this respect . He would also like to see if additional measures have been taken .
 He believes we should be able to arrange for regular visits to Cuba of visitors of a rank and sophistication . This would give them access to high authorities of the Cuban government, he says .
 The Cuban economy during 1963 probably will not decline further in total output and may show some improvement in comparison with 1962 . Cuba's economy during the year 1963 is expected to be better than 1962 .
 Cuban GNP in 1962, measured in 1958 prices, is estimated to be 25 percent below the 1958 level . GNP is measured in 1959 prices and measured in 1962 prices .
 Cuba ran a trade deficit in 1962 that was substantially higher than the deficit in 1958 . The total supply of available goods, however, was only about 20 percent lower than in 1958 because of the trade deficit .
 Total agricultural output will not increase much during 1963, for sugar harvest . Sugar harvest probably will decline slightly from last year, largely offsetting moderate gains in other crops .
 Industrial production will increase as Cuba's new managerial class gains experience and the economy begins to regain some of its lost efficiency . Industrial production is expected to increase some of Cuba's lost efficiency.
 Investment also will expand as a number of new industrial projects are started during the year . Investment also probably will expand .
 The dynamic upward improvement of prices in the world sugar market probably will raise Cuba's export earnings in 1963 above the 1962 level . Cuba's exports in 1963 will be higher than 1962 levels .
 Cuba will still require large balance-of-payments credits from the Sino-Soviet Bloc . The increase will not be enough, however, to finance the required volume of imports .
 It appears probable that the Cuban economy will continue to improve during 1964 and 1965 . The Cuban economy is expected to continue to grow during the next two years .
 The government is making vigorous efforts to expand agricultural production . The government has made efforts to increase agricultural production in the country .
 The traditional failure of most Communist regimes to achieve satisfactory results in agriculture, however, precludes the prediction of any dramatic successes for Castro in this sphere during 1964-65 . Castro's success in agriculture is unlikely to be a surprise, however .
 Continuing improvement at the managerial level may well yield further increases in industrial production . Continuing improvement in the management of the country's factories could yield further growth .
 Cuba will remain dependent on the Bloc for large industrial and balance-of-payment credits . Cuba's export earnings suggest that Cuba will continue to be dependent on Bloc credits .
 In presenting the paper to the Committee, Vance made it abundantly clear that while he had identified an alternate course of action, the identification did not include an endorsement— he had not yet reached a decision on that question .
 Bob Hurwitch seems to have accepted the consideration of an alternative course of action in the policy paper . However, he undoubtedly views it coldly .
 He believes that such factors as our hope to act with full OAS support, and Presidential statements about our non-aggressive intentions, necessarily limit our policy to one of applying pressures as opportunities present themselves . This is neither a ""hard"" nor ""soft"" policy but the only politically realistic
 "Active policy" is an attempt by DOD dreamers to bring to life a policy which will earn battlefield promotions at the expense of U.S. national interest . Deep down, I think he regards the consideration of the so-called ""active policy" as a useless exercise and waste
 If they are to be effective in their new roles, they should think through basic courses of action which may appear to be unattractive .
 The process need not turn out to be either very time-consuming or dangerous . The process should not be very time consuming or dangerous, it's not very dangerous .
 After you received the phone call from Secretary Vance,/3/ I passed your message to Mr Cottrell. After you . received the . phone call,/2/ I . passed on your message .
 Mr Vance and Mr Vance planned to meet late Saturday/4/ afternoon to thrash out the policy paper .
 CIA vis-a-vis the Miami Office - I mentioned to you in a previous memorandum that at one meeting, , the CIA representative, viewed the work of the Miami office in a narrow sense; he obviously was reluctant to see Mr Crimmins getting involved in CIA business .
 He said that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had simply not gotten the word . Mr FitzGerald and others in CIA do have the word, and that there is no need at present to make a point .
 Monday, 2:00 PM-Cuban Coordinating Committee at State Wednesday, 10:30 AM-Mr Cottrell, Secretary Vance, Mr Helms, Mr Dungan, with you in your office Thursday, 10,00 AM-ExCom/5/ /5/
 Gordon Chase/7/ /7/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature . Gordon Chase. Gordon Chase .
 Notes of President Kennedy's Remarks at the 508th Meeting of the National Security Council Washington, Washington, January 22, 1963 .
 McGeorge Bundy prepared a briefing memorandum, January 21, for the President for this meeting . Bundy prepared the memo for the meeting, which was held on January 21 .
 Notes on Remarks by President Kennedy before the National Security Council Tuesday, January 22, 1963 . President Kennedy: "I will start by reviewing areas of policy which will be before us in the coming months"
 The responsibilities of the United States are worldwide, the U.S. is the only country which is recognizing its wide responsibilities . The responsibilities are worldwide and the United. States is only country that recognizes wide responsibilities.
 "We are part of NATO, SEATO, etc. and support other pacts even though we are not a part of them," says President Obama . The U.S. is not a member of NATO but is part of the European Union and other NATO nations .
 "It was a very close thing whether we would engage in a quarantine or an air strike," says President Obama . "We were very close," says Obama .
 In looking back, it was really that it presented us with an immediate crisis and the USSR had to make their judgment and come to a decision to act in twelve hours . The USSR was presented with an 'immediate crisis' and had to come to an immediate decision in 12 hours .
 In looking back over that four or five days period, we all changed our views somewhat, or at least appreciated the advantages and disadvantages of alternate courses of action . "In looking back at that time, I'm sure we changed our view somewhat," says author of the book .
 "That is what we should do in any other struggle with the Soviet Union-and I believe we will be in one in the future," he says . "We should do what we would do if we had a struggle," he adds .
 The Russians had a good deal of debate in a 48 hour period. You could see that the Russians had to debate in 48 hours period. It was a good time for the Russians to debate.
 If they had only had only acted in an hour or two, their actions would have been spasmodic and might have resulted in nuclear war . If they'd acted in such a short time, they might have led to nuclear war.
 "We should continue our policy even though we do not get Europe to go along with us," says David Cameron . The UK should continue its policy even if Europe does not agree with us, he says .
 Cuba might be our response in some future situation- the same way the Russians have used Berlin . Cuba could be our future response in a future situation, the author says .
 We may decide that Cuba might be a more satisfactory response than a nuclear response . Cuba may be a better response than the nuclear response, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We should be prepared to move on Cuba if it should be in our national interest, says President Obama . Cuba is a key ally of the U.S. in the world, says Obama .
 The planning by the US, by the Military, in the direction of our effort should be advanced always keeping Cuba in mind in the coming months and to be ready to move with all possible speed . The US should be planning to take advantage of the situation in Cuba .
 We can use Cuba to limit their actions just as they have had Berlin to limit our actions . We can also use Cuba as a tool to limit the actions of the Cuban government .
 There are submitted for your consideration two alternative statements of policy and related courses of action with respect to Cuba .
 The Coordinator's Recommendation that Alternative I be approved, and the Department of Defense non-concurrence, appear at the end of this paper . The Coordinator of Defense Recommendation for Alternative I is approved .
 The U.S. must ensure that offensive weapons are not reintroduced into Cuba; . 2. Protecting the security of the United States and the other states of the Organization of American States by . assuring that . offensive weapons . not . reintroduced in Cuba; 2.
 4. Preventing Cuba from taking any aggressive military action against other Caribbean states; . Preventing the Cuban government from taking aggressive military actions against other . Caribbean states . Prevent preventing any aggressive . military action .
 5. Reducing the capabilities of the Castro regime to direct and support subversion and insurrection within the other OAS states . Reducing and supporting subversion, insurrection within OAS countries; 5.Reducing and support of subversion within the OAS state; .
 Cuba could divorce the Cuban Government from its support of Sino-Soviet Communist purposes, or replace the Government with a regime which would accomplish this purpose . 6. Encouraging and supporting any developments within Cuba that offer the possibility of divorcing and replacing the Cuban government with a new regime
 The Castro regime was the focus of the Soviet Union's efforts to support the Castro regime . The U.S. would have to pay more to the Soviets to stop supporting the regime .
 The Castro regime will be isolated from other free world states, and especially from states of the OAS . The Cuban regime would be isolated in Cuba from other countries, especially from OAS states .
 Being prepared to meet, with the employment of appropriate United States combat elements and/or logistical support, the U.S. military contingencies that may arise from pursuit of the foregoing objectives . 9. Being prepared for the deployment of appropriate . United States. combat elements . and//
 Mr Donovan's imminent negotiations with Fidel Castro for freeing the 20-odd American prisoners . Await results of Mr Donovan’s imminent negotiation with Castro for freed Americans .
 NATO and OAS have been notified by the U.S. in advance of the proclamation of the four point shipping orders . The U.N. has been in contact with NATO and the Organization of the Security Council for more than a year .
 The other OAS members will be approached in Washington and in their respective capitals, simultaneously . After obtaining the maximum possible support of the key countries of Mexico, Chile and Brazil, the other members of the OAS will seek the support of Mexico and Chile .
 It should be possible for this consultation and OAS action on the resolutions to be completed within ten days . OAS should be able to take place within 10 days .
 "We will inform our NATO allies of the impending OAS action," says President Obama . "Prior to formal approval of the resolutions, we will inform [NATO allies] of the action," he says .
 At the first NATO meeting after formal OAS action on the resolutions, OAS will request that NATO include Cuba on the list of countries to which shipment of COCOM list items is prohibited . Cuba will be included on NATO's list of nations to be prohibited from shipment of items .
 After NATO decision on COCOM request, NATO will seek to get agreement from Free World industrial nations to prevent shipping of critical spare parts and equipment to Cuba . Cuba is not currently on the list, not on the COCom list .
 Launch propaganda balloons after an operational capability has been established . Launch of propaganda balloons is a first step in the process of establishing a military presence .
 U.S. seeks overthrow of Castro/Communist regime and replacement by one compatible with the objectives of the United States . Cuba's ultimate objective with respect to Cuba is the overthrow of the Castro/communist regime .
 Our immediate objectives are to isolate the Castro/Communist regime from the Free World and from the Bloc, weaken it economically, promote internal dissension, erode its domestic political support and frustrate its subversive activities .
 Isolating, undermining and discrediting the Castro/Communist regime through the exercise of all feasible diplomatic, economic, psychological and covert actions may achieve the immediate objectives and could create propitious conditions in Cuba for further advance .
 We should be in a position to respond with open military support to any anti-Castro/Communist group or groups in Cuba which threaten the present regime, and whose aims are compatible with those of the U.S. 5.
 Invasion of Cuba by U.S. military forces, as distinguished from military support upon request of indigenous forces, should not be undertaken in the absence of aggression or other Castro/Communist and/or Soviet actions that threaten the peace or security of the hemisphere . invasion of Cuba should not
 This does not preclude appropriate U.S. retaliation for isolated hostile acts by the Castro/Communist or Soviet forces . The United States could retaliate for isolated attacks by isolated hostile forces .
 To the extent feasible, U.S. military forces employed against Cuba should be accompanied by United States militarily-trained free Cubans . The armed forces of those Latin American nations desirous of participating in the United States effort should also be joined by those of those nations .
 Intensive, comprehensive and continuing intelligence gathering in depth on Cuba should be identified as a primary objective of the national intelligence effort . Intensive . intelligence gathering should be a primary . objective of national intelligence efforts, officials say .
 U.S. actions against Cuba should be multilateral, preferably based on Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance or on resolutions adopted by the Organization of American States . Whenever possible, United States actions should be multi-ilateral, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The newlywon hemispheric solidarity on the Cuban issue should not be jeopardized by seeking OAS actions of marginal value and which might split the hemisphere . OAS should not seek to seek OAS action that might split hemisphere .
 " Overt and covert annexes of specific actions in support of this policy will be prepared," officials say . "Overt and covert" annexes to be prepared .
 The active pursuit of our ultimate objective involves a phased and controlled series of political, economic, psychological and military actions . Discussion: The pursuit of the ultimate objective is a phased approach .
 OAS sanctions, Caribbean security arrangements, intensified surveillance of and publicity concerning Castro/Communist subversive activities in Latin America, application of four point shipping restrictions and other economic sanctions . In addition, this course of action would involve a broad gamut of carefully timed political, economic, psychological and
 "This course of action has the advantage of attaining the objective more rapidly and under more controlled conditions than the alternative stated by the Coordinator," said the Coordinator . "This is a more controlled and more controlled option than the other stated by Mr. "
 "This may be the only course of action that will accomplish the ultimate objective," says President Obama . "This is the only way to accomplish the objective," he says. "It may be this way of accomplishing the objective."
 'It involves greater risks; and, in the short run, a greater expenditure of money and material and far greater numbers of personnel' 'It is a long-term risk,' says the British Prime Minister .
 From the standpoint of international politics, the U.S. will probably be subjected to criticism for aggression from the uncommitted nations . The United States is likely to be criticized for aggression, CNN's John Sutter says .
 It is difficult to predict the reaction of the Latin American governments, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The reaction of the nations throughout the world, and particularly the Latin American nations, will depend on how adroitly these actions are handled . To a large extent, the reaction to the actions will depend upon the adroitness of these actions .
 There may be advantages to the fact that our active policy and the courses of action under it may eventually become impossible to conceal . For example, there may even be advantages in the UK's active policy .
 If properly handled, the overt aspects of this policy may serve not only to mitigate any unfavorable reactions from other countries, but also to gain, particularly in Latin America, increasing appreciation of the threat of Castro/Communist Cuba .
 The active pursuit of our objective will make it clear that the U.S. will not permit the maintenance of a Communist base in the hemisphere .
 The more active approach may be subjected to counteractions from the Sino-Soviet Bloc elsewhere . From the standpoint of military posture, the more active stance may be vulnerable to counteraction from the Soviet Bloc .
 As we increase the pressures of Castro/Communist Cuba and the extent of our commitment to overthrow the regime, U.S. prestige becomes more deeply involved . The United States prestige is at stake in overthrowing the regime .
 The further we progress along this route, the more significant will be the loss of U.S. prestige if we alter or abandon it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The United States prestige will be lost"
 The successful execution of this policy will require careful timing and coordination of our actions, the government says . Successful execution of the policy requires careful timing, coordination and detailed plans .
 Such plans would be designed to bring about the overthrow of the Castro regime within a given time frame for planning purposes . They would have to be sufficiently flexible to accommodate changes to the international situation .
 At crucial points along the way, it will be necessary for the highest levels of our Government to review the actions already taken and those contemplated .
 The Castro regime could be isolated from the Bloc, says the president . Castro's regime has been accused of corruption and human rights violations in Cuba .
 Statement of DOD Representative: "I do not concur in the policy recommended by the Coordinator. I recommend approval of Alternative I Statement of Defense Secretary's Recommendation" Statement of D.C. Representative: I concur with the policy recommendation .
 Alternative I does not make the overthrow of the Castro/Communist regime an objective of the U.S. In addition, Alternative I doesn't sufficiently contemplate the creation of opportunities to effect the downfall of that regime . Alternative I also does not sufficiently contemplate creating opportunities to harm the regime .
 The specific actions recommended in . Alternative I are consistent with the policy recommended in Alternative II . Many cases would be among the initial steps that would be taken in executing that policy .
 Also attached is a new page 8 for the paper entitled ""United States Policy Toward the Cuban Brigade" The paper was published in the spring of 1961 .
 Being prepared to meet with the employment of appropriate United States combat elements and/or logistical support, the wide variety of military contingencies that may arise from pursuit of the foregoing objectives; and Producing comprehensive intelligence related to the above objectives .
 OAS sanctions, NATO action to include Cuba on the COCOM list, and approaches to Free World industrial nations to eliminate sale and shipment of critical items from their Cuban trade .
 Existing programs will be reviewed and further recommendations made as necessary . Existing program will also be reviewed to make recommendations .
 Planning for the variety of contingencies related to Cuba will be undertaken at once, says President Obama . Planning for Cuba contingencies will be done at once .
 It should be noted that approval of the foregoing actions may impair our ability to accomplish objective . Taking these actions could provide the U.S. with rationale for maintaining its forces in Cuba, says the State Dept. of Cuba .
 Cuban Brigade Brigade leaders should be induced to accept a specially tailored civilian and military program for Brigade members . Brigade members should be able to participate in a special program for them .
 The Brigade should be disbanded as a military unit and individual members urged to accept civilian training or enlist in the existing U.S. military program for Cubans . Individual members should enlist in existing United States military program .
 Our moral obligation would be discharged to the Brigade members and creation of a privileged class in the exile community would be avoided . We would not create a privileged group in the exiled community .
 Actions listed below are those requiring immediate approval and would be initiated in the sequence set forth below . The actions listed below include those that would require immediate approval .
 Recommendations for further actions based upon the re-examination of existing programs and upon the development of new programs will be forthcoming .
 With respect to the actions listed below, the results of Mr Donovan's imminent negotiations with Fidel Castro for freeing the 20-odd American prisoners should first be ascertained .
 If these actions were taken before the conclusion of the negotiations they could jeopardize the release of the Americans . The actions could also jeopardize their release, CNN says .
 NATO and OAS have been notified 24 hours in advance of the proclamation of the four point shipping orders . The U.S. government is expected to announce the orders 24 hours before the proclamation .
 At the first NATO meeting after formal OAS action on the resolutions, OAS will request that NATO include Cuba on the list of countries to which shipment of COCOM list items prohibited . The U.S. will also request that Cuba be included in NATO's list of nations to
 New opportunities for accomplishing our objectives may arise as a result of Bloc action in other parts of the world, or aggressive moves by the Castro-Communist regime itself . Uprisings of internal conflict within Cuba within Cuba could also be a possibility .
 Secretary Rusk asked Ambassador Thompson to explain why he did not agree with the others . Ambassador Thompson said the paper was aimed at Cuba and does not take into account some of our worldwide objectives .
 There still exists a possibility of a split between Castro and the Russians, he says . Castro and Russia are still at odds, he adds .
 He urged that we do nothing overtly which appeared to the Russians to be contrary to what we had agreed to do during the Cuba negotiations . He urged us not to do anything that appeared to have been contrary to our agreement .
 The proposed shipping orders, he said, would cause the Russians more concern than any of the proposed courses of action listed in the paper .
 He feared that if we implemented the proposed shipping orders, we might delay the withdrawal of Soviet troops still in Cuba, he feared . He feared it might delay withdrawal of Russian troops .
 He acknowledged that domestically the policy he was suggesting would be difficult . He suggested that key Congressmen be told exactly what the situation is .
 Secretary Rusk doubted that the Russians would remove any more of their troops . Rusk said he believed we must assume that the forces there are going to stay .
 The risk of delaying Soviet troop withdrawal was not great, he said . Therefore, he felt we should accept the actions listed in the Cuba paper .
 As to the shipping orders, he called attention to the fact that they would mean little practically .
 Free World trade with Cuba has, in the period January 1 to January 19, practically ceased . Free World Trade with Cuba was practically ceased in January 1 .
 He acknowledged that while many of our allies would take informal actions to block the use of their ships in Cuba trade, these same allies would oppose us if we asked them to adopt an embargo .
 He said that in view of the President's press statement, he felt we may have to issue the shipping orders .
 The Secretary of State reported that even without the shipping orders, our economic pressures against Cuba are in fact tending to isolate Cuba economically . John F Kennedy, 1963, 93, .
 He preferred not to take on the task of persuading our allies to act formally to prevent Free World trade with Cuba when they appeared to be ready to block this trade by informal means .
 He felt that a decision had to be taken on whether the President's press conference statement required us to issue the orders even if they were not really necessary . He said a decision was made on whether it was necessary to issue orders .
 Secretary Ball said serious problems would not arise until ships which had participated in the Cuba trade came to U.S. ports and were refused admittance in compliance with the orders .
 Director McCone repeated his earlier view that there was little evidence to support a statement that Russians were withdrawing their sophisticated equipment from Cuba .
 Director McCone estimated that there is about twice as much Soviet equipment in Cuba as there had been prior to the Russian buildup .
 The President said that Senator Keating was alleging that there is now in Cuba ten times as much equipment as there was . The president said that there was now ten times more equipment than there was.
 He asked how we made available to the press accurate statements of the Soviet increases in equipment. He asked if we had been able to make such statements available. He said we had to make the statements accurate .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that the State Department, the Defense Department, and the White House press heads reconstitute a group to be responsible for giving to the press current information on Soviet equipment in Cuba .
 Bundy says the Defense Department should be responsible for giving to the press information on the military situation in Cuba . Bundy: Government should give to press information about military situation .
 The Cuban Coordinator should know all the latest information in order to avoid giving to the press differing stories, he said . He added that the Cuban coordinator should know the latest news .
 Secretary Rusk reviewed for the President the earlier discussion on removal of Soviet troops . President Obama spoke with Rusk at the end of the session .
 President asked whether Ambassador Thompson shouldn't raise with Dobrynin the question as to whether the Russians were going to remove additional troops from Cuba as had been suggested in one of the Khrushchev letters .
 Secretary Rusk reviewed for the President the problem of the issuance of the issuing of the shipping orders . The problem was reviewed by the Secretary of the President .
 Donovan was negotiating with Castro on the release of American prisoners in Cuba . Donovan did not think they should be issued while he was negotiating . He did not want them issued while Donovan negotiated with Castro .
 He asked that we draw up a statement/3/ explaining why we were delaying the issuance of the orders, which would be released only if the press asked about the orders . He asked for us to release a statement explaining the delay .
 Secretary Ball said the only part of the shipping orders which were meaningful had to do with the shipment of U.S. property on vessels engaged in the Cuba trade . Ball said that the only meaningful orders were for the shipment .
 The President could give guidance to the Department of Agriculture which would cover the largest amount involved,e.e. food shipments . He said that no Executive Order was necessary to achieve this objective .
 The President decided that there would be no public announcement but that the Department of Agriculture and other agencies should be directed to refrain from shipping U.S. products on ships engaged in the Cuba trade .
 There followed a discussion of the dropping of propaganda leaflets from free traveling balloons .
 Acting Director Wilson stated that USIA would prefer to rely on airborne TV to meet an emergency . In response to a question as to whether a balloon capability should be retained for use in an emergency, acting Director Wilson said .
 The President expressed his strong reservations to the course of action proposed . The President has expressed his 'strong reservations' to the decision .
 He did not wish to have Assistant Secretary Martin undertake a trip to Mexico, Chile and Brazil with his hat in his hand requesting support for an altered resolution . He said he did not want Martin to travel to Mexico and Chile with a hat in hand .
 Secretary Rusk said the practical effect of the recommended OAS resolution on trade would be very little . Latin American states had very little trade with Cuba, he said .
 OAS action would provide a basis upon which to ask NATO to place Cuba under COCOM rules . Cuba is not currently under NATO rules, but the OAS has taken action .
 Secretary Rusk said we were now seeing in Cuba the effect of our economic embargo . Rusk: We are now seeing the effect on Cuba's economic embargo.
 The lack of spare parts for U.S. equipment in Cuba is seriously affecting the Cuban economy . Director McCone agreed and said that the lack of parts in Cuba was affecting the economy .
 The President decided that Assistant Secretary Martin should go to Mexico on other business and incidentally find out the current Mexican position toward further OAS action against Cuba . President decided to send Martin to Mexico to find out Mexico's position .
 Depending on the Mexican reaction, a decision could then be made as to whether he should proceed to Chile and Brazil . A decision could be made on whether to proceed to Brazil and Chile .
 Only then will we decide whether further action in the OAS should be undertaken . Only then should we decide if further action should be taken .
 The President did not wish us to undertake an effort which had little chance of succeeding, he said . He said: "We did not want to undertake a project which had no chance of success"
 He asked for a statement as to what the effect would be if the OAS adopted the resolution we favored and if NATO agreed to place Cuba under COCOM rules, he said . He asked if the resolution would be adopted, he added .
 Secretary Rusk concluded discussion of the OAS by calling attention to the fact that some OAS members felt that we should act more forcefully than we have so far done . Rusk said that some members of the body felt that the U.S. should act 'more forcefully'
 General Taylor expressed reservations about allowing members of the brigade, upon completion of their military training in the United States training camps, to become eligible for membership in a reserve unit . General Taylor said he was concerned about allowing the brigade members to join a reserve force .
 Mr Bundy expressed his view that the proposed course of action would be difficult to sell to the brigade members . Mr Bundy said he would be disappointed with the proposed decision .
 He said some members should be sent to Latin America to lecture in Latin American universities or engage in work with Latin American student groups . Others would choose to undergo military training while others would want to return to civilian life, he said .
 He felt some members could be usefully placed in special forces units assigned to Latin American countries . He felt that some members of the U.S. forces could be better placed in Latin American units .
 He felt their firsthand experience with Communism could be used to great advantage in Latin American countries in explaining the threat of Communism . He felt that their firsthand . experience could be . used to . use in explaining Communism .
 Attorney General said he had been told most brigade members were opposed to Cardona, the present head of the Cuban Revolutionary Committee .
 Many of them wanted to stay out of politics but wanted to retain membership in a group which would be a symbol to those who would eventually rebuild Cuba . Many of the Cuban dissidents wanted to remain out of political but wished to retain .
 He said we should first talk to the brigade members and then draw up a program . He said it should be discussed with members of the brigade .
 He thought that the brigade members should be treated as equal partners, and that we should try to get their ideas rather than dictate to them . He said we should not try to dictate to the brigade .
 In order to avoid their turning hostile, he felt they must be treated properly and must have a sense of participation .
 One way would be to tell them honestly that they cannot now now fight Communism and that they can fight Communism much more effectively in the present . They can do tasks suggested to them in other Latin American countries, either as special forces members or as civilians in the academic field .
 The Attorney General concluded that the brigade members should participate in some way in planning Cuban intelligence actions .
 He urged that we not merely pick brigade members and use them as agents, but rather we should encourage them to take part in the selection of targets and methods of operation . He urged us not to pick up our own agents and told them what to do .
 He acknowledged that one reason why this had not so far been done was because of the reputation the Cubans had of being unable to keep a secret . He said the reputation of the country's people was behind the decision .
 Mr Cottrell expressed his doubt that the brigade members would be accepted by the 26 July group in Cuba which considered them to be untrustworthy .
 He said it was considered to be a brave group of Cuban patriots . On the contrary, he said the group was considered patriotic and brave .
 He urged that we not destroy the value of the brigade but use it as an asset, preferably by working with individual brigade members . He urged not to destroy value of brigade but to use it to be asset .
 Secretary McNamara said there would be no difficulty in providing military training for those brigade members who wished to be trained . McNamara: There would be 'no difficulty' in providing training .
 The President decided that in the next two weeks we should find out from individual brigade members what each would prefer to do, i.e. take a civilian job, be given military training, go to Latin America in various capacities as scholars, lecturers, student leaders, etc., or
 The Army, CIA and Mr Cottrell's office would work together, in consultation with the Attorney General . The Army would work with the CIA and the CIA .
 A decision as to whether there should be a brigade headquarters would be made later . A decision will be made on whether the brigade headquarters should be set up .
 The President expressed his hope that large numbers of the brigade members would choose to take military training .
 Secretary Dillon referred to the basic objectives listed in the Cuban paper . Secretary Dillon refers to the objectives of the Cuban government .
 He questioned objective number 5 which called for encouraging Castro to split with Moscow . He said objective number 4 called for the Castro-Moscow split .
 He felt this objective was inconsistent with the objective of seeking the overthrow of Castro . He felt that this was not consistent with the objectives of seeking to overthrow the Castro .
 Mr Bundy said this was a subordinate objective which should be kept in . He said it was in some ways inconsistent with another objective .
 The President said he did not think it was necessary to approve the general parts of the paper . He summarized the specific actions which he had already approved . The President did not want to approve it .
 There followed a discussion of the intelligence ""objective"" author-ized in paragraph 10 of the basic paper .
 The President expressed his strong view that we should not risk good men by sending them to Cuba to get information which is only of marginal use to us .
 He was reminded that the 5412 Special Group reviewed each plan to send intelligence teams into Cuba . He said the group reviewed each of the plans sent into the country .
 The President said the Group should make a judgment in each case as to whether the danger of the loss of the team was worth the benefit to the United States .
 He said no intelligence officer should feel that he was required to send in the largest possible number of agents merely to satisfy an intelligence requirement .
 Cottrell sent this memorandum to Rusk, January 28, informing the Secretary that McCone had similar information . According to the memo, McCone's information was similar to a previous memo .
 Castro agreed to release the imprisoned Americans, after a short ""rehabilitation"" period . Castro released the prisoners after a brief period of rehabilitation . Castro agreed the release would be part of a "reintegration" period of time .
 Molina wanted to exchange Molina and the three Cubans involved in the UN incident . He wanted to swap Molina with the three others involved in that incident . Molina has been charged with attempted murder in the past .
 Castro indicated that a little more of the commodities due for the exchange should first be shipped . Castro also indicated that more commodities due to be shipped should be shipped first . Castro: More commodities should be first shipped .
 Castro says he would turn the Americans over to Donovan only, rather than to the Swiss . Castro said he would so inform the Swiss Ambassador that evening at a reception at the Swiss Embassy .
 Castro agreed to reply within a short time to the PAA proposal for ten flights a week on a payment basis of 50 per cent in dollars and 50 percent in pesos .
 Castro seemed receptive to Donovan's suggestion that in view of Cuban-Chinese friendship Castro might be helpful in obtaining the release of Americans imprisoned in China . Donovan suggested that Castro might help in getting Americans released from Chinese prisons .
 Donovan told Castro his difficulties lay in his dependence upon the Soviets . Donovan said Castro's problems lay in dependence on the Soviet Union . Donovan was in the midst of a war with Castro .
 At Donovan's suggestion, Castro agreed to review the cases of some Cuban political prisoners, but pointed out in irritation that if they were released, they would only attempt to return and cause trouble as CIA agents . Castro agreed in irritation to review cases of political prisoners .
 Castro also irritated over the U.S. press story that crutches were taken from an invalid girl as she boarded the Shirley Lykes . Castro also was irritated over a story that a girl was given crutched by a woman on the plane . Castro was angry over the story
 Donovan and Vallejo agreed to communicate with one another by telephone regarding any matters of importance relating to their conversation . Donovan will be allowed to use the phone to discuss matters of interest in their conversation with Valleho .
 At the airport just before Donovan's departure, Vallejo broached the subject of re-establishing diplomatic relations with the U.S. 9.9.
 Castro indicated he wished to talk at length with Donovan about the future of Cuba and international relations in general . Castro indicated that he would like to talk about Cuba's future with Donovan . Donovan: "I want to talk a lot about Cuba, international relations"
 The two high level Red Cross officials who spent two days last week in Havana with the Cuban Red Cross found the latter's cooperation and hospitality remarkably good . The officials spent the two days in Havana last week with the Red Cross .
 The Red Cross and the Cuban Red Cross hope the cooperation will lead to improved relations between the two governments .