 Tobias, giant of hominin nuclear weapons, is a call for more direct action . John F Kennedy meets the United States Executive Committee of the National Security Council in October 1962 to discuss Soviet nuclear missiles .
 Linguistic analysis reveals how advisers influenced President Kennedy during the Cuban missile crisis 50 years ago, argues David R Gibson .
 The existence of the ExComm record with the meticulous transcription of converof the Cuban missile crisis was known only to hesitations . October is the 50th anniversary of the 13-day stand-off .
 It asks why, were discovered on the island of Cuba . to light during the Watergate investigations when and with what consequences people people . Much has emerged about these events as in 1973.
 The tapes were eventually declasdo things such as interrupt, restart sentences . successive troves of information have been sified .
 It also helps to shed uncovered — including records from the to the public in the mid-1990s — including those from the public .
 Historians light on why particular discussions unfold as Soviet secret service and ruling Presidium1, have looked to them and transcripts 3 they do, from conversations about mundane and from the United States Department of State .
 Study of of of the crisis, between 16 and 28 October 1962. tion analysis . Analysis of of crisis between 16 October 1962 .
 Kennedy was susceptible to persuasion, reflected a growing determination to reach BETTMANN/CORBIS CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS which was shaped by . conversational vicisconsensus on some course of action .
 How events unfolded during the height of the crisis in October 1962 . outside world. outside world . outside of Russia .
 When all options look bad, a decision may hinge on the ability of the ability to talk in circles until such a time .
 His first major decision was to impose a naval blockade on Cuba, which he announced overTATAKEN BY EVENTS 22 OCTOBER to the world on 22 October after revealing the Kennedy’s second main decision con .
 President Kennedy was drawn to the idea of a blockade because it seemed like announcement on 22 October, Khrushchev 23 OCTOBER a strong action that did not involve an immeordered Soviet ships carrying weapons to the Kremlin .
 Certainly the president be diverted away from Cuba2 (although not necessarily diverted from Cuba) The president should be diverted from the president to Cuba.
 Organization of was not eager to begin dropping bombs, but a warhead-laden ship called the AlexsanAmerican States supports blockade . The blockade option itself carried serious drovsk slipped into port in Cuba before the risks .
 Other ships to force Nikita Khrushchev to continue their course were allowed to continue on their course . Other ships were forced to stop following the order .
 Four Soviet-bloc ships were put forward as 25 U.S. cities — perhaps by accident or without candidates . Khrushchev would not doubt United States resolve. the missiles, some of which could be fired at .
 Two Bucharest and Völkerfreundschaft authorization — in the event that the United were ordered by Khrushchev to turn back allowed past blockade; . The United States attacked before they could be intercepted; photographs were taken .
 "I identified and examined every passenger ship that no one had the stomach instance of talk about a blockade and subseto challenge for fear of loss of life," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The only serious candidate for interception was the Marucla (Lebanese freighter under Soviet the danger of a missile launch was reiterBucharest, a Soviet tanker that, lacking deck charter) intercepted . The only air strike in the tapes to see whether serious candidate was the
 The ship turned up at the blockade line early early on 18 October, from frequent warnon on the morning of 25 October to frequent warnings . Khrushchev makes second proposal, demanding withdrawal of Jupiter missiles on the island, to a string of statements .
 U-2 plane shot down over first from Llewellyn Thompson, former United States that morning was, in part, about whether to Cuba . Plane shot down first from U.S. that morning . Plane was shot down in Cuba .
 Kennedy publicly accepts Khrushchev’s first proposal and secretly ambassador to the Soviet Union) chased it down and board it belatedly . promises to remove Jupiter missiles . the blockade and air strike but omitting any air strike . the standard story is that the president reference to this
 In fact, the tapes reveal a Kennedy who warn about the danger of allowing the Soviets is very worried about appearing weak if he time to finish work on the missiles before a United States does not order the ship to be boarded . Twice, for instance, Robert Kennedy tries to
 The first hand is stayed by opposition from his moretime, Maxwell Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Joint Council of Advisers . Maxwell Taylor is the chairman of the Advisory Board .
 The second ure to intercept could easily be justified to time, McNamara . McNamara repeatedly interrupts him domestic and international audiences, even before he can finish his thought . I believe such efforts at ‘suppression’ consideration to the way that the Soviets tried to suppress the way
 The discussions were undoubtedly beneficial in bringing to light the various options and their associated risks, and in forcing the different factions (the 'hawks' and 'doves' to hone their arguments)
 Conversational machinery is not easily put to the service of comparing the consequences of competing courses of action . But they were structured by conversational machinery, such as rules of turn-taking and expectation that one say something relevant to whatever was said last .
 The same process could have had a difpostpones a decision until later in the day . Still seems inclined to board the ship, but of accepting Khrushchev’s first offer, .
 Had a consensus in favour of Before the ExComm reconvened, howfor disagreement the blockade been forged even a day sooner, ever, a state-department briefing for legislaure .
 Given that this ship was under admit indecision, the Pentagon announced does so most forthrightly . The Pentagon announced the decision on the ship .
 This results in an orders to sink itself rather than be boarded . The navy had let it pass after an 'explosion of laughter at his audacity'
 ExComm reconvened later in the afternoon, the room could down a different path . It took the passage of the tanker as irreversthe primary impediment to consensus as to have had had entirely . a different .a different .
 President Kennedy’s third big decision concerned has taken, President Kennedy . Finding little support for the position he ending. entists, advisers and . advisers . But policy-makers is that the deal that resolved the crisis. resolved.
 Late on relents and agrees to the wording of a letter the details and mechanics of conversation 26 October, he received a private letter in that accepts Khrushchev's first offer .
 Khrushchev offered to withthough it hints at later negotiations over but its conventions do not ensure that susdraw his missiles in return for a U.S. pledge ‘other armaments”
 Kennedy remained unconvinced that that could go wrong . Yet Kennedy was not convinced that it would go wrong.
 Given enough time, discussed by the ExComm the next mornthis would be enough . The ExComm will discuss the matter next morning .
 Treaty Organization’s nuclear removed from Turkey within a few months neglected and even wilfully abandoned . Following a more all branches of the decision tree might ing, the group received another offer .
 The ExComm was of the end of the crisis, on the condition that Kennedy’s advisers that Khrushchev did not publicize that part quickly converged to recommend that the of the deal . P.30 dumbfounded, but Kennedy's advisers that . didn't .
 This marked the beginning of the is published this proposed a missile trade. end of the crisis. This is the first time this has been proposed a trade deal with Russia and China .
 Dobbs, M One Minute to Midnight . felt pressured to respond to Khrushchev’s 3.3.4.6.9 . Dobbs . felt pressure to respond by responding to the 3.5.4 . Khrushvic's 3.7.9.
 The Kennedy Tapes offer before the end of the day, partly for fear NOT SO RATIONAL . that if there was any delay he would issue the offer . The Cuban missile crisis had a good end .