 Kennedy and johnson 7 Share Ekart's World Geography . Kennedy and Johnson .
 KENNEDY AND JOHNSON LEAD AMERICA in the 1960s . 2.2.3.5.4.5 . The Great Society of the Great Society .
 The Democratic nominee for president in 1960 was a young Massachusetts senator named John Kennedy . Kennedy promised to “get America moving again”
 The Republicans nominated Richard Nixon, Ike’s Vice-President . Nixon hoped to ride the coattails of the popular President 4.0 .
 On September 26, 1960, Kennedy and Nixon took part in the first televised debate between presidential candidates . Kennedy looked and spoke better than Nixon, says Russell Baker .
 Many observers blamed Nixon's loss to John F Kennedy on his poor appearance in the televised presidential debates . One observer said Nixon resembled a "sinister chipmunk"
 Martin Luther King was sentenced to hard labor for a sit-in at a lunch counter in Georgia . King was arrested for his role in the fight for civil rights .
 JFK phoned King’s wife and his brother, Robert Kennedy, to work for his release . JFK, NIXON REACT DIFFERENTENTLY to King's arrest, JFK says .
 Kennedy won the election by fewer than 119,000 votes . Nixon dominated the west, while Kennedy dominated the south and east coast .
 The Kennedys were considered American “Royalty” by the press . JFK appeared frequently on T.V. during his term in office .
 JFK could read 1,600 words a minute, thousands enrolled in speed-reading courses . JFK's wife, Jackie, too, captivated the nation with her eye for fashion and culture .
 Kennedy relied most on his 35-year-old brother Robert, whom he appointed attorney general . Kennedy surrounded himself with what one journalist described as the “best and the brightest” available talent .
 From the beginning of his term in early 1961, JFK focused on the Cold War . JFK tripled our nuclear capability, increased troops, ships, ships and artillery .
 Cuba presented the first big test of JFK’s foreign policy . Cuba was led by revolutionary leader Fidel Castro who welcomed aid from the USSR .
 Eisenhower gave the CIA permission to secretly train Cuban exiles for an invasion of Cuba . Kennedy learned of the plan only nine days into his presidency . The mission turned out to be a disaster when in April, 1961, 1,200 exiles met 25,000 Cuban troops backed by Soviet
 Almost 3 million East Germans had fled into West Berlin to flee communist rule . The Berlin Airlift took place 11 years after the East Berlin-West Berlin airlift .
 Soviets began construction of a 90-mile wall separating East and West Berlin on August 13, 1961 . East Berliners were fleeing their city for the democratic west . The wall becomes a primary symbol of Cold War and Soviet oppression .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy began searching for ways to ease tension between the two superpowers . In 1963, they established a hot line between the White House and the Kremlin . The superpowers signed a Limited Test Ban Treaty that served to ban nuclear testing in the atmosphere .
 Kennedy initiated his vision in a program he called “The New Frontier” The economy, education, medical care for the elderly and the poor were all part of his vision .
 Peace Corps is a volunteer program to assist developing nations in Asia, Africa and Latin America . The Peace Corps has become a huge success .
 On April 12, 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human in space . America’s space agency began construction on new launch facilities in Cape Canaveral .
 On July 20, 1969, Neil Armstrong took the first steps on the moon . Armstrong said, "One small step for man, one giant leap for mankind" Armstrong was the first man to walk on the Moon .
 In 1963, Kennedy called for “a national assault on the causes of poverty” He also ordered his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy to investigate racial injustice in the South .
 JFK received warm applause from the crowd that lined the downtown streets of Dallas as he rode in the back seat of an open-air limousine . Air Force One landed in Dallas with JFK and Jackie on November 22, 1963 .
 Lyndon Baines Johnson became President after JFK was assassinated . LBJ takes the oath of office aboard Air Force One with Jackie next to him 32 .
 Americans can recall where they were when they heard the news of the President’s death .
 Jack Ruby broke through the crowd and shot Oswald to death 11/24/63 . Oswald was charged and as a national television audience watched his transfer from jail to another .
 The Warren Commission investigated the assassination and determined that Oswald had acted alone . Recent filmmaker Oliver Stone isn’t so sure – his film, ‘JFK, is filled with conspiracy theories .
 Lyndon Johnson entered politics in 1937 as a congressman . He admired Franklin Roosevelt who took the young congressman under his wing . He became a senator in 1948 and by 1955 he was Senate majority leader .
 President Johnson urged Congress to pass the tax-cut bill Kennedy had sent to Capital Hill . $10 billion in cuts took effect .
 LBJ pushed the Civil Rights Act through Congress in July of 1964 . The Act prohibited discrimination based on race, color, religion or national origin .
 LBJ pushed through Congress a series of measures known as the Economic Opportunity Act . The Act provided $1 billion in aid to the inner city . LBJ launched his War on Poverty .
 Republicans nominated conservative senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona to oppose Democrat Lyndon Johnson . Goldwater alienated voters by suggesting the use of nuclear weapons in Cuba and North Vietnam .
 LBJ won the 1964 election by a landslide . LBJ launched his reform program in earnest . 43.
 The Elementary and Secondary Education Act provided $1 billion to help public schools buy textbooks and library materials . The Act represented the first major federal aid package for education ever .
 LBJ and Congress enhanced Social Security by establishing Medicare and Medicaid . Medicare provided hospital insurance and low-cost medical care to the elderly . Medicaid provided health benefits to the poor .
 LBJ and Congress appropriated money to build 240,000 units of low-rent public housing . Robert Weaver appointed the first black cabinet member as HUD’s first leader .
 The Natural Origins Acts of the 1920s strongly discriminated against immigration by those outside of Western Europe . The Immigration Act of 1965 opened the door for many non-European immigrants .
 The Water Quality Act of 1965 required states to clean up their rivers and lakes . LBJ also ordered the government to . clean up corporate polluters of the environment .
 Consumer safety laws were passed in the United States auto industry and Congress passed the Wholesome Meat Act of 1967 . Americans can feel safer now in their homes, on the road, and at the supermarket”
 In Mapp Ohio the Supreme Court ruled that illegally seized evidence could not be used in court . In Escobedo Illinois the court ruled that the accused has the right to have an attorney present when questioned by police . In Miranda Arizona the court rules that all suspects must be read their rights