 Until the events of 1959, Cuba was essentially an American protectorate gave USA the rights of intervention in Cuba . Cuba required Cuba to provide land for naval bases hence Guantanamo Bay .
 Inevitably, this attitude generated opposition among many nationalistically minded Cubans . The attitude has created opposition among Cubans, especially in the country's population .
 Castro on 1st January 1959, Batista's dictoral regime collapses and Castro becomes leader of Cuba . Castro is the first Cuban leader to take over from the Batista regime in 1959 .
 It looked like the revolution was nationalist and home grown, with no external aid from communist states, the USA was willing to let it run its course . The U.S. would be willing to allow the revolution to continue .
 In May 1958, Vice President Nixon led to a shift in U.S. policy towards Latin America . Economic stability became a target . Eisenhower agreed not to support dictators in the area .
 He could not let Cuba deliver Cuba into the hands of Soviets or China, but needed support of a great power to manage the inevitable U.S. response to his plans to reduce United States economic and political influence .
 In May 1959, Castro introduced agrarian reform which led to American-owned property being seized by the state . The reform led to the seizure of U.S.-owned property .
 U.S. fears of Cuba becoming a satellite state were worsened when Soviet First Deputy visits Cuba in Feb 1960 and arranges $100 million in credits to Castrotying Cuba in economically .
 In April 1960, Castro nationalises the oil companies and America imposes economic sanctions, reducing their imports of sugar . America imposes sanctions on Cuba . Castro nationalised the oil and sugar companies in April 1960 .
 1961 Bay of Pigs had been initiated under Eisenhower and inherited by Kennedy . By 1961, USA wanted to remove Castro .
 It was an unmitigated disaster and humiliation for Kennedy but also confirmed the Soviet Union and Castro's fears about the USA's intentions for Cuba . It was also confirmed that the U.S. was planning to attack Cuba .
 Castro's power had been reaffirmed as he protected Cuba from U.S. imperialism . Castro had been protecting Cuba from American imperialism .
 On 30th November 1961, Kennedy authorises Operation Mongoose to overthrow communism in Cuba using covert operations . Kennedy authorised the operation to overthrow the communist government in Cuba .
 Malinovsky concludes that in face of a determined U.S. attack, Cuba would not survive a week . He concludes that a determined United States attack would not leave Cuba alive .
 Khrushchev decides to deploy Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba in 1962 . Code name 'Anadyr' to keep USA off the scent. Code name Anadyr was used to keep the U.S. from being seen .
 Khrushchev claimed his only purpose was defence of Cuba in face of U.S. hostility towards Cuba . He was determined to translate this into direct action against the United States .
 This would have been less risky in terms of peace and not provoking the USA the aims of peaceful coexistence . This would be less risky to the USA and not provoke the USA .
 No one would have been threatened this way thus presents the view that Khrushchev had ulterior motives . No one in the world would have reacted this way to the threat posed .
 Khrush knew this lost atomic leverage in international relations . Dominant power was USA, despite what was suggested and Khrush .
 Reducing missile gap would also supply military planning aims reducing spending on conventional military forces and investing in civilian economy due to the fragility of Eastern bloc states .
 China thought USSR was weak. Spreading revolution through Latin Am. by controlling it as leaders of international communism, not China in view of split due to peaceful coexistence . China thought Soviet Union was weak and thought it would be weak .
 Intervention in Cuba was a way of putting pressures on the powers over Berlin . Intervention was meant to put pressure on Berlin, according to a report .
 Khrushchev was repeatedly failing to remove the Western power . The Cuban government was trying to link up with the Soviet Union .
 Political embarassment to Khrushchev and implications in terms of the security of the communist bloc in Eastern Europe . Embarrassment was political embarrassment for the Soviet Union .
 To put pressure on NATO alliance if other members felt the USA was placing its own regional interests above those in the Western Alliance . The U.S. placed its interests in the region above those of NATO members .
 The Cuban issue might present the USA with a hemispheric threat serious enough to impel them to withdraw from Berlin in return for Soviet concessions in Cuba . The U.S. might withdraw from the Berlin withdrawal in exchange for Cuban concessions .
 One problem in one area could be used to solve a problem in another this strategy appears throughout the era . However, did illustrate how one problem could be solved in one way .
 Jupiter missile deployment in Turkey to supplement NATO's defensive nuclear umbrella . USA May 1962 Jupiter missile deployed in Turkey . Jupiter missile was deployed to Turkey in 1962 .
 Khrushchev's response in Cuba may be in response to this thus there was equal threat on both sides . The threat may have been equal to both sides of the two countries .
 Crisis would have given Khrushchev a bargaining tool to use against U.S. missiles in Turkey . Crisis presented Kennedy as a strong leader, who forced him to back down after his opportunistic challenge to USA's nuclear and global strategic power .
 Kennedy's failure in the intial stages lay in his certainty that Khrushchev would never carry out such a reckless plan so close to the USA failed to account for reactions against Bay of Pigs/Mongoose . Kennedy failed in the early stages of the plan to attack the U.
 Khrush did not know how Kennedy would react overestimated the attitude that the USA would have . Similarly, Khrush overestimated how the U.S. would react to the situation .
 Failed to see that his actions would be seen as aggressive and offensive to the international community rather than defensive or driven by sense of need, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Castro had secured defence of his island by pitting the two superpowers against each other . Kennedy claims they will do whatever is necessary to protect its own security and that of its allies .
 Gromyko tells the UN, an attack on Cuba would mean war with the Soviet Union . Gropropropko tells UN, a Cuban attack would mean a war with Russia . The Soviet Union would attack Cuba .
 Soviets depended on a major nuclear build up without U.S. realising but the secrecy ends on 14th Oct. 2015 . U.N. had been building up without realising .
 They could do nothing, risking splitting the NATO alliance by appearing to ignore interests of Europe as it would expose to a nuclear response . The U.S. could also risk splitting the alliance by . appearing to . appear to ignore interest of Europe . as it . would expose . to a
 Naval Blockade would stem the flow of missiles entering Cuba as there was too many missiles to guarantee the destruction of all of them before Soviet retaliatory action . Naval Blockades would stop the flow .
 Brinkmanship was a high risk strategy and could only be effective if both sides recognised that any form of military confrontation in a nuclear age would be undesirable .
 If Khrush had intended to protect Cuba from U.S. aggression, he had clearly not succeeded . Cuba was in more danger. Cuba was more danger .
 Khrushchev was the first to propose a truce with Cuba . Soviets withdraw from Cuba on the grounds that USA doesnt invade Cuba .
 Peaceful resolution made difficult by Castro who was convinced of a U.S. attack . Castro believed to have been convinced of the United States attack . U.N. Security Council resolution was made difficult to reach .
 Orders anti-aircraft forces to start firing on low level reconnaissance planes . Order to fire on low-level reconnaissance planes in the air .
 Khrushchev amends proposal by proposing removal of Jupiter missiles . Khrushche proposed removal of the Jupiter missiles from the sky .
 Kennedy's strategy was to ignore the second proposal and reply to the first . Kennedy was responding to the other proposal by ignoring it .
 Kennedy was willing to remove the already 'old' and ineffective missiles in Turkey but not immediately and not incorporated into a public settlement of the crisis . NATO allies did not see it as a concession so the NATO allies didn't see it .
 Castro saw it as a humiliating betrayal by Khrushchev and refused to allow checks on the dismantling of the sites . On 28th October, Khushchev agrees to remove the missiles, but Castro refused to let checks on dismantling of sites .
 Only fulfilled as Soviet ships removing the missiles revealed the contents . Brought the world closer to nuclear war than any other time .
 The crisis did show that international relations could not be conducted through crisis management methods and was not a model of crisis management . What did it do show was that the crisis did not be a model for crisis management, says David Cameron .
 In 1963, a 'hotline' was created connecting Washington and Moscow to solve crises directly . It was created in 1963, connecting Washington with Moscow .
 Some historians take the view that its symbolic value is greater than its practical application . Some historians say the symbolic value was greater than the practical use of it .
 Crisis led to a growing awareness of the need to create some control over the nuclear arms race by placing restrictions on nuclear tests . Crisis in 1950s led to the need for some control of nuclear tests in the world .
 Described as a watershed, marking an important new era in arms control . Described by President Obama as a 'watershed' and 'one of the world's most powerful arms control powers'
 The ban fell short as the treaty made no provisions for underground tests or inspection . However, the treaty fell short because it did not include underground tests .
 After 3 months powers could restart testing and no obligatory start up . China/France did not join . Encouraged weapon proliferation among the nuclear powers .
 SU had to be forced to respond rather than be deterred from taking action USA aggressive. SU had been forced to react rather than being deterred by taking action . USA aggressive .
 USSR emerged with the determination to restore its international status . USSR emerged from the ashes of Soviet Union in 1980s .
 Cuba remains communist in the backyard of the USA . USA's commitment to containment had failed but did not undermine policy . USA had failed to undermine containment but failed to do so .
 Cuba was part of the start of the revolutionary change in developing countries . Cuba was a part of a revolution that began in the 1950s .