 The Soviet leader was composing a response to his American counterpart, John F Kennedy . It was one of the tensest days of the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 .
 Kennedy had gone on TV to announce discovery of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . Two days earlier Kennedy had announced discovery of Cuban nuclear missiles . Kennedy was president of the United States .
 He declared a naval blockade of the island, euphemistically calling it a quarantine, in the language of international law, a blockade would have meant war . He demanded their removal and declared a blockade, which would have seen war .
 On 23 October, Kennedy also sent Khrushchev a private letter demanding that he turn back his ships heading for Cuba . Kennedy also demanded that Khushchev turn back ships heading to Cuba . Khushmushchev threatened Kennedy with a nuclear attack .
 This was already Khrushchev’s second letter to Kennedy composed that day . The letter was already written to Kennedy . This was the first of Khrushchchev's two letters to Kennedy that day.
 Khrushchev's letter was meant to be confidential, but was not supposed to be . Letter was to be dispatched via Colonel Georgii Bolshakov of the GRU, acquaintance of president’s brother, Robert .
 Khrushchev abruptly reversed course on 25 October . Able Archer 83: Nato war-game that nearly spelled nuclear disaster .
 President Reagan agreed to dismantle Soviet missile installations in Cuba . Not only did he refuse to send his letter, he agreed to recall his ships loaded with ballistic missiles .
 Khrushchev had “shat his pants”, recalled his deputy foreign minister, Vasilii Kuznetsov . The Cuban crisis had begun only 11 days before, on 14 October 1962, when an American high-altitude U-2 plane spotted Soviet ballistic missiles
 The 22-metre-long medium-range missiles, known to the Americans as SS-4 Sandals, had been built in the Ukrainian city of Dnipropetrovsk and brought to Cuba in secrecy .
 Khrushchev cultivated the relationship in order to keep his Cuban counterpart out of the clutches of his great foe, Mao Zedong . The Soviet premier had two motives for these actions .
 The Sputnik rocket aside, Khrushchev had very few of those, and they were highly unreliable . Kennedy was alerted to the presence of the Soviet missiles on 16 October .
 Khrushchev had publicly declared that he would not put ‘offensive weapons’ on the island . Kennedy had been deceived by Khrushchchev, who had assured him he would do nothing to undermine him .
 It took Kennedy and his advisers on the ExComm – the Executive Committee of the National Security Council – almost a week to come up with a response to the threat .
 Khrushchev summoned Presidium members to the Kremlin to discuss the Soviet Union's upcoming address . The address is scheduled to take place in Moscow on November 25, 1956 .
 One possibility was to declare that the USSR had a defence treaty with Cuba, making an American assault on Cuba tantamount to an attack on the Soviet Union . Another possibility was that the US would declare that Cuba had a treaty with the USSR .
 One was to declare that the missiles were Cuban missiles, and that Havana might respond to an invasion with nuclear weapons . Another was to say that Havana may respond to a Cuban invasion with a nuclear weapon .
 In that case, Washington would have had to negotiate with Havana, not Moscow . Worst-case scenario would have been a nuclear war between the United States and Cuba, with the USSR on the sidelines .
 General Pliev was prohibited from using ballistic missiles without orders from Moscow . But the telegram gave him de facto clearance to use tactical nuclear weapons if attacked .
 Khrushchev's relief as Kennedy did not announce an imminent attack . Khrisschev decided to postpone sending the telegram until they heard Kennedy’s speech .
 The crisis was resolved when news unexpectedly reached the White House that the ships Kennedy had just ordered to be intercepted had turned back much earlier . But he refused to turn back ships delivering non-military loads .
 Khrushchev had blinked long before, on the night of Kennedy’s television speech . They didn’t know that he had blinked . They did not know that .
 Lack of timely information almost caused the outbreak of a shooting war . The lack of timely info almost caused an outbreak of shooting war.
 Unknowingly, Kennedy had ordered the interception of ships moving away from the quarantine line, not toward it . Kennedy had in fact ordered ships to move away from quarantine line . Kennedy braced himself for possible confrontation .
 The Strategic Air Command raised its Defense Readiness Condition to Level Two – just short of Level One, which meant open warfare . Meanwhile, the military dusted off their plans for an invasion of Cuba, and the Cuban government raised its defense readiness condition to Level 2 .
 Nuclear-armed B-52s were now in the air, flying to Europe and the eastern Mediterranean . The nuclear-armed aircraft are now flying to eastern Mediterranean and Europe .
 Soviet intelligence intercepted the SAC order on 24 October, the day on which Khrushchev dictated his letter to Kennedy . They were prepared to strike targets in the Soviet Union .
 He implied that he would consider removing the missiles as part of a comprehensive agreement leading ultimately to the elimination of all nuclear weapons . He said he would be open to removing missiles in a comprehensive deal .
 Khrushchev woke up on 25 October to a barrage of disturbing news . Comprehensive nuclear disarmament was an old demand . The Caribbean was the world's nuclear dumping ground .
 Kennedy had responded tersely to his official letter of the previous day, refusing to be pushed around . Kennedy had written a letter of support for the president .
 Kennedy was getting ready to strike not only Cuba but the Soviet Union itself . Those steps could be taken as an indication that Kennedy was preparing to strike .
 Khrushchev: "We and you ought not now to pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knot of war" The more the two of us pull, the tighter that knot will be tied, he wrote .
 Khrushchev’s aides, fearing that his adventurism would trigger nuclear war, unanimously supported his proposal . Khrushchevitch's aides feared that he would trigger a nuclear war .
 The U.S. leader had scuttled the Bay of Pigs invasion a year earlier . The Soviet leader expected him to do the same now . The United States leader had been expected to kill the invasion .
 Within three days of the presidential address, the Soviet leader had decided to remove the missiles from Cuba . This, though, didn't mean the danger and drama were over . When he didn't, a frightened Khrushchev felt that he had .
 Khrushchev asked Kennedy to remove U.S. missiles in Turkey as a precondition of removing his missiles from Cuba . Kennedy also agreed to remove missiles from Turkey in exchange for removing his own missiles .
 Kennedy was prepared to take the deal – he had contemplated such an exchange from the start of the crisis . Kennedy was not prepared to accept the deal, but had contemplated it from start of crisis . He had contemplated the deal from the beginning of crisis.
 He could not do so openly or immediately without offending the Turks and sending a signal to Nato that one day he might remove the American nuclear umbrella without so much as a prior consultation . But he could not . easily offend the Turks or send a message to Nato . without offending .
 On 27 October, the captain of a Soviet submarine ordered a strike with a nuclear torpedo against American ships . General Issa Pliev, the Soviet military commander in Cuba, took a nap . Ironically, things began to spin out of control just as the two leaders had all but agreed on a
 An American U-2 airplane surveying the island was shot down by his subordinates . Just then, his subordinates fired a surface-to-air missile at an American . U.S. U.2 plane was also shot down .
 Castro had already ordered his air defences to shoot at low-flying U.S. airplanes . They had been expecting a United States air attack at any minute .
 The two generals who gave the order without consulting Pliev or Moscow believed that with the U-2 registering the locations of their missiles, a U.S. assault was imminent .
 With the U-2 down, the Cuban crisis had degenerated into a shooting war . The officers who executed the shot braced themselves for immediate retaliation .
 The captain of a Soviet submarine in the Sargasso Sea ordered a strike with a nuclear torpedo against American ships . It almost turned into a nuclear one .
 Only the interference of a senior officer on the submarine stopped the launch . The launch was stopped by an interference from a senior submarine officer .
 In Moscow, Khrushchev woke up to the news about the downing of the U-2 . The U.2 was shot down by Soviet Union forces in September 1962 .
 At that moment, Kennedy was prepared to withdraw his demand about the Turkish missiles . The no less desperate Kennedy was offering a secret swap of the American missiles in Turkey for the Soviet ones .
 Diplomatic note sent through diplomatic channels might take up to 24 hours to reach the White House . Note sent by diplomatic channels could take 24 hours .
 Castro felt betrayed – his fate and that of his country had been decided by the superpowers without consulting him . The Cubans refused to allow inspection of their missile sites – a condition of the Khrushchev-Kennedy deal .
 U.S. inspections humiliated the Soviet military, turning its commanders against Khrushchev . So the Soviets had to show the Americans the missiles loaded on their ships . In October 1964 Marshal Malinovsky, the Soviet defence minister, backed the palace coup .
 Like others in the Soviet leadership, Brezhnev was frightened of Khrushchev’s unpredictability and nuclear brinkmanship . Like others others, he feared the threat of the nuclear threat .
 His attempt to blackmail Kennedy with the threat of nuclear war failed, and he became so frightened that he was prepared to remove the missiles for nothing but a promise from Kennedy not to invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev had confidently expected the missiles to prevent American aggression against Cuba . The missiles were intended to prevent U.S. aggression not only against Cuba but also against the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev was frightened about what could happen to his country and all the countries that would be devastated by a nuclear war, he told a visiting American journalist . “I was frightened. I was frightened ... I was scared about what would happen to my country," he said .
 BBC History Magazine and BBC History Revealed are published by Immediate Media Company Limited under licence from BBC Studios Distribution .
 To Khrushchev’s relief, Kennedy did not announce an imminent attack, opting instead for a naval blockade . They decided to postpone sending the telegram until they heard Kennedy's speech . Kennedy opted for the naval blockade instead of an attack .
 President Kennedy refused to turn back ships delivering non-military loads . The crisis was resolved when news unexpectedly reached the White House that the ships Kennedy ordered to be intercepted had turned back much earlier .
 Unknowingly, Kennedy had ordered the interception of ships moving away from the quarantine line, not toward it . Kennedy had in fact ordered ships to move away from quarantine line .
 Soviet intelligence intercepted the SAC order on 24 October, the day on which Khrushchev dictated his letter comparing Kennedy to Hitler and Napoleon . They were prepared to strike targets in the Soviet Union .
 The Caribbean was the world's nuclear dumping ground . Khrushchev's demand for nuclear disarmament was an old demand of his .
 A Central Committee official wrote on a copy of the old letter that it should not be sent because of the Presidium’s decision to send a different letter . The more the two of us pull, the tighter that knot will be tied, Khrushchev wrote .
 Presidium decided to “dismantle the missile installations’. According to the protocol of the meeting, the Presidium .
 Within three days of the presidential address, the Soviet leader had decided to remove the missiles from Cuba . Khrushchev felt that he had no choice but to blink .
 Khrushchev asked Kennedy to remove U.S. missiles in Turkey as a precondition of removing his missiles from Cuba . Kennedy said removing the missiles was a pre-condition for removing his own missiles .
 Ironically, things began to spin out of control just as the two leaders had all but agreed on a deal . General Issa Pliev, the Soviet military commander in Cuba, took a nap on 27 October .
 The officers who executed the shot braced themselves for immediate retaliation . With the U-2 down, the Cuban crisis had degenerated into a shooting war .
 Kennedy was prepared to withdraw his demand about the Turkish missiles . Terrified of what might come next, he was ready to withdraw .
 Castro felt betrayed – his fate and that of his country had been decided by the superpowers without consulting him . Castro's revolution was anti-imperial first and communist second .
 The Soviets had to show the Americans the missiles loaded on their ships . This humiliated the Soviet military, turning its commanders against Khrushchev . The U.S. inspections of vessels heading back to the USSR humiliated the military .
 We nearly plunged into nuclear war, says Khrushchev . “Khrushchev’s nuclear gamble backfired.”
 He abandoned his scheme after the missiles were discovered . ‘Of course, I was scared. Of course,’ he said .
 This article contains affiliate links and we may receive a commission from Amazon.com.com .