 This was prompted by the Berlin Blockade of 1948-9 and the discovery of a Soviet spy ring . Successfully tested in November 1952 .
 From 1953, 40% of the United States defence funds were allocated to the air forces . The bomb was delivered by plane from a plane .
 By 1955, the USA owned the B52 Stratofortress, the first bomber with intercontinental range . Strategic Air Command became the USA's main nuclear strike force . The Soviets could not compete with SAC but responded with the TU20 Bear .
 By the early 1960s the arms race had reached the point of mutually assured destruction . US confidence about its nuclear superiority in the 1950s led the Eisenhower administration .
 Kennedy rejected massive retaliation . Favoured a flexible response strategy not just an all out nuclear attack . Rejected massive retaliation against any attack .
 By the mid-late 1960s, the USA and Soviet Union had reached the position of mutual assured destruction . Stablising effects + Prevented direct US-Soviet confrontation .
 Soviet acquisition of the atomic bomb led to spiralling arms race . Culture of secrecy surrounding it led to superpowers fears that the other side had military superiority . Cost of nuclear weapons imposed huge financial strains on both sides .
 January 1959, Batista, a ruthless military dictator, was overthrown by the revolutionaries led by Fidel Castro . The revolution overthrown Batista overthrown in 1959 .
 Castro signed a trade deal with the Soviet Union to nationalise U.S. interests in Cuba that were worth over $1 billion . USA imposed economic blockade on Cuba, thereby refusing to buy its sugar . Castro formally embraced communism in early 1961 .
 Kennedy authorised a CIA-backed invasion of Cuba in 1961 . The Bay of Pigs invasion was the first of its kind in Cuba . Kennedy authorised the invasion in March 1961 .
 THe Anti-Castro Cuban exiles were overwhelmed by the Cuban army and air force . THe former Cuban government forces were overwhelmed in Cuba .
 Secret programme destablise Cuban regime Jan-July 1962 60,000 acts of sabotage . Operation Mongoose, Operation 1961, was a secret programme of sabotage against Cuba .
 Khrushchev sends letter to Kennedy to promising to remove Soviet missiles if U.S. lifts the blockade and publically pledges to never invade Cuba . American forces go to DEFCON2 .
 Khrushchev removed U.S. missiles from Turkey but the Soviet military never forgave him . Although the Soviet action had removed United States missiles, the military was never forgiving him . The United States had removed the missiles, but the military never accepted the decision .
 They regarded the Cuban venture as ending in humiliating faliure and this was a factor in Khrushchev's removal from office in 1964 . They regarded it as a humiliating falaure .
 Nixon and Brezhnev used the 'hot-line' during the India-Pakistan war in 1971 . The two men were in touch during the war in Pakistan .
 The two superpowers and Britain signed the treaty in August 1963 . It banned them from conducting nuclear tests in the atmoshphere, underwater, or in space . Underground testing was still permitted .
 The Arms Race 1949-63 1. / 5 based on 1 rating . NUCLEAR ARMS RACE CONCISE ESSAY PLAN 0.0 .