 Labor has 8 seats, the LNP with 8 seats and The Greens with 1 seat . The Greens have 1 seat in the ACT Legislative Assembly . The ACT election has thrown up the result of Labor with 8 .
 Most commentators would see that the Green member would join Labor in a coalition to form government . But they equally could do so with the LNP in theory in theory . The Green member could join Labor but could also join in a government coalition .
 There is a third option which I'd find more favourable and fun and that is the idea of a Unity Government, with all members forming government . All members of the Unity Government should form government, says David Cameron .
 Due to the way that the Westminster System operates, there is almost always always the government and an official opposition . The Westminster system is designed to ensure that there is always always always a government and opposition .
 In most lower houses of Westminster parliaments, there government and opposition spend a great deal of time ripping into each other . That's partly as a result of the mechanics of adversarial politics, writes Simon Tisdall .
 It acts like a perpetual divorce case, or the two sets of supporters and ultras at a football match, or a divorce case . Really it acts like divorce case or a two-set divorce case at football matches .
 It makes for interesting radio and I suppose does provide ten second sound bites for the news . But I don't know if it improves the political discourse or dialogue of the country; nor do I think that it solves problems all that well .
 All members on the floor would be in the government, they would select the cabinet from all available members . Unity Government would have to argue through merit of legislation rather than the usual slanging match down party lines .
 This isn't to suggest that those forces within the parliament would somehow magically disappear, but I think that the acidity of the dialogue would be toned down . This is not to say that the forces within parliament would magically disappear .
 There were arguments based on party and factional lines in the Roman Senate; so I don't see it going away in a hurry . The Roman Senate was formed from parties based on factional and party lines; so there was no rush to change .
 Sitting members of the government would more freely cross the floor in both directions . The proposal would allow sitting members of government to cross the floors of Parliament .
 If we look at multi party parliaments like Belgium or Italy, there is a pulling and pushing of forces which shapes legislation to a far greater degree than in the regimented world of strict two party politics that Westminster has a strong tendency to produce .
 Even in the UK currently where there should be a vociferous voice railing against the Tories with whom they share government in coalition, they have almost fallen silent . The Lib Dems have almost respectfully fallen silent.
 It seems a little odd that two party politics which results in many more words being said, results in a narrowing of voices . Two party politics seems to be a bit odd, with a lot of words being exchanged .
 I think that parliaments work best when there is a bigger plurality of voices all adding spice to the pot . Personally I think . Parliaments best when . there are a larger plurality of . voices adding spice . to the . pot .
 Stable government does help a state/nation/local council etc. achieve practical outcomes . But again I ask what we want from our parliaments .
 The new model will run in addition to the models we are currently manufacturing in our plant . It will allow us to supply the regional and domestic market with even more high-quality, high value Chevrolet products, Costantini said .
 If you want to follow the intentions of someone, merely follow the money. Follow the money, just follow the intention of someone's intentions .
 General Motors is a signal of intent, which should put the Australian arm on notice . The Australian arm are probably surplus to requirements . General Motors has announced that they will not be selling Australian cars .
 The only global platform not currently tied up in 2014 is the Zeta which underpins the Holden Commodore and the Chevrolet Camaro . The Zeta is the only platform not tied up with 2014 is Zeta .
 This announcement ties in perfectly with the end of the model cycle of the Holden Commodore . Due to the scale of the investment, it can be assumed will be the end . It can also be assumed that this will end GM manufacturing in Australia .
 This announcement is basically a death warrant for the Australian car industry . Without GM and Ford who are hesitant to continue the Falcon, there will be no underlying service and parts industry . The decision is a 'death warrant' for Australian car manufacturers .
 Manufacturing cars is a very capital intensive occupation and the decision to invest not quite half a billion dollars should not be seen as a mistake, it is quite deliberate . The decision is not a mistake; it is a deliberate attempt to invest a lot of money into manufacturing .
 Like any other firm, General Motors is looking to cut input costs . The attractiveness of lower wages and a greater degree of funding assistance from the Argentine Government makes this decision a no brainer .
 The Australian Government pumped $275 million into the Australian arm of General Motors . I don't think anything close to that has even been returned in taxation let alone any attempt to pay any of it back .
 In my opinion, I think that the Australian people have been shafted by Detroit again and I'd like to see the Australian Government sue the company for every cent . I think in my opinion that I think . The Australian Government should sue Detroit for all its losses .
 Every single car apart from the Commodore and Combo Van are Chevrolets with the bow-tie removed and a lion tacked in its place .
 There is no real reason for Holden to even exist anymore apart from cultural reasons and the fact that the Commodore which is still built here, holds some sort of place in the nation's psyche . The Commodore still holds a place in Australia's psyche.
 Horse 1389 FF Is The Best Number I was fiddling with the modem last night because of a line dropout .
 Hex code is one of those little windows into the past and the hidden and scary world of the machine's brain . For those of us who still remember the days of reel to reel and tape drives on computers, hex code is a window into the old .
 A computer uses binary, which is made of switches that can either be on or off, 0 or 1 . This is a fancy way of saying that a computer is a switch that can be switched on, or off .
 0000 is 0, 0001 is 1, 0010 is 2 etc. but if were to write 10 we get 1010, 13 is 1101 and 15 is 1111 . Even in a four switch machine the length of numbers gets very long; very quickly .
 In hex, a single digit can discreetly refer to a group of four binary digits and that is incredibly useful . In hex though 10 becomes A, 13 is D and 15 is F in hex .
 decimal becomes increasingly useless if you want to look at discreet packets or binary strings . If you were to compound the problem with ever increasing binary strings such as the switch from 8 bit to 16, 32, 64 bit computing and beyond, the binary strings become increasingly useless .
 The modem was busy counting to itself with a hex counter which I imagine was 32 characters long . I could see it work its way up the line ticking off numbers before ticking over the next digit .
 GUIs mean that stuff sits deep behind shiny sliding things . As we progressively become less curious, shiny sliding sliding things will hide more and more stuff from us .
 We still do occasionally meet hex codes though, when picking colours on a computer .
 The value #000000 says to me that there are three sets of paired four digit binary bits and all of them are off . All of the binary bits are off, and the value is #000000 .
 The regular decimal number for that is 16,777,215 which apart from being a big number, bears no real relationship to what it represents, whereas every F is 1111, and there are six sets of those . Incidentally, there are no real relationships between the numbers and the
 Tape drive computers would sometimes have a counter to tell you how far along they were in loading a program . Tape drive machines would sometimes show you how long they were loading programs . Tape drives were sometimes used to record programs on tape .
 FF in hex is 1111 1111 and an 8 bit counter can not hold a number bigger than that . 8 bit counters cannot be bigger than 1111 in hex .
 I guess that the closest people mostly get to the joy of FF in computing now, is a percentage bar which fills up when installing or downloading things . The closest people get to that joy of computing now is the percentage bar that fills up .
 We all blame the gruff gentleman who always turns out not to have done it. Until someone yells ""There's been a murder"" and we all blame him . The gruff man turns out to be not the man responsible for the murder .
 I think that this is a top idea and will do its part in smashing oiks, which I only assume is the point of the plan . I think it is a good idea and it will help smash the ooks .
 A pay-as-you-drive scheme sounds reasonable on the basis that if you use the roads more, then you should pay more . A pay as-you drive scheme sounds perfectly reasonable . It sounds like it would be a good idea to pay more for a car .
 It's important to realise who the actual burden of paying such a tax would happen to fall on . It's then important to understand who the real burden would be on .
 The people who need to drive the furthest distances are obviously those people who live the most away from where they need to go . People who live in the most remote part of the world need to get to where they can't get there .
 People who live furthest away from work are those who tend to earn less in the first place . If you need to drive to work, then the people who live the furthest are likely to live further away . Those who live far further away tend to live in the most expensive city
 If you earn less, you tend to be living somewhere where house prices and rents are cheaper . You tend to live in a lower-earning city than a city where you earn more money .
 The less well-do areas tend to be on the fringes of the city where services aren't as developed and where rents are cheaper .
 Market forces with are such that properties which are able to command higher prices are closer to existing infrastructure like schools, shops and buses and railways, which by virtue of living further away would also be charged more to get to .
 If you live outside of the Sydney metro reason where distances can be massive then you'll be asked to pay a tax for something which you don't even cause . The tax is a tax on people who don't cause it to pay .
 If there are exemptions for living outside of the Sydney metro, then I have no choice to assume that this is a tax designed to specifically burden poorer people . The tax is likely to be a tax on Sydney's poorer residents .
 'Let's call it for precisely what it is, an attack by an evil government. I don't have a problem with that' 'I'm not having a problem but I'm calling it an attack on evil government,' he says .
 There already is an effective pay-as-you-drive system, with excises and GST being charged on petrol and diesel . Never mind the fact that there already is already a pay-for-driving system .
 People in the west and south-west are more likely to drive smaller cars than luxo-barges and baby-carrying-tanks . This also explains why people out in the south-east drive smaller .
 The irony behind all of this is that the people who actually need to travel the least amount by road, also happen to be the best connected by public transport . The irony is that people who travel the most by road also need to be connected by transport .
 It is my experience that the people living closer to the city and who would be paying the least amount of tax because of it, are also the people who could most afford to pay it . The people living in the city would pay the least tax because they live closer to them .
 Three of the four richest suburbs of Sydney also happen to have both a railway line and several bus routes running right through them . Yet people who live in those suburbs are less likely to use them for fear of accidentally getting the smell of oik on them .
 You'd think that the solution to traffic congestion would be something like improving public transport, say, installing a train line . But instead, the solution is to improve public transport and stop congestion .
 You'd also think that the self-appointed Minister FOR Western Sydney would have listened to the people of Western Sydney, especially those the the north west who have more or less given up trying to ask the Government to listen to .
 When asked what sort of infrastructure the people of Western Sydney wanted, one survey said that they most wanted heavy rail . When originally asked what people wanted, the people in Western Sydney said heavy rail was the most wanted .
 Survey says they would have preferred a railway line in the first place . Instead they were given the M2, then the road was tolled, they then got a second motorway to nowhere in the M7 which was also tolled .
 There are a few other things which specifically make this proposal a tax on oiks .
 It has the dual effect of specifically taxing oiks who want to go to work but also lets people drive for pleasure untaxed . How very delightful, how very delightful.
 Someone in a can-kicking oiky job will pay for the privilege of having the gall to drive to work . Some man in a suit in an office is allowed to take a lovely jaunt on the weekend, maybe through wine country, without paying tax .
 Motor expenses can be claimed as a tax deduction but costs of getting to work are not an allowable deduction . Income tax laws allow motor expenses to be claimed, but not the costs of working .
 95% of car usage by most businessmen actually has nothing to do with generating an income or is simply the cost of driving to work . The ATO isn't seriously going to audit everyone because the costs of doing so would be hideous .
 As far as the NSW State Government is concerned, that would entirely be a Federal issue, says the NSW Minister . The NSW Government is not even remotely concerned about the issue . It is not their concern at all, he says .
 I reckon that it's even odds or better that Professor Hensher lives in a postcode with a number less than 2100, and perhaps also likely that he lives in an area less than 2050 . I reckon it's also likely he lives with a post code less than 1900 .
 This means that he personally lives in an area which would be nicely connected to either a railway line or a very nice bus network . This means he lives in a nice area which is well connected to both the railway and bus networks .
 With such a cosseted existence, it would be easy to make the mistake that everywhere in Sydney is as well connected to public transport, without bothering to research .
 In future I'll pay my oiky tax as a penalty for having the cheek to live further away from work . I'll take pride in the fact that at the weekend a better class of people will be able to go on oh so lovely and pretty drives .
 Being on the security council would bolster Australia's image on the world stage and better position Australia in the future . But it still wasn't made clear exactly what that position was, is and will be, or why Australia needed to spend the money to be there .
 Despite the myth that we've been forced to swallow for the past 65 years, Australia is not the 51st State of America as the media sometimes likes to portray it . Let's not sugar coat this, despite the myth, despite this, Australia isn't America .
 U.S. foreign policy has for almost the entire of the 21st century thus far been about smashing Arabic countries because of a commitment to Israel . Even China gets more said about it than Australia does about it .
 Big Brother says Obama promised to visit Australia when he became president . Big Brother believes Australia is unimportant in the eyes of Big Brother .
 In 2008, Kevin Rudd was still the Prime Minister and didn't win a federal election until 2011, by which time we'd had another federal election . That was in 2008 while Kevin Rudd is still the PM and it didn't happen until November 2011 .
 Australian Government should sit on UN Security Council, says PM . 61 years since ANZUS was signed and America started telling us what to do . Australia has not sat on the Security Council since it was signed 61 years ago .
 I can't imagine that it is to do with actually saying anything on the world stage because that would be like us growing a backbone and we certainly cannot have that . I can’t imagine that . it is . that it would like us grow a backbone, says David Cameron .
 For more than three times my lifetime, Australia has had a decidedly invertebrate foreign policy . During that time, we have switched big brothers though. Australia's foreign policy has been very different from Australia's .
 After the First World War, Billy Hughes travelled to Paris for the conferences to do with Germany being asked politely to pay for the war . The Australian Prime Minister travelled to the conferences .
 Hughes was a upstart; larrikin of a man who was also a little bit deaf . He was a larriankin of an upstart . Hughes was also deaf, and he was a good guy, but he was not deaf .
 During the conferences, if there was something he didn't like, he'd pretend not to have heard it and cheekily made people repeat what they'd said or rather made people change what he'd said until he got what he liked . During the conference, he pretended not to be there
 I seriously doubt whether any modern Australian diplomat would have the audacity to do such a thing now . I doubt any modern diplomat would be willing to take such a decision now .
 The United States President, Woodrow Wilson, was offended by Hughes' demands at the conference for a mandate over New Guinea . Hughes' basically told Wilson where to do and probably gave him the money for the bus fare to get there .
 Australia is trying ever so hard to be America's lap dog, to wag our tail, to heel when told to heel, to bark when we're told to bark and to sit and take a nap on that UN Security Council seat . No, I suspect that the reason why Australia
 Mittens* Romney sends us to Iran and maybe Pakistan in 2014 or 2018, depending on if he gets elected this year or four years hence . We're there to yap loudly against China, growl at the meanie Ms Merkel and bite and snarl at the evil evil bad
 Peter Lewis in the Opinion section of the Daily Telegraph writes an interesting piece in favour of voluntary voting .
 He argues that giving people the right to choose to vote or not, forces political parties to engage with voters . He says it makes the public feel that their vote matters more because they have chosen to cast it .
 I personally think that this is fundamentally flawed logic; moreover that this appears in the newspaper because an agenda is being pushed, he says . He says he thinks this is a flawed logic .
 When people choose not to vote, it is usually an indication that they either do not care or more importantly, feel that they are not represented at all by the field of candidates . When people do not vote, they often do not feel represented by candidates .
 Arguably the people who feel the least attached to politics are the people whose voices need to be heard the loudest because they represent a failure of the system . The people who don't feel connected to politics should be heard loudest in politics .
 "If those voices are never heard because the option was given not to speak, then the lessons are never learned at all," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Politics tends to follow the first law of thermodynamics, that is that objects and politicians are lazy . Objects and politicians like to keep in doing what they already do unless something forces them to change .
 Remove impetus for change and the exascerbation of non engagement by politicians only accelerates, which is precisely what you get in America . Remove the impetus for changes, politicians only accelerate the pace of change .
 Mr Lewis goes onto assert that the Australian system has produced a ""sausage machine"" whereby student hacks become regular political hacks and wait their turn to become MPs . Mr Lewis says that the system is a 'sausages machine'
 He asks us to compare and make a contrast to the American system as though this somehow magically does not happen . Whilst this may be true that the political machines in Australia have to some degree produced career politicians, he asks us .
 By the end, nearly $7bn will be spent on advertising during the 2012 election campaign collectively . The RNC and the DNC lay on extravaganzas to elect their respective candidates .
 The other thing to note with so much money being fed into the parties by corporations, businesses, individuals and weird conglomerate super PACs, those parties are going to want something to show for it .
 A local candidate in Australia might have come from their local political party mechanics but as at 2012 they're still more likely to have engaged with the community by actually being in it than an American equivalent . A local politician in Australia is likely to engage in the community more than a local politician .
 The amount of rusted-on-Ness reaches levels which would make Australians cringe . Arguably the amount of the rusted on-ness is too much to bear .
 You even get churches and charities declaring their rusted-on-ness, which seems strange, given the level of yelling about the separation of church and state in America .
 This also seems to ignore the long history which some families have in sending members to the Town Hall, the State Capitol and the Congress . This also appears to ignore a long history of sending members of Congress to the town hall and the state Capitol .
 There is a strange sort of assertion that in Australia our politicians lack a dynamism because the public compulsorily votes . There is also a claim that our politicians are lacking dynamism in Australia .
 You can walk into any of the state parliaments in Australia when they are sitting and even at Federal level and see people argue very vitriolically and vociferously . You can also walk in to any state parliament in Australia and even Federal level .
 At Federal level, you try to tell me that it is not a dynamic and at times fiery place. At Federal Level, you can't say that it's not . At federal level, it's a dynamic .
 Mr Lewis though does accidentally give the game away and hides his aims in plain view .
 He openly admits that there might be a correlation between lower incomes and non-voting . He also admits that he might be worried about a correlation with lower incomes .
 The easiest way to cut costs is to cut loose entirely that portion of expenses which are the most troublesome, say experts . Cutting costs is the easiest way of cutting costs, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 In this case by advocating voluntary voting, he more or less like Mitt Romney did that a portion of the electorate isn't worth bothering about . In the case by . advocating voluntary . voting, it's like Mitt . Romney did .
 The truth is that with a less motivated poorer section of the electorate, that also provides easy benefits when it comes to governments abrogating responsibility to them, writes Andrew Hammond .
 As a consultant to political parties, his work dovetails nicely into every political party's aim to retain power if they do so, to claim government if they're in opposition and to climb into power .
 The really scary and almost forgotten thing about compulsory voting isn't so much that it is like a civic duty burr rather that it introduces more uncertainty into parliaments . compulsory voting introduces uncertainty into parliament, rather than civic duty . It's a good idea to have compulsory voting in the
 More specialist groups, smaller interest parties, smaller parties, more voices . More different sorts of political dialogue and different items placed on the political agenda. Different items are placed on political agenda .
 Canberra to be the mother of all Westminster Parliaments, Westminster herself . If you want proof of this in the real world, compare Canberra to the mother-of-all Westminster Parliament .
 Nick Clegg has made a formal apology because he couldn't keep promises that he made before the election . London during 2011 suffered a series of riots because young people in particular felt disenfranchised .
 In Australia, we've seen just a few independents swing the entire character of the parliament . In Australia's parliament, independents have swung the entire political landscape .
 The dialogue between the two majors might be as toxic as it ever has been but between them, the independents and Greens have still changed the direction of two parties . The independents and the Greens have changed the way of two major parties who without reason would have continued on their own merry way .
 Compulsory voting provides a voice of protest against inadequate and unrepresentative swill, says John Defterios . Compulsor voting provides "voice of protest" against 'inadequate' swill .
 It provides a voice for the apathetic and the disenfranchised, it provides a check against the power of parliament itself . It is a check on parliament itself, it says .
 Channel 7 is currently playing a television series of The Unbelievable Truth . Horse 1385 is currently being shown on Channel 7 .
 Originally a radio series on BBC Radio 4, the premise of the game is simple . Originally a BBC Radio series, it was originally a BBC radio series .
 Contestants must present a short lecture in which they must tell lies and hidden amongst the lies they must smuggle past five pieces of true information . Contestants get a point at the end for every truth that goes past unnoticed .
 Competitors gain a point for identifying a truth and they lose a point if they mistake a lie for a truth . Competitors are given a point each for correctly identifying a lie .
 Many players on the radio series end up with scores that are in the minus and a final score of 1 is sometimes enough to win . Consequently many players end up scoring as low as 1 .
 I've seen two episodes on telly now and I'm still not sure if it works, or maybe it just hasn't hit its strides yet . I've watched two episodes of this new series, but it's not clear if it's working yet .
 On the telly version, people have the use of visual aids which I suppose is necessary for television but is unhelpful when it comes to the flow of the lecture . People have to use visual aids but it's not necessary for TV .
 The BBC Radio 4 Radio 4 show is hosted by David Mitchell . Mitchell brings a sort of annoyance to the role, but he is not always annoying .
 The BBC and radio generally, generally, fit spoken comedy with spoken comedy so well, says Simon Cowan . He says spoken comedy fits it so well with the BBC .
 Aunty Beeb has a plethora of panel shows and some of them have been adapted to television . But because they're usually more of an intellectual battle of wits rather than visual spectacle, they often don't migrate .
 Have I Got News For You is now in its 44th season . The show thrives on visual simplicity . It is also a panel game which thrives in its simplicity .
 Private Eye is the print print version of ABC 1's Media Watch . Ian Hislop is the editor of Private Eye magazine . Private Eye has been described as a comedy version of the ABC 1 show .
 When HIGNFY was migrated to Australia, suddenly it became this largish extravaganza, renamed Good News Week and developed into its own sort of thing . I still don't find it as witty, dry or scathing as the original .
 GNW certainly doesn't attract politicians and journalists the way that HIGNFY does . GNW doesn't get the attention of politicians or journalists . HIGN FY is not a political party .
 If there was to be a proper Australian version of HIGNFY, I'd be hoping to put Mark Colvin and Joe Hildebrand in the two permanent chairs on the panel . I'd like to see them in a permanent chair .
 Mark Colvin is a brilliantly restless journalist whilst Joe Hildebrand needs a proper vehicle to drive his journalism/comedy talent . Joe Hildildbrand is a brilliant journalist whilst Mark Colving is a wonderful restless journalist .
 I rather think that The Unbelievable Truth would have been better off on radio than radio . "The Unbelieveable Truth" would have had a better radio debut .
 ABC Sydney's afternoon drive slot with Richard Glover has an hour segment at the end of the week called Thank God It's Friday . The segment is an hour-long segment at end of week . Richard Glover is the host of the ABC Sydney morning show .
 TGIF almost without fail completely fills its studio audience on a weekly basis . TGIF will be a weekly feature on CNN iReport.com .
 'I bet that it also gets a wee bit of a ratings bump at the end of the week too. I bet that this week's episode will get a bit of an audience bump .
 This means that there exists a market for radio comedy, it's just that it needs to be built . This means to say that there . there is a . market for comedy, but it needs a market built .
 Norman The Quiz would do well if it ran on Friday nights . The show could be carried nationally like ABC Grandstand shows do .
 ABC missed out on getting a show which it could have done better and cheaper . Maybe I'm just a little annoyed that the ABC has missed out .
 Maybe I'm a little miffed that the ABC didn't put this on the radio first . Maybe just maybe, I'm disappointed that David Mitchell isn't the host . David Mitchell is not the host of the new ABC show .
 If someone happens to win the lottery for instance, then if we apply the provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act it isn't strictly income until it becomes a regular source of income . If someone wins the lottery, then it's not strictly income .
 It is reasonable to suggest that what determines the difference between a journalist and someone who happens to be occasionally paid for what they write is a matter of regularity .
 Eden Riley boasts that she has been featured by two newspaper companies, the national broadcaster and a television station . She probably is a journalist, albeit one who doesn't write about anything I'm particularly interested in .
 I think that the vast bulk of blogs are exceptionally small scale which is perhaps why when you do hear of the one in a million that is commercially successful that people sit up and take notice . The truth is that the success rate probably really isn't that much different to most businesses .
 I think it's worth noting that the vast majority of people don't even have the patience to sit through anything more than a few paragraphs anymore . Also, I think that many of those who watch TV shows have no patience for a few minutes .
 Twitter and Facebook have helped in their own small way to the slow death of serious journalism . It's not the first time serious journalism has been taken to Twitter by the social networks .
 I will suggest that these ""so-called mummy bloggers"" probably don't engage in political journalism because it doesn't interest them . I'll suggest that they probably don’t engage in . political journalism .
 It stands to reason that any good writer like anyone who plays music, has a fire in their belly so they'd better stick an instrument in front of it . "Any good writer, or any good music writer, has to stick to their fire in the belly," she says .
 Labor in the ACT might gain an eighth seat at the expense of The Greens' leader Meredith Hunter . I also don't think that these ""mummy bloggers"" are going to write about the possibility that Sebastian Vettel might move to Ferrari in 2014 .
 I would wager that political journalism doesn't interest mummy bloggers because it isn't fun for them . Political journalism is not fun for mummy bloggers, it's not fun to write .
 I don't understand why you'd want to post pictures of your children on the internet . But then again I wouldn't visit these sites anyway. Personally I'm not sure why I'm posting these pictures .
 Dubious bloggers/journalists are no more than the mirror providing a reflection on society . Dubious blogger/journalist is no less than a reflection of society. Dubious blogs are more than a mirror of society providing a mirror .
 The first major boom or journalism in England at least was called the ""Augustan Age"" and went from about 1710 until about 1730 . This was the first major period of journalism or journalism .
 Journals and pamphlets were being written and published by craftsmen and farmers . Guilds and farmers, shopkeepers, smiths and toolmakers, and even merchants, bankers and other entrepreneurs .
 Samuel Johnson's Dictionary of the English Language appeared in 1755 . He also wrote essays and pieces for The Rambler, The Idler the London Gazette etc.
 Thomas Paine's 1776 piece Common Sense was a pamphlet that helped to spur on a nation to find its feet . Paine wrote Common Sense in 1776 and it was published in 1777 .
 The point is that people since the advent of reasonably widespread literacy have and will continue to write about what interests them . The point it that people have since been writing about what they want to do .
 Horse 1383: If X must resign, then Y must resign . If X resigns, Y must also resign. If Y resigns then X must do so .
 Abbott said it to Gillard, Gillard said to Abbott, Bishop said to Swan, Swan, Macklin said to Hockey . Barnaby Joyce almost said it himself . Gillard and Abbott said to each other .
 When Peter Slipper was on the verge of resigning, Ms Gillard had a glorious fifteen minute rant at Mr Abbott... and said it again . Ms Slipper said it was a glorious 15-minute rant at him .
 I don't think that calling for the resignation of someone in government unless in the case of serious misconduct or criminal act, achieves anything, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: "I think calling for resignations is not a good idea."
 This means that a majority of people in the area that the MP is supposed to represent, or in the case of proportional representation, a sufficient proportion of people have consented to that person being their representative . This means to say that either the majority of the . people in . area that
 We do not elect Ministers of the Crown; in fact we do not even vote for the government of the day . We are not even voting for the Government of the Day. We are in the UK for the first time ever .
 We only vote for our local MP and their power and right to be in parliament is derived from their electorate . Their power and the power of the MP is derived in their electorate, says the MailOnline editor . We are happy to clarify that we are not voting for our own MPs .
 The people of Bennelong directly appointed Maxine McKew to replace the former PM John Howard . But they didn't formally elect the new Prime Minister either . Bennelong residents also appointed the new PM .
 I think it strange that Gillard and Abbott keep calling for their opposite number's resignation . Gillard says it's strange that they call for the opposite number to resign . Abbott and Gillard call for Abbott to resign as prime minister .
 If they mean that they should resign in some other capacity, say as leader of the party, or as head of the Cabinet or Shadow Cabinet then this also makes no sense . If they say they want to resign, they will not resign as a result, say Labour leader or shadow cabinet
 I suppose that you could ask for the opposite party to choose a new leader but that would be like trying to ask a cat to look at itself in in the mirror . Even if you asked nicely there's no guarantee that it would do so and even if it did it would be because
 The ""If X . then Y must resign"" line sounds theatrical and grand if you happen to like going for ten second sound bites on the six o'clock news . But it doesn't really add much to the political discourse of the day .
 It certainly is not the rousing ""out of the depths of sorrow and of sacrifice" sort of parliamentary speech that Churchill would have said; nor is the same as the scathing bile filled yet witty fights that we had from Keating and Howard .
 Ms Gillard is certainly capable of brilliant oratory and we've only really seen that a few times on the floor of the house . She has been accused of using her oratory as a political weapon .
 To the best of my knowledge Mr Abbott has never delivered such a speech. Mr Abbott is not expected to do so, says Ms Abbott .
 Politicians are endowed with their own unique method of speaking . But this almost fallback line of ""If X , then Y must resign"" is bordering on the verge of childish .
 One of the consequences of having a house so finely balanced is that there should be a greater flow of the duopoly of voices from both political tribes . In theory, this should be the result of the balance of the house being balanced .
 The chamber will naturally tend towards a further degree of disorder . What he should also find as we found in NSW, is that the chamber is naturally prone to disorder .
 One writer called it like "a couple of mad uncles bickering in the attic" The argument isn't going to be ended merely by asking the other to be quiet .
 Asking your opponent to be quiet denies the core of political dialogue . It's time to be honest with your opponent in a political debate .
 Politics gets in the way of and replaces good government entirely . It is the triumph of politics over government, says David Cameron . The problem with politics is that it gets in way of good government .
 Section 51 of the Constiution of Australia states that the Parliament shall have power to make laws for the peace, order, and good government of the Commonwealth with respect to" and then lists a heap of legislative powers . Section 51 states that Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have
 Khrushchev had arranged with Fidel Castro to host nuclear missile launching silos and platforms in Cuba . JFK had ordered nuclear capabilities in Turkey and had failed spectacularly with the ""Bay of Pigs"" invasion .
 On 16th October 1962, a U2 spy plane had taken surveillance photographs which showed that Khrushchev had the ability to strike the East Coast of the U.S. with nuclear missiles . The photographs were taken by a spy plane .
 The unsung hero which averted nuclear war was a piece of technology which has changed the world perhaps more often and with more force than any other weapon ever unleashed... a letter . I don't know precisely how close either JFK or Khrushchev got to "pressing the button"
 Both JFK and Khrushchev had underneath their fingers, the power to exterminate life on this planet . JFK had the power of exterminating life on the planet, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: "Both of them had the ability to kill all of our species"
 The famous Red Telephone which connected the White House to the Kremlin had not even been set up by October '62 and so this form of communication wasn't yet an option . The Red Telephone was not even set up .
 Even after it was installed as a result of the missile crisis, it is still doubtful whether in all the years of its operation it was used for anything beyond making calls to test if it worked and to give instructions for chess games .
 The United States State Department has released all sorts of exchanges between Kennedy and Khrushchev . The exchanges make for fascinating reading .
 Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, Moscow, September 28, 1962 . Message from Chairman Khruschev to . President Kennedy . Khruski was chairman of the Soviet Union's Communist Party .
 If we read something like this, it paints a very very different picture of what we might expect, it's not surprising . It paints the picture very different than what you might expect from the media .
 Khrushchev appears far more conciliatory than the press in the west would suggest . The former Soviet leader appears to be a far more moderate figure than the media would suggest.
 This is a man who after making cuts to conventional weapons budgets, though for a while that he could achieve the same ends through missiles . This is the man who made the cuts to the conventional weapons budget .
 It was hard enough to manage domestic policy and agriculture without having to worry about the threat of the nuclear boogeyman . It's hard enough for domestic policy to manage without worrying about nuclear threat .
 Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticós: "I repeat, we have sufficient means with which to defend ourselves; we have indeed our inevitable weapons"
 Cuba openly declared that it had ""inevitable weapons" then it must have got them from somewhere . Cuba must have gotten them from some of the world's most powerful nations . Cuba's weapons are likely to be from somewhere in Cuba, says the Cuban president .
 Congress adopted a resolution expressing its support of this declared policy . It was in order to avoid any incorrect assessment on the part of your Government with respect to Cuba, President Obama said .
 Khrushchev stated on the 23rd that they ""are destined exclusively for defensive purposes"" and had openly admitted that they shipping missiles to Cuba . Khrushov stated that they were destined only to be defensive purposes .
 Kennedy issued a shipping quarantine order on the 23rd October 23rd .
 Mr President, if you coolly weigh the situation which has developed, not giving way to passions, you will understand that the Soviet Union cannot fail to reject the arbitrary demands of the U.S. Mr President . Mr President. Mr Obama .
 The key letter in the exchange whilst they were flying forth and back was from Khrushchev on the 26th:""This indicates that we are normal people, that we correctly understand and correctly evaluate the situation," he said .
 "If you did this as the first step towards the unleashing of war, well then then, it is evident that nothing else is left to us but to accept this challenge of yours," he said .
 If there is no intention to tighten that knot, then let us relax the forces pulling on the ends of the rope, let us take measures to untie that knot . And a moment may come when that knot will be tied so tight that even he who tied it will not have the
 I really don't know how close the USA and the USSR came to all out nuclear war and I shudder to think what would have happened if it ever came to be . The letters which literally flew back and forth did their part in making sure it never did .
 These letters are the unsung heroes of the Cold War, saving more lives than possibly both World Wars combined . The letters saved more lives in Cold War than any other major war .
 On October 26, 1962, the Beale dropped depth charges on a Soviet Foxtrot named ""B-59" armed with a 15 kiloton nuclear torpedo . The air-conditioning system was running out of air because of the failure .
 Valentin Savitsky, Ivan Maslennikov and Vasili Arkhipov had authorisation to fire their nuclear torpedos if all three of them came to a concensus . The three officers were given permission to fire the torpedos on board .
 Valentin said ""yes" to Vasili Arkhipov, Ivan and Valentin, but Vasili said ""no"" and his protestation caused B-59 to surface for air . Valentin and Ivan said "yes" and "no" to the request of Vasili .
 Vasili Arkhipov probably made the single most important decision of anyone in the entire of the 20th Century . Vasili made the decision in a decision that was probably the most important of all time . The decision was made by a man who has never been heard of .
 There is an old story that says that the best way to cook a galah is to put it in a pot of water, along with peas, carrots, celery and other vegetables, add a lump of granite, and then boil . When the granite has turned soft, then the
 The poor old galah has taken a bit of a bum wrap over the years . Now I don't know if this is a story with any basis in fact because galah meat is tough .
 Also like the cockatoo, they have a distinct habit of scratching the ground to get at the little seeds that they want to eat .
 I don't know if this makes them any more or less messy than say a cockatoo or parrot but I wouldn't think so . I wouldn’t think so. This makes them more messy than cockatoos or parrots .
 The sounds of a cockatoo in the late evening must have seemed very scary and weird to someone who had never heard anything remotely close to it before . The people of the First Fleet spent those first few weeks in this new and bewildering land .
 When you get a large flock together, they're really quite orderly . The galah on the other hand doesn't make such an awful din, the galah doesn't .
 With their grey wings, white caps and fantastic pink waistcoats, in large groups they look like a meeting of aldermen or perhaps one of London's clubs that appeared in the late 18th century .
 No human could get away with such an outfit unless they were either on a sporting field, or unless they happened to be Jeff Kennett . No human would get away from such a bizarre outfit unless it was on the sporting field or on the road .
 If you replace the pink for blue and they grey for yellow and you pretty well well have the kit for the West Coast Eagles AFL team . The West Coast Coast Eagles are currently playing in the Australian National Football League .
 Unlike the mynahs which like to dive bomb my cats and who attack much larger birds by ganging up on them, galahs are far far less violent . Unlike my nahs which attack my cats they are far more violent .
 I can't honestly recall seeing a galah ever being in an airspace war with another bird, even though I suppose that it must happen at some point .
 I will concede that they're not the most majestic of birds when flying but they're still quite pretty and look purposeful . The birds are not the best of birds but they are quite pretty .
 They're also quite a lot more intelligent than we give them credit for. They are also quite intelligent than people think they are . They are quite a bit more intelligent, they say .
 When we tell people not to be a galah, we mean for them not to act so foolishly, we say . When we say 'don't be a gah' we mean 'not to act foolishly' when we tell them to behave badly .
 Galahs know how close they can get to people and also know that they can stand on the central median strip of a divided carriageway in safety and impunity . Galahs though, however, know how much of the road is divided .
 They do like to sit in the wattle tree out the front of my house and will regard me quietly as I trundle forth and back with the lawnmower . They know that after I've mowed our sorry excuse for a lawn, that their job to scratch for seeds has
 "No other kind of bird that I see in the front yard has worked this out. No other bird ... has worked it out," she says . "I see no other bird working this way," she adds .
 I do know that I'll never own one or even pat one because they are practically untameable but there's something a little gladdening about that . There's something in gladdness about that.
 A wild bird which is free to do what it pleases and takes no orders from anyone is more regal, more grandiose and more majestic than the qualities which we foolishly try to impose on it . The bird is a free bird that is free of any orders and takes
 Perhaps galahs think that we're the fools and in some weird galah language they have the expression ""flaming humans" - or at least I like to think they would . Perhaps they think that they would have the phrase "flamming humans" or "fllaming
 I saw this Rolls-Royce this morning and part of me died a little inside . The Spirit of Ecstasy .
 I can understand perfectly, the need to make cars more aerodynamic, sleeker and to cut through the air efficiently . I can also understand the need for cars to be aerodynamic and sleeker . I'm not afraid to say yes, but I'm glad to say 'yes'
 Making cars slice more cleanly through the air increases their fuel efficiency, which saves the owner more money and saves us all more prudent with the limited resource of petroleum . We all need to be careful with our petroleum resources, and make sure we don't overuse our vehicles .
 I will more than likely never own a Rolls-Royce and so I suppose that the question of why my opinion even matters matters is more than valid . I suppose the question is why I even matters is that I don't know .
 The thing is though, though, that even if I'll never own a Rolls-Royce I am still part of a society which does . Even if I won't own it, I am part of the society that does, I'm not alone .
 Rolls-Royce has become sort of a metonym to describe something of the highest quality . The sad fact is that even if you can afford to buy one of these, you still can't but but a nice looking car .
 Rolls-Royce has failed in its raison d'être. It has failed to do that. If even a Rolls Royce cannot do that, then I'm sorry but it has failed . If even Rolls- Royce can't do that .
 "I come from a generation to ever see utterly beautiful machines on the road," says Lewis Hamilton . "It's the first time I've ever seen utterly beautiful cars," he says .
 Cars used to be styled by men with pencils, sculptured by people out of clay and finally assembled by hand . Cars were then assembled by people who were wealthy enough to make them .
 Stylists like Pininfarina, Bertone, Issigonis etc. could make metal sing . Metal metal has a long history of heavy metal .
 The Jaguar D-Type was obviously built for purpose and managed to stride valiantly against the wind . The 1959 Cadillac expressed a vision of the future of unbridled optimism .
 Even the original Mini and the Mark 1 Ford Cortina proved that style could be given to the family hack . The Mini and Mark 1 Cortina were the first cars to be built in the UK .
 The Falcon Coupe and the Holden A9X Torana look like they'd rip your head off and use it as a football . The Holden Torana was a classic sports car from the 1970s . It was the first time a car has been driven by a car that looked like
 Cars of the late 00s and early 10s have usually all been trying to look edgey with swoopy hard cutting lines . This looks fine on a computer but lacks an arist's hand, a craftsman's touch; dare I say it, soul .
 Legend has it that when the people at Jaguar had made the full size clay model of the Jaguar XJ6 . When the clay was left to dry it sagged and the designers liked the downwards slope of the boot so much, they left it like that for the final production model .
 The hard edged design trend doesn't just apply to cars, it can be found in architecture, in industrial design for household appliances and even Windows 8 when it comes out at the end of this month .
 A car company like Rolls-Royce especially cannot rely on motor racing program like Mercedes-Benz and it cannot really generate the halo effect from producing hypercars . A company like Ferrari cannot rely heavily on racing racing programs like Mercedes, Benz .
 Rolls-Royce should be about producing jealously and envy in other people, says James Carleton . Rolls Royce should not be about production of jealous and envy, he says . The company should not produce envy in others, he adds .
 The sign came from a sign that reads: "I've heard all sorts of explanations about where it came from but none seemed to hold much basis in fact in fact . Over the years, I've heard many of the explanations but none of them seem to hold a much-needed basis
 There is the suggestion that it is an anti-capitalist sign; being a corruption of the Mercedes-Benz three pointed star which has been cut down the middle .
 I couldn't really find much of an actual historical basis for this though though. I'm not sure if it's true or if it was true . I'm happy to have a history of this .
 There was also the theory that the thing in the middle is supposed to be a broken cross with the arms in a fallen position and that it is an anti-Christian symbol .
 This works nicely with the rise of the hippie movement of the late 1960s and the rejection of authority including the church . But it still doesn't really explain why it was seen in the late 1950s, some ten years beforehand .
 Gerald Holtom was a prominent player in the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament . Holtom is a prominent figure in the campaign for nuclear disarmament .
 If we look at the semaphore signals for N and D, N is a flag straight up and one straight down and D is the two flags held at the quarter marks below horizontal with straight arms . N is the flag held straight up, D is held straight down . N and
 Peace symbol is actually the semaphore for ND or Nuclear Disarmament . In other words, the peace symbol is also a symbol for nuclear disarmament . Peace symbol symbol is a symbol of peace .
 Eric Austen made the very first peace sign for Nuclear Disarmament in 1958 in from Gerald Holtom's original design . The sign was made by a ceramics manufacturer .
 In some ways the sign is supposed to be reminiscent of an individual in despair . The sign is meant to represent a person in despair, the artist says .
 We have to remember that in 1958, the threat of nuclear weapons being used loomed large . In 1958, nuclear weapons were still being used in North Korea .
 The peace sign can be taken in a number of ways from an anti-peace sign to something else subversive, to something as simple as that it was done by some vandal . The sign is an upside-down peace sign, but it can be used in a variety of ways .
 I'd like to re-appropriate this sign and suggest that this looks like something else . I'm not sure what I'm looking for, but I want to make it look like a sign .
 If this looks like a person with their arms held aloft in the air, then this can be taken to mean someone with a lot of joy . This can also be taken as a sign of joy in the sky . If this is taken to be a sign that someone has a lot
 It could also mean someone with their hands held up, ready to serve, provide assistance or in worship . It also means someone holding their hands up ready to provide assistance .
 If the peace symbol is supposed to be originally the symbol of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, then it has sort of failed . The peace symbol was originally intended to be a symbol of nuclear disarmament, but it has failed .
 The USSR may have dissolved more than 20 years ago, but the US, UK, France, China, Russia, Ukraine, India, Pakistan and Israel are confirmed as having nuclear weapons . Iran, if it doesn't have them, probably wants them .
 The world was in short supply of joy, service, worship and hope in 1958 . Perhaps as the threat of nuclear weapons again rears its head, we need to be reminded of these things .
 If there is still a severe shortage of those things in the world, we should take this as a pithy reminder to start spreading, doing and producing .
 The reason I won is purely down to knowing one of the basic mechanisms of the game; this is where we begin the story . This is where the story begins, and the reason I win is simply down to knowledge .
 There are 16/36 ways to roll numbers between 6-8; that is almost one half of the total possible dice rolls . There are 36 ways of rolling two dice but there are almost one in 36 rolls .
 There are Community Chest and Chance cards which direct you to go there, and if you roll three doubles, you also go there . If a square on the board which sends you there, a square is sent you there and if three doubles are rolled, it sends you to a square .
 The next commonly landed on space is Go because of operation of the Community Chest and Chance cards . The Community Chest is used to make money from the charity .
 The most profitable squares to own on the Monopoly board are the ones 6-8 spaces away from Jail and Go . It therefore follows that the most profitable square to own is the ones away from jail and go .
 If you think about other games, they provide interesting mathematical thought puzzles . The game is based on a series of mathematical puzzles .
 Candyland is usually only played by anyone over the age of 8 because they want to play with someone younger . The game requires zero decision making because quite literally every move is directed by the cards .
 Candyland is a classic zero player game because the player can make no difference to the outcome of the game . Although the result is unknown before the start, the game has a predetermined outcome . Candyland has a zero player rule .
 A game like Sorry which also has decision making but not the chance element as directed by dice, has decision-making but not chance element . Sorry is directed by cards, but not by dice . Sorry also has a decision making element like chance element but not a chance element like dice .
 If you roll a 3, you move three spaces and are directed to move upwards or downwards by the directions on the board; that's it . Roll a 3 and move 3 spaces, you are directed by the direction of the board . If a 3 rolls a 3 you move 3,
 There is usually quite a complex decision making process but either the order of the cards in s central stockpile is fixed or in the case of trick taking games, once a card has been played, it is gone .
 If I have in my hand the King of Hearts, then unless you are playing with multiple decks, no-one else does . If you have in your hand, you have to play multiple decks . If I'm playing with a deck of cards, I'll be playing with the King
 A lot of card games including those at casinos can have elements of card counting to them . Card counting is a popular card game at casinos .
 Bridge players are exceptionally excellent at tracking each and every one of 52 cards in a deck . I've found Bridge players to be exceptionally good at tracking cards .
 Of the group whom I usually play Bridge with, there are two ladies who on the surface have lovely conversations about their family and like to gossip . However, we suspect that secretly, they have named every card in the deck .
 Poker is more about a psychological showdown of players than about the cards which they happen to possess . Games like Poker which is shown on television almost as a sport, is shown almost as sport . Poker is a psychological battle between players and players .
 The board itself is a largish network of unevenly joined spaces, the reward system is uneven, there is a high element of decision making and there is an element of chance .
 As far as fixed square board games go, it is very complex . It is only really matched in terms of complexity by tabletop war games .
 This is when describing a game mathematically starts to become useless . Instead of looking at fixed positions we start to look at general trends . This is where we look at the general trends of the game .
 Game theory is sometimes used in applications far beyond mere board games and is applied to such things as behavioral psychology, economics, epidemiology etc. all of which are a far cry from Monopoly .
 There are quiz type games like Trivial Pursuit which I happen to hate . Then there are quizzing type games such as Trivian Pursuit like I hate .
 My problem with quizzes is that they tend to act like Sorry or Snakes and Ladders in that you either do or don't know the answer to the question . I'm not sure why I'm taking part in this quiz .
 There is no skill or decision making involved other than rolling a die and moving a piece . Roll a die, move a piece and roll a piece in order to make sure it's not rolled .
 Boardo is the second most complex game in the world . Boardo has been described as the world's most complex board game .
 Boardo is a tangled fusion of snakes and ladders, Monopoly, chess, Trivial Pursuit and Scrabble . It ranks only behind Mornington Crescent in terms of unfathomable unfathomability .
 Players take it turns to roll the dice and make a move, in the logical direction, to their destination . Players take turns to make the move, which is the logical way to get to their destinations .
 Horse 1377 Abortion is Murder . Abortion is murder. Abortion is the murder of a woman .
 No correspondence needs to be taken into, no argument needs to form; nothing more should be said on the subject . Nothing more should need to be said about the subject, says the author of the book .
 Someone will ask where the candidate in question stands on the subject of abortion . Almost without exception, in every single debate or set of questions posed to a candidate for the U.S. Presidency, someone will ask .
 It's almost as though the state of the economy, the impending debt problem, the questions of unemployment and lack of basic healthcare fade into the background . The economy, debt and unemployment all seem to fade in the background of the debate .
 This single question has the potential to make people jump up and down and holler until they're blue in the face . CNN.com will feature a new iReporter's weekly quiz .
 Joe Biden and Paul Ryan squared off in a debate as Barack Obama and Mitt Romney had done the week before . Biden and Ryan faced off on Thursday night American time American time .
 Paul Ryan: "If you believe that life begins at conception, that, therefore, doesn’t change the definition of life" Paul Ryan had this to say .
 The policy of a Romney administration is to oppose abortion with exceptions for rape, incest and life of the mother." Paul Ryan: "I think that that is a pretty solid sort of principle to be working with"
 There have been so many arguments when it comes to the issue of abortion as to when a ""group of cells" is human or not . There are many arguments over when a group of cells is human .
 If it is not, Paul Ryan's position that life begins at conception is the only logical one to take . This is what makes Ryan's comment so poignant . If it's not, it is the way to take the position of Paul Ryan .
 If we expand our scope beyond the borders of the U.S., it is worth having a look at the legal framework which we find ourselves operating in .
 If we are to be talking about an international standard, we'd need to find what international law says about such an issue; fortunately this has already been established . Once you set up a standard, you can then start making empirical judgments based on that standard .
 The United States is one of the countries to have signed it but not have ratified it . The U.S. is the only country to sign it .
 The U.S. champions itself on human rights issues but refuses to ratify the vast majority of international conventions . It is largely this reason that this debate exists in the United States at all . The United States' arrogance says that no international law should trump that of the US .
 It should also not exist in Australia; the only reason it does is because of unconscionable people . The only reason is that it does exists in Australia, and that it should not exist .
 The child, by reason of his physical and mental immaturity, needs special safeguards and care, including appropriate legal protection, before as well as after birth . Take note of the preamble of the Convention on the Rights of the Child .
 It is safe to assume that the U.N. through the Convention on the Rights of the Child, has taken a legal position equal to that of Paul Ryan . It is therefore safe to think that the United Nations has taken an equal position .
 If it is not even possible to make an empirical judgment as to when a ""group of cells"" is human or not, then the clause ""before as well as after birth"" can only logically taken to mean that a ""life begins at conception"" and if this is true, all
 Crimes Act 1900 says in Sections 82 84 that if a woman herself or someone else either procures or administers drugs or any instrument or other means to procure to abortion, they shall be liable to imprisonment for ten years . If we look closer to home, we find that in New South
 The very fact that it's mentioned in the Crimes Act 1900 means that it is a crime at law . It is mentioned in a Crimes Act which means it is now a crime in law .
 The Crimes Act 1900 is the result of the Crimes Act of 1900 . There must be a corresponding right or freedom which is being defended . The flipside to a negative, which is what the act is, is that it must be defended .
 The UN says the Crimes Act in NSW properly defends:Article 6 1. 1. The Crimes Act is in NSW . It is in breach of Article 6 .
 I challenge anyone to reply with any coherent argument against this, because I have looked into the abyss and have found nothing . "I challenge anyone who challenges me to argue against this," he says. "I have looked and found nothing."
 Alan Jones: Advertisers trying to go about their business and exercise their choice as to where they spend their money and where they want to communicate .
 I have heard all of Alan Jones' almost nine minute rate about cyberbullies and how supposedly people voicing their concern, has resulted in turning the dialogue of the nation into a dark place . Alan Jones has been criticised for his comments on the subject .
 "To be honest I wouldn't have expected anything different at this point in time," he says . "It illustrates the other side of the coin we call free speech," he adds .
 I have heard over and over again of the need for Australia to have a Bill of Rights and how free speech needs to be protected . I have been told that free speech must be protected in Australia . It is not the first time I've heard of a need for an Australian Bill of
 The right to free speech is in the Bill Of Rights Act 1689 and Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, of which Australia is a signatory . Never mind the fact that the right to speech is free speech in Australia .
 The right to free speech and expression is very much ingrained into the life of this country . There is really very little need to write yet mote legislation which might inadvertently limit the scope of the right .
 The right to free speech and expression it should be noted, pretty well gives people licence to speak their mind . Free speech is a key part of the right to freedom of expression and expression .
 I note that Alan has done this on multiple occasions, even calling for the Prime Minister to come to harm . Alan has called for the prime minister to be harmed .
 The other side of this is that although the right gives people the ability to say pretty well what they like, it also gives them the right to consume that free speech and judge what they have said . It also gives people a right to judge that speech and what it has said .
 Consumers of free speech have the right to accept or reject what they've heard . Since free speech is like a marketplace of ideas, consumers should reject ideas, he says .
 We see this when it comes to politics, religion, science and even entertainment . We see it when we go to politics and religion, but also when we look at entertainment .
 Advertisers have the right to exercise their choice as to where they spend their money and with whom they want to communicate . So then, advertisers as corporate people who have the . right to withdraw their . money and communicate elsewhere, he said .
 Since advertisers rely on the public to spend their money and buy what is being advertised, they will look to see what sorts of profits and benefits will be gained for doing so .
 Advertisers have threatened to withdraw their monies from advertisers from advertisers . The public who have been accused of cyberbullying, have basically threatened to pull out of advertisers .
 It stands to reason that doing so threatens the profitability of those businesses . It's a good thing for the U.S. to keep up with its business model .
 Alan Jones says if a corporate person withdraws their money, it is taken by Alan Jones to be a business decision . But if the public do likewise, it then becomes cyberbullying, he says . The difference is between corporate people withdrawing their money and the public .
 In slightly different terms he suggests on one hand the right to free speech and expression should exist for companies and advertisers but not for individuals . He suggests that free speech should be allowed to be free for individuals but not individuals .
 In effect he in effect says that he himself does not have the right to free speech and expression . That in itself is kind of hypocritical, he says . But he defends the free speech he says that enabled him to say that .
 As a consumer of free speech, I find Alan Jones to be dull and don't usually listen to him anyway . I find him dull and I don't like him anyway. I'm not a fan of Alan Jones, but I like him .
 As a consumer of free speech with the right to judge the content if that free speech, I find it terribly horrid . As a . consumer of . free speech he finds it terribly . horrid, he says. As . a consumer with the . right to . judge the .
 I still defend Alan Jones' right to say whatever he wants to and more importantly be judged on the basis of what he has said, however horrid it may be . I still however defend Alan .
 Jamie Whincup and Paul Dumbrell win the Bathurst 1000 Tourist Car .
 Being the fiftieth running of the event at Bathurst, a number of cars including the second place X Falcon, were wearing liveries echoing those which had competed before . I think it illustrates something important. It was great to see, I think .
 A car whizzing down a piece of tarmac at 300km/h is a moving billboard . The billboard shows the speed of a car travelling on a highway at 300 km/h .
 If you want a billboard to successfully do its job and sell the product or service in question, it has to communicate a message effectively and more importantly, simply, simply .
 Falcon illustrated yesterday that you do not need swirly; funky graphics to make a car memorable . James Moffat and Alex Davison's ""Tru-Blu Steel Tubing"" Falcon illustrated that you can make your car memorable.
 Even the colour of the car itself communicates the message simply and so well, that even 31 years after the original car driven by Dick Johnson had won the race in the hand, it still lived long enough in the memory .
 The point about simplicity of message or lack thereof is proven perfectly by the Pepsi Commodore . Greg Murphy and Owen Kelly's Pepsi Commodore is a simple message .
 I completely understand that Pepsi want to appeal to ""da youff" market but you can not make anything memorable if you change the livery for every race and in the case of Pepsi generally, by changing the corporate logo . You can't make a memorable race livery with changing the
 Pepsi would be better off in my opinion, to change back to their logo from the 1960's . Pepsi would better off by changing back to the logo of the 1960s .
 Their marketing on their bottles in the supermarket does this and it seems to work well for them . Their marketing is on the bottles in supermarkets and they seem to be working well .
 I think it is a mistake to ever change the logo of a company unless it reflects its history or because the company has undergone a merger . I think that it is the wrong thing to do to change a company's logo .
 General Electric was the only original original component on the Dow from day one . General Electric has retained its logo, or at very least evolved it slowly .
 The same also goes for Ford, which has retained the same script in the blue oval which appeared on the Model T as early as 1906 . Ford also has kept the same blue oval script in its iconic car as well .
 The Craig Lowndes and Warren Luff Commodore ran a colour scheme echoing the Marlboro colours run by the late, nine times winner of Bathurst, Peter Brock . The late Brock was the first Bathurst winner to win a Bathurst title .
 Even the chevron on the bonnet had to be turned upside-down . The colour scheme of the Marlboro Toranas and Commodores of the '70s and '80s was so strong it had to have a chevy-up .
 The power of good graphic design has even recently been acknowledged at law, with the move to sell cigarettes in plain packaging . Good graphic design was recently acknowledged by the law .
 Having big numbers on the door is as important as the logos emblazoned on the car, says Fernando Alonso . The British Grand Prix took place on Sunday afternoon in Melbourne .
 Motor Racing like all forms of sport is in part about the unfolding of a story . Motor Racing is about unfolding a story, and it's not just about the race itself .
 Each car should be given a proper identity to tell the story of its story, says author . "It is essential to telling stories and the cars and drivers in the story are its characters," he says .
 NASCAR in the U.S. has known this for years and even in the country which developed and refined advertising further than any other, the numbers on the doors of the cars in a NASCAR race are massive and obvious .
 So strong is the branded message of a number that even they are considered as assets . Even they are bought and sold for millions of dollars .
 Peter Brock was paid to run 05 on his car to tie in with anti-drink driving advertising . He continued to run the number for years after the Victorian Dept of Transport had ceased to pay him for doing so .
 I know it sounds odd but I really find the little yellow numbers in the rear window annoying . I really like the number numbers on the rear of the car .
 Triple 8 Engineering which runs the Vodafone Commodores would be numbered 88 and 888 . If as per the regular season that say the number 1 was taken by another team, it would be number 88 . The number 1 would be taken by the team which is the V
 At the track, they just blur into a yellow blob and you have no idea which one is which . That's fine on television but if you're at the track it just blurs into yellow blob . You can't know which one of them is which. You can only know which
 I think that V8 Supercarsm specifically and the teams generally should take notice of certain aspects of graphic design though. I think it's a sign that the teams should take note of the graphic design of the cars .
 I saw this poster whilst getting off the bus near Wynyard yesterday and just had to write something about it . I saw it while getting out of the bus and had just had a thought about it.
 Presumably he will be giving his advice on how to achieve happiness in this hectic age we live in .
 Before you needlessly spend your hard earned cash, I will dispense the secret to happiness . I will now dispense with the secret of happiness .
 Before I'm roasted about how materialistic this sounds, I'd like to draw the distinction between actual needs and wants . I'm not just a fan of materialistic materialism, I'm just a lover of real life .
 Humans needs extend as far as being fed, clothed, housed and living in adequate safety; that's it . Humans needs basically extend to being fed and clothed, as well as being housed, and adequate safety .
 People don't need cars, washing machines, sofas, electric tin openers, stereos etc. etc. People need washing machines and washing machines . People also need electric cars or washing machines as well .
 "People can and do survive quite happily without them. Those things are nice to have but people can't survive without them," he says .
 The biggest sources of material unhappiness, revolve around the issues of poverty, war, domestic violence and crime . Poverty, war and domestic violence are the biggest causes of happiness .
 The truth is that you can prove empirically that it does right up to a certain point; and then it doesn't any more . "You can prove . empirically, you can . prove that it . does right . up to the point; but then it does not any more
 The point almost but not exactly coincides with the point where one's basic needs have been met . That point almost coincides with that point . But it's not exactly where one needs to be met, it's where the basic needs are met .
 If you'd like to conduct the experiment on yourself, invite a robber to come around and steal your stuff . Conversely and if you want to do the experiment, invite someone to come and steal .
 Eventually you will reach a point at which the amount of stuff stolen genuinely has long lasting effects on your happiness . The amount of stolen items has a long lasting effect on happiness, says author .
 It is also worth pointing out that humans are incredibly adaptable . It is worth pointing to this juncture that humans can adapt to adapt quickly .
 When a norm has been established both upwards or downwards with respect to material comfort, any immediate changes will be noticed more or less immediately . Any immediate changes to the norm will likely be noticed by the end of the decade .
 Sociologists, religious groups and even humanists will concede the point that humans are social creatures and have the inbuilt need and desire to love and be loved .
 Virtually everyone seeks out friends and is part of at least one connected group of people, no matter how small . Virtually all people seek out friends, and are part of a connected group .
 Christian theology speaks of God's love and a relationship which is broken and then attempts made to repair that relationship . Jewish theology is for the most part congruous save for their lack of belief as Christ as Christ .
 Islam speaks of people's relationship with God as being first and foremost . Islam is a religion that focuses on the relationship of God first .
 Islam suggests that this relationship determines the basis of their other relationships with their fellow human beings, family, community, and even the state itself . Islam also suggests that the relationship also determines the relationship between people and their family, family and community .
 Buddhism in principle does not believe in a personal God or a divine being . Buddhism does speak heavily of the relationships which we have with other people . Buddhism is not a belief in personal God but it speaks heavily of relationships .
 Hinduism talks of a vast pantheon in which it's possible to relate to a whole host of different gods . Hinduism also talks of the importance of loving your fellow man .
 The point is that I've yet to encounter even a single religion which stresses the importance of showing love to other people and/or the creator's love for their creation .
 What is in debate are the questions of ""who"" and ""how"" to love rather than whether it exists or not . What's in debate is whether or not love even exists or if it exists .
 As daft as this sounds, be it the Christian model of the church, or the local community, or even something broader like a nation, people have a need to contribute and belong to something bigger than their own experience . People have a desire to be part of a larger community,
 We can find evidence of this by examining virtually every aspect of culture we desire, says John Sutter . Sutter: Culture is at its most powerful when it comes to identity and identity . He says it's a good thing to learn from culture, not just from culture .
 Plays, songs, TV shows, novels, art etc. all tend to display the idea that people are meant to interact and befriend other people and their creator to some degree .
 Every single text that I've ever read seems to come down with these two fundamental aspects 100% of the time . "Every single text" always comes down with a question: 'What do you think? What do we think?
 There doesn't seem to be any particular magic pill, no 39 steps, no program to sign up for, that really is it . "There is no particular magic bullet," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Most of the causes of unhappiness seem to revolve around the lack of material well being or love, both as a noun and a verb . Most people are unhappy with material or lack of love .
 Admittedly temperament does have a part to play in all of this but that only goes so far as to explain reactions to what's gone on . Admittedly, temperament does play a part, but that doesn't go far as far away .
 In essence, provided that you are fed, that you love and loved, then that really is all you actually need to be happy . In essence that is all that you need is to be fed and loved .