 According to officials of the science department the job should be completed this week . The job is expected to be complete this week, officials say .
 A newly initiated astronbeing constructed at a total cost of $157,784.30, is havomy class wiM be offered to students, with six hours ing final touches of work done on the interior .
 Plans are indefinite as of yet for the class annex adjoins the old science building between it and schedule . Plans for the new science building are indefinite yet .
 Ten new Faculty Members Appointed On Hinds Staff For ’62 School Year . Total cost of the annex is $157,784.30.30 .
 Regular equipment costs about $23,000.00, while the revolving dome is priced at $4,300.00 and the telescope at $ 4,945.00 .
 The telescope arrived today, and will go into use within three to weeks . It will be the first telescope in the world to be built in Antarctica .
 The telescope was manufactured in Japan and tested I in California . Shipping was demanded for the telescope .
 Technical name for the telescope is the Nishimura twelve inch Cussegrain-Newtowan Reflector . It will be used by qualified students in astronomy courses .
 Astronomy class is classified as a physical science course . Students may obtain six hours credit for the astronomy course .
 Night classes will be held, open to any student who wishes to apply, at the descretion of the instructor, new head of the science department .
 Plans for the addition were made definite in October, 1961, and bids were let on January 5, 1962 . Bids were let for the expansion of the hotel in 1962 .
 Campbell Construction Company of Jackson was low bidder, and Jay T Liddel, Jackson, served as architect for the project . The project will be completed in 2018 .
 The new addition provides 8400 added square feet of floor space for classrooms and laboratories . The addition will provide 8400 extra square feet for classrooms .
 Fresh Freshmen Cheerleaders will be elected Wednesday, September 19 . Freshmen cheerleaders will vote for freshman cheerleaders on September 19.
 Miss Roberts asked those interested to report to the girls’ gym Thursday night, September 13, at 6:15 .
 Sophomore cheerleaders elected last year were Ray Rochelle of Jackson, Patsy Roberts of Jackson and Ruby Hudgins of Brandon . The winners of each year's cheerleaders were selected by the Jackson-Brandon school .
 McLendon Steps Into 25th Year As Helmsman Of Hinds Progress . McLendon steps into 25th year as leader . Language labs are being readied for use .
 Ten new faculty and administrative staff members have joined Hinds Junior College for the 196263 session . Hinds has also added 10 new faculty members .
 James T Sparkman, a native of Morgan City, is the new Dean of Instruction . Sparkman is the first African-American to be Dean of instruction at the University of Mississippi .
 She attended Sunflower Junior College and received a B.A. from Mississippi State College for Women . She also received a A.B. from Sunflower University .
 Miss Peggy Seay, of Batesville, is a new instructor in the English department . Miss Seay is new English teacher .
 Morris interrupted his studies with two years in the U.S. Navy . Morris is a graduate of Hinds Junior College .
 He resumed studies at Northeast Louisiana State College in Monroe . He plans to return to the college at the end of the first semester .
 Miss Joan Melton, a new addition in the music department, will instruct music theory . Miss Melton will teach music theory at the school .
 Stephenson, from Louisville, Kentucky, is a machine shop instructor in the Hinds, technical school . Stephenson is an instructor at Hinds Technical School in the state .
 He worked for four years as a machinist apprentice in Meridian for Soule Steam Feed Works . He also taught machine shop at Ross Collins Vocational School .
 Stephenson was employed by the Southern Railroad for fourty-four years . Stephenson was a foreman and machinist for four decades .
 Griffin taught in Mississippi high schools from 1943 to 1956 . More recently he was associated with Holmes Junior College .
 William Davis, of Terry, is the new instructor of biology in the science department . William M Davis is a new biology instructor at the University of Terry .
 He has eight years teaching experience in high school and senior levels . He has been teaching for eight years .
 Kent Prince, of Newton, has assumed duties as public relations director for the college . Kent Prince has been in charge of public relations at the college since 2008 .
 Rex Tatum, from Debach, Louisiana, is a new piano instructor in the music department . Tatum will be a new teacher at the University of Louisiana .
 Since “Mr Mac’s” began guiding the destiny of Hinds, staggering changes have taken place in the enrollment and campus appearance . Since ‘Mr Mac,’ as he is affectionately known throughout the educational world, Hinds has seen a dramatic increase in
 The 1961-62 session saw the opening of the ultra modern library and the beginning of construction of the new two-story science department annex . The 1961/62 session was the first session to open the new library .
 In previous yiears two new girls dormitories, two new men’s dorms, and the original science building have appeared . In previous years, two girls dorms and two men's dorms have appeared.
 The new administration and academic buildings, a student center and a football stadium have also been added . The university has also added a new administration, academic buildings and a new football stadium .
 At present, Northside dormitory for girls is being expanded, faculty members are occupying the recently completed faculty homes . President McLendon stated, “We extend a cordial and hardy welcome to the faculty, staff and student body”
 To those who are with us for the first time, we request you to study the traditions of Hinds and enter in company with the vast number of who constantly strive to make improvements . The first time Hinds have been with the club for more than a decade .
 He is married to the former Louise Boyd, of Montgomery County, and they have two daughters . He is also married to his wife, Louise Boyd .
 It’s Your Duty: Cooperation and understanding are two basic traits which should be present in the lives of every college student . Betty Bowen, of Jackson Page 2 HINDSONIAN September 12, 1962 .
 Every student should take an active interest in all school-concerned affairs, says author . "Every student should be involved in school-related affairs," says author of the book "Every Student is an active student"
 "In past years many things have been added to our campus because someone thought it their duty to suggest it. In past years people have added things to campus because they thought it was their job to suggest them. In the past years, many things were added to campus as a result of
 Many clubs and groups can't think of everything, but they can't. Of course, that is the purpose or sub-purpose .
 A student suggested that if glasses of tea were placed by helpers on the dinner trays instead of each individual having to pour his own tea and ice, much confusion would be eliminated .
 By placing pre-iced glasses on the trays as students come through the lines, the cafeteria workers have caused the line to move much more swiftly .
 Now you aren’t jostled and pushed when you try to put ice and tea into your glass . Now you don't have to be pushed and pushy when you put ice or tea in your glass.
 Of course, don’t be surprised if this type of serving is not continued . Don’s not surprised if it will be continued .
 Other ideas may occur which can aid the cafeteria’s problems in better ways . The cafeteria's problems may be solved in a better way .
 Whatever the situation, students have a direct bearing on the matter . Students are responsible for their safety .
 From such cases, you can presume it to be your duty to strive to help our college improve . From such a case, you should strive to improve your college .
 Some make plans which are constructive, others destructive, but they are plans and ideas all the while . Some plans are constructive but destructive, some are destructive, others are destructive .
 Not necessarily to just sit around and think all the time, but to learn to use our brain for something worthwhile . We need to learn how to use the brain to do something worthwhile, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Erroneous picures of college students have been emplanted in the minds of unknowing persons . The pictures were taken by students at various colleges across the globe .
 The average student is not one who sits around all day smoking a pipe and stroking his goatee, but one who tries to do his part in all activities which interest him, says the author .
 There is a thin division line between thinking correctly and just thinking, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "There's a thin dividing line between right thinking and wrong thinking"
 Only one channel of thought is right, while there are a thousand others which are wrong . Only a thousand other channels of thought are wrong, and only one channel is right . Only one of these channels is right for the world .
 Hinds Junior College prides itself on fine, outstanding groups and clubs . Hinds junior college prides on outstanding groups, clubs and activities .
 As you become better acquainted with the campus and its contents you too will become proud of it . The campus will be proud of its diversity and diversity .
 "We prefer not to think of ourselves as an average student body in an average junior college," says student body . "We're not an average college student body. We prefer to not think of us as students," says junior college student leader .
 Each division contributes its part to making Hinds what it is, says Hinds . "Each division of our school contributes part of our part to make Hinds."
 Every new year brings forth another class to carry on tradition and activities . Every new class will carry out tradition and carry out activities .
 The campus Church organizations will sponsor a campus-wide social in the girls’ gym this Thursday at 6:00. The social will be held in the gym .
 All coeds on campus are invited to attend the meeting and join the group . The meeting will be open to all co-ed students .
 There are very few things that a junior college can offer a senior college . Prince Appointed . Prince appointed .
 Hinds, however, filled one of the Rebels' needs when Mr Pat D Smith became Director of the Unir versity of Mississippi News Service . Hinds has been in the news service for more than 20 years .
 Formerly Public Relations Director at Hinds, Mr Smith was also head of the Department of Journalism, publisher of the Hindsonian and the Eagle, Director of Publications and debate coach .
 During his tenure at Hinds, he led the debate team to state championship, published an award-winning annual, and sponsored Mississippi’s first place junior college newspaper, The Hindsonian .
 While doing undergraduate work at Millsaps College, he was named on Who's Who in American Colleges and served as the editor of the Purple and White, campus newspaper .
 The Hindsonian staff welcomes Mr Prince and looks forward to a successful year under his leadership .
 Bill White, President of Lendon Players, has called a meeting of the group Thursday night at 7:30 in the Music Auditorium .
 Auditions for parts in the fall play, Mother is a Freshman, will be held Wednesday, September 19 .
 Ralph Hemphill, president of the International Relations Club, has called its first meeting Wednesday, September 19, at 7:30m. in room 12 of the Academic Building . The club will meet at the same time as the University of Cambridge .
 The group will formulate plans for the beginning session, and nomination of officers will be held . The group plans to start a new session of parliament in 2015 .
 A giant pep rally will be held Thursday night at 6:00 in front of the grill .
 Sponsoring the rally is the Circle K Club, local college affiliate of the Kiwanias Club . The rally will be held in New Jersey City, New Jersey .
 Cheerleaders will be present, and music will be furnished by members of the Eagle Band . Cheerleaderleaders will also be present .
 The initial meeting of the WAA will be held Tuesday night, September 18, at 6:15 . Francis Pickett, president, plans will be made to extend the membership drive now in progress .
 New Dean Of Women Adopts Hinds Coeds into Her Immense Family . How did she become involved in her own life?
 For the past twelve years she has served as executive director of the South Central Alabama Girl Scout Council . She has been in Alabama for the past 12 years .
 The sixteen county council had a girl and adult membership of between six and seven thousand . The 16 county council was founded in 1903 .
 She served on summer camp staffs in Jackson, Mississippi, and Memphis, Tennessee, for several summers . She directed a camp one summer in Goldsboro, North Carolina .
 Miss Marshall attended high school and junior college in Moorehead at Sunflower Junior College . Miss Marshall was born in Brandon, Brandon, and Miss Marshall is from Moorehead .
 She obviously likes the students, too, and extends a special invitation to the girls to come by for a conference at any time .
 InSPIRED LASS is Marilyn Mitchell, Jackson sophomore . Mitchell is a sophomore at Jackson High School in Jackson, Washington .
 Marilyn attended the Miss America Pageant in Atlantic City and made the tour with the group . Marilyn as a Hi-Stepper, attended the pageant and made a tour of Atlantic City . Marilyn also made a trip to Atlantic City with the band .
 Hi-Steppers made their way through the north on their way to North America . The Hi-Stppers were in the midst of a major battle in the area .
 She certainly makes an improvement to the scenery on the Hinds campus, and ably takes the position of the initial (Hinds Honey) Honey for the 1962-63 school year .
 Six members of the 1961-62 Hinds Junior College faculty have resigned to accept other positions throughout the nation . September 12, 1962 HINDSONIAN Page 3 Schedule For Bus Routes To Campus Are Announced .
 Glenda Rush Malone, instructor of piano, has moved to Meridian and will teach at Meridian Junior College . Malone will also teach at the junior college .
 Phi Theta Kappa officers held a preschool retreat Friday, August 24 at Raymond Lake . Rosser Wall, instructor of biology, has taken a leave of absence to attend .
 Attending the retreat were Henri Lou Coleman, Marianne Neal, Rosalind Healy, Stewart Gibbes, and Miss Mildred Herrin, sponsor .
 The purpose of the retreat was to plan projects and programs for Phi Theta Kappa during the coming session . The retreat was held to discuss the coming sessions of the Phi Tta Kappa .
 The present members of Phi Theta Kappa are Henri Lou Coleman— president, Stewart Gibbes — vice president, Carolyn McKey—secretary, Marianne Neal — treasurer, Mariann Neal — Treasurer, Mariane Neal — . Rosalind Healy — parliamentarian, Juanita
 Members are making plans to attend the 1963 National Convention which will be held in Miami, Florida . Members of the 1963 Democratic National Convention are planning to attend .
 John P Adams, instructor of piano, has accepted a position at Odessa Junior College in Odessa, Texas . Adams will teach piano at the college .
 A1 Rowan, director of bands, has taken a sick leave, and will return second semester . Rowan has taken sick leave from his job .
 Southside Stadium Classes Will Start Monday Evening In New Division . Dr. Dwayne Cox says classes will start Monday evening in new division .
 Evening classes will be offered in the Evening division beginning Monday night, September 17, at 7m. James Sparkman, Hinds Dean of Instruction, will be at Hinds .
 Courses included in the curriculum are those which meet graduation requirements at Hinds, courses which are transferable to other colleges, and courses in vocational and technical training, and self improvement courses .
 Tuition for each course is five dollars per semester hour up to a total of six semester hours of work . Tuition is $5 dollars per course hour .
 All classes except the technical, vocational and semi-vocational ones will meet one night each week from 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. The classes will be held at the same time each week . All classes will meet at least one night a night from 7 to 9
 Meeting times for vocational and technical courses will be worked out with students at the first class meeting . Students will be able to choose their own times to attend the class .
 Registration will be signified either at the first class meeting or by coming to the registrar’s office in the Administration Building . Registration is required at first class meetings .
 Hinds post office facilities are available for student and faculty use . Post office facilities will be available for students and faculty at Hinds University .
 Post office hours have been set at 8.00-11.30m. and 1:00-4:00m. Monday through Friday, and 8:00 -10:30 m. on Saturdays . Post offices will be open at 8 a.m. on Monday through
 The mail is picked up at 8:30m. and 2:30 m. and arrives at 9:00m and 3:00 m.m. The mail arrives at around 9m and 11m.
 Free bus service to Hinds Junior College campus from Jackson-TerryForest Hill areas and from Vicksburg have been released by President McLendon . Free routes for free bus service have been announced .
 All routes are subject to change if improvements can be made after this week . Additional buses will be added to the routes to sufficiently handle any number of students .
 Applicants must prove themselves willing and capable before assuming definite positions . Applicants are required to prove they are willing and able to perform .
 A trial-period will be conducted in which all interested persons may work on the paper . Therefore a trial- period will be held in order to work on a paper .
 Interested persons are asked to contact Joe White or Mr Kent Prince in the Public Relations Office .
 Positions are also open on the Eagle yearbook, and those wishing to work should contact Belva Watkins or Mr Kent Prince in the Public Relations Office .
 North Jackson bus route leaves Northside Drive and Hanging Moss Road, comes down Northwest Street to Lamar, goes west on Robinson Street, out through Van Winkle to Raymond Road to Raymond .
 West Jackson route leaves West Capitol and Gallatin Street, goes out West Capitol, through Clinton to Raymond . The route goes from West Capitol to Raymond, ending at Raymond .
 Route leaves downtown Vicksburg, comes out business Highway 80 to the Arch where most of the passengers are picked up, to Edwards, to Bolton, to Raymond . Route also includes Bolton, Raymond, Edwards, Bolton and Raymond .
 Most buses will leave .about 7:10m. and will leave school at 3:40m. going back over the identical route . Specific time schedules will be worked out as needed, but most of the buses will . leave about 7:20m.
 Pick-up on every MONDAY AND THURSDAY NIGHTS ON CAMPUS GUARANTEED work or will pay any liable claim . PICK-UP on every Monday and Thursday nights on campus .
 HINDSONIAN September 12, 1962 . Students amass In the administration building and form lines to complete their registration . MITCHELL’s TEXACO service is free .
 The entrance program will be ended Thursday morning, as classes begin on a fifteen minute schedule at one o'clock Thursday afternoon .
 Former Hinds student, Wy D McCreary, now assistant project manager, Nike Zeus Project. Mr Wy D. McCrearies was a former student at Hinds . He is now the project manager of Nike Zeus project .
 Mr McCreary attended the old Hinds Agricultural High School and Junior College . He is now employed by the Thiokol Chemical Corporation in Huntsville, Alabama .
 Thiokol manufactures solid fuels used primarily in offensive and defensive weapons . The company's solid fuels are used primarily to make weapons and fuel production .
 Mr McCreary is in the division of research and development at Nike . He has been involved in the Persian and Nike Zeus projects .
 Mr McCreary was greatly impressed with the many changes made on the Hinds campus since his stay at the school .
 "I would like to encourage those interested in engineering to look into Huntsville. Huntsville," he said .
 Mass confusion is the trademark of all registration days for students entering colleges . Hanes Underwear Sports Shirts and Socks are no different .
 Any change at all would make it seem that HJC’s halls were slightly noiser, more massively filled and full of jittered, jarred and jangled students .
 Not just one hour is spent by a person registering, but the whole day may be spent if the student is unfamiliar with the setup of things . Students can spend an hour or more of a day trying to learn how to use the system .
 Most students seem half dazed and expressionless, as if the whole thing were just too, too much for them . Most students seemed dazed or expressionless .
 A record-breaking number of transfer sophomores and entering freshmen and freshmen are on the way to the University of Maryland . A record number of freshmen and sophomore transfers is on the rise .
 As of yesterday at five o'clock, almost 1,100 students had signed up for classes . Almost 1,000 students had already signed up to classes .
 Two more days of registration will bring this mark up to that of previous years . Two more consecutive days of registering will bring up that figure far above that of others .
 The main program has been in full swing for some time, being preluded by a faculty workshop, which was held last Thursday, Friday and Saturday .
 This program consisted of various meetings spaced over the three day period which covered all phases of the school’s activities . This program was a three-day period of meetings which covered the school's activities .
 The new faculty housing project is in part nearing completion just across the highway from the main college grounds . Also explained was the new faculty living project .
 Hinds takes particular pride in its excellent guidance and counseling program . Guidance, in particular, was stressed . Hinds is proud of its excellent counseling program.
 James Sparkman, new Dean of Instruction, announced expansion and increase in number of committees serving directly in conjunction with the school . Sparkman announced expansion of committees .
 Phi Theta Kappa, honorary scholastic group, and Circle K college Kiwanias Club affiliate, are both in active participation in the affairs .
 Booths and tables have been set up by both organzations to give new students information about Hinds .
 With the end of this trying period, peace will again settle over the campus, students say . Peace will again be settled over the university campus .
 They will all wonder when someone will invent an automatic registration machine . Tired students will remove themselves from long waiting lines .
 We would appreciate the opportunity of doing busi* ness with the people in Raymond and Hinds . Served In The Eagle’s Nest Try It Now .
 The dance team and Eagle Band are the first Southern group invited to appear in the national extravaganza . The Eagle Band is also the first group from the Southern U.S. to be invited .
 Traveling all day and night, the troupes arrived in 'Washington, D.C., at noontime Monday . Traveled all day, night, and arrived in Washington D. C. Monday .
 Guides, furnished by the hotel, led the groups to the high spots of Capitol city .
 Stops were made at the Lincoln Memorial, Arlington Cemetery, and the Smithsonian Institute .
 The ambassadors of goodwill saw the Washington Monument, White House, Pentagon, Capitol and Post Office Building . They then traveled to Atlantic City, where they visited Atlantic City .
 RAYMOND MISSISSIPPI ticing were enjoyed before the evening's performance .
 Miss Mississippi, Miss Charlotte Carroll, followed the Hi-Steppers and Band in the parade . Miss Mississippi was crowned Miss Mississippi on Saturday .
 Many took tours during the free afternoon, and dur ing the evening the groups had a choice of seeing a Broadway play, Radio City Music Hall .
 The Hi-Steppers and Band are the first Southern dance and drill teams ever asked to participate in the national extravaganza . The band and dance team is the first to be asked to perform in the event .
 Mention the trip to any of the travelers and they will quickly tell you tales of their wonderful times . The trip was one of the most memorable in the world for travelers .
 Band members recall trying frantically to catch the performances of Miles Davis, Dizzie Gillespie and Qene Krupa . Band members say they tried to catch them at a different spot in Greenwich Village, Greenwich Village .
 Another co-ed described the pains of packing the necessarily limited luggage . Another described the pain of traveling with limited luggage.
 Alon Bee was also the official chaperone for the Miss Mississippi candidate in the national contest . Bee is also a Miss Mississippi contestant .
 Jim Morris is director of the Eagle band during the absence of regular bandmaster A1 Rowan . Morris is replacing Rowan, who has been in the bandmaster's absence for two years .
 The forty-fifth session of Hinds Junior College opens Thursday . President McLendon to the student body in an assembly program at 1m. ET .
 The following is Hinds’ 1962-63 administrative and teaching faculty list by departments . Hinds administration and faculty list is published by Hinds .
 Benton, dean of men; Mildred Herrin, registrar; A L Denton, director of guidance; and Walter Gibbes, coordinator of vocational training . Benton: "I am sorry for the loss of my son."
 Virginia Riggs, librarian; Jack Treloar, supervisor of campus and farm operations; Kent Prince, director of public relations . Mrs. Trelar: "I'm glad to be here for the first time"
 Miss Margaret Lucas, assistant registrar. Majors, assistant librarians; and Miss Margaret . Lucas is also an assistant librarian at the College .
 Miss Hilda Ree Davis, Miss Peggy Seay and Claude Williams; and Miss. Juanita Canterbury, Miss. Seay, Miss . Seay . Davis, Mrs. Canterbury and Miss Seay; French and Spanish .
 Mrs. Marjorie Stricklin, Leslie Reeves, Miss Joan Melton and Jim Morris; physical education . Physical education—Joe Renroe, Arlis Ricks, William Oakes, William .
 Fred Brooks, Fred Davis, Marvin Riggs, Thomas Stricklin, Miss Susan Brown and James Sansing were honored with honors .
 Annie Vernon Lidell, dormitory hostess; Grady L Sheffield, manager of Frozen Food Locker Plant; B J Frew, director of Baptist Student Union; Mrs. Annie Vernon . B J . Frew is director of the Baptist Student . Union .
 Hinds Speech Department Plans Extra Class in use of parliamentary procedure . Hinds speech instructor Fred L Brooks says Hinds will offer a special class this year for the first time .
 The first meeting will be held next Friday, September 21, in the speech classroom . The meeting will continue meeting for the next four consecutive Fridays .
 The major purpose of the class is to instruct and aid officers of the campus clubs .
 Five hundred new books, including the 1962 edition of the Encyclopedia Britanica, have been added to the local collection . Head librarian Virginia Riggs, head librarian, has announced that the new books will be added .
 Freshmen through their first year English course will be given an orientation visit to the library . Freshmen will also be issued the library handbook containing checkout procedure .
 The Eagle highlights advancement made during the McLendon administration . Rating superior in all categories, The Eagle says .
 Seventeen color pages depicting the past as compared to the present highlighted the new nine by twelve book . The book was broken into six major sections, including faculty, features, organizations, sports, classes and advertising .
 The award winning yearbook was sponsored by Mr Pat D Smith and edited by Sallie Baker .
 Hinds Hi-Steppers meet the state winner in Atlantic City at the Miss America Contest . Contestants in Miss Mississippi pageant this summer meet state winner at Miss America contest .
 Miss Mississippi Charlotte Carroll, Miss Pearl Dot Lyons, Miss Jackson Eva Sipes, Miss Hinds Junior College Una Jo Schaeffer, and Miss Hind's Sharon Bearden. Bearden . Bearden is Miss Miss Mississippi .
 Hinds' Donnie Dick, number 23, halfback, pauses in mid-air as if he is undecided whether to fall on the sprawled players or change his direction by rolling . Hinds: "Donnie Dick is a great player. He's a great athlete. He
 The Eagles recovered five fumbles from the Ranger team during the course of the game . The Eagles were especially sharp on recovering fumbles .
 Hinds’ Eagles stressed defense in practice this week as they prepare for Perkinston Bulldogs in their second game of the season and their first away from home . Hinds' Eagles will play the Bulldogs for the first time this season in their first home game .
 Coach Joe Renfroe said a lot was learned from last week’s 6-6 tie with the Northwest Rangers . Coach Joe Rennroe said, “A lot of was learned” from the tie with Northwest Rangers.
 Team spirit is at an all time high, according to the coaching staff . Team spirit will be evident in future games, says the coaches .
 Aerial attacks will continue if nothing happens to the strong right arm of quarterback Mike Vincent . Vincent is a strong leader in the NFL and has a strong reputation for toughness .
 Last week the ace grid star threw a 52 yard touchdown pass for the only Eagle score of the game . Last week he threw the only touchdown pass to the Eagles .
 Last week favored Holmes was upset 10-6 by the Bulldog squad that was selected to finish low in a pre-season poll of coaches . The Bulldog team was selected as a low-ranked team in the preseason poll .
 Last year the Eagles downed the Bulldogs 20-6 in the seventh game of the season . The Eagles beat the Bulldogs in the season's seventh-round game .
 This year the Perkinston team is under the direction of a new Head Coach, Harold Wesson . Wesson is the first head coach to take charge of the team this season .
 A strong passing offensive pattern has been developed and should be used in this Saturday’s game . A strong pass pattern is expected to be used for this Saturday's game .
 The Hinds Eagle Band under the direction of Jim Morris and the HiSteppers supervised by Mrs. Mrs. Morris . Mrs. Morrific was the band's conductor .
 Hinds’ Eagles and Northwest Rangers battled to a 6-6 tie here last Saturday in their 1962 football opener .
 Northwest steamed ahead 6-0 in first period when quarterback Billy Gold went wide around right end for the touchdown . Hinds deadlocked the game in the second quarter on a 52-yard scoring pass from Mike Vincent to end Jimmy Clark .
 Billy Gold, Ranger passer who had been on the casualty list at the first of the week, returns to the field . Billy Gold's tossing woes plagued the Eagles with his tossing . The Eagles had been without Billy Gold for two weeks .
 Hinds line covered five Northwest fumbles and completely smothered Northwest’s attempt to kick their extra point . Hinds defense covered five fumbles . Northwest's extra point attempt was denied by Hinds .
 The Eagles put their game into gear and score with only two minutes gone in the period . Wftc * * ""KID GALAHAD"" STARRING ELVIS PRESLEY .
 After the half, a strong Northwest line led by Jim Brinson and James Walker stopped the Eagle ground game and forced them to take to the air .
 Action see-sawed back and forth in the third quarter with neither team posing a serious threat . Neither team was threatening to take the lead in the first half .
 In the final minutes both teams frantically attempted long passes in a desperate effort to break the tie . Both teams desperately attempted long-passes in an attempt to break tie .
 Coach Joe Renfroe’s Eagles will meet the Perkinston Bulldogs next Saturday . The Eagles will play the Bulldogs at home next Saturday at Perkinst .
 Rough and rugged junior college football started last week with several favored teams being upset . Several favored teams were upset at the start of the season .
 Holmes, tied for first along with Jones in pre season poll of coaches, was upset by Perkinston 18-6 . In the first game of the season, Holmes was beaten by the team .
 Hinds-Northwest 6-6 tie was slated an upset, since Hinds was a high pre-game favorite . Hinds and Northwest were high-ranked in the polls, but Hinds won't be surprised .
 This Saturday the Eagles will travel to Perkinston and following Thursday will meet Holmes in Raymond . The Eagles will also travel to Raymond this Saturday and the following Thursday .
 Harold Wesson, new coach at Perkinston, has revealed his dependency on the Bulldog passing attack for the comeback expected of them . Wesson has revealed that he is relying heavily on his new side's passing attack to make a comeback .
 Pearl River, the defending loop champion, beat the Mississippi Delta visitors 30-8 last weekend . Pearl River is also the defending champion in the loop .
 Copiah-Lineoln trounced East Central, and Itawamba managed a 14-0 win over Southwest . Copiah Lineoln beat East Central 14-1 .
 Student Bus Trip To Perkinston Junior College planned by school . Five specified busses of students will attend the football game Saturday night .
 Four busses are designated for band and Hi-Stepper members, and one is open for student use . One buss is designated for students and band members . One bus is available for band members and students .
 Those wishing to attend the game should sign their name to the petition in President McLendon’s front office . The petition is in the front office of McLendon's office .
 The bus of students will leave at approximately the same time as the ofter four, from the front of the administration building .
 Chaperones for the trip will be Mr Perry, Miss Switzer and Mr Bill Oakes . Chaperone will be Miss Perry and Mr Switzer .
 The lens equipment was transported from , the Beila Observatory in Anheim, California, arriving on campus last Thursday . It arrived on campus from an observatory in California .
 Much student interest assistant John Jap, Forest Hill student, and James Stokes, is shown, both in general astronomy .
 Professor Frank Stephenson said the telescope was placing it correctly in place . Professor Stephenson said it was a 'miracle' for the telescope .
 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI, 1962 Campus Shaken By Deluge Of Entering ’62 Students Classrooms, Dorms Quickly Fill Out To Capacity Size . For students waiting in rows to register for the
 Of course, it only seemed that way because of the rush, worry and downright aggrivation which they felt . Of course it only appeared that way .
 Not one entering student at Hinds was lost in the turmoil . Oddly enough, not one entered student was lost .
 Dean of Men says definite steps have been taken to improve the crowded parking situation on campus . Dean Benton says the parking situation has been improved .
 All vehicles operating on the Hinds Junior College campus are required to have a campus permit sticker on the back bumper . All vehicles on the campus must have a permit sticker .
 Dormitory boys are required to park behind Eastside and Central, Southside students in front of Southside . There will be a $1.00 fine if a student does not have his car registered with the Dean of Men .
 Dormitory girls are to park behind Main and in front of Northside dormitories . Girls will also be encouraged to park in the dormitory parking area .
 Day students will park on the drive in front of Eastside, Central, Shangri-La and Main dormitories . Students will also park in the drive for Eastside and Central dorms .
 There will be parking space in front of the men's gym except for reserved spaces . Parking space will be limited to the gym except reserved spaces.
 Dean of Men asks students not to park in front of Administration and Auditorium buildings . This space is reserved for visitors . Students should not park in the Administration or Auditorium .
 All parking space behind the grill is reserved for faculty and grill workers . Parking space is reserved behind the bar .
 Benton said violations will be doubled if not paid within 24 hours . Benton: Violations will be increased if not reported within hours . He said that violations will go up to double if they are not paid .
 If the fine is not paid within 24 hours, the charge will be doubled each day thereafter for a total of ten days, including Saturday, Sunday, and holidays . The fine is doubled every day thereafter, including on Saturday and Sunday .
 Day students should have B stickers on their cars . dormitory students should also have C stickers . Students should have a B sticker on their vehicles .
 Freshmen cheerleaders this morning in chapel for the ’62-’63 session were Brenda Dixon, George Wilkerson, Joy Williams, and Shirley Morris . Elected as Freshmen Cheerleaders in chapel this morning .
 Freshman cheerleaders along with the sophomore cheerleaders will serve as the main cheer squad for the athletic season . Freshman Cheerleaders will be the main cheering squad for this year's athletic season.
 Hinds faculty members will be moving into their new homes across the street from the growing campus of Hinds . Homes for Faculty Personnel will be finished tomorrow .
 These eight houses for faculty personnel are located in a new area specially developed for such homes . All have three bedrooms, two baths, kitchen-den combination, and a double garage .
 A park in the center of the area will soon be beautified, and curbed gutters added to the new street . A new street will be added to a new park near the new park .
 President McLendon, puts the approximate cost of this housing project at $120,000.00.00 . McLendon says the project will cost about $120k .
 The homes will be fully completed tomorrow . Jack Treloar, Superintendent of the Farm and Physical Plant, says that the homes are fully completed .
 Two duplex apartments are being built on Old Faculty) Circle and future plans are to build a fourplex for single teachers . Future plans for the fourplex are to be built for teachers .
 When the project is eventually completed, there will be around twenty faculty houses .
 Those who will be inhabiting the eight new homes will be the families of Dr. Dr. Martin and his family . The eight homes are being built in honor of Dr Martin .
 James Sparkman, Bill Davis, Grady Sheffield, Ivan Rosond, Fred Brooks, Howard Sessums, Howard Wall, Wallace Wall, and Mrs. Wallace Wall . Mrs. Wall was the first lady of the Great Depression to be elected .
 The apartments vacated by these families will be completely renovated and made available to other staff members . The apartments will be made available for staff members of staff .
 Students continue to enroll at Hinds each day, although the once massive lines of admission have diminished to a mere trickle . Students still enroll at the school each day .
 The number of regular students totaled 1147 by Monday of this week . This is the most enrollees in the history of the college .
 Only a few reserved rooms remain unclaimed, but those will be quickly filled by names from the top of the long waiting list of students now commuting by bus . Only a handful of reserved rooms are unclaimed .
 A new women’s dormitory is almost complete, and will house 42 girls after October 15 . The dormitory will be open to 42 girls .
 Miss Herrin reported, but had to be turned down, because of lack of space . She was turned down because of the lack of room .
 Hinds, now in its 45th year, is the largest junior college in Mississippi . Hinds is the oldest junior college college in the state and is now the largest in Mississippi.
 Enrollment 40 times as large as the first freshman class of 30 in 1922 . Enrollment is 40 times the size of the first class in 1922. Enrollment also 40 times larger than the original class 30 years ago .
 Each year our college grows larger, and each year more trouble is felt in the parking division . I Page 2 HINDSONIAN.
 "Definite steps have been taken this week to eliminate confusion and difficulties arising from this situation," the government said .
 An announcement in this edition of the Hindsonian should clarify the matter for all students . An announcement should be made this week .
 A faculty committee has assigned specific parking positions for instructors and other members of the staff . The parking positions will be assigned to instructors and staff members .
 If you are a dormitory student, please leave your automobile in the restricted space designated for you . Please leave your car in a restricted area designated for students .
 The semi-circular front drive of the college has been made to carry smoothly the flow of one-way traffic only .
 Parking spots are marked off in portions of the drive for day students only . Parking spots have been marked off for the day students .
 The staff asks your cooperation in this matter, and if it is conducted well, most of the college’s traffic problems will be eliminated . If it is done well, the college will eliminate most of its traffic problems .
 Eleven new members have been appointed to the faculty for the 1962-63 session . W. W Welcome New Faculty .
 Miss Annice Rae Jernigan, Miss Annie Rae, and Miss J. Stephenson, William W Griffin, William M Davis, Kent Prince, Rex Tatum, and Kent Prince are all featured .
 Hinds Junior College students can now have date nights at Hinds junior college . There are some restrictions on the date nights .
 A “C” average must be maintained before a person is allowed to participate in the program . A ‘C’ average is maintained before the person can participate .
 Students must pay attention to their school work and grades . This means that students must particularly pay attention for their grades .
 It also means that added incentive is provided scholastically and socially . It also provides an incentive to encourage students to take advantage of their education .
 College is not only a time for work and study — many more areas of learning are made available during this period . We all know that college is not always only for work but for study, it is also a time to learn more .
 The habits, friends, and attitudes that we make this year and throughout our period of higher education will have a main bearing on the life that we lead three or four years from now . The habits and friends we make in higher education can have a major bearing on our lives .
 Activities of this sort are possible only when the student body takes the right initiative and obeys the rules . Activities are only possible only if the students take initiative and obey the rules.
 When some people get out of hand, they can ruin or eliminate an ideal situation . Some people get so out-of-hand that they ruin the ideal situation, say experts .
 Be on your best behavior and make your school proud of you during this coming year . Be on the best behavior for your school .
 Hinds coeds will not be permitted to hear the words . W Muscled Doctor I Hailed Best. I'm not allowed to hear from Hinds .
 Ben Casey is seen on Thursday nights from 9 'till 10' and girls' study hours are from 7:30 to 9:30 . Ben Casey will appear on Thursday night at 10 p.m.
 Kildare with his low boyish voice reminds me of a blonde high school sophomore who doesn't know a needle from a sharpened pencil point . The actor's low voice is reminiscent of a high school freshman .
 "To leave an intern to fill a prime television spot leads me to believe that the producers should visit Dr. Dr. John Sutter," she says .
 Vince Edwards who plays Casey and Dick Chamberlin who tries to play Kildare are as different as the characters they portray . Edwards and Chamberlin try to play the characters in the same way they portray each other .
 Edwards adds the muscular masculine touch that Kildare lacks . Hard hitting Edwards adds a muscular touch to the Irish side .
 Hinds girls will not be wasting their muscles, Hinds say . The Hinds Girls will be wasting the muscles they have .
 LITTLE MAN ON CAMPUS A mu eteiOAU PRESS ' -Highlights of Minds .
 The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by students at Hinds Junior College .
 “Saints and Sinners“ centers around this madening world of news called reporting . Newspaper people will be most interested in the new television series .
 Nick Adams plays the lead of the charming reporter who covers everything from murders to births . Adams plays a charming reporter in the charming new drama .
 John Larkin, the old Mike Karr of daytime drama, plays the demanding city editor . Larkin is the city editor of the daytime drama .
 Newspapermen will be glad to hear there will not be phrases such as, ""Hold the front page,"" and ""Stop the presses,"" used on this show . This show will be broadcast on PBS at 9 p.m. ET .
 Reporters will carry their press cards in their wallets instead of their hats . The liquor drinking image that most people have of reporters will be discredited . Reporters' image of reporters drinking will also be discredited.
 Nick Adams will handle a news story and how he will write a lead for a feature will be determined later . Adams will be the next president of the Washington Redskins .
 From week to week I hope to give the students of Hinds a fairly complete resume of what’s going on entertainment-wise, and whether or not it's worth seeing . From week-to-week I’ve given the students a fairly comprehensive resume of entertainment-
 Richard Beymer stars as Nick . The picture is now playing at the Paramount in Jackson, Jackson .
 Beymer still bothers me with his unusual screen personality and his even more unusually flashy set of dentures . The actor's unusual screen personalities and his flashy dentures still bother me .
 "It really hurts to see such a talented young woman so miscast and misdirected," she said .
 Several ‘cameo’ roles are played by Fred Clark, James Dunne, and Dan Dailey . Dailey is superb as a pathetically alcoholic vaudeville promoter .
 Newman completely submerges his own personality and becomes the punch-drunk, half-insane, stooped fighter, evoking pity and admiration . Newman's performance evokes sympathy and admiration for the actor .
 An interesting, enjoyable two hours-plus that proves, with a few exceptions, that the art of acting is not dead . An interesting and enjoyable two-hour-plus .
 "Mother Is A Freshman" is a three-act comedy . Fred L Brooks, speech instructor and drama coach, said the play to be presented is a comedy .
 President Kennedy and his adj visors seem to think otherwise, or otherwise they are not thinking . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Even under so-called International Law, we have the right to invade to protect our national sovereignty . Even under International Law we have a right to invasion to protect national sovereignty. Even under international law, we should have invaded,’s government says .
 This invasion wouldn’t be necessary if our leaders had made the right decision at the Bay of Pigs, says George W. Bush . Bush: "This invasion wouldn't be necessary" if leaders made the wrong decision .
 Laos and South Viet Nam are now being taken over by the Vietnamese government . More recently, we let them keep North Viet Nam and now they've taken Laos and other parts of Vietnam .
 If the U.S. lets them keep Cuba, is there any reason to believe the communists will not acquire riotous Dominican Republic and unstable Haiti, and repeat the cycle? If the United States keeps Cuba, they will acquire rioting Dominican Republic .
 Conditions ripe in South I America for internal communist conquest, just as they were in China . Conditions ripe for internal Communist conquest, as are in China, says Maoist leader Maoist .
 Castro has said that his ambition is to turn the Andes into another Sierra Maestra . The Andes was his base of operations when he was taking over Cuba . Castro said that he wants to turn it into a more remote area .
 Khrushchev stated at the 22nd communist party conference in Moscow support of such undertakings, probably because they are less risky and less obvious . The Soviet Union did not take part in any of the projects .
 President Kennedy has announced that this government will use force to stop any aggression on the part of Castro in this hemisphere . President Kennedy said that the government would use force against any aggression .
 Castro does not need aggression to turn the Andies into another Sierra Maestra . Castro doesn't need aggression, he says, but does he need aggression . Castro needs aggression, Castro says, to turn Andie into another Sierre Maestria .
 He is already doing it in Columbia by aiding long standing guerrillas forces . He has already aided Colombia's government in Colombia .
 When the facts are stacked up against this administration’s foreign policy they are staggered and staggering in comparison, they are staggering and staggering . Obama administration's foreign policy is "staggering and staggering"
 Cuba is just a rug with which the communists are planning on using to pull the whole Western Hemisphere out of under us . We must remember because we cannot forget that Cuba is a rug . Cuba is the rug with the communists planning on pulling the whole .
 Gort was created four years ago by Millsaps student for the pure fun of it . Gort now appears in college publications from Alaska to California .
 Michael Kelly is an impressive young bachelor named Michael Kelly . Kelly was an unsuspecting Millsaps student who suddenly found himself a nationally syndicated cartoonist . Kelly is a college student at Millsaps .
 Gort at first appeared at irregular intervals ini the Millsaps Purple and White . Gort first appeared in an irregular irregular intervals . He has since appeared in a series of episodes for Millsaps .
 By popular demand and at the insistence of the Purple and White editor, Gort evolved into a weekly strip .
 Kelly was born in Tupelo in 1933 and graduated from Central High in 1951 . Kelly moved to Jackson in 1941 and graduated in 1951 at Central High School .
 Kelly was a popular answer to many questions posed by Kelly . She says she's not a fan of the show .
 Originally called “Trog,"" from troglodyte, meaning cave-dweller . Originally, he was called ‘Trog."" from "Trog" originally called "trog," or "Cave-in-the-Cave"
 Kelly's fondness for palindromes (words which read the same when read backwards or forwards) eventually led him to Gort-Trog spelled backward . Kelly also wrote a book about the same-word palindrome . Kelly's book was published in 1998 .
 No explanation given as to Kelly’s inception of Gort and his continued ideas—no explanation . Gort is the leader of the U.S. Senate in New Hampshire .
 The assortment of books lining the walls of Kelly’s Jackson apartment keynote the diversity of Gort . Kelly's apartment is filled with more than 100 books .
 The personality of Gort's creator is soon—at least partly—revealed as one reads the strip . Gort creator's personality will soon be revealed .
 The central character in Kelly's cartoon carefully, completely controls all situations he confronts . GORT is a cynical, dubious, iconoclastic, caustic, witty, perceptive .
 He has drawn since age seven, with only one week of official art training on record . He has only been trained in art since age 7 .
 He has been with the television station for two years, drawing station advertising . He has drawn advertising for the station .
 Michael Kelly, creator of an ugly, inteL lectual troglodyte called ""Gort"", four years ago began the strip for fun . Kelly created the strip in 2004 .
 The Mililsaps alumni still has fun, but shares his popular caveman with college newspapers throughout the nation . The caveman has been featured in college newspapers across the country .
 Catholic students held first meeting of the year's Newman Club for Catholic students on September 17 . Catholic students plan their year's program .
 None of the officers from last year are attending Hinds this session . Shelia Troyer, Vicksburg sophomore, was elected temporary president and election was scheduled for October 1 .
 Reminders will be posted on announcement bulletin boards before meetings . Reminders are posted on bulletin boards .
 New Staffers Honored at Annual Reception In President’s Home . The home of President and Mrs. Obama is the home of the president .
 Hinds Junior College's new faculty members were honored at a reception Tuesday night from 7 till 9 . The reception was held at the college's new campus hall of residence .
 Faculty Club President Bill Oakes, president of the Faculty Club, met guests at the door of the club .
 i Honorees in the receiving line were Dr. Robert Mayo, Administrative Assistant. Dr. Mayo was awarded the award for his work at the University of Columbia .
 James T Sparkman, Dean of Instruction, Miss Fay Marshall, Miss F. Fay Marshall and Mr Sparkman were Dean of Women . Miss Sparkman was Dean of instruction .
 Mr. Griffin, chemistry instructor; Mr William M Davis, biology professor; Kent Prince, public relations director and Mr Rex Tatum, piano instructor .
 McLendon chose a black eyelet sheath for the occasion and accessoried it with strands of crystal beads . McLendon wore it to the occasion .
 She used a floral color scheme of yellow and gold to accent the coffee table and mantle in the living room . She used the same color scheme as the decorator .
 Guests were directed into the dining room where refreshments were served by the light of petite silver hurricane candles . The event was held at the end of the day in a private residence .
 Fall flowers of varying shades of gold adorned the buffet along with pale yellow tapers on each side of the arrangement . Fall flowers were the centerpiece of the buffet at the event .
 Modernistic arrangements of bud roses decorated the right sun porch where Mrs. Mrs. Smith sat on .
 Hinds never closes. Campus plays host to State Meetings during past Summer Meetings . Campus never closes .
 The boys organized a mock state government, divided into political parties and held elections . After being instructed in the procedure of operating state and local government by workshop participation, the boys organized the mock government .
 A few weeks after the elections were held and the confetti swept away, the college doors welcomed the State All Stars . The state All Stars were elected to represent the state .
 Ten North and ten South basketball players plus 33 South football players invaded the campus . North and South basketball and South football teams invade the campus.
 Basketball players practiced daily in the gym with the North and South alternating in the use of the gym . The North and the South used the gym to practice basketball .
 The South All Star football team was coached by Harrison Arnold of Booneville and George Haley of Lambert . The South won the game .
 Hinds settled down to welcome the PTA safety chairmen from the local units . Hinds was joined by the local PTA Safety chairmen .
 Members attended lectures on traffic, home and water safety . They were trained to assist local officials in safety campaigns and educate the general public .
 PTA safety members made way for Hinds County Farm Bureau . PTA members completed their training and made way to the local farm bureau .
 Hinds sophomore Kathy Kilby selected Miss Hinds County Farm Bureau and Ann Stephenson chosen winner of talent contest . Ann Stephenson won talent contest for speaking, speaking and beauty .
 You get MORE for your money here . Cameras from the least expensive Brownies to the finest the market offers Standard Photo MEXESEZiH Cameras .
 In answer to many requests, the grill will offer hot french fries this year . The grill will also offer hot fries .
 In the equipment department, shorts and shirts for girls’ physical j education classes are being sold for $2.75 and $2 .60 . The equipment department is also being sold .
 Circle K Club met Thursday afternoon, September 13, at 4:45 in the cafeteria private dining room for a supper session . The band j Wednesday_ 7:154:00-5:00:00 and Hi-Steppers spent a few hours on the Gulf beaches while waiting f
 After the meal, the group moved to the Faculty Conference room for a business session . The group then had a meal in the faculty Conference room .
 Twenty-two nominees for membership were selected, and the names sent for approval to Miss Mildred Herrin .
 Royd McPhail, president; Lynn Earnest, first vice-president; Joe White, second vice-presidents; Clyde Pullen, treasurer; Joe Roberts, reporter; and Vaughn Varnado, secretary .
 Only eight members of the club and Hilda Bullock, Club sweetheart, returned from last year . Only eight return members of last year's club .
 Raymond and Hinds. Raymond And Hinds . Raymond And Hinds. The Neighborhood of Westland is located in Meadowbrook .
 The department will consist of three main rooms; a painting room, a drawing room, and an exhibition and lecture room . The department is expected to have a total of three rooms, including a painting and drawing room .
 At the rear of the building, off the painting and drawing rooms, will be two patios separated by a green and enclosed by a brick and redwood fence . Two patios will be separated from each other .
 With today's entry I begin my ninth year of writing columns in your school newspaper for the makers of Marlboro Cigarettes . AnOTHER YEAR, ANOTHER DOLLAR .
 The shovel was not invented until 1946 by Walter R Shovel of Cleveland, Ohio . The work would have gone more rapidly if the shovel had been invented .
 Before Mr Shovel’s discovery in 1946, all digging was done with sugar tongs . The discovery was made using the same method .
 There were, naturally, many efforts made to speed up digging before Mr Shovel’s breakthrough . Thomas Alva Edison tried to dig with the phonograph, but the only thing that happened was that he got his horn full of sand .
 Mr Edison fell into a fit of melancholy from which he did not emerge until two years later . William Wordsworth, the eminent nature poet, cheered him up by imitating a duck for four and a half hours .
 For nine years, I say, I have been writing this column for the makers of Marlboro Cigarettes, and for nine years they have been paying me money . For 9 years, he says, I've been paying them money. For nine .
 Whether you love your work or hate it, our system absolutely requires that you be paid for it . Whether you like your work, hate it or love it, you should be paid to do it .
 For example, Rex Glebe, a veterinarian by profession, adores to worm dogs . He says he simply adores worm dogs, and he loves worm dogs.
 "Hey, Rex, let’s go bowling a few lines,” he says . "No, thanks," he says. "I mean you can call him up and say, “Hey,Rex, let's go flatten some pennies on the railroad tracks
 Rex likes worming a dog better than playing with a dog, Rex says . Rex says he loves worming dogs . Rex has a long list of things he likes to do with his family's pets .
 Rex always sends a bill for worming your dog because in his wisdom he knows that to do otherwise would be to rend, possibly irreparably, the fabric of democracy . But even so, Rex sends the bill because he knows it would be a breach of democracy, he says .
 Marlboro's flavor represents the pinnacle of the tobacconist’s art, says Bob Greene . Greene: "I’m not surprised by the taste of this flavor. I think it represents the height of its art"
 I think Marlboro’s filter represents the pinnacle of the filter-maker's art . The filter is the most powerful filter filter in the world, according to the inventor .
 I think Marlboro is a pleasure and a treasure, and I fairly burst with pride that I have been chosen to speak for Marlborough on your campus . "I fairly burst" with pride, she says . She says she is "proud" to be able to speak
 In these columns, while grappling with the crises that vex campus America, I will make occasional brief mention of Marlboro Cigarettes . And in these columns I will also mention the fact that the U.S. is a nation of college students .
 It is not unlikely that Old Max will step on some toes during this period . But we think it's all in fun and we hope you will too .
 Faculty Members Pursue Interesting Avocations During Months Of Leisure . Students of Hinds gayly relate their summer experiences .
 Editor calls Staff Meeting To Discuss Eagle Assignments . Anyone interested in joining the Eagle yearbook staff is asked by Belva Watkins to meet in the Public Relations Office Thursday at 3:00.
 Already appointed is faculty editor, Suzanne Slay of Raymond, and associate editor, Bettye Simmons of Brooklyn, and Joe White of Mendenhall .
 They spent some time in Hot Springs, Arkansas, then on through the Ozarks . The couple also spent time in Arkansas and Arkansas .
 Thomas Stricklin did advanced work in history at Mississippi State for six weeks . He says he is proud of his achievements at the school .
 Marvin Riggs took a general tour of the West, with stops in Kansas City, Denver, and Seattle for the World’s Fair .
 International Relations Club will hold its first regular Wednesday night meetings tonight, September 19 . IRC to choose new officers Wednesday night . IRC will hold regular meetings on September 19.
 Offices of the vicepresident, secretary-treasurer, and reporter will be filled . Offices will also be filled by the president and vice-president .
 IRC will meet regularly on Wednesday at 7:30m. in room 12 in the Academic Building . IRC meets regularly at the same time every week . IRC will also meet regularly in the academic building on Wednesday .
 All members are urged to attend, and all freshmen interested in world affairs are invited . All members of the U.S. Senate should attend .
 Haircuts, shaves and shampoos at Hinds only cost twenty-five cents . Two-Bit Haircuts Still Obtainable in Barbering Lab .
 The School of Barbering is located on campus, at which students prepare for full time barbering . This is possible through the School of Barbering located in the University of Columbia .
 The shop is open for business every week day, Monday through Friday, from 9:00 until 3:30 .
 Barbering students complete a nine month course using up to date equipment . Barbering is a nine-month course using the latest equipment available in the UK .
 Miss Hilda Ree Davis studied this summer at Memphis State University . Miss Ree Davis studies at the University of Memphis . Visit Johnnie's grocery store .
 She did advanced work in Spanish, and took a refresher course in French . She also took up French and advanced Spanish .
 After a two week workshop at Ole Miss, he headed west, visiting in Albuquerque, Dallas, Amarillo, and Oklahoma City . After two weeks of workshops, he went to New Mexico, Texas and Oklahoma .
 Miss Susan Brown "baby sat for 3 delightful girls, ages 10, 11, and 12, while their parents went to Europe"
 Herring family spent one week on the coast while their Raymond home was being painted . Raymond home is being painted in Raymond, Raymond, California .
 James Sansing completed his Master's in Education at Mississippi State and worked on a nearly completed Master's Economics in Economics . Sansing has a Master's degree in Education .
 Margaret Kimball, went to Chicago for a meeting of the American Association of Junior Colleges . Kimball attended the meeting in Chicago .
 Kimball also visited Atlanta, Southern Pines, Williamsburg, Charleston, and Atlantic City with the Hi-Steppers .
 Nell Picketf also went to school, taking secretarial work relating to English term papers and legal documents . Nell also went on to study law and law .
 Miss Joan Melton is a former Miss North Carolina . Miss Melton will be a junior college student at Hinds Junior College . She is a member of the school's first class .
 Miss Annice Rae Jernigan has been crowned Miss Miss Mississippi . She was crowned Miss Mississippi last year . She is now the reigning Miss Mississippi and Miss Miss Alabama .
 Miss Melton instructs music theory and Miss Jernigan acts as secretary to the dean of instruction . Miss Melpton instructs . Miss Jarnigan also instructs in music theory at the school .
 This novel, though theoretically unable to be called a novel, tells of Maugham’s acquaintance with a young semi-mystical man who finds himself stagnating in an affluent Chicago society . It tells of the young man's acquaintance with an affluent man .
 In this rich and supposedly highly cultured society in earlier years, he later realized that the society itself was merely a ""gilded cage"" for him . I say stagnating, for though though he had moved, he had . moved .
 With this realization he abandon"" ed his society, home and fiance and 'journeyed to Europe to look for something which he could not express or identify but believed to be valid in his life'
 Though Maugham pictures this character in a European underworld of squalor and dinginess, still he reveals him as being beautiful, says the author . "He seems to possess a feline j gentleness," he says .
 Guitar Shop Westside Circle Across Robinson from Westland Plaza PHONE FL 4-1237 BAND REPAIR SERVICE FREE ESTIMATES GUITAR LESSONS EPIPHONE, FENDER GIBSON GUITARS and HOLTON BAND INSTRUMENTS
 The character which I am referring to will come as no surprise to modern readers, for he seems to be quite prevalent in our increasingly stodgy society . The character will come to an end in no surprise .
 Maugham does a beautiful job of making the reader repulsed at this character . He reveals this personage’s view that man is invalid unless he is wrapped and ribboned in aristocracy and wealth .
 Maugham’s British-American style is likely to be soothed by the novel's British style . The novel is set in New York and London .
 Maugham created this rather interesting effect when he contrived to Americanize his characters . His characters were Americanized in this way .
 From the surface they appear entirely American, but a closer look at their descriptions, figures of speech, and general calmness in nature suggested the British strain .
 This book includes just about every kind of human emotion and experience, and if Faulkner is right in saying that the purpose of the writer is to lift up the heart of man then Maugham was very successful with this novel .
 Hinds Eagl es Ready For Bulldog Invasion . Hinds end, Jerry Clark, sweeps around the left side of the line for a gain .
 Bulldog halfback Bryan Rasco and Guard Harvey Bond pulled the swift Eagle ball carrier down after he gained seven yards . Eagle halfback Rasco, center, and Guard Bond pulled down the ball carrier .
 The Eagles got off to a bad start with their first play of the game being called back on an illegal procedure penalty . The Eagles were called back after the first play was called back for a penalty on a play that was illegal procedure .
 After three downs, they kicked and Perk took control for the remainder of the game . Perk kicked the game's final kick .
 Quarterback Teddy Roberts swept from the Eagle 30 to the three-yard line to set up the touchdown on a quarterback sneak on the next play . The Eagle scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Perkinston halfback Wayne Ray covered the kick-off for the Hinds . The ball touched an Eagle player and touched the ball on the ball touching an Eagle .
 The Eagle offense proved no match for the Bulldogs and they were forced to punt . The Eagle defense held, however, and four plays later the Eagles took over on th~ir own 18 # .
 In the second quarter Henry Letort ran across from the eight yard line, and just before the half ended, the Bulldogs drove 43 yards in four plays capped by a scoring quarterback sneak by Roberts .
 Early in the second half the Eagles started an offensive attack that took them from their own 20 deep into Perkinston territory . The Eagles started the attack deep into their 20-yard territory .
 Quarterback Mike Vincent tosses several ground gaining passes to end Richard Stacy and halfback Mike Greer . Vincent's 25-yiard payoff pitch to Greer put the Eagles back in the game .
 In the fourth quarter the Eagles drove to the Bulldog 10 before halfback Phil Carriere intercepted a pass . In the final quarter of the game the Eagles had a drive to the Bulldogs' 10th-quarter advantage .
 Five minutes had elapsed in the final period before the Bulldogs scored again . The Bulldogs scored a late goal in the second period .
 Right halfback Bryan Rasco grabbed a 40-yard pass from Roberts in the end zone . The game ended with a touchdown for Roberts .
 Holmes and Jones, tied for first i the pre-season poll of coaches, ave dropped low in this weeks tandings after two games each . Four teams now tied for top 'ere expected to hold the cellar ositions .
 Pearl River, a team undefeated in 22 consecutive games, suffered a 6-0 loss to Southwestern . Southwestern was the onference champion for the past two years .
 Copiah-Lincoln dropped Jones for its second loss of the season 13-0 pushing the Bobcats to the bottom of the list . The Bobcats have now lost 13 of their 13 games in a row .
 Northwest will travel to Perkinston and Itawamba will meet Pearl River . Northwest will also travel to Pearl River this week .
 East Central goes to Jones and Copiah Lincoln . Lincoln and East Mississippi will meet with both teams holding perfect records . Both teams are undefeated in all competitions .
 Hinds will host Holmes and Southwest will travel to Mississippi Delta Thursday . Southwest will play Hinds in Mississippi Delta on Thursday .
 Roy Jones took a hand-off and walked across for another six points . Three plays later Halfback Roy Jones walked across to score six points for the Lions . Roy Jones scored the other six points in the first half .
 Hinds Eagle Band and HiSteppers entertained the near capacity crowd in a pre-game show . Perkinston Perk-etts performed during halftime . Hinds famed Eagle Band also entertained the crowd .
 Offensive halfback Butch Greer will fill in at defensive end when needed . He will play halfback for the rest of the season .
 Benton, on the injured list with a hurt thumb, has been unable to play his usual offensive position since his transfer from Ole Miss two weeks ago . Benton has been on the sidelines with a thumb injury .
 Bulldogs lost 18-6 to Perkinston in season opener, lost 7-6 against Northwest Hinds . Hinds tied Northwest 6-6 and was dropped 42-6 by Perkinsston last week . Bulldogs also lost last Thursday's season opener to Perkins .
 Holmes will be a slight favorite in the game . The Bulldogs will be using the strong Holmes line to give quarterback Charles Myers time to fire his passes .
 Myers has scored two touchdowns this season . The two touchdowns have been scored on aerial plays from Myers to end Johnny Vaughn . Vaughn scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Quarterback Mike Vincent does the throwing with Mike Greer, Richard Stacy, Ken Johnson and Jim and Jerry Clark potential targets . Quarterback Vincent throws the football with the help of Richard Stacy .
 Holmes Head Coach Billy Mustin is fielding Jimmy Whittemore at end, Clinton and Mike Tompkins at tackle, Alan Wallace and Doug Peterson at guard with Jimmy Phillips at offensive center . Myers and Vaughn are also playing for Holmes .
 Charles McClusky is the starting fullback with the additional backfield men remaining to be picked . McClusky will be the starting back-up at the start .
 Halftime entertainment will be provided by the Hinds Hi-Steppers and Eagle Band under the direction of Jimmy Morris and Mrs. Mrs. Morris .
 Perkinston 2 0 0 0 60 12 1.000 . Co-Lin 2 0 . 0 0 40 6 1.00 . Itawamba 2 0. 0 0 41 15 . 0.000 E Miss. 1.0 0 0 1.5 .
 New IBM Data Course Offered In Curriculum . Hinds business department will add to its regular curriculum a course in IBM Data Processing .
 The course, offered to students in both the day and evening class divisions, will be worth three semester hours credit . The course will be offered in the day or evening divisions .
 Included in the course will be basic machine operation and functional operational principles . The course will also focus on the basics of machine operation .
 Hinds is paying forty per cent of the cost of the machines, while IBM is paying the remaining sixty per cent . Hinds are paying the rest of the money for the machines .
 James Sparkman, in announcing the new course, stated, “Ordinarily, only customers are trained by IBM personnel.” Sparkman said .
 The complete course, when taken through a private agency, costs tremendously . The course can be taken through the private agency .
 Political Air Covers Campus Scene Nominees Selected For Soph Offices In Class Meeting . Campus Scene nominees students for offices in class meeting . Political atmosphere greater than any other of the coming year .
 Nominations for sophomore class officers were made Mon'day at 2-A period during the initial class meeting . This is the beginning of another season of campus political activities .
 George Weeks, George Cooley, Mike Oliver, George Tannous, Vicksburg, George Weeks and George Weeks are featured .
 Nominated for vice-president are Ralph Hemphill, Jackson, Boyd McPhail, Jackson and Carl Henry Sullivan, Jackson . Nominated by vice-presidents are Ralph and Boyd Mcphail .
 Shirley Morris, Brenda Dixon, Joy Williams, Patsy Roberts, Karen McBride, George Wiltkerson, and Patsy Wilterson . They are bottom row from the left, Shirley Morris and Brenda Dixon .
 Ten Classes Offered In Night Division To Adults; Enrollment Now Numbers 75 . Hinds Hi-Steppers and Eagle Band will represent Kentucky at Memorial Stadium Saturday when Kentucky meets Ole Miss .
 The troupes were invited by Kentucky when it became evident that their band could not make the trip . Kentucky's band was not able to make it to Kentucky .
 Performing in the pregame show will be Hi-Steppers top from left from left Roxie Noblin, Patty Hebler, second row, Sandra Jabour, Martha Knight and Gloria Shirley . Dean of Instruction Dr. Dr. Shirley is also performing .
 Classes average ten students each . Classes range over basic science, humanities, and improvement courses .
 Educational backgrounds of students vary from high school graduates to holders of master’s degrees . Educational backgrounds include high school grads, masters and masters degree holders .
 Special plans are being made to include a course in IBM data processing next semester .
 Monday, basic electronics and freshman English; Tuesday, principals of accounting and survey of physical science; Wednesday, astronomy and human development; Thursday, reading and speech fundamentals; and Friday, office machines and English literature .
 Joy Ferguson, Utica, Hilda Bullock, Jackson, and Steve Erwin, Natchez, were nominated . For the office of treasurer, Joy Ferguson was nominated .
 Patsy Roberts, Jackson, and Dottie Breakfield, Yazoo City, are the nominees for secretary . Patsy . Roberts, . Jackson, is the nominee for secretary of secretary . Breakfield is nominated for secretary in Yazoo .
 Miss Joan Melton, music theory instructor, was chosen sponsor of the class . Miss Melton is music theory teacher and music theory student .
 Campaign speeches will be made Wednesday during the regular assembly period . The first primary election will be held the following Thursday, October 1 .
 All nominees will meet with Beemon during the 2-A period Monday for a closed discussion concerning freshman day . Beemon will also hold a meeting with the nominees for freshman day Monday .
 Jackson Music Association Begins Sale of Seasonal Concert Tickets . Jackson Music . Association has announced concerts to be presented this season .
 Trips from the college will be made again to each of the concerts, free of charge to the students . Trips to the concerts will be available to students at the college .
 A center has been set up in the music building, where tickets are available . Tickets are available at the music venue .
 The Royal Scots Greys and Argyll Sutherland Highlanders, a Scottish Bagpipe group, on October 26; Ivan Davis, who is ""in the forefront of America's pianists,"" on December 4 . Ivan Davis will perform at the concert on December 5 .
 Also, the Canadian Ballet on January 15; “the reigning Rigoletto of the generation,” Robert Merrill, baritone, on February 6; and the Detroit Symphony, Werner Torkanowsky on February 19; . Also on February 15: ‘the reigning
 Reynolds Tobacco Company of Winston-Salem, N.C., to give the college recreational materials . The college has been given the tobacco company's recreational materials by R.C. Reynolds .
 The miniature megaphones will be used by the cheering section at the next football game . They will be the first of its kind to be used in a football stadium .
 Playing cards were given to Mr Benton and Miss Fay Marshall, dean of women . The playing cards were also given to Miss Marshall .
 Dormitory students may check out cards through either of these persons at any time they desire . Students may also check out their cards through these people at any request .
 A small, unnoticed blunder on your part is revealing to all your inconsiderate nature . All the while you are supposedly a true-blue citizen of the United States of America, one small blunder .
 You must know that as each day rises our country’s flag should be raised on campus, says President Obama . You must also be aware that the flag should also be raised at the university .
 As each day begins, a tall, undraped flagpole is visible in front of the old auditorium building . The flagpole remains undraped, but it is visible every day .
 Students walk past all during the day, unmindful of a big error on their part . Students walked past all day, unaware of the error .
 A few notice, but they cast eyes downward when nearing the spot . Perhaps a few notice the spot, but many look downward .
 Last year someone raised a furor when it was discovered that an old flag had been tucked away in a corner on campus instead of being destroyed in a proper flag burning ceremony .
 Hinds Junior College has as many active clubs and organizations as does other colleges . Hinds junior college has a large number of clubs, organizations and organizations .
 I propose that one of these clubs, in a spirit of respect, select a person or a group of persons to conduct a flag raising ceremony each day .
 You are now a college student, and no one is going to make you do anything . W Do It Yourself is the ultimate guide to how to do it yourself .
 People now presume that you are an adult, and expect you to act as such . People now assume that you're an adult . You are now an adult and expect to act like such .
 You won’t hear childish sermons about your behavior here at Hinds Junior College . You won't hear childish sermonmons about you behavior .
 Someone might sit and talk with you seriously about different phases of your life and schoolwork . Instead, someone might sit down and talk to you seriously .
 An interested person could be a teacher, administrative officer or just a friend . That interested person is a teacher or administrative officer .
 Most of the time it will be one of your classmates, perhaps wishing to strengthen himself and his character by talking with someone else who lives his sort of life . The best way to strengthen yourself and your character is to talk to someone who lives your kind of life, not just yourself .
 Buses run to the church of your choice, so that you may attend if you desire to . If you want to attend, you can attend at your choice of church .
 No, I’ll admit it is not required, but didn’t you go to church with your parents when you lived at home? No, it's not required. No, he says, but it's important to go to the church .
 Adult is a person who is in control of himself at all times, or tries to be . Adult is an adult who is not always in control at any time . An adult is a child who is always trying to be the best person in the world .
 Jackson’s Little Theatre production of ""Critic's Choice"" spouts these words to criticize a play . I’m not like the fictional cleaning woman in Jackson's Little Theatre play .
 Like the cleaning woman, I went to see a play last night but unlike her, I loved my play . "I love my play," she says of her play .
 "Life and the Critic's Choice" is full of life. Live drama has something that movies lack. "Life" has something to movies lack." "Critic's choice" is "full of life"
 The Little Theatre’s production is a light and breezy one . Dealing with the troubles that befall a drama critic whose wife writes a terrible playi .
 Mr Levin's quotes from the play are well worth space in anyone’s scrapbook . The playwright's quotes are worth a scrapbook of his own .
 A self-centered director who dislikes Ballentine’s son has this to say, “He's a cute kid.” The director says he doesn’t think he dislikes his son .
 One of the funniest scenes came when Hagen Thompson, under the influence of alcohol, tells about the first play he reviewed . The play is set in New York .
 The play, The Wild Duck laid an egg, and for the opening line of the review he wrote, “If this is the Wild Duck, I’ll take the vegetable plate.” The play is based on the same name .
 The gas is contained in four heavy tanks and fastened to the interior of the barge lying on the floor of the Mississippi River . The barge is filled with gas contained in heavy tanks .
 In order for the deadly fumes to be released in the river, some of the valves leading to the four tanks would have to be damaged . In order to release the fumes, the valves on the tanks are damaged .
 A recent low in the water level has opened a question of the tanks being hit by passing vessels . The tanks are expected to be hit by ships passing through the water .
 A slight leakage in the tanks would cause Hydrochloric acid to form when the gas and water combine . A slight leak would cause a form of the acid form when a small amount of water and gas combine .
 This would cause corrosion of the tanks and eventual expulsion of the entire load of gas . This would eventually cause the tanks to burst and expel the gas .
 The gas being heavier than air would hang in the atmosphere posing a deadly problem for a long time to come . It would be a long-term problem for many years .
 The actual lifting of the barge would take from 30 to 60 days of careful engineering . It would be 30-60 days of engineering .
 A single unpredicted tide in the river could bring about a disastrous crack in the comparatively fragile tanks . The fragile tanks are fragile and fragile .
 Care must be taken that the tanks remain firmly lashed to the barges . The barges do not attempt any aquanautical acrobatics. Care must also be taken .
 Safety measures are being taken in the form of aid from most state agencies for public safety . Most state agencies are providing aid from public safety, including the state .
 Civil Defense Director has asked the military for 100,000 gas masks in case of emergency . Robert L Crook, Civil Defence Director, has asked for the masks .
 The central coordinating agency for the emergency is the Mississippi Civil Defense Council . The state's civil defense council is in charge of the emergency .
 Hinds will be working closely with the Corps of Engineers, Public Health Service, American Red Cross, Public Welfare Department, National Civil Defense, Highway Patrol, Highway Department, and National Guard .
 European Unity Soon To Be Realized by RALPH HEMPHILL . One Europe, united, under God, with liberty and justice for all . European Unity soon to be realized by Alphphphill .
 The long sought for united states of Europe, today is not a dream, it is an awakening reality, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "Today is not the dream of a united state of Europe."
 The idea was conceived in this century by Jean Monnet, an energetic, farsighter French economist . The idea of the concept was conceived by Monnet this century .
 To make his idea practical, he realized that Europe must first be united economically before she can be united politically . Europe must also be united financially before it is united politically, he says .
 He sold ideas to some of the leaders of Europe who formed the Common Market . He sold his ideas to leaders of the Common European Union .
 A trade agreement among the member nations to gradually eliminate all internal tariffs between them . The deal aims to bring about one common external tariff . In essence, it is a trade agreement .
 The original members of the I Common Market were West Ger( many, France, Italy, Netherlands, Belgium, Belgium and Luxemburg . The original member states were West Germany, the Netherlands, France and Italy .
 Great Britain, Norway, SwedI en, Austria, Denmark, and Greece have applied membership . Since j then, however, because of its suc, then, Great Britain has applied membership. Great Britain now has six members of the European Union .
 This concept of no internal tariffs accompanied by a common external tariff is very important . No internal tariffs will be allowed to be exchanged between the two countries, he says .
 It was one of the major reasons that U.S. industry grew so rapidly and so big. It was also a major reason that the United States industry grew rapidly .
 "We do not have any internal tariffs that restrict trade between the states. We do have no internal tariffs," says President Obama .
 This has caused larger mar kets, and larger markets breed bigger business, while, at the sametime, our industry has been protected by one external tariff . This has led to larger markets and bigger business in the UK .
 Khrushchev would then be confronted with two united states, instead of one, he says . Khrushchevitch would have been confronted with a united state, he adds .
 West Germany’s goods are tariffed in France just as American goods . Today, West Germany's goods are tariffs in France, just as U.S. goods .
 When the Common Market is completed, West German’s goods will be much cheaper in France than ours, because they will not be subject to tariff . Possibly the greatest significance to America in the future will be in the line of foreign policy .
 In the past, their foreign policy has not been ""exactly"" the same as ours, says President Obama . "In the past," Obama said .
 In the future, there is a danger of the west being split as the Common Market countries begin to merge politically . Common European countries are expected to merge in the future .
 In a crisis like Berlin, this could play right into the Communists hands, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 In summary, after the facts are weighed, the Common Market is both an opportunity and an over caste . The Common Market will be both a success and a failure, says David Cameron .
 The only rational answer seems to lie in the area of close cooperation, right from the start, between these two industrial giants of the world, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 If our recent past relations are any judge for the future, close co-operation should be highly possible . The UK has a long history of diplomatic relations with the UK .
 Pensive Persian Importee Has Dreams Of Return To Homeland As Engineer . Shahla Azordegan is a 17-year-old bolt of Persian electricity .
 A resident of the United States a little over a month, Shahla is beginning her college education at Hinds . She hopes to return to her homeland of Persia as a qualified engineer .
 Shahla wiill succeed in engineering or any other field . With five years each of Chemistry, Algebra and physics behind her, there is little doubt as to whether she will succeed in any field .
 Persia doesn't believe in co-educational schools . Shahla attended a girls' school for her twelve years of schooling . Her only brother, who is twelve, attended a nearby boys’ school for his 12th year .
 Quickly becoming Americanized, she has even last slx consisting of high school seen an Elvis movie . Quickly becomes Americanized .
 Hircdsonian carries on an extensive exchange program with other Mississippi college publications . State Colleges Claim Recognition For New Edifices, Title-Holders, title-holders .
 Jones Junior College at Ellisville once again topped the enrollment of second-place Hinds . Hinds. Jones was the second-ranked school in the state .
 East Central Junior College at Decatur, Georgia, is a junior college at East Central . Dr. Dr. Michael Lister is a member of the faculty at the Decatur school .
 Montgomery speaks seven languages, including Portuguese, Spanish, French, Persian, Italian, Italian and German . Montgomery speaks and reads seven languages .
 Tommy Nance, a former Hinds student from Jackson, moved into his third quarter of editing the Student Printz . Tommy is now a senior at the University of Mississippi .
 Mississippi College adds new dormitory to campus . Whittington Hall is a modern male dormitory .
 A $100,000 renovation of the Old Chapel building has been, completed also . The Old Chapel is also being renovated .
 The building served as both a hospital and stable for Grant's horses during the Civil War . The building also served as a hospital for the president's horses .
 Miss Carroll was crowned Miss Mississippi in August . She was a finalist in the Miss America Pageant . Miss Carroll is a Miss America finalist .
 Mississippi State College for Women claims ten young women who were candidates in the Miss Mississippi pageant in Vicksburg this summer . The college claims ten women were candidates for Miss Mississippi .
 Hinds exceeded last year’s record-breaking enrollment . Hinds has appointed a new dean of instruction, completed a $157,784 science annex and developed a housing project .
 Shahla's name means ""sad beautiful eyes"" and they are beautiful but not sad by any means . Shahla is the daughter of Shahla, who was born Shahla .
 Her laughing green eyes and dark hair are the first things noticed about the future engineer . In fact, she has green eyes, dark hair and green eyes .
 Her cousin is a 17-month-old girl who lives in Jackson, Mississippi . Her parents say she's a big fan of her little cousin .
 Shahla is living with Dr. Albert Azordegan, a Jackson neuro-surgeon, while she attends Hinds . She is now attending Hinds High School in Jackson, Mississippi .
 When asked about American television, the Persian freshman’s answer was very Americanized . The Persian freshman's answer to the question was a very American-Americanized .
 She was saddened when she learned that her favorite movie star, Ava Gardner, has ceased making American movies . She was also saddened by the news that she lost her favorite American actress .
 Shahla Azordegan always does and that is speak her mind . Shahla always speaks her mind, and she is always willing to do so .
 Hinds County Farm Bureau held its monthly meeting in the Hinds cafeteria last Monday . County Bureau Meets at Hinds .
 Jack j Treloar, superintendent of farm and j physical plant, is president of the group . The group is based in Washington, D.C.
 Resolutions to be presented before the annual Harvest Supper in October were the main topic for discussion .
 Mr. Barnett’s stand in the present Mississippi education situation, I wrote him a letter to this effect .
 Thomas Whitfield, from the Agriculture Stabilization Commission, discussed the effects of the drought on Hinds county farmers . Whitfield said the drought is affecting Hinds County farmers .
 Hinds county will host the Mississippi Farm Bureau West Central District contest . The contest includes an area of 16 counties, including Hinds County, Mississippi .
 As a registered PHOTOGRAPHIC DEALER we service, repair, and teach you the proper use of the photographic equipment we sell . Buy from us with Confidence .
 Cameras from the least expensive Brownies to the finest the market offers . Cameras range from the cheapest to the most expensive .
 Freshman English course at Hinds lectures began Thursday, September 20 . Lectures began on general usage of the library and its components .
 Students will be tested at the end of the course, and the grade will be part of their regular English course grade . Students will also be tested for their English course grades at end of course .
 A change from last year’s schedule makes available only one class in the library for each group .
 Howed for Hinds students will be posted ever . It will take approximately two on the “telephone board” weeks to complete .
 The board is located outside the president’s office . Margaret Kimball, secretary to the president, has announced that all telephone calls receivial calls are received .
 She emphasized that students should notice the board when passing so that they can get their calls . She said it is important for students to notice the school board when they pass .
 If students see a friend’s call, they should advise him of the message . Students should also advise friends of the call, if they see a friends' call .
 Each class had a three day instruction course followed by a comprehensive test . Last year, the library was just completed .
 The material is made more compact this year, and a complete, yet brief, program of library usage is taught . This year, the material is more compact and compact .
 Hurley, publishers of the 1962 Eagle, college yearbook, sponsor the workshop annually . Hurley sponsors the workshop every year . The 1962 Eagle is a college year book .
 Eagle editor Belva Watkins, Vicksburg, Jackson, attended the two-day affair . Eagle editor Bettye Simmons and photographer Robert Pickenpaugh also attended the event .
 Kent Prince, public relations director and sponsor of the Eagle, also made the trip . Kent Prince is the sponsor of this year's Eagle .
 Vicksburg students Duane McClurg and Vicky Hazzlerigg take advantage of Hinds expanded facilities in the laboratory sciences . The conference, which is designed IN NEW LABS, was designed in new facilities .
 Both freshmen are studying introductory botany, and thus qualify to use new equipment in refurnished labs . The new science annex adjacent to the science annex is as equally well furnished as the annex adjacent .
 Ralph Hemphill, Jackson sophomore, stated, “The legislature will probably enlarge the senate like the present plan calls for.” He said the legislature is likely to do so .
 It is the same as taking surplus wheat out of one silo and putting it into another silo . It is not the same thing that happens when it is taken out of a silo, it's the same way .
 A visitor to the campus said, ""I'll tell you what they had better do— IRC Fills Vacant" The IRC Filled Vacant said, "They had better better do something quick"
 "There is diversity of opinion ranging from one house to two houses to four houses," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Governor Ross Barnett recently called a special session of the Mississippi legislature to discuss reapportionment . One lady, one lady, was in attendance at the special session .
 The senate has had time to reject the proposed bill . Since opening day on September 18, other state matters have divided attention . The bill would have the senate have 82 members and the house 146 .
 We asked several people on our campus for their opinion as to what the legislature will do, and what then should do . We asked people on campus to share their thoughts on what they think of the state legislature's decision .
 Jim Toombs, Jackson freshman, answered, "I believe they wiM wait until they are forced to action. I believe they will wait," he said .
 Fred Peyton, Vicksburg sophomore, said, “I think the legislature will pass something, but I don’t think it will be a full-fledged change.” Fred Peyton said . Fred Peyton: "I think I think I'm not going to see a
 Boyd McPhail, Jackson sophomore, said, “The legislature probably won’t do anything.” He said the state legislature is unlikely to take action .
 They should go on and redistribute seats according to the population now. They should be redistributing seats to the people now . They should redistribute the seats in the country now, says David Cameron .
 Peggy White suggested that there should be two houses for the urban areas and two for the rural areas . James Sparkman, dean of inGeorge Shumaker, Darrel Slack, struction, replied, “I’ve been out of Marianne Strube, and Peggy
 I think the matter should be placed in the hands of an outside committee of Mississippians . Personally, I think I think it should be put to the outside committee .
 Students who have attained the standards required for Phi Theta Kappa membership were announced today in chapel . We can only await the outcome of the outcome .
 Dorothy Dianne Breakfield, Rebecca Cooper, Shelia Corbin, Olga Sue Deaton, Joy Ferguson, Ralph Hemphill, Mathew Bowen Johnson, Rebecca Massey . The team is represented by Rebecca Cooper and Joy Ferguson .
 Merrilym Mitchell, Linda Gail Murray, Dianne McClung, and Linda McClung have been in the state for several years, but I definitely think we need reapportionment. Also, Merrily . Mitchell, McLung, Mitchell, Murray, McClung .
 The legislature will have a senate — one from each county — with the house on a population basis, says superintendent of the farm and physical plant .
 Phi Theta Kappa is the national honorary society for junior college students . "I would favor that the real power continue to belong to the conserva," she says .
 Jimmy Chandler was elected vice president; Steve Cannon was chos| en reporter . Dawn McNeil was elected secretary-treasurer . Jimmy Chandler is elected vice-president . Dawn . McNeil is also elected secretary, treasurer, secretary, secretary and treasurer .
 President Ralph Hemphill appointed a committee to make arrangements for a dance in the recreational hall . The committee has been made up of members of the public .
 Dawn McNeil, Leroy Stockdale, Harry Jackson, and Jeffrey Boler are serving on the committee . The committee is serving on a committee of four members .
 IRC will discuss the top ten trouble spots of the world . The list includes Cuba, Congo, the United Nations, Algeria, India, China, Moscow, Berlin and Berlin .
 President Hemphill urges all members to attend, and opens the club to all persons interested in international affairs . The club is open to international affairs, and the club welcomes all members .
 The meeting will be held in room 12 of the Academic Building at 7:00m. tonight, and thereafter every other Wednesday night . The meeting is held at 7 p.m. every other night .
 Circle K met Monday, September 24, in the administration building at 7:30, to elect new members . Invitation to new Circle K Inductees Offered at meeting .
 Easterwood, Steve Erwin, John Fitzgerald, Ralph Hemphill, Johnny Hines, David Jenkins, David Jones, Larry Lauderdale, Marcel McLendon, Marcelle McLendon and Bill White .
 This brings the club membership to twenty-five, if all those selected choose to enter actively . This would bring the membership of the club to around 25,000 members .
 The club will sell hot dogs and coffee at all future home football games . The decision follows the decision by the club to sell coffee and hot dogs at all games .
 Last on agenda was distribution of literature sent to the club by Circle K International .
 Circle K is a local Circle Circle K club in North London . The club was founded by Circle K in 2007 . It was formed by the group of Circle K members .
 Next regular meeting of the Circle K is Thursday, October 24 in the private dining hall of the cafeteria . Circle K's next regular meeting will be October 24 .
 General assembly began with a general assembly in the Hotel Camden at 1:30 m.m. to aid students in planning yearbooks . At this time all new members will be introduced .
 A series of four group sessions taught by outstanding yearbook consultants were conducted throughout Saturday .
 This week's featured news stories are edited by Ernest Rubak of Chicago and Leroy Brock of Camden, Camden, Illinois . The weekly Newsquiz was created by Chicago-based staff at CNN.com/Impact .
 States represented included Louisiana, Texas, Missouri, Tennessee, Arkansas, Arkansas and Mississippi . States represented include Texas, Texas and Missouri .
 Patsy Roberts, head cheerleader, and Karen McBride, remain from last year . Patsy . Roberts and Karen . McBride remain as cheerleaders .
 Eleven home economics majors have returned this year . Robbie Dukes, sponsor of the lplighters’ Club, reports that eleven home economics major have returned .
 Club members are largely composed of students enrolled in home economics, but anyone interested is invited to attend . Club members will be mostly home economics students .
 Phi Beta Lambda plans a Coke party Friday at 2-A period, in room 6 of the Academic Building . The party will be held at 2 A period in the academic building .
 Walter Bishop, president, encourages all interested students enrolled in a business course, either past or f present, to attend . Walter Bishop encourages students to attend the course .
 Purposes of the club will be dis| cussed at the meeting, and plans receive a WAA pin at the end of the year will be made .
 WAA A round robin volleyball tournament will begin next Tuesday, October 2, at 6:15 in the girls’ gym for all WAA members . WAA meets each Tuesday and WAA meetings each Tuesday .
 Volleyball captains are Jane O’Neal, Garry Sanford, Patsy Roberts, and Francess Pickett . Jane O'Neal is the team’s first female volleyball captain . Garry Sanford is the fourth woman to be named a captain .
 Contestants will be permitted to sign up for participation until Friday of this week . Contestants can sign up to participate in the competition until Friday .
 Freshman girls or new members in WAA must earn 50 points in order to receive a Hinds letter . Freshmen girls or members of WAA need 50 points to receive Hinds letters .
 Father Pendergrast will be here for the regular meeting next Monday, October 1 . The regular meeting will be held on October 1.
 This will be an organizational meeting, at which regular officers will be elected and the agenda for future meetings will be planned . The meeting will also be a meeting for the treasurer and reporter .
 Four freshmen were chosen to lead cheering Eagle fans throughout the remainder of the year in last week’s special election . Four freshmen have been selected to lead cheerleaders throughout the year .
 Joy Williams, an 18 year-old brunette from Forest Hill, plans to major in home economics . Joy Williams plans to study at the University of Cambridge .
 Shirley Morris, a 17 year-old Jackson Central graduate, is the daughter of Mr and Mrs. Morris . Shirley Morris is a 17-year-old high school student .
 Brenda Dixon plans to major in elementary education . The 18-year-old is the daughter of Mr and Mrs. Dixon of Jackson Central .
 Polly Rabalais, sponsor, also serves as girls’ physical education instructor for the college . Polly is sponsor of the program . She also is an instructor at the college.
 An organizational meeting of the group will be held Thursday night at 7:30 .
 Officers to be elected then are vice-president and * secretary-treasurer . Officers will then be elected as vice-presidents .
 Rehearsals for the fall production of “Mother Is a Freshman’s” are underway this week . Laundry and Dry Cleaning will be picked up in each dormitory every MONDAY and THURSDAY NIGHTS .
 Warren Nybo, Robert Everet, Paula Jo Hopson, Bill Forrester, Peggy Smallwood, Diane Abernathy and Diane Abermathy were selected for parts in this year's theatrical venture .
 Dramatized by Christopher Sergei from the story by Raphael David Blau, the play was successfully made into a motion picture a few years ago and starred Loretta Young .
 Hinds production of "Mother Is a Freshman" will be presented November 1, at 8:00 in the college auditorium .
 Lynda Berry pauses against the sky in a natural work of art . Berry is an art major at the University of Arkansas . Berry was a major in the Art Department of the Arts and Design .
 Lynda, a 17-year-old Jackson freshman, is this week's Hinds Honey . Lynda is artisically obvious, evidently aesthetic . She is the daughter of a high school senior .
 Student busses will run to the ball game Thursday night at Summit, when Hinds plays Southwest Junior College . Student bus trip to Summit contest planned by school .
 As of two o’clock today, seventy persons had signed the list in the foyer of President McLendon’s office .
 Other uncounted lists are placed in dormitories and the day students’ lounge .
 A special supper will be served at 4:30 tomorrow evening to facilitate the persons making the trip . President McLendon says a special supper is planned for the trip.
 The band was originally little more than a chunk of the marching band transplanted and playing pep songs . Organized in 1955, the band is now a national championship team .
 It grew to combo size, type music when they perform at hotels, banand performance depending on perquets, conventions, and other spej sonnel . Gradually it grew to . combo size and performance size .
 Hinds Stage Band is an outlet for jazz hun-, commented during the first rehearsal of the Hinds stage band Tuesday night . The band has a long-term commitment to playing jazz .
 A select group of Hi-Steppers got together and organized the big band . The 15-piece big band accompanies a select group . gry musicians who like to swing .
 Later this semester is a jazz concert, director Jim Morris announced . The jazz concert will be later this semester .
 Hi-Steppers will perform on October 27 at the White House Hotel in Biloxi . They will entertain the Mississippi State Poultry Association convention .
 Howard Quinn, lead alto; Libby Smith, alto, tenor; Jerry Cogell and Jimmy Goodwill, tenors; and Conrad Dove, bari. Howard Quinn leads alto . Libby is lead singer of the group . Howard Quinn also sings lead al
 Four trumpets, Mike Jones lead; Bill Brister, James Stokes, and Wayne McIntyre lead . Wayne McIntrere, Wayne McIntree, and Mike Jones play for the band .
 Bobby McCool and John Tompkins played on string bass, bass bass, drums, and lead, and Bill Dunlap . The band is known for their hard-fought music .
 The group blows mairtly Bob Siebert charts . Pursuing the big band sound, the group is known for its distinctive sound .
 Siebert scores Kenton-like sounds in varying degrees of complexity . Siebert is famous for his work with the Stan Kenton workshops . He scores sounds similar to Kenton sounds .
 Following pattern of the big groups such as Count Basie, Duke Ellington and Kenton, they purchased big sound dance band scores, but found them mostly stereotyped and unedify . Last year they happened on the swinging scores .
 A post card offering free trombonerhythm sets came from Siebert’s company . Siebert's company also offered free sets of tromboneerhythms .
 They tried it (“anything that’s free, man”s found it a “real swinger” and started stocking up on Seibert charts for the big band .
 Plans for the coming season indicate several public appearances with and without the HiSteppers .
 Cloth samples are being tested so that blazers can be tailored in time for the first performance . Cloths will be tested to ensure they are ready for the performance .
 Rowan was highly complimentary when he dropped by the rehearsal yesterday . Director Morris can make nothing but good sounds about what is ahead of the show .
 The Eagles scored the initial and final touchdowns of the game, but they couldn't get up quite enough energy . Although the Eagles scored a touchdown and a touchdown in the first quarter, they didn't fill the middle of the scoreline .
 Holmes advanced to sixth place in state ranking with the win over Hinds . The Holmes team is ranked sixth in state rankings .
 A special permit to hunt Bear in Summit, Thursday has been issued to Coach Joe Renfroe and his Hinds Eagle grid squad . Hinds hunters hot on trail .
 Eagle party to visit Southwest Junior College in Mississippi . Hi-Steppers and Band to join in . The Eagle party will travel through southern Mississippi forests .
 A tribe of Itawamba Indians trapped one 14-0 in their season opener . In the season opener three weeks ago, the tribe's first game of the season began with a win . The tribe has a history of trapping .
 The next week, however, a pack of Wildcats from the Pearl River swamps got hum gry and went picking a fight in the Summit woods . The fight was the first of its kind in the area .
 Cats take on more than they could handle and go away licking their wounds from a 6-0 defeat . Undefeated in 22 scraps, Cats took on the Cats in their first 22 scraps . Cats have been unbeaten in 22 scrapes .
 Reports from Mississippi Delta hunters last week-end stated the Bears were more plentiful and easier-to-hand . Bears are more plentiful in the Mississippi Delta and easier to handle .
 Renfroe has put his squad through fast paced drills this week working mainly on defense . The U.S. squad has been put through drills for the first time this week .
 Ken Johnson in as slotback and Dan Magee going to fullback from halfback . Ken Johnson will play slotback for the first time in the team's history . Ken Magee will play for the second time in a row as halfback in Saturday's clash .
 Joe Patterson will fill the vacated halfback post moving from fullback to halfback . Joe Patterson is expected to fill the vacant halfback position at half back .
 Only two teams remain undefeated in the junior college grid circuit . Jimmy Dukes and John Stanley will alternate at fullback with Pat Pat Pat . Only one team remains undefeated after three weeks of action .
 Perkinston and Copiah-Lincoln are tied for the league's top spot with a record of three wins each . Copiah has won three of their last five games .
 More defensive changes may be announced prior to game time . Coaches may also make defensive changes .
 Eagles have taken Bear meat on 14 trips and licked wounds seven times in past seasons . Eagles have licked Bear meat seven times and have taken bear meat 14 trips .
 Hinds will travel to Summit for a meeting with Southwest Thursday . Holmes hosts Mississippi Delf ta at Goodman while Hinds travels to Summit .
 Eagle Tackle Oscar Teasleyt picked up a stray fumble on the Bulldog 31-yard line and set the stage for the initial goal . The Eagles started with a bang in the first quarter .
 Seconds before the first period ended the Holmes crew turned on their driving machine . Holmes won't be surprised when the game was over .
 Thus far this season the rampaging Bears have scored 20 points with their opponents gathering 55 . Quarterback Charles Myers opened with a 29-yard pass from
 Copiah-Lincoln and East Mississippi tangled, with each having a perfect record . Head Coach Horace Williams has perfect record for the two teams .
 Visiting Co-Lin manfive experienced members back Vincent before being downed on the from last year, seven . Visiting members of the team return to Vincent's home base .
 Two minutes into the final period ter Beesley will provide the the the Holmes squad took control again . The Holmes squad led the home side to victory .
 Patterson’s kick . Tackle Bob Jackson are the was good. Patterson‘s kick tackle Bob Jackson is good.
 Minutes later the driving machine j 0 pen season will be put on Johnof the visitors took the ball from n y McGuffie, a freshman quarterquarter .
 Copiah-Lincoln Itawamba and East Mississippi p er kinston dropped ther perfect records over the weekend putting them in a four way race for second place in the state .
 One minute and 45 seconds after Patterson took a 20-yard pass from the ball was shifted, Myers pitched to End Johnny Vaughn on the one yard line where he was tackled by Butch Greer . Halfback Joe Patterson took the ball from Patterson and pitched to end Johnny Vaughn .
 Myers kept the ball on the next play rolling off right tackle for the touchdown . Myers kept running the ball for the next drive . Myers keeps the ball in the air for the rest of the game .
 The Eagles staged a desperate attempt to control the ball on offense before punting to the visitors . The Eagles were forced to punt to the punters in order to keep the game alive .
 The Bulldogs started their march toward the posts in the first half of the second half . The Bulldogs continued their march to the posts as they continued their progress .
 My^ers passed 13-yards to Halfback Keith Morris in the end zone for the score . The score was the first touchdown of the 2014 season .
 Holmes’ third score of the night came after Fullback Charles MeCluskey intercepted a pass on the Eagle 36 . Holmes' third score came after an interception on the Eagles' 36th play .
 The kick by Peterson was Vincent Vincent and was followed in the act by End Jimmy Clark who dashed to the two . Vincent was Vincent's first kick and the end of the act was Jimmy Clark's .
 373 Passes Attempted 17 Passes Completed 9 Passes Intercepted 9 Intercepted “ 0 Penalties “ ” . Total of 3,373 Passes completed .
 Hinds tries to even the score in the third period but the strong Bulldog line held it to a single touchdown . Hinds tried to even even score a touchdown in the second period but it was held to a one touchdown .
 This week the Eagles will face Southwest Junior College at Summit at Summit in an effort to regain solid standing in the conference . The Eagles are looking to bounce back from a poor start to the season .
 Coach Renfroe readied his squad for the "bear hunting" trip . Coach Renrroe is preparing his team for the 'bear hunting' trip .
 Candidates for sophomore class offices presented campaign speeches this morning in a final formal attempt to win votes . Hinds EAGLES BEAT SOUTHWEST BEARS in 1962 .
 Hinds students react sensitively to each vicissitude of the Olei Miss integration crisis . Students display concern over arrival of Meredith Meredith . Hinds Students Display Concern Over Ole Miss Integration Crisis .
 Several students were involved in the National Guard call-up . Several students traveled to Hinds, where they were called up .
 Meredith is being housed on sively waited the resolution of the the the Ole Miss campus in Baxter conflict . Also reported, unconfirmed, was that Meredith was being housed in the dormitory .
 Author of the petition, Mike Oliver, said that only a few persons refused to sign . Mississippi flag was flown beside j Mississippi flag .
 The unidentified person was hung in the trees before Central Hall, and a small cross was scorched beside the auditorium building . The' petition said, “We support your stand to preserve States Rights.”
 The IRC Sponsors Student Dance International Relations Club will sponsor a campus dance in the recreation hall Thursday evening at six o’clock immediately following the pep rally . Unofficial, unconfirmed reports stated that several Hinds students were present during the mass meetings Sunday night .
 IRC president Ralph Hemphill announced admission price will be 25 cents, stag or drag . Admission will cost 25 cents for the first time, but not for drag .
 Hemphill explained that the event is a special move by the club to raise funds for programs and club projects while rendering a service to the student body . The event will be held in honor of students who are required to vote .
 Nominees for office of president are Walter Bishop, Lynn Earnest, Clay Cooley, Mike Oliver, George Tannous, George Weeks, and George Weeks . Walter Bishop is the nominee for president .
 Those seeking the office of vicepresident are Ralph Hemphill, Boyd McPhail, and Carl Henry Sullivan . Those seeking to be vicepresident will be Ralph Hemmphill and Boyd Mcphail .
 Joy Ferguson, Hilda Bullock, Steve Erwin, and Jimmy Chandler have been nominated for treasurer . Joy Ferguson is the treasurer of the state of the treasurer .
 Beemon this week to discuss possible rules and regulat ; ons for Freshman Day . Beemon will meet with other students to discuss rules and regulations . Freshmen Day will be held at the University of Maryland on Monday .
 Specific rules were to be set by the elected officers as soon as possible . Specific rules of the annual harrassment were to set by elected officers . The rules will be established by the election of the council's officers .
 Hinds officials will perform for the Jackson a( l m i n i s tered by Hind's officials . Funds will be raised to raise money for Jackson family members .
 iTrr; ""” r show m ^rv ot 24 sophomores accompanied by the 15-piece stage band . In the 30-minute review will be iTr; "" ‘rv’ .
 Hi-Steppers are almost the same group that performed at the Neshoba County Fair in early August . Hi-Stppers director Mrs. Mrs. Johnson says she hopes to see the group again at the fair .
 Circulators of the signature sheets were insistent that all who signed knew exactly what they were signing . Circulators said all those who signed were aware of the fact that the signature sheet was signed .
 Director of the stage band, Jim Morris, said that later in the year the groups will perform on campus for the students . The groups will also perform later this year on campus .
 Bee said the band and HiSteppers have received numerous compliments for their pre-game show Saturday night at the Ole Miss-Kentucky game . Bee said he has received many compliments for his pre-match show .
 The entire band and 64 Hi-Steppers will perform at Moorhead this Satur . “We will cooperate to the fullest in making the opportunities available to worthy students,” he concluded .
 Featured speaker was Superintendent of Education, Jack Tubb . Tubb's text dealt with the history of education in Mississippi since the Civil War .
 Seventh period classes will meet during the __ “„„ oatu 2-A period, and the general assemday night for the game between blyi wil1 be at 2:45 > seventh period .
 Mayor's luncheon was arranged by special agreement this week . First public performance will be on Gulf Coast October 24 .
 Pride Seen Clue To Spirit School spirit is an intangible with a tangible impact on school life, progress and sense of pride . The slogan of the day was "Pride to Spirit School"
 School spirit at football games is good, but true school spirit is a seven-day project, not a one-night affair . School spirit is good at football, but it's good at school spirit, not one night affair .
 Maybe the reason we sometimes show a ‘soft’ school spirit at sports events is that we don’t practice it the rest of the week . Maybe the real reason is that it’s not practice it all the week, coach says .
 We are attending the most outstanding and highly-recognized junior college in the state of Mississippi . We are at the best of the Mississippi junior college .
 The opportunities of building an empire of knowledge from the fountain of youth flowing through Hinds are both numerous and varied . Hinds is one of the world's most famous universities .
 We have an ultra-modern, air-conditioned library with new art and language facilities . We have a new art, language facilities and new art facilities .
 An addition to the science building has just been completed, including an astronomy observatory . The new science building features an observatory for astronomy and astronomy .
 The finishing touches are being put on a vocational-technical building . The building will be used as a training facility for students .
 Hinds have all the ingredients of a wholesome and vigorous school spirit at Hinds . Hinds are proud of their 'whole' and 'vibrant school spirit'
 The students of Hinds will elect sophomore class officers tomorrow . The students will also vote on the president of the junior class .
 The election of these leaders should be no less carefully considered than the election of regular state officials such as governor or lieutenant governor . The election should also be considered as a regular state official such as lieutenant governor or governor .
 Of course students have their favorite for each office, but we seriously doubt that many have thought over the qualifications of the various candidates . We seriously doubt many students have thought about the candidates' qualifications .
 Julia Todd, associate professor of speech and art at Mississippi College, has been named debate instructor for Hinds . Todd is an associate professor at the college .
 Non-communist nations should establish an economic community . Resolved: that the non-communists should establish a community of non-Communist nations .
 In their 13th year at MC, the couple previously instructed at Ouachita College, Arkadelphia, Ark. Arkansas .
 They will also participate in other speech contests such as extemporaneous speaking, sight reading, oratory, and oral interpretation . Speech contests will be held during the competition .
 This year definite platforms have been drawn up by each nominee . The group will represent Hinds . This year the group will be represented by Hinds.
 Last minute preparations and campaigns show lack of interest and design . Last year's election results are due to be announced on Friday .
 A job worth running for is worth pre-1 at the state Youth Congress . The Youth Congress takes place in the state capital at Jackson on November 30 and 31 .
 Ask yourself who made the most impressive speech — tournament at Mississippi College who seems best suited to fill the office . There will be a novice at the White House .
 Decemelected debaters will determine the direction and accomplishments of ^ er ^ H ‘ nc *s . The sophomore class will also attend the sophomore class and student body this year .
 The debaters will attend the Millsaps tournament the first of January, the MSCW tournament in March, and the tournament in January . Tomorrow, before you mark just any name on the ballot, take time to reason for yourself .
 Her husband, Hollis Todd, acts as coach for the MC senior division Zhe Highlights of Hinds . Zhe highlights highlight of Hind's senior division .
 In the future, the class will meet each Tuesday and Thursday evenings at 7.30 a.m.
 Of the students registered for debate, only one returned from last year’s championship team . Only one of those students is expected to return to the debate team .
 Ralph Hemphill, Jackson sophomore, was a member of the 1961-62 traveling team which won both South Mississippi Junior College Speech Festival and State Debate Championship under debate coach Pat D Smith . He was a sophomore at Jackson University .
 The 27-year-old debate club will attend its first tournament in early November . It will be the first debate club to hold a tournament in November .
 "I think the American system is the best devised by any inspired group of men," says President Obama . "It's a good system," says Obama .
 It seems some of our present national leaders are, or have been, misinformed as to the abilities, qualities, and goals of our system . It seems they are misinformed about the abilities and qualities of our society .
 We are not “over the hill” despite the actions of some four leaders on Capitol Hill, says Sen. Rand Paul . We are still not ‘over-the-hill’, he says, despite the efforts of four leaders .
 We have not yet begun to fight, and with our present leadership, we may never be given the chance to fight for what we believe . We are not ready to start fighting for what they believe, but we have not begun to .
 This is not to condone war, but we are in one, the cold war, and that is just as deadly in the long run as any war that has plagued peaceful people, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 It is the fault of our leaders and not of our system that we are in trouble, says CNN.com's John Sutter . It's the fault not only but our leaders, says Sutter. It's not our system, it's our leaders' fault, he says .
 The communists are proving that wrong ideals strongly held, will prevail over the right ideals weakly held . Today, all over the world, they are proving they will prevail against the wrong ideals .
 We must hold our ideals strongly in Cuba, in Laos and South VietNam and in Berlin . If it becomes necessary, we will die for them. We must also die for our ideals in Cuba and South Vietnam, and if necessary, they will .
 Because a civilization that does not have men willing to die for it is a dead civilization, it will be a dead society, says Obama . Obama: "A civilization that doesn’t have men ready to die is dead civilization"
 To do this will not be easy, nor should it be; nothing worth fighting for is . Nothing worth fighting is is, says President Obama, Obama's predecessor .
 To stand firm in the face of prevailing adversity will take a national resolve of single-minded purposefulness on the part of the U.S. people .
 It seems that one of our greatest handicaps in the cold war is the lack of effective leadership . The U.S. has not been able to win the Cold War in the past, writes David Frum .
 We need leadership that doesn’t follow the crowd; we need leadership, not followship, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We need leadership not following the crowd," says Sutter. "Leadership that doesn't follow the crowds"
 Today’s psychiatrists would probably say that the books were a means of releasing tension . The books were likely to be released by psychiatrists .
 The new adaptation isn’t supposed to be colored, however, just looked at and enjoyed . The adaptation isn't supposed to just be colored .
 The new spree of books include ones for secretaries, housewives, executives and just about everyone . The new books are available for everyone .
 In the one for executives, a drawing representing an executive has this caption, ""This is my suit. In the other one, the caption says, "This is a suit. It's my suit."
 The Hurly Companyi of Camden, Arkansas, publisher of THE EAGLE, the school annual, also publishes some of the covers for the adult coloring books .
 Sales of the books, which range in price from $1 to $2.98, are nearing the million mark after only eight months of publication .
 Adults coloring books have been popular in the U.S. for more than a decade . The adult coloring books are expected to be released in the fall .
 Hinds Industrial, Technical Training j Helps Mississippi’s Vocational Needs . Cries for scientists, mathematicians, and members of the professions are heard throughout America daily .
 Little thought is given to where the nation’s builders, tradesmen, and technicians of the future will be coming from .
 Ninety-six day students, 24 night students, 42 high school shop students from surrounding county schools, and 75 technical students fill classes through the week .
 A new vocational building is being planned to house shops, classrooms, and machines operated by the department . The building will be used to store shops and classrooms for students .
 Machines include drill presses, lathes, precision grinders,. and welders . Machines are used to make precision work, drill presses and lathes .
 Finished products are turned out from blueprints and drawings, with the work termed by leading industrialists as a significant factor in the industrial growth .
 Hinds has pioneered in the South the training of skilled, efficient workers for industry, as well as other specialized fields in which craftsmen are sorely needed .
 Instructors cooperate with industries to prepare trainees for future jobs . Instructors in the program cooperate closely with industries . The program is based in New York City .
 The machinist technician program is an invaluable course . To the stream of new large industries coming into the state, the program is invaluable course.
 Following a future technician’s career at Hinds reveals a freshman year crammed with English, maths and sciences, mechanical drawing, political science, physical education, and — finally — his specialization .
 As a sophomore, he carries loads including English, literature, history, speech, physics, art psychology, and accounting . As a student, he also carries loads of homework, including art psychology and accounting.
 Many of the courses broaden the technician’s background and equip him to deal successfully with the people he’ll meet on the job .
 With this program the student earns a junior college diploma and a technical certificate at the same time . The program is designed to teach students how to use the skills necessary for a technical degree .
 A balance is struck between studying the construction and operation of the lathe and lab work in lathe tool grinding .
 Episcopalian, Catholic Elections Held At Meetings Monday Night . Two religious organizations at Hinds elected officers in regular meetings .
 Canterbury, Episcopal group, elected A1 Dahduh, president; Robert Everett, vice-president; Carolyn Everett, secretary-treasurer; and Ann Strickland, reporter . Canterbury Episcopal group also elected a secretary of treasurer and secretary of secretary-secretary .
 Newman club, Catholic group, elected Sheila Troyer, president; Steve Cannon, vice president; Elaine Bossemeyer, treasurer; Sandra Schilhab, secretary, secretary; Carol Fortier and Reynolds Ridgley, reporters.
 Application is being filed by the Newman club for membership in the nation^ Newman Club Federation . Application is currently being filed to join the federation .
 President Troyer of Newman announced that next meeting will be held October 15 . Report will be given on Cardinal Newman by Danny Faulkas .
 The new constitution drawn up by the club officers will be brought up for ratification . Also at the meeting, the new constitution will be discussed .
 Canterbury club will hold a special membership meeting Thursday, November 4, at 3:00 in Room 11 administration building . Canterbury club members will meet on November 4 at 3 p.m.
 President Dahduh urged all Episcopalians, day or dormitory, interested in joining the club to attend that meeting . The meeting will include technical training and academic training .
 A common concept contradicted by the vocational department is that technical trainees are in the field because little else is available to them . Technical trainees in technical training are trained because they have little else to choose from .
 80 per cent of the enrollees are high school graduates and four are junior college graduates . The school maintains standards accepted by the rest of the campus .
 Statistics reveal demands so great the school cannot produce the workmen to fill them . An accurate index of the worth of the department is quickly obvious from the statistics .
 Prince also issued a statement that copies of the 1961-62 award winning Eagle yearbook are available for three dollars each . Prince also said the yearbook is available for $3 each .
 Students wishing to purchase either of these selections may contact Belva Watkins, editor of the Eagle, Joe White, or Mr Prince in the Public Relations Office .
 Gamma Lambda chapter of Phi Theta Kappa will hold formal initiation for new members Tuesday, October 9, at 6:45m., in the college auditorium at 6.45 p.m. The fraternity will also hold initiation initiation for members of the Gamma Kappa Kappa .
 Henri Lou Coleman, president; Stewart Gibbes, vice-president; Carolyn McKey, secretary; Marianne Neal, treasurer; Suzanne Slay, historian; and Rosalind Healy, parliamentarian. They are also president, secretary, treasurer, secretary and treasurer .
 Other current members of the board include Juanita Hjilderbrand, Judy Herring, and Larry Lauderdale . Larry Lauderdale is also on the board .
 Bowen and the sophomore girls in Main Dormitory will serve as hostesses at the brief informal reception following the initiation . Bowen will be the first female to attend the reception .
 Lynn Powers, sophomore from Utica, was accidentaHy left off the list of new members in last week’s Hindsonian . Powers is a sophomore at the University of Utica . Powers, a junior at Utica High School, is a member of the U.S
 Hinds vocational students learn the construction and operation of the drill press . Students learn basic theory and techniques of machinist’s trade .
 Sessions will be held in Meridian’s First Baptist Church, it has been announced . Sessions will take place in Meridian's First Baptist .
 Ralph B Winders, Director of the Department of Student Work of the Mississippi Convention Board, sponsor. Ralph B. Winders is director of the . Department of . Student Work . The Mississippi Convention . Board was sponsor of the event .
 Frew urges every Baptist student at Hinds to attend the Convention . Frew, director, urges every student to attend .
 Those wishing to go should contact Boyd McPhail or Miss Frew for further details . The event will take place at the end of the year .
 Presiding over most sessions will be Tim Townsend, student at Mississippi jCollege . Townsend is president of Mississippi Baptist Student Convention .
 The Convention will get underway Friday evening with music under direction of Dr. Dr. John Defterios . The convention will be held in New Jersey .
 Ralph Herring, Director of the Seminary Extension Department of Jackson, Jackson, Mississippi, speaks at the end of the year . Ralph Herrings is Director of The Seminary . Herring: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future"
 Other features will include special music, group prayer meetings, social activities and a business session .
 The three act comedy, dramatized by Christopher Sergei from the story by Raphael David Blau, will be presented in the school auditorium November 1 at 8:00 m.m.
 Students gaining parts in the play have been rehearsing three nights a week . Students gaining roles in the production have been preparing for three weeks a week for students .
 Thursday is an ‘off’ night since Mr Fred Brooks, director of the play, teaches a speech course on that night . The play is set to take place on Thursday night .
 Lines for the first act have been memorized and the long hours of rehearsing and re-rehearsing are now underway . Lines are now being memorized for the show's first act .
 HINDSONIAN October 3, 1962 EAGLE LOOSE . End Jerry Clark, right, breaks loose and picks up yardage for the Hinds Eagles .
 Southwest Fullback Bob Jackson, left, and Quarterback Davis McLain try to catch the fleet-footed Clark . Clark was one of Southwest's top tacklers for the season .
 Co-Lin Wolves lead Mississippi Junior College Grid Conference for first time since season started . Eagles travel to Moorhead Saturday to face Moorhead . Eagles Travel To Moorhead on Saturday .
 Hinds’ arch-rival, Copiah-Lincoln gained the top spot after holding an open date last week . Copiah’s arch-rivals Copiah and Hinds both held open dates last week, but Hinds now holds top spot .
 PR Wildcats are now in a second place tie with their vanquished foes . This win puts the PR Wildcats in a tie for second place with their foes .
 East Mississippi suffered from its open date and dropped from a second place tie position to third spot . East Mississippi dropped from second place to third place in the standings .
 Delta and Holmes tangled last week in a free-scoring game that showed little defensive activity for either team . Delta's win over Holmes was the first time the two teams had played each other this season .
 Delta scores 40 points and Bulldogs 28 points in 60 minutes . Delta and the Bulldogs score 28 points . Delta score 40 points .
 Bobcats one spot below Hinds and Northwest in non-conference standings . The game was not counted on the standings because it was non-contested . The Bobcats beat Hinds by one point .
 East Central is in the cellar with three losses and no wins this week . East Central has three wins and three losses in all three games .
 Itawamba's Indian’s will be favored to lose against top-rated CoLin . Perk is expected to walk over East Central .
 East Mississippi and Southwest tangle on the Summit field and Jones travels to Holmes . Jones goes to Holmes, Mississippi, for the first time in four years .
 Pearl River travels to Senatobia for a fight with the Northwest Rangers . Pearl River is the only Thursday game scheduled for Pearl River . The Northwest Rangers are also on the move .
 If the pass defense of the Delta squad slips as it did last week, the potent passing combinations of the Hinds crew could play havoc . According to the Eagle coaching staff, if the passing defense slips, it could be a big problem .
 The Trojans, on the other hand, have swift Quarterback, John Garrison, who is equally at home on the cinders or grid turf . Vote Hemphill for Vice President .
 Last week the fast signal caller put four of his teams touchdowns on the board . Last week he put four touchdowns in his team's winless streak .
 Hinds have ace Quarterback Mike Vincent to depend on for their running and passing attacks . Hinds will be relying heavily on Mike Vincent for their success this season .
 Jimmy and Jerry Clark, along with Richard Stacy, have been the aerial targets this season . In earlier games this season, Jimmy Clark, Jerry Clark and Richard Stacy have been aerial targets .
 Halfbacks Ken Johnson, Donnie Dick and Dan Magee moved into the pass receiving game last week . Halfback Ken Johnson took pay-off pitches last week taking pay-offs pitches .
 Fullback Jimmy Dukes and John Stanley will alternate for the rest of the game . Fullback John Stanley and FullbackJimmy Dukes will alternate .
 After the touchdowns are made the Deltans have something the Eagles don't have is a kicker . The Eagles have a kicker instead of a punter .
 End Tommy Shumaker is the; boy with the golden toe to the Trojans . Hinds hasn’t scored a point after this season . End Tommy Shumaker has the . golden toe .
 Hinds Eagle Band and Hi-Steppers will make the trip to Moorhead where they will entertain the crowd in a pre-game show . Hinds Eagles will be playing in the game .
 Southwest defense stops a Southwest drive short in the game at Summit last Thursday . Southwest guard Durwood Magee, left, and Ken Johnson, right, piled in to stop the drive .
 The favored Bears held the Eagles in check during the first half, but couldn't control the ball in the second half . The Eagles held the Bears in check in the first and second half of the game .
 Eagles first win of the season and third loss of the year for the Bears . Bears lost to Eagles for the third time in a year . Eagles beat Bears 24-24 on Sunday night .
 Raymond held the Southwesterners to just 67 yards on the ground . Hinds’ practice on defense during the past week paid off as the Raymond crew held the Southeasterners to 67 yards . The Raymond crew also stopped the Southerners from running the ball around the clock .
 Summit picked up only 35 yards on the flats during the first half of the game . Summit had an average of 35 yards in the first-half .
 The Eagles came out after the half on the bottom of the score 6-0 . Eagles came from behind to win the game 6-1 at halftime .
 Halfback Ken Johnson took a 33-yard pass to the one foot line where Quarterback Mike Vincent walked over for the touchdown . Halfback Johnson took the pass from Ken Johnson to Mike Vincent for a touchdown . Quarterback Vincent was the quarterback of the game .
 Jimmy Clark intercepted a pass on the 50-yard line and carried to the Bear 25 . I End Jimmy Clark intercepts a pass and carries to the bear 25 . Clark intercepted the pass and carried it back to the Bears 25 .
 Halfback Dan Magee picked up a I pass from Quarterback Vincent and stepped across for the score . Six playis later Halfback Magee had the score back on the field for the touchdown .
 The Bears, desperate in the final minutes, hurled passes o*n nearly every play in an attempt to pull out of their slump . The Bears threw passes o'n almost every play during the game .
 Bob Jackson playing in the slot position grabbed a short-jump-pass on the fouryard line and powered his way across the goal line . Bob Jackson was playing in a slot position for the Eagles .
 The Bears attempted one kick and a pass while Hinds had a kick go wild and two aerial plays fail . Hinds kicked a wild kick and failed a pass for the Bears . The Bears failed to score a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Dean of women, Miss Fay Marshall, announced that women students may attend the men’s intramural events . The dean of women announced that students can attend the events .
 The most important aspect of college life is finding your way around campus and hate your roommate . It is time to learn how to dress for the most important part of college .
 She was a real Englishwoman who lived in Elizabethan times and indeed, England is forever in her debt . She was an Elizabethan woman who lived during her time .
 Smash the Spanish , Sink their boats, Make 'em vanish, Like a horse makes oats, like a horse make oats . Smashing the Spanish .
 As a reward for these inspirational verses Queen Elizabeth dubbed her a Dame, made her Poet Laureate, and gave her the Western Hemisphere except Duluth . Queen Elizabeth also made her the Poet laureate, giving her the title of Dame .
 Dame Fashion's service to the Queen and country was not the extent of her service . But this was the true extent of Dame Fashion’s service to her country and country .
 In 1589 she invented the laying hen, and she was awarded a lifetime pass to Chavez Ravine .
 In 1591, she was arrested for overtime jousting and imprisoned for 30 years in a butt of malmsey . She was imprisoned in 1591 for overtime .
 Certain to be the rage again this year is the cardigan . The cardigan was named after Lord Cardigan, who commanded the English fleet against the Spanish .
 The sweater is only one product of this remarkable Briton’s imagination .
 The cardigan, I say, will be back, which is, I believe, cause for rejoicing . It is, for example, that the cardigan will return to the sport .
 Because the cardigan has nice big pockets in which to carry your Marlboro Cigarettes— and that, good friends, is ample reason for celebration as all of you will agree .
 Beemon, biology instructor at Hinds, vigorously engages in the art of living . Beemon is a prime example of how to get adventure and fun out of life .
 Off and on from 1949-1960, he was the lone sponsor of the Eagle yearbook as well as the sophomore /-j-fc /-r* 1 DOOK as well .
 Three faculty members will sing in the Raymond PTA Ranger Roundup tomorrow afternoon . Raymond is still holding the title of 'Ranger'
 Faculty members participating are A1 Rowan, Band Director; Writer Gibbs, Vocational Coordinator; Jim Morris, Band director; and Eurlton Gibbs, brother of the Vocational coordinator .
 The Roundup, an annual part of the Hinds County Livestock Show, is taking place in the Edwardslivestock Arena . The Roundup is a popular annual event in the area .
 Performances of the Roundup will include horse shows, calf chasing contests, rooster races, and a greased pig chasing contest . Performances will include square dancing, square dancing and can-can girls .
 Prizes for the contests are all trophies except the greased pig chasing contests . The winner of the contests will receive the grease pig .
 Tickets for the entire show are being sold to adults for seventy cents and to students for thirty cents . Tickets for adults and students for students will cost seventy cents .
 The PTA will also sponsor a Bar-B-Q pork, beef, chicken and kid's supper . The event will be held in honor of the PTA's daughter, who is a junior at home .
 One dollar will be charged for adult plates and fifty cents for student plates . Student plates will also be charged 50 cents .
 Many students think their ears have gone bad when they hear that Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Smith are having an ear problem . Many students thought their ears had gone bad .
 They both remain “young at heart” and their swift witticisms and pleasant humor make them favorites of all the students .
 He implies that neither was a tragedy—but quite the opposite so . He implies, though, that neither is a tragedy . He says neither was, but a tragedy.
 He has lived hapily ever after and the old building was replaced with three news ones . The old building has been replaced by three new ones .
 He rushed out to take a first-hand photograph of the incident for the paper and annual-only-only . But his camera, along with the rest of his equipment, had gone up in the smoke and flames .
 Mr Beemon, in stating a very sensible philosophy on life, says, “My wife once heard a physical therapist sayi that people who work in yards don’t go crazy.” His wife once said that people working in yards 'don't go crazy'
 Yellowstone National Park in Arizona is a popular tourist destination in the U.S. National Park . It's the first national park in the world .
 Students given glimpses of his interesting trips in his classes . As he talks a animal and plant life in classes, students learn about his trips .
 Now that the college curriculum and student body have grown, he only instructs courses in biology . Now that he only teaches biology, he says, he has only taught biology .
 When asked why he chose this field, Mr Beemon said, “I think it’s a dynamic subject.” When asked about his choice of subjects, he said: ‘I think I’m not scared of the subject. I think that’
 Circle K will meet Thursday night, October 4, at 4:45 in the private dining hall of the cafeteria . Circle K Will feature a speech at the end of the night .
 At this meeting all new members will be introduced to the club, and will be presented their Circle K pins and their copy of the constitution and by-laws of the club .
 Mr Henry Cadjen, the club’s advisor from the Jackson Kiwanis club, will be the featured speaker . Mr Cadjen will be a featured speaker for the Jackson club .
 Boyd McPhail urged all old and new members to attend this meeting . President Boyd Mcphail urged everyone to attend the meeting .
 Modern Language Club will hold its initial meeting tomorrow evening at 6:30m. in the Home Economics Building . Modern language club will meet in the home Economics Building tomorrow evening .
 Bill White, vice president of the group, will conduct the program on France . The program will include slides and commentary .
 Modern Language Club is open to all students taking a foreign language, and to those interested in learning more about other peoples . Club is also open to students taking foreign language classes .
 During the years as sponsor for the Eagle, he was the only photographer and darkroom expert . He was also a sponsor of the Eagle .
 Sandra Thrash, 18, of Byram, is majoring in secretarial science and minoring men . Added to campus features this year is 18-year-old Sandra Thrashing, who’s minoring in men .
 Hinds students may participate in a “college round-up,” with a 19 inch Motorola television console set as grand prize .
 The contest is open to any individual, but groups are likely to compile more points and win more easily . Groups are more likely to win points than individuals .
 The contest is based on a system of points, whereby each empty package of Marboro, Parliament, or Alpine cigarettes will have a value of 5 points . Each empty package will have 5 points, with the value of five points per pack .
 All packages will be turned in on November 8 in the Eagle's Nest between 1:00 and 3:00 p.m. All packages are expected to be turned out in November .
 No other order of arrangement will be accepted . Quick results from the count will be aided byi this, and no other order is accepted . The count will only be shown at the end of the count .
 Any club or group which wins may place the television set wherever they wish . The TV set may be placed wherever it is placed by the winner .
 WHO Prize will be awarded to any Group, FraterWINS* n ^ y ’ ’ Sorority or Individual who qualifies and has the highest number of points .
 Each empty package submitted on Marlboro, Parliament or Alpine will have a value of 5 points . Empty packages submitted will be worth up to five points .
 Each empty package submitted on Philip Morris Regular or Commander will have a value of 10 points . The empty package will be added to the list .
 Closing date, time and location will be announced in your campus newspaper . Closing date and location of the closing date will not be announced .
 Contest closes November 8 at Eagles* Nest between 1:00 and 3:00 p.m. All packages will be turned in at that time .
 Kinney Brother's World’s Championship Rodeo held nightly at the coliseum . Marlboro Smells And Sights And Sounds Summarize State Fair’
 Robert Horton, alias Flint McCullough of television’s Wagon Train series, even sings as one of the stars of this extra-vaganza . Robert Horton even sings .
 Leaving the rodeo possibly feeling saddle sore, many people head directly for exhibitions .
 Mississippians display for six days products that often take months in preparing . The products are displayed in aluminum roofed barns in Mississippia .
 Quilts, spreads, rugs, coats, dresses, knits, and pillows of varied colors, shapes and designs are viewed by thousands each year . Thousands of quilts and spreads are viewed each year by thousands of people .
 Prizes are given to the best, and to the others are given the thrill of exhibiting their products for their fellow Mississippians . The winners are given a chance to show off their products to the public .
 Agricultural displays by the thousands consisting of shining jars of food perfection, make the average housewife’s cooking seem second rate . Agricultural displays are made up of shiny jars of perfect food .
 City dwellers especially enjoy visiting livestock barns, where calves are as meticulously groomed as the Vogue's high fashion models . The animals are kept clean and well-groomed in the barn .
 Closing the barn door and taking a last walk down the midway, a candied apple in hand . The sights, sounds, and smells are left behind for others who tread behind us to see, hear and smell .
 Though the smells are memorable there are also the visual remembrances . The smell of the food is still a part of the memory of the holiday .
 The middle-aged woman carrying a teddy bear; a child looking for a lost coin in the sawdust; the lines at the concession stands; the lights revolving against the ebony sky . The people—the people—are the fair .
 1962 edition of this "road production" has even more smells, sights and sounds than ever before . The 1962 edition runs October 8-13 .
 The midway is jammed with 50 rides of every description . The Round-up, the Calypso, the Paratrooper and the Trabant were invented in Germany . The rides are gay and thrilling .
 The immense double ferris wheel is the center of the Mississippi State Fair . It is the largest of the state fair's ferris wheels in existence .
 The Space Wheel, a new ride, has been added to the Royal American Shows' midway . The new ride is a new addition to the midway attraction .
 The huge, four wheel sky climber rises to a height of 90 feet above the fair's crowd level . The giant four wheelers can be seen at the fair .
 Between 50 and 75 classroom teachers met at Hinds Saturday for their annual district fall conference . ME A Classroom Teacher In Fall Convention was held in Hinds County .
 Mississippi Education Association Districts VI and VII from Natchez through Yazoo County gathered . Women gathered as prescribed by the MEA to disseminate information .
 Sparkman represented Hinds at the opening session . Sparkman welcomed the women to the campus and welcomed the campus .
 Newton, Tylertown schools; and Hugh M McCall, manager of Sears Roebuck in Natchez . Newton, Newton, McCall and McCall are educators . McCall is a former teacher of the day .
 The conference was divided into three sections; two Monday and one Tuesday morning . The conference is scheduled to take place on Monday and Tuesday morning.
 The main address was ''The changing design of college buildings” by Gordon P Nimnicht of Education Laboratories . Monday the main address of the meeting was .
 Monday afternoon he spoke on ‘Planning new facilities’ to the presidents and business managers . He spoke to deans and registrars and deans . Monday afternoon, he also spoke to presidents, business managers and business leaders .
 Tuesday morning discussion was devoted to the transfer of credits from junior to senior colleges . Tuesday morning talk focused on the transfer between junior and senior college .
 The purpose of the conferences was to co-ordinate the work of the junior and senior colleges of Mississippi . Robert M Mayo, Hinds Administrative Assistant, said that the conferences were intended to help co-ordinate the work .
 One of the primary concerns was to keep informed about the transfer of credits between the two college levels . He went on to say one of the main concerns between the groups was to be informed about transferring credits .
 He noted that as a result of close co-ordination through conferences such as this, there has been little trouble in transferring work .
 Presiding at the meeting was Ralph Noonkester, vice-president, Mississippi Association of Colleges . The meeting was held at the University of Mississippi .
 SOPHOMORE officers were elected last week . George Tannous is president, Ralph Hemphill is vice president, Dottie Breakfield is secretary . Jimmy Chandler, Jimmy Chandler is treasurer .
 Slides, films, and other materials would be received from that organization at cost . Slides and films would be sent to that organization .
 The objective of the group would be to instruct its members in the nature of communism and its designs upon the freedom of the Western World . It would be instructing its members about communism .
 Banner-filled halls of the past two weeks are gradually returning to normal following the election of sophomore class officers . Bishop Beat Beat Beat By Tannous In Secondary .
 Ralph Hemphill, Jackson, elected vice president . Dottie Breakfield, Yazoo City, selected secretary . Jimmy Chandler, Vicksburg, chosen treasurer . Ralph Hemhphill elected vice-president . Dotta Breakfield selected secretary; Jimmy Chandler chosen treasurer.
 Hilda Bullock and Joy Ferguson tied at 67, allowing Chandler an open lead of 123 . Chandler leads by 123 points . Bullock, Ferguson and Bullock tied for 67 .
 Nominations for positions were made Monday, September 24, during the initial class meeting of the current session . The school will hold a class meeting on September 24 .
 A week of campaigning ensued before final speeches were made on Wednesday, October 3, during the general assembly . Final speeches will be made on October 3 at the General Assembly .
 Miss Joan Melton was selected class sponsor during the nomination period . The class sponsor was selected by the class sponsor of Miss Melton . Miss Joan was selected as class sponsor .
 Voting is becoming the most important right held by the American people today . Voting is now the most significant right in the U.S.
 The right to vote, won for us by the forefathers of our country, should be cherished as a golden freedom of Americanism . The right vote should be a cherished as an Americanism, the author says .
 In the recent election at Hinds, it was evident that this great privilege was not used by everyone . Yet, it is evident that the great privilege of being a member of the Hinds party was used by many .
 If we aren't good citizens now, we can’t expect to be when we get out of college . If we're not good citizens, we won't be as good citizens when we're out of school, she says .
 Diane Cilento steals a scene from Snsan Hayward in I Thank A Poor . With star role Immmhi, Diane plays a bleached blonde .
 Green-eyed starlet steals the show with her green-eyed beauty .
 The character Miss Cilento portrays, the vivacious young wife, obsessed with the past and half-loving, half-hating her husband and the present, is a ""natural"" for scene stealing .
 His character, the long suffering tyrant of a husband, is appealing and thought provoking . His character as a husband is appealing, thought provoking and appealing .
 Anything else about Mr Finch’s performance would have me listing superlatives by the dozens . Mr Finch's performance was one of the best of the show's many performances .
 Her lines are said with blank expressions and no warmth penetrates the screen . Her lines were said without blank expressions, no warmth enters the film .
 It is so unlike Miss Hayward to leave an audience cold and yet she does in this picture . It was so unlike her to leave the audience cold, she did in this photo .
 Diane Cilento simply takes advantage of this and plays her part to the hilt . Don't make the mistake of calling the Presidents Council a President’s Council .
 The word is punctuated correctly without an apostrophe and should always be spelled that way . The word should be punctuated with a punctuated punctuation .
 A defeatist attitude is sometimes evident when a student mentions the Presidents Council . The Presidents Council is sometimes seen as a defeatist approach to students .
 Hinds students seem to think that this council belongs specifically to the president of our college and is just a way to rigidly direct campus activity . "Just another way to get things done for the administration," Hinds says .
 President McLendon visits council meetings when' invited, to add his constructive ideas, or when he wishes to make an important announcement . A surprising fact to many com,ng the real fema,e star is that he visits the council meetings .
 Faculty sponsor of the group is actually Mr Robert Mayo, administrative assistant at the university . Faculty sponsor is Mr Mayo, an administrative assistant .
 President of the sophomore class is George Tannous . Directing the activities of the group is the president of the junior class .
 The Presidents Council is made up of presidents from every organization on campus . It is not only the presidents of all organizations on campus, but it is the presidents from all .
 Committee plans are being drawn up now by President Tannous, in an effort to formulate an early organization of activities . Committee members are working on plans for the first time .
 Mr Mayo has sponsored the Presidents Council for two years . Mr Mayo expresses his wishes on making this year’s council the best ever .
 The group should strive to top the ’61 council, which was directed last year by President David Yewell of Owensboro, Kentucky . Announcements will be made tomorrow .
 "We must go Fo’ward,” to coin a phrase. W 4 l I/V\ pf£ AlPIWS UP UPAS A '^5 \\l£Zl iJ CURRENT EVENTS _ Coins Have Two Sides .
 As far as the plot is concerned nedy’s face. We must be willing to accept it at face value .
 I Thank A Fool is based on Jane Eyre, but has much, much more than the Bronte novel . I Thank a Fool is set to be released on Friday at 8.30pm .
 I Tha-nk A Fool is a movie that keeps its audience guessing . If you enjoy seeing a starlet turn into a star before you, then don’t miss it .
 If you’re hoping to see the real Susan Hayward, however, stay up and watch the late movie . If you're hoping for the real Hayward, you'll probably be disappointed .
 The other side, the one we do not see, contains the cost of the New Frontier . "The other side," the other side of the border, is the one that we see .
 Free medical care is free in the U.S. Not only in dollars but in incentive, free enterprise, freedom of religion, and free medical care . It's also free in other ways .
 Various Newspapers Show Progress Of Mississippi’s Growing Colleges . Many newspapers show progress of Mississippi colleges .
 Kennedy said this would cause inflation, because steel unions had just signed a socalled non-inflationary contract with the steel companies . Kennedy said that this would lead to inflation .
 The U.S. steel workers are the highest paid factory workers in the world, as a result of this and other past contracts . The U S. steel . steel workers . are the . highest paid . factory workers .
 The economic truth of the matter is that rising prices cause inflation like wet pavement causes rain . The cost of living in the U.S. can be seen as a reason for rising prices to rise .
 Kennedy administration says it wants to help the elderly people in America . Kennedy administration: We want to help America's elderly people . The Kennedy administration has been criticized for its policies .
 Kennedy Administration turns around and has a 12 billion dollar deficit, causing further inflation . Kennedy Administration turned around and had 12 billion dollars deficit . They say medicare or foot-in-the-door socialized medicine is the only way to do it .
 Mirian May, Belva Watkins, Vaughn Varnado, Scotty . Troyer, Dannie Evans, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Claire Parker. Claire Parker .
 From these papers we have gathered interesting tidbits for Hindsonian readers . Hindsonian.com has published a series of articles from the Hindsonian Institute .
 The department of Student Affairs has accepted the invitation to appear on the nationwide quiz show . According to the Reflector, the university's department of student affairs will be appearing .
 Mildren Meacham, director of public relations at Northwest Mississippi Junior College, will conduct a daily newscast from the school over Radio Station WSAO in Senatobia .
 Seven buildings are scheduled to be built during the next few years, with a gymnasium at the top of the list . People will be able to see people in the gym during the build-up .
 Mississippi College freshmen allowed not to wear their Indian costumes for a day . Instead, they were forced to dress in suits and heels for classes .
 Co-Lin Watchman became Mississippi’s newest junior college newspaper with volume 1, number 1, on September 25 . Volume 1 is number 1 of the Co Lin Watchman's first volume .
 The Watchman, edited by Joanna Shaffer, will be published every other Tuesday .
 It's true that there is not any steel plant modernization, on a scale that is needed, now in America . It's also true that . There are not any . any steel . plant modernization . needed in America now, now .
 It is also true that inflation would have wiped out any benefits gained from it, it is true . But inflation would also have wiped away any benefits from it .
 It is also true that it is the other side of the coin that shows its value, it is true . It is true that there is no doubt that the value of the coins is worth much more .
 Unnaturalized Citizen Endorsed For Natural Leadership Ability . George Tannous elected president of the sophomore class and Presidents Council for 1962-63 school year .
 The election of George as student body president was another first for Hinds’ campus . George was elected as president of the Hinds College of Technology in 2012 .
 George is the first foreign-born, unnaturalized citizen who has obtained the highest student office . George is also the first person in the country to obtain a student job .
 George asked the advice of T T Beemon when he was nominated for class presidency . George asked for advice from Beemon before being nominated for presidency .
 He was uncertain of any school rules pertaining to unnaturalized citizens holding school office, and was unsure of any rules .
 Upon his arrival in / Vicksburg, j where George’s uncle lives, the plans were being completed for his college attendance . 'I was excited because I was happy,' he said of his arrival .
 "I have been impressed most by the good people, especially the Southerners," he says . "They have hospitality almost like that of the people in my country," he adds .
 Chief William T Worthey, U C Navy Recruiter, Post Office Building, Jackson, Miss., will present a movie entitled “The Navy's Blue Angels" on Wednesday, October 17, at assembly . George's hobbies include collecting stamps which number 40,000 .
 Naval Cadets demonstrate skills they are taught to all Naval cadets during flight training .
 Chief Worthey will be on campus each Friday from 10:00 until noon in the Grill . He will discuss military obligations with any interested student . Chief Wortshey will also be available to students interested in the military .
 When George first came to Hinds he had no idea he was going to be class president . George was elected sophomore class president of the Hinds school .
 Elias Tannous of Beshmezzeen, Lebanon, announced the arrival of a baby boy on May 2, 1944, and proudly proclaimed him George Elias . George Elias was born in Lebanon in 1944 .
 He was president of the Athletic Education Youth Organization for 3 years . He was chairman of the social committee at the YMCA, president of his high school senior class, Boy Scout leader, and supervisor of the Sunday School at his church .
 Lebanon Consulate received recommendation from John Bell Williams that George come to the U.S. and attend school . George was 16 when the Lebanon consulate received a recommendation from Williams that he attend school in America .
 In 1961 the big decision was made and George was on his way to America . So in 1961 he decided to move to the U.S.
 "I am very thrilled and honored to be elected to the highest office a student can hold," she says . "I'm very honored to have been elected," she said .
 George’s plans for the future provide for a medical career, either as a surgeon or a psychiatrist, but he doesn’t know what college or university he will attend .
 Choose a style in black or red kid or black suede with soft heel counters . Choose the style from a pair of kid or red suede or a suede .
 Business ethics prevent us mentioning brand names, but you’ll recognize every one in our store . Business ethics prevents us mentioning brands names . You'll recognize all of the products in the store .
 Canterbury Club votes to raise flag in response to Editorial their beliefs on purgatory, with the Rev. Rev. Michael Lister . Canterbury Club voted to raise the flag in a response to the editorial .
 James Butler presents the church's doctrine on the subject and leading the discussion . James Butler leads the discussion on the topic .
 At the close of the meeting, the cent Hindsonian, the group readily Rev. The Rev. Rev. Hindsonian. The group met at the end of the session .
 Canterbury Club voted to raise and lower the campus American Flag each day . Butler asked everyone to ob* agreed to assume the responsibility of the responsibility .
 The question was raised in the regular meeting last Monday . Inspired by an editorial in a reity when the question was brought in .
 Episcopalian group discussed For fast Quality and Photo Finishing . For fast quality and photo Finishing, try our service either in Color or Black and White .
 Club will discus the subject of church architecture at 3 p.m. Thursday at three o’clock in room 11 in the Administration building .
 Hinds’ Eagles were simply outfind their way against the Trojans effort to come from behind .
 Eagles continued throwing in an 43 yards rushing in the first half and losing 10 in the second half . Eagles gained only 43 yards of rushing in first half . On the ground the Eagles were Taking the low end of a 35-6 final passes that led to scores, yet the even more
 Taking a cue from the pros, the Deltans had several blockers ahead and to the side of every ball carrier . The Deltan had several blocking blocks ahead of the players .
 In the third quarter pass interference was called against the Trojans on their own 10-yard line . In the second quarter, the USC offense was penalized for pass interference on their 10th quarter drive .
 Two plays later end Jimmy Clark took a pass in the end zone from Vincent for the score . The score was the first touchdown of the season for Vincent .
 The Delta crew moved the ball about the field with ease . Quarterback John Garrison and halfback Randy Hodges led the Delta crew .
 Halfback Joe Dean Shannon was the aerial standout of the day grabbing three touchdown passes . Halfback Shannon also grabbed three touchdowns for the team .
 Garrison led the ground scoring with 71 and 61 yard runs . Garrison led his way through a nest of Eagles wouldbe-tacklers to break in .
 Hodges, playing his first game this season, proved himself an outstanding broken field runner . Hodges was also an outstanding player in the first half .
 Taking pitch-outs from Garrison, he picked his way around the Hinds team members and gained on every play . He picked up pitch-out from Garrison and picked up every play, picking up pitch outs .
 Prior to season's start Hodges was involved in freak lightning accident and was out for the first four games of the season . Hodges has been out of action since the start of the new season .
 Eagle end Richard Stacy, number 84, and Trojan quarterback John Garrison, number 15, grapple for the ball in the late second quarter . The two teams meet in Pasadena, California, on Saturday night .
 Pearl River Wildcats Schedule League Leading Gopiah-Lincoln Wolves . Wolves undefeated in four starts . Pearl River unbeaten in four games in the league .
 Perkinston beat cellar dwelling East Central 27-6 and Holmes dropped Jones 2714 . Holmes dropped Holmes 2714.
 Shangri-La and Southside dorm teams took honors last week in intramural football contests . Shangri La dorms took the lead in the contests last week .
 Men's Recreational Association is the only men’s intramural sports organization on campus . They are sponsored by the Men’�s Recreational . Association, the only intramurals .
 This week East Central will travel to Holmes and Southwest will go to Jones . East Central is ranked No. 1 in the rankings .
 Homecoming Court Election Set Monday is Monday . Nominations start today by Petition of Hinds students . Election of Homecoming Queen and her court is held .
 Nominations began this morning, and the final selection will be made October 22 . The final decision will be announced on October 22, 2015 .
 A faculty committee appointed by President McLendon recently compiled and released the rules governing the selection of the queen and her maids .
 Any student may initiate a petition which must be turned in to Miss Joan Melton, sophomore class sponsor, by 3:30 Friday, October 19 .
 The four leading candidates for queen will be queen and three sophomore maids . The queen and maids will be crowned at the end of the year .
 Three freshman maids will be | chosen by the same procedure as the queen . The queen will have to choose the maids by a procedure as a queen .
 A person may sign only one petition for freshman maid, making it possible for a person to sign 2 petitions . A person can sign two petitions, one for a sophomore and one for freshman . A petition for a freshman maid can be signed at least once .
 Election will be held in the administration building Monday, October 22 . Election will take place on October 22 at the school .
 Miss Melton and sophomore class officers George Tannous, Ralph Hemphill and Jimmy Chandler will be in charge of election . In charge of the election will be Miss Melanie Melton .
 Faculty committee consists of Kent Prince, public relations director, William Oakes, recreation director . Faculty committee is composed of Kent . Oakes is also the director of the recreation department .
 Volume 29 — NUMBER 6 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI MigMights of Minds . Guest speaker at the next Wesley Foundation meeting will be Kenneth Quinn, art instructor at Whiton Junior High in Jackson .
 His subject will be “Chalk Talk/’ a talk given in connection with a religious picture done in chalk . His talk will be a talk about the religious picture in chalk chalk .
 Hinds Junior College livestock judging team captured 14 trophies at State Fair in Jackson . Hinds won the award as the best overall judging team in the state .
 Scott won the W overall individual judging award, the best beef-cattle judging award and first place in the Angus judgJ| KJBH Bi ing. Scott won an Angus judging award .
 The team is, from the left, instructor Billy Banes, instructor; Charles Rogillio, John Blough Jimmy Scott, Roger Sturdivant, Bernard King, and James McCaskill .
 The building will be reserved for sophomores . Students will have three rounds of discussion and two speeches advocating a phase of the topic under discussion .
 Also under consideration will be the goals that such an economic union should have in mind if formed .
 The topics under discussion will point up a need for the free world taking definite steps to unity . The free world needs to take definite steps towards unity .
 The most exciting part of the conference will be the last portion dealing with advocacy speeches . Would currency differences be a severe handicap to achieving?
 Discussion rounds and advocacy speaking will be judged by competent members of college speech departments . The event will be held at college campuses across the U.S.
 Julia Todd, participating in the conference, will be Carol Fortier, Dawn McNeil, Jayne Landis, Belva Watkins and Jimmy Chandler . The conference will be held in New York .
 The team culminated its season by winning the South Mississippi Debate Championship . The team also won the Mississippi State Junior College Championship .
 Jame McCaskill won first place trophiej in sheep and hamster sheep . John Blough won first . place in hog, hamster hogs . Jame; McCaskills won first. place in sheep, hamsters and hamsters .
 Char lie Rogillio ranked superior in shor horns at the annual judgng event . Charlie Rogillia ranked superior at the event in a row .
 Teams participating were Hinds Itawamba, Northwest, Northeast, East Cen tral, East Mississippi, Northeast Perkinston and Holmes .
 Hinds team was led to victory by Billy Banes, Hinds agriculture instructor . Hinds won the game by the team of two .
 The bus will leave Raymond at 5:30m., returning to the campus at approximately 7.30m. the same day . The bus is scheduled to leave Raymond, Raymond, at about 7:30 a.m. to return to campus .
 Students must register for the trip in the president’s foyer . Fifty cents transportation fee will be charged .
 High School Day has been combined this year with Engineers Efcay, resulting in an elaborate program which will include tours of the various schools on campus . The program will also feature tours of various schools .
 A large number of high school bands will participate in the half-time ceremonies along with the famous Maroon Band of Mississippi State . Mississippi State will play host to the University of Mississippi in Mississippi .
 Not always can each task or duty be completed properly, not always can it be done properly . So fast, it's not always possible to complete each task properly .
 People rush around in a frenzy trying to get their particular job done as quickly as possible . People rush to get things done as fast as possible in order to get them done .
 Each person’s actions throughout the day determines in some way what will happen . Each person's actions during the day determine what happens .
 It is of great importance that each of us perform our duties with much preciseness . Therefore, it is important to each other to be on top of the world's top job .
 If Worker A takes all day to perform a task to perfection, while Worker B does the job in half a day to near perfection, Worker B should be valued more . Worker B is valued more than Worker A . If Worker B takes longer than one day to do the job to perfection
 This is a question that most all freshmen ask themselves early in the academic year, usually after the first test . This is the question most freshman students ask themselves about this question .
 The first semester is usually a time of adjustment to a new way of doing things . The first year of college is a time for students to adjust to life in a new school .
 "The first year in college is not a grade thirteen. One of the first facts that is . realized is that the first year is not . a grade 13. The first year of college is . the first . year .
 Another thing must be reckoned with is, ironically — —free time; that is, what to do with it . Another thing that must be . must be, ironically, be what is free time, and how to do it .
 This is the easiest course on campus present to take, and the hardest to drop . This is also the easiest to drop, and it's the easiest of all to take .
 Quality Wanted, Not Quantity --^ by RALPH HEMPHILL . It happened in England, and it has been an obvious failure .
 Government sponsored medical care is what the above three have in common . Government sponsored health care is a form of form of treatment for cancer .
 It all boils down to the point that free medical care is not free with the government running it . Free medical care would not be free if the government ran it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 If this analogy is followed Your high school days were filled with planned activities, further, it seems the best way lies Your college days will be filled only when you plan your acti\ n the plan with the most assets and vities .
 This is undoutedly one of the main purposes of college; ■ the core and truth of the matter is to teach you, or better still, let you teach yourself how to . It is indispensible that the concept make decisions. Now, if the objective is to get to This
 A good decider is a good provider. Life is full of trivialities. A good decision is a very good decision maker . A good doctor is not a bad doctor .
 One must learn what is imbited in life and go after it, says the author . One must go after what he wants to do in life .
 When a person inquires about a doctor he doesn’t ask about the doctor’s price list . Instead, he asks whether the doctor is good or not . The doctor's price list should be included .
 In all due respect to the number of patients a physician may have, the emphasis is still placed on the DWAYNE COX quality of the treatment received .
 We now have free medical care, freedom to choose under the free enterprise-medical care system . Albeit true, i*n some instances the -Jim Bonney doctor may make your bank acreditations look sick .
 Doctors gaining wealth off our health, doctors are gaining wealth from our health . The conclusion may be drawn that doctors gain wealth off their health, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 This may be so, but, on the other hand, we are gaining health off their wealth . This is not the case, it is the case that we are getting health off our wealth . We are not gaining health from their wealth, it's the health of the country, says
 It infuriates me to think that Jackson, the capital city, can be so absent minded as to have only two movie theatres . The city has so much vital interest in theatre and the arts, it's infuriated to think it's so bad .
 The population of the ever growing Jackson, Jackson, demands an increase in movie houses . The population is growing and the population of Jackson, Mississippi, is growing .
 Jackson needs at least one more theatre for variety reasons . Not necessarily seating capacity, although that is important also important also . Jackson needs a theatre with variety reasons, including capacity .
 Since movies are 75% of their entertainment, it poses a problem on dates . The problem is that movies are the most popular form of entertainment .
 The theatre owners are confident of gaining a crowd, even on the worst of shows .
 "My greatest revenge would be to see a brand spanking new theatre erected downtown," says author . "A theatre to compete with those who hold monopolies on Jacksonians' entertainment"
 I'm ashamed to say that Meridian, our somewhat smaller neighbor, has three movie houses . Meridian, Meridian, is also home to three movie theaters .
 Even the middle age group has been complaining about the lack of enough entertainment facilities — movie wise . Even middle age groups have complained about lack of entertainment facilities .
 As long as this lack remains movie producers will keep losing money and television gaining it . The lack of a lack of talent will continue to keep television gaining money .
 A few dashes of fresh movies and new movie theatres will brighten up the capital city . Perhaps a few new theatres are needed to brighten it up .
 Jackson might even become the cinema center of the state . The issue still is which do do which do you value most?
 Varnado, Scottye Troyer, Dannie Evans, Vicky j and Claire Parker will return to Hazzlerigg this week . Claire Parker, Claire Parker and her co-stars appear in the new series .
 Freshman Dayi is set for October 24 . Freshman day will be held in schools across the globe .
 Committee on rules, composed of Joe White, Richard Foster and Dottie Breakfield, released today 23 rules the underclassmen must observe . Committee on Rules: Underclassmen to observe 23 rules .
 Charles Dudley, A1 Dahduh and Shelia Troyer are assigning freshmen to their sophomore sponsors . Charles Dudley is the principal of the school's first class . The students are assigned to their freshman sponsors .
 Another committee is planning Kangaroo Court where freshmen will be punished who fail to meet sophomore approval during the day’s activities .
 Members of the court committee are George Tannous, Mike Oliver, Joe White, Ralph Hemphill, Hilda Bullock, Boyd McPhail, Patsy Musselman, Jimmyi Chandler and Ronnie Mollere . The court committee is also a committee of members of
 The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., at Hinds Junior College .
 OC-The world is not flat, but spherical . ‘y-It is but an infinitesimal speck in a vast, curved universe. z-This universe is dominated by a Spiritual Force, who has chosen Man to make His Truth manifest .
 The world is a roll-on applicator in a celestial bottle of spiritual deodorant . The world's world is rolled-on with roll-ons and deodorants .
 The building also served as a hospital for Confederate soldiers during the Civil War .
 Next week the Band a-nd HiSteppers will present a show based on a ""rebel"" theme at the Sons of the Confederates convention .
 The two groups will travel to Biloxi for a performance at the meeting of the Misissippi Poultry Association . Then on October 23, they will perform at a meeting in Biloxian .
 Bee gave a day by day account of the thrilling events of the pageant . Bee spoke on the Miss America Pageant, giving a day-by-day account .
 Bee's surprise guest was the current Miss Mississippi, Charlotte Ann Carroll . Miss Carroll is a Miss Mississippi .
 Statement filed in 1856 is one of the many fascinating fragments to be found in the history of Raymond’s stately court house . Raymond's stately home is now a stately museum .
 Raymond was founded some time before 1820, with the first court house being constructed about 1822 .
 It was a simple frame building erected where the water tower stands today . The water tower was erected where it now stands .
 Built in 1857-59 by a skilled slave labor crew, the second Raymond court house was designed by the famous Weldon brothers who were also the builders of the old Vicksburg Court House . The second Raymond Court House was also built by the brothers of the Weldon Brothers .
 Within five years, Raymond and Sparkman Releases List Of 1962-1963 Department Heads . Department heads for the 1962-63 school session have been elected . Dr. Sparkman releases list of department heads .
 Robbie Dukes, mathematics, Miss Lurline Stewart, music and music, Leslie Reeves, Joe Renroe, and social science, Tom Stricklin . Miss Calvinia Switzer, Miss Calvinie Switzer; social science and speech and drama, Fred Brooks .
 Canterbury Club held its regular meeting Thursday with Robert Everett presiding in the absence of President A1 Dahduh . The Canterbury Club is a member of the Canterbury Club .
 Ann Strickland will report the summer conference at Rose Hill at the next meeting . The court house became victims of circumstances during the Civil War .
 The little town lay in the path of Grant’s inland march to Vicksburg, an objective which was extremely important to the Union cause . The town itself was unimportant but was important to Grant's march .
 Following the Battle of Raymond on May 12, 1863, the court house was used as a hospital for confederate soldiers . Following the battle of Raymond, the hospital was used to treat confederates soldiers .
 The court house records werd saved, an unusual occurence during the burning-mad marches of the Union forces . Probably because the federals were stationed there, the court records were saved .
 Reconstruction period brought the first and only Hinds County Negro sheriff . The sheriff was the only black sheriff in the area .
 The Negroes were granted the right to vote and registered by marks . Few, if any, could write. Few could write, few could write .
 In 1870 the county was divided into two separate judicial districts with court houses in both Raymond and Jackson . In 1870, Raymond was the county's second judicial district . Raymond was located in Raymond .
 The division remains today in Hinds County, and in infrequent counties throughout the state .
 A town so full of pre-war relics and landmarks would naturally have tales and legends to I accompany . The town is full of stories and legends from the pre-WWII era .
 One townman recalled the halloween night a group of boys carried a mule up the stairs to the belfry . One townsman recalled how the boys carried the mule .
 The town, was awakened I the next morning by the braying I hinny, and the owner embarras-1 singly hastened to reclaim his mule . The stile onei must climb in order to enter the court yard .
 It seems the cows and horses used to wander through the town . The black rail fence and steps were erected to keep them out . It was erected to stop them wandering through town .
 Gillespie Annex was added in 1949, and houses the county library, old jail, and numerous county offices . Gillespie Annex is located in Gillespie Annex, which was added to the county in 1949 . Gillespie annex houses the old jail and old jail .
 Engrossing files dating back to 1822 of wills, property deeds, divorces, and so on are kept in the museum .
 The estate was worth little more than $1.25 an acre, the most important item in the will was the bequeathing of slaves . The slaves were the only slaves to be left in the estate .
 An obviously wealthy gentleman in 1835 left to his five children seven slaves, named Chang, Mary, Violet, Robin, Washington, Gilbert and Joseph . Washington, Washington and Joseph were among the slaves .
 Another man left to his daughter a buggy, and to his son a horse . The other man left a buggy and a horse for his daughter . A man also left a horse and buggy for his son .
 Within one sentence the cows, horses, slaves and bedroom furniture would be distributed . The cows and horses would have been distributed in one sentence .
 Mississippi was often spelled Mipipippi in the scroll used to record happenings . Mississippi was also spelled 'Mississippi' and 'Mipipippippi'
 The courts of the early 1840's were rather active, recording as many as thirty decisions in one day . The courts were active in the early years of the era .
 The court is still one more story, and the sleepy town of Raymond has an endless supply . Raymond has a long history of unsolved murders .
 Catholics Ratify New Constitution In Monday Session . New constitution for Newrqan Club ratified with minor changes at Monday's regular meeting .
 The historian would be required to keep a scrap book with newspaper clippings and pictures of club activities .
 Because of the time taken for the constitution discussion, the president Shelia Troyer called a special meeting'for next Monday . The constitution discussion has been adjourned .
 Official Women’s Club held their meeting on the Heidelberg Roof . Official Women's Club is composed of the wives of Mississippi's state officials .
 CAMPUS AGENTS DWAYNE COX Southside Stadium BENNY CROSBY Shangri-La RALPH HEMPHILL Eastside MILTON MOORE Central Eagle Emblem FLEECE LINES .
 At the stoke of 12 last night, she was washing dishes and he was grading papers . At the end of the night, they were washing dishes together .
 Many nights they grade papers together—for both are instructors at Hinds . Both are former teachers at the Hinds school .
 Mike and Polly Rabalais are best known for their quality of being individuals as well as teachers . Married since May 26 of this year, they have been married since 2010 . They are known for being individuals and being individuals .
 To see them in downtown Jackson one would hardly suspect that they teach at all . They teach at least one of the city's largest universities .
 She doesn’t have the short dumpy figure of our junior high gym instructors and he looks far from the stereotype of the reserved, proper, overly prim professor of ten years ago . She also has the short, dumpy figures of our Junior High gym instructors .
 During the ten year span from then till now, the two have enjoyed an active education as well as an active life .
 Rabalais was born in Aberdeen, Mississippi, and delights in telling of the summer she graduated from high school . She was born and raised in the state of Mississippi .
 Westminster Fellowship elected officers in its third meeting . Stewart Gibbes, president; Gerrye Sanford, vice-president; Katie Thompson, secretary; Elizabeth Seitz, treasurer; and Nancy Smith, Nona Goodwin, Ronnie Moore, Charles Nicholas and Eulalia Hallman council members .
 Meeting in the home of Reverend Norman Harper, the group was served ice cream by Mrs Harper .
 Westminster Fellowship meets each Monday night at 6:15 a.m. in room number one of the Music Building . It was because I had to sit at a desk eight hours a day, that I decided to become a gym instructor .
 He is known as the ArkLaMiss teacher, having lived for a time in Arkansas, Louisiana, and Mississippi .
 The Pelican state is his love, however, and he hails from Marksville, 30 miles from Alexandria . The state of the Pelican State is his state of choice, however .
 Charlie Tollar was the lead scorer of a rival high school team in Pineville, Arkansas . Tollar is now playing with the Houston Oilers . He graduated from Pineville High School .
 To say Mike and Polly were popular in school with students and teachers alike would be a gross understatement . "Mike and Polly" were popular with students, teachers alike .
 She was elected Miss Hinds Junior College, class officer, cheerleader, president of the Women's Recreational Association and was a member of Pi Tau Chi . She was also a class officer at her Junior College .
 Mr Rabalais was elected president of the student body at Southwestern University . He was also vice-president of Blue Key, honor society, and elected to Who's Who in American Colleges and Universities .
 Those students taking psychology courses under Mr Rabalais have no doubt noticed how well he presents his subject . Those students have also noticed that he presents the subject well .
 Rabalais, remembering how hard chairs can be, never wavered from her desire to teach physical education . She says she will continue to do it despite the challenges .
 Both Polly and Mike Rabalais worked in and out of college at Southwestern University . She and Mike worked in bowling alleys and representing the L&M tobacco Company on campus .
 If Mr Rabalais loses a paper, even though she doesn’t know where it is, or where to look for it, he will look after it . Mrs. Rabalaas says she doesn't know where the paper is or where it's located .
 Rabalais walks around the room, giving him moral support, until he finds it . Then she sits down, giving the man moral support . She sits down and gives him a hug .
 Mike and Polly attended summer school at Ole Miss this summer . They were kept busy attending summer school in Miss Miss . The Ole Miss summer school is just a few weeks old .
 Mr Mike Rabalais, h aili n g from southern Louisiana, enjoys a morning cup of strong black java . Rabalaes accompanied him to work on her masters degree in ""LUZIANNE"" LOVERS"
 Rabalais has acquired the knack of perfect coffee-making,and often sips the pre-dawn coffee along with him . Rabalaises has acquired a knack of making the perfect coffee .
 Boyd McPhail Represents Circle K at Business Session in Louisiana . Meet physical education. Meet physical ed. meet physical education education.
 At Hinds Polly and Mike Rabalais are in complete agreement as to why they enjoy teaching col-, lege students . The teachers at Hinds say they are passionate about teaching col-lege and col-ge .
 Boyd McPhail, Jackson sophomore and president of Hinds Circle K, attended a weekend business session of the Mississippi, Louisiana, and West Tennessee Districts of Circle K in Pineville, Louisiana .
 Registered students spent Friday night on the Louisiana College campus in Pineville, Louisiana . Saturday's sessions were held at the Kiwams Lodge in Alexandria .
 Representatives were guests of I the Alexandria Kiwanis Club for lunch Saturday . McPhail returned to the Hinds campus Saturday evening .
 Freshman Day Rules: Dormitory freshmen should dress up by 6:30 as they are told to do . Freshman day rules include dressing up by the time they leave the dormitory . Freshmen must dress up as required by the rules of freshman day .
 If a freshman has no sophomore, he or she must wear his clothes inside out . Sophomores will dress freshmen, but freshmen must dress freshmen in their own way .
 From 7*30-8:15 all freshmen must perform exercises in front of the cafeteria . Freshmen must also perform exercises at the cafeteria during the time .
 All freshmen must wear a name tag with name and home town enscribed on it . Students must also wear name tags with their home town and their name on them .
 When sophomores yell “CHARGE,” all freshmen must run at least five yards, then fall on the ground and imitate a Yankee dying . All freshmen are required to run five yards and fall five yards .
 Each freshman must have 13 minnie balls in a sock and count them upon request of sophomores . Sophomores may be able to count them on request of freshmen .
 Each freshman must know all the words to Dixie, the Alma Mater and “Go Mississippi” and be ready to SING at command .
 No freshman can cross the streets without the permission of a sophomore . No freshman will be allowed to cross the street without permission from a freshman .
 A freshman may not enter the cafeteria without permission of a sophomore . A freshman must also have permission from a second-grader to enter .
 Freshmen are required to attend Kangaroo Court and participate in all other freshman activities . Freshmen must also participate in other activities such as Kangaroo court .
 SOPHOMORES AND FRESHMEN MUST DRESS in SEMIFORMAL ATTIRE for supper after Freshman Day activities . SopHOMorors and FRESHAHMEN must dress in semi-semi-matriculum attire for supper .
 A freshmen may not be seated in the presence of a sophomore unless requested to sit . A freshmen cannot be seated with a second-grader unless requested by a sophomore .
 Engineering Group Meets To Discuss State Trip Friday . Engineering Club will hold organizational meeting Friday, 2A period, in room one of the Administration Building .
 The club is comprised of engineering, science, and math majors . The club holds discussions and lectures in an effort to stimulate interest in scientific and industrial development .
 Some names have meanings that otherwise could apply to just about anything but the person behind' it . But other than that, some names have meaning that can apply to anything else . The names of some of the world's most famous names are often misunderstood .
 Back in Medieval times, people took the names of their occupations and made them their own . The names of occupations and occupations were taken from medieval times to modern day .
 A number of Butlers, Bakers, Farmers, Cooks, and one Carpenter on the Hinds campus suggest that somebody has kinfolks from way back . The Hinds school is home to many Butlers and Bakers .
 Getting on the tastier side of the food, there is Berry, Bean, Lemmon, and Bacon . There is also a variety of varieties of fruit and vegetables .
 Only North and West showed up at Hinds . And although there must be an East and a South somewhere, only North and South showed up .
 Among the things of nature, there are Woods, Hedges, a Hill, a Lane, Clay, a Rose, and Brooks filled with Reeds . Among these things, there is a Wood filled with Woods .
 Even various fields are represented, such as Barefield, Brasfield, and Breakfield . Even various kinds of fields are also represented .
 Splashes of Whites and a dash of Green adds a little color to a dull group of Browns and Grays . Splashes also add a little bit of color to the dull set of Browns, Grayses and Browns .
 Dickens, Hawthorne, Fitzgerald, and Fitzgerald will live on, continually reminding us of those great authors . It is also nice to know that the names of Dickens and Hawthorne will still live on .
 The freshmen certainly aren't the bravest class in the Land with two Cowards among them . The freshmen are the class with the courage of their bravery .
 In the miscellaneous category, you might find a Ring, a Monk, a Cannon, Cotton, and even a few Bells . You might also have a Ring and a Monk .
 In summing things up and getting down to the Price of things, Hinds isn’t very well off financially with only three dollars .
 Clay Cooleyi became acquainted with the three terms, plus dozens more, while working at Yellowstone National Park this summer . He says he became familiar with the 3 terms while working in Yellowstone .
 He applied for the position through civil service after a friend suggested the job . He said: 'I'm a good guy. I'm going to be a great guy'
 Clay, along with fifty other boys, lived in barracks in the early part of the summer . Clay was stationed at Canyon Village, Wyoming, with 50 other boys .
 The well-organized camp was run “much like a military camp,” said Clay Clay . Clay says the well-organized camp was "much like military camp" The camp is now being run by a team of volunteers .
 While learning the new type of work, the young men had to adjust to the climate . The young men also had to adapt to the new climate .
 Clay enjoyed the opportunity to view the country around Yellowstone National Park . Clay says he enjoyed the chance to view Yellowstone National Parks .
 The boys, whose ages ranged from 19 to 29, worked to rid the forest of ribes . Ribes are ribes, which (indirectly causes blister rust on white pine trees)
 The “hodag,” an instrument slightly resembling an ax, was used to first detect the ribes, and then to dig it up . The ‘hodag’ is an instrument that resembles an ax . The instrument was used first to detect ribes .
 Clay plans to continue his education a either Millsaps or Southern . Clay is inter ested in “everything and nothing’ * Plans to continue to attend Millsaps and Southern .
 Registered Pekingese pup knowi as “Phoo-Phoo” cuddles contentedly in the arms of bubbling Bobbie Jean Kitchens . You are the lucky dog .
 The 18-year-old Jackson Cen tral graduate pleases people regularly with Hi-Stepper appear ances and extraordinary charm .
 Members of the 1962 edition of the Hinds’ Eagle football team are set for action when the East Mississippi Lions invade Raymond tomorrow night . The East Mississippi Lions will invade Raymond .
 The squad has undergone intensive practice during the past two weeks in preparation for the contest . Head Coach Joe Renfroe and assistant Ivan Rosamond have been in charge of the squad .
 East Mississippi Squadron Invades tomorrow night . Hinds Junior College Eagles are digging in for the mid-week invasion of the high scoring East Mississippi Lions . The Eagles are back in Raymond tomorrow after three weeks away .
 Eagle coach, Joe Renfroe, encouraged by the bristled spirits of his Hinds crew, spent last week's breather in hard contact drills and sweat sessions .
 Most of the injured Eagles, crippled earlier in the season, are well on their way to recovery, Renfroe says . Most of them are now recovering from the injuries they sustained earlier this season .
 His sprained arch kept him out of the Delta game two weeks ago and could possibly keep him sidelined the rest of the season . The injury could keep him from playing the entire season .
 Richard Stacy, end, who figured heavily in Hinds passing offense this season, has been bent under a bruised shoulder . Joe Patterson, another strong fullback, is nearly recovered from a sprained ankle .
 Last year the big Lion team took second place in the junior college conference, and is pushing its way into the same position again, this year . The Lion team is pushing for second place this year in the conference .
 At present Coach Bob Sullivan's boys are tied in the number two slot with the Perkinston powerhouse, four wins and one loss each .
 Sullivan will be depending on his versatile running-passing offense which clicked so*well against Northwest . Sullivan's offense clicked so well against Northwest last week . Sullivan will need to rely heavily on his running and passing offense .
 Defensively he will be counting on strong secondary such as Allen Bruton . The defensive play against Northwest’s passing attack last week ended in a spectacular interception .
 Hinds has thrown over a hundred passes this season, 40 of them in the last contest . Hinds threw 40 of his 100 passes in his last game .
 Hinds has won 12, East Mississippi 5, and only one ended in a tie . Hinds and East Mississippi have won 12 of 19 games . Only one of the 19 games has been a tie between the two teams .
 They are tied with Central for the top spot, each having one loss and three wins . Each team has one loss, three wins, and one win .
 Shangri-La remains in third place and Eastside is still dragging the rear of the pack . Eastside remains in fourth place .
 No game will be played Thursday night of this week because of the football game, Polly Rabalais announced . No game was played because of a football game .
 The last round of the tournament will be played next Tuesday night, October 23, between Frances Pickett’s team and Patsy Roberts’ team . The last match will be held in New Jersey on October 23 .
 Wolves now hold a solid grip on the top of the standings with five wins and no losses . Send the Wildcats from second to fourth place in the standings .
 This week they meet third place Delta, and next week second place Perkinston . Next week they will meet second place Delta .
 Perkinston, Hinds, and Delta rested last week, but will venture forth this week during a full slate of six scheduled games in the conference . The conference is full of six games this week .
 Copiah-Lincoln will travel to Misissippi Delta, and East Central will journey to Southwest . Copiah and Lincoln will travel on Thursday . East Central is also scheduled to travel Thursday .
 Pearl River will meet Holmes at iPoplarville, and Itawamba will go to Perkinston . Pearl River and Holmes will play each other on Saturday . The two teams will meet in the middle of the year .
 Favorites in Thursday contests will be Co-Lin, Southwest, and East Mississippi . The Thursday contests are scheduled to be held on Thursday .
 Perkinston, Jones, and Pearl River are favored in Saturday's Saturday battles . Pearl River is favored in the Saturday battle .
 Coke makes your party Sparkle . The company behind the party is Jackson Jackson COCOO-COLA .
 Sophomore maids chosen are Sharon Bearden, Port Gibson, Jackson, Annis Bell, Jackson; and Sandra Jabour, Vicksburg . The girls' maids were chosen from Port Gibson to Port Gibson .
 Freshmen maids selected in a special election Tuesday are Kaye Bullock, Jackson; Carmen Cotton, Florence; and Bobbye Jean Kitchens, Jackson . The maids were chosen from Jackson and Florence .
 On Friday evening a campus party has been planned for the many students expected to remain on campus for Saturday's activities . A campus party is planned for those expected to stay on campus .
 Hinds Hi-Steppers began budgeting their time as the parade and show season stacked on top of regular football appearances . Highlighting the Saturday program will be official opening of IN FULL SCHEDULE — Hinds High School Show .
 Already scheduled are the Red Carpet Bowl parade and halftime in Vicksburg, Christmas parades in Columbus and other Mississippi cities, stage band shows in Jackson and New Orleans .
 Hindsonian has been awarded First Class Honor rating in a national contest of junior college papers for the fourth straight year . Hindsonian receives high rating from Associated Collegiate Press for fourth year .
 The award was given for ""excellent"" work during the second semester last year . It was presented to only eight other papers in the country during this grading by the Associated Collegiate Press .
 Joe White of Mendenhall, co-editor of the Hindsonian last year, is editor again this year . Joe White co-editors of last year's Hindsonian will be editor again .
 He is also president of the Mississippi Junior College Press Association . He says he is proud of his work at the Mississippi University of Mississippi .
 Gwen Canoy of Magee, White's co-editor on the award winner, is now at Mississippi State College for Women . Canoy now works at the college for women in Mississippi .
 CNN.com's "This Morning Morning" is a weekly feature on Facebook and Twitter . In the U.S. this week, please submit your best photos of the week's featured news stories . Share your best shots of the day with CNN iReport .
 The contest is widely recognized as one of the tightest collegiate newspaper rating services . It is extensively known for its service to universities and senior colleges .
 Five Hinds students will attend the annual fall workshop of the Mississippi Junior College Press Association October 26, and 27 . Students will attend Southwest Mississippi Junior college at Summit .
 Delegates to the conference will be Joe White, editor of the Hindsonian . The Hindsonian will host a panel of editors and writers .
 Kent Prince, public relations director and sponsor of the Hindsonian, will accompany the group as faculty advisor . Kent Prince will be faculty advisor for the group . The Hindsonian will be on campus at the University of Tulsa this year .
 Hinds Represented At Education Meet President George M McLendon, Robert M Mayo, administrative assistant, and Dr. Dr. Michael Mayo . Hinds represented at the meeting .
 James Sparkman, dean of instruction, represented Hinds at a meeting of the Mississippi Association of School Administrators yesterday in Jackson .
 General sessions and sectional meetings were conducted throughout the day . General sessions were held throughout the morning .
 An appearance by Governor Ross Barnett highlighted the morning’s program . Governor Barnett appeared on the morning's program .
 Office of Education, Washington, D.C. C. spoke on ""Progress in Mathematics and its Implication for the Schools,"" Dr. Dr. John Sutter spoke on "Progress in Math" and "implication for schools"
 The feature of the final session was an address by Tom Bailey, Florida State Superintendent of Education . The final session of the session was held in Florida .
 Pictures For Annual Scheduled By Editor Belva Watkins, Eagle yearbook editor, announced that student pictures will be taken November 8 on the auditorium stage .
 This is the only day that individual photographs for the yearbook will be taken . Individual photographs will only be taken for individual yearbook photos .
 Belva: Students must wear dark coats and ties or dark blouses and sweaters . Belva says students must wear a dark coat or tie . Students are encouraged to wear dark clothing .
 Belva stressed that only one day will be designated for picture taking . Belva: Only one day is designated for photo taking .
 Students who do not attend will not have their pictures in the 1962-63 Eagle . Students will not be able to submit their pictures to the newspaper .
 This date, a month later than that of last year, was chosen so that boys’ hair would have time to partially grow out, Belva said . This date was chosen to allow boys to grow out a month earlier than last year .
 Price has been set at $1.04 per student, which will be paid at the time of the pictures taken .
 Howard O Pippen Studios, Jackson, has been selected to make the portraits . The portraits will be made at the request of the former footballer .
 Pippen Studios is noted nationally for quality workmanship in the photographic field . The new science observatory is located in the new state of New York .
 Visitors will be allowed to view the stars and planets through the new 12-inch reflector telescope at convenient hours both day and night . Visitors will also be able to see the stars, planets and the planets at convenient times .
 Informal tours of the campus and coffee hours in the home economics lounge will fill the afternoon agenda . Coffee hours will also be available at the University of Cambridge .
 Talent program will be presented in the college auditorium . Hinds alumni dinner will be held in the Hinds cafeteria . Alumni dinner will take place in the cafeteria .
 The crowning of Queen Hilda Bullock will proceed the ItawambaEagle football clash scheduled for eight days . The crown will proceed to the football match between Itawambamba and the Itaawamba Eagle .
 Immediately following the game a reception for the court and a dance will be held in the air-conditioned girls physical education building .
 Senator John Stennis will be featured speaker at the annual Hinds County Farm Bureau Harvest Supper Tuesday, October 30, in the Hinds cafeteria . Stennis to speak at the event in Hinds campus .
 Senator Stennis will be joined by winners in the West Central District of the Mississippi Farm Bureau . Special guests will also be winners .
 Miss Kathy Kilby, district Farm Bureau queen and Miss Ann Stepher&son, district winner in talent division, will be honored . The Hinds students will perform at the event .
 Senator Stennis is expected to speak on recent developments in farm legislation . Stennis will speak on farm legislation in the coming days .
 He is nationally recognized as the champion of the small farmer . He is the leading sponsor of agriculture and forestry research research .
 He has worked tirelessly in be* half of agriculture, forestry, health and education, and the development of rivers and harbors .
 Tonight Decides Future: An important, though irregular, program taking place on campus tonight . Tonight Decisions Future is important, but irregular .
 The faculty and administrative committees have been thoroughly patient and understanding with the student representatives who petitioned for the social occasion . Students will be able to attend the event at the end of the year .
 The idea for this program originated in the student body, initially in a sophomore class meeting . The idea of this program was discussed in a freshman class meeting at the school .
 The petitioning students recognized that a major let-down is felt by all after Freshman Day activities, dressing in semi-formal attire for the evening meal and then returning to the dormitory .
 These students expressed a desire for a social occasion to follow up the light-hearted day . Students said they wanted to follow-up with a social outing .
 A cross-sectional interest interview was plotted throughout the student body and faculty members . The interview was done with cross-section interest interviews of students and staff members .
 We can now enjoy the results of complete student-faculty cooperative relations . We can no longer rely on the University of Cambridge .
 An extended hour program, which will last until nine o’clock. Thus we are able to obtain an extended hour of program . The program will be extended until nine .
 Some basic restrictions must be observed by participating students, students say . Students say it is highly irregular to hold such an affair in the middle of the week .
 Students simply follow campus rules, which must be doubly respected at this time . They simply follow university rules, they say .
 If we don’t respect these obligations to our college now, we never will, we'll never be able to do so again . If we’re not respecting these obligations, we might never will. We’ve got to respect our obligations now .
 An infraction of the rules now will eliminate any further week-day social action by the student body . It is clearly discerned that an infraction is now likely to end any further social action .
 The program is given as a grievance-apology to the freshman from the sophomores who have harrassed and heckled them most of today . The program was given as an apology .
 Depression Hits Hinds Campus; ' ""Students Change ; Students Change ; By LINDA BYRD .
 "We have lots of common and therefore have a common ground on which to converse," he says .
 "We both attend college, a junior college, and we're both interested in getting an education," she says . "We all attend college ... and we both want to get an education"
 "We try to further our knowledge by coming here, and so we are partners in the learning process. We try to learn from each other," says Daley .
 I can't believe you are one of those individuals who is attending college just to be going, or escaping the draft, or waiting just for that gold band . I can’t believe you’re going to college just for the draft or for the gold band. I can
 The others I mentioned* aren't parts of this or any other college campus—they're simply fixtures . The others are simply fixtures. The others aren't in college campuses .
 Sometimes, though, like now when we’re in the seventh week of school, depression sets in and you change . Sometimes, however, sometimes, like when we're in a school week, we're not sure what's going on .
 In the early stages of this disease called depression, a slight change occurs in your makeup . In the beginning stages of depression, the makeup of your makeup changes dramatically .
 Homework becomes harder to produce, teaching boring and friends friends seem childish . Homework is harder than producing and teaching boring is boring, teaching is boring .
 You become a mass of irritability, homework is cursed as a necessary evil, classes are unbearable . You lose some of your friends in this stage .
 It usually tapers off at the end of the eighth week of school, just in time for you to start studying for nine week exams .
 Since we don't know the exact reason for its beginning, neither can we pinpoint its ending . We can't pinpoint the end of the story, and neither can pinpoint its end .
 Perhaps because of exams we are busier than ever and therefore too busy to worry about ourselves . Perhaps because exams are so busy, we are too busy for ourselves to worry .
 Time plants the need of self-pity in our minds and depression results . Maybe, however, when there is a slag in our existence, time plants a need for self-Pity . Depression results .
 I can’t tell you if your tomorrows will hold ebbs of depression and heights of enjoyment for you . You decide your own days, not me. I can't tell you whether you will be happy or depressed .
 I simply want to let you know that depression, doesn't strike only you. It's not only you, it's also a person who suffers from depression, says CNN.com .
 It can hit several, thousands, and nations at one time and yet we all consider it an individual tragedy . The tragedy can be hit several nations and nations, but it can be individual tragedies, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The first was made by the President himself, and the second by the Attorney General . The President later reiterated the comments at a news conference .
 The first statement was made at a news conf conf conf e r e n c e, concerned negotiations over Berlin . The first was made by President Kennedy at a press conference .
 No wonder the Communists leaders have been able to talk us out of most of their present day possessions . If the above statement has been our attitude, then no wonder the Communist leaders have talked us out .
 Such an approach with the Communists at the negotiating table is the same as Ole Miss and Kentucky scheduling a football game, and Ole Miss not showing up for it . Such a deal would be the same if Ole Miss doesn't show up for the game, the school says .
 This is not to say we should lower ourselves to their level, but it is to say, at least have a practical and knowledgable attitude as to the objectives of our opponents . It is not a matter of us not lowering ourselves to the level of their level .
 Great Britain had to learn that it couldn't rely just on principles, and depend on others to look out after its interests . Great Britain learned the same thing when she took over the world's dominant power .
 The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., at Hinds Junior College .
 Robert Kennedy has not prosecuted Communists for not registering as agents of a foreign power . This statement may explain why Robert Kennedy hasn't prosecuted the Communists . The Communists were supposed to register as agents under a recent law .
 The Attorney General does have plans for prosecuting the Ole Miss rioters . Attorney General says he has no plans for the rioters to be prosecuted .
 This film and evidence proves that the riots were caused, started, and led by professional agitators of the Communist party . The riots were started and started by professionals of the party .
 There wasn't any prosecution of these instigators by the Attorney General . Yet, there wasn’t any prosecution by the attorney general .
 If the Communists can stir up resentment against an American Government committee, they can stir it up against the U.S. Government, he says . He says .
 Our leaders either do not know that the threat exists, or they are naive to the facts . If that is not the case, then our leaders either know that there is a threat exists .
 Miss Charlotte Ann Carroll, Miss Mississippi of 1962-63, was crowned Miss Mississippi in 1963 . Miss Miss Mississippi was Miss Mississippi from 1963 to 1964 .
 Charlie was visiting in the home of Mrs. Mrs. Edith, who was visiting from her home . Charlie is a member of the Royal Family who has been in the UK for more than 20 years .
 Hi Stepper director and official chaperone for Miss Miss Miss Mississippis. Alon Bee, Hi Steppers director, chaperon for the past feur Miss Miss. Miss MissMississippis . Bee was Miss Miss Mississippi, Miss Mississippi .
 Bee and Miss Carroll had met some time ago when both the Hi-Steppers and Charlie appeared at a Junior Chamber of Commerce district meeting . Bee and Ms Carroll met at a junior chamber of Commerce meeting .
 Charlie, officially Miss Eupora, captured the Miss Mississippi title in Vicksburg on August 4 . Their second meeting came after Charlie captured the title in August 4.
 Of the numerous articles written about Charlie, not one has failed to express marvel at her naturalness, lack of sophistication, her All-American manner . Charlie's naturalness and lack of sophisticatedness have been marveled .
 Her impersonation of Popeye's girl, the long-loved Olive Oyl, won for her both the judges’ and the people’s approval in Vicksburg . These merits, as well as her rollicking impersonation, won her the judges' and the
 Charlie won first night talent honors and a slot among the ten finalists . Charlie charmed the Atlantic City audience also .
 Miss Mississippi was ranked second in the annual press poll on the Saturday afternoon before the final judging .
 A sophomore at Delta State College, 19-year-old fireball is a physical education major .
 Charlie hopes one day to instruct, probably on a college level . Charlie is three times All-State basketball guard . Charlie hopes to be a college coach .
 It would seem that she generally likes being active, and that includes horse riding, swimming, water skiing, and even hunting .
 The Carroll family is a four-year-old couple with four daughters . The Carrolls are known for their love of outdoor activities .
 She chose Delta because some of her relatives went there, and because she like a small college, she says . She says she likes Delta because of its small campus .
 Delta doubtlessly appreciates the free praise and plugs of its excellent representative . Delta's representative is a proud Delta Airlines representative .
 Delta is no doubt beaming also because its frolicsome femme stole the Miss Mississippi title from the Ole Miss monopoly . Delta is also beaming because it stole the title .
 We put this statement to a test by asking if she remembers a certain night in a certain restaurant when she crowded into a tiny ladies room with another girl . We put her statement to the test .
 Writer recalls discussing damp weather's effect on hair, but she was surprised to learn the other girl was this writer . Finally she did remember, and recalled discussing the damp weather .
 At Vicksburg, I didn’t really expect to win, but I wanted people to like my talent. "I didn't really expect ... to win," he says . "I wanted people like me," he adds .
 "I was sitting backstage eating nabs and drinking Pepsi, wishing I could take off my bathing suit," she said . "I'm sitting backstage and drinking ... Pepsi," she added .
 Miss Mississippi continued with assorted hand gestures and word emphasis . "And what thrilled me more than anything," she said, "At least half of the Miss Mississippi contestants sent me telegrams when Mrs. Mrs. Miss Mississippi .
 Charlie has a knack for impersonations which rang the rafters at both pageants . Charlie's hilarious knack for impressions is not infrequent in Charlie's everyday conversation .
 During our interview, she went into a cigar smoking routine, imitating a fellow student at Delta State . She imitates a fellow Delta State student at the time .
 This delightful performance continued as the subject changed to future plans . "This is not the first time I've heard from such a young person I've been in the U.S. history. This is the first of many things I've seen in the United States. It's the first
 Charlie plans to return to Delta for second semester . Charlie will stay through summer school session .
 Scores of appearances throughout Mississippi are scheduled for 1963 for flawless beauty . The Mississippi beauty pageant was held in 1963 .
 Miss Mississippi's mother will accompany her on most of her trips . She will be her chaperone, advisor and “second mother”
 Charlotte Ann Carroll, Miss Mississippi of 1962-63, talks with Hindsonian writer Bettye Simmons . Carroll's now famous spontaneous smile is the reason for Miss Mississippi .
 Initial Student Faculty Forum Discusses Censorship Of Press . “Censorship of the press” will be the topic under discussion .
 Miss Susan Brown, originator of the panel, and Boyd McPhail, student chairman, invite all faculty members and students to participate in the discussion every Wednesday at 3:30m.
 Prize will be awarded to any Group, Fraternity, Sorority, or Individual who qualifies and has the highest number of points . Prize is given to any group, fraternity, sorority or individual who qualifies .
 David Blackstock, president, Frank Wilson, vice-president; Robert Hudson, secretary and treasurer; and James Bond, reporter. The group is based in Washington, D.C.
 Wallace Wall, club sponsor, demonstrated the new blueprinting machine . Wallace Wall demonstrated the machine at the meeting .
 George Tannous is newly elected president of Hinds Junior College sophomore class and Presidents Council . He addressed the Pelahatchie Parents Teachers Association Tuesday night . He is the president of the Hinds junior college sophomore class .
 A 14-month immigrant from Lebanon, Tannous used a Lebanese magazine and post cards as samples . He explained the economy, politics, and American aid aspects of Lebanese life .
 Tannous spent much of his talk talking about the differences between Lebanon and America . He spoke informally about Lebanon's differences with America .
 Comparing the clijmate of his native land to that of Californa, he commented on the extreme weather in Mississippi . Comparing Mississippi to California, he said .
 Lebanon is called an • eastern Switzerland because of the mild climate . Many people, he said, are surprised to learn that Lebanon is an eastern Switzerland . Lebanon is known for its mild climate and its mild winters .
 He passed pictures among the group, showing how in this climate, cedars of Lebanon, which were mentioned in the Bible, are still growing .
 Tannous, a resident of Vicksburg, was accompanied by Jim Smith of Pelahatchie who introduced him to the large group of people .
 A few general comments were made about Pelahatchie students at Hinds, showing the overall records they make and the honors they are awarded . A few . general comments made about the students .
 Beginning at six o'clock this morning freshman students gathered in small groups to confer on the coming activities .
 Most of these freshmen wandered to their selected spohomore's room and be* gan to perform menial tasks for him . Most of them wandered to the room to perform tasks for the spohomomomore .
 These tasks included such meaningless forms as mopping and waxing floors, sweeping halls, emptygarbage, and even cleaning sinks with a toothbrush .
 Freshman Day rules are enforced by freshmen at the slightest infraction of Freshman day rules . Sophomores and freshmen are punished for the slightest mistake .
 A mid-evening program, ending at 3:30, concluded the major portion of activities . The program was part of a series of events that took place throughout the day .
 Freshmen were tried in a mock trial, conducted in a satirical vein in the manner of ' the Supreme Court' Freshmen tried in mock trial conducted in the style of 'the Supreme Court .
 Students have Varied Reactions Toward Kennedy’s Tough Talk Against Communist Controlled Cuba .
 A familiar voice sounded through the wires and cables of our communication systems . It was a familiar voice from a man who had been in the air for a decade .
 Students on Hinds campus have only a vague knowledge of what is gping on . Most of them have no idea how the situation has affected them .
 Students agreed with Kennedy’s plan to impose a blockade on arms shipments to Cuba . A number of students agreed with the plan . The blockade would impose an arms embargo on Cuba .
 Several people thought that some of the ""older guys"" such as Truman and Eisenhower, should be called for advice . Truman and Ike, should have been called to ask for advice.
 Sylvia Sandifer, also of Pelahatch e, thinks Kennedy was late making a decision . Sylvia Sandif says Kennedy was too late to make a decision on the issue . She says Kennedy's decision was a mistake .
 Some one noticed that the StarSpangled Banner was played before and after Kennedy’s speech for the first time since his inaugj uration . It was played in both of Kennedy's speeches .
 They pointed out that the I purpose for this was to stir up I patriotism that has been dead for j so long . They said that the purpose of this was stirring up patriotism that is dead for so long.
 One boy thought that President i Kennedy seemed nervous, while de. livering his nation-wide emergency message . The boy thought it was actually the beginning of a war .
 He only hoped that he wouldn't slip and make 'any serious mistakes that would set off a nuclear war' He said he only hoped he didn't make 'serious mistakes' that set off nuclear war .
 Many students thought that the crisis would heal, if Castro were only done away with . Many thought that Castro would heal the crisis if he was removed from the country .
 Vicki Hazzlerigg and Dannie Evans, both freshmen, will attend seminars on varied journalistic writing and tour the newspaper plant . The students will also tour the paper plant .
 The first consists of news art, news photography, photography, general news writing, women’s news, and a tour of the plant .
 Second session will include discussions of sports news, editorial writing, feature writing, and headline and make-up theories . Discussion will also focus on sports news and feature writing .
 Noon luncheon on Heidelberg roof will feature speaker Norman Mott, president of Misssisippi Press Association .
 HINDSONIAN October 24, 1962 School PICTURES FOR 1962-63 YEARBOOK YEARBOOK 1962 63 . Patsy Barnes takes time out to enjoy a bit of rustic nature .
 Miss Denton, an English major, is the daughter of Hinds faculty members, Mr. and Mrs. Denton . She is a junior at Hinds College .
 George Boyd, head of the English department at Millsaps College announced Miss Denton’s enrollment . George Boyd is head of English department .
 Miss Denton was a member of the Millsaps Players for four years . While at Millsaps, she was able to play for the team .
 She is a full-blooded Chiricahua Apache and holds the world's hammer-throw record . She is also a full blood-blooded woman who holds a hammer throw world record .
 The little woman is someone we found crouching under the sofa when we moved into our apartment several years ago . She has remained there ever since, and there she has remained since .
 She never speaks, except to make a kind of guttural clicking sound when she is hungry . She also makes a gut-whistling sound when hungry .
 To get back to tests, let's not allow them to get too important . Muiy tyftiwttoo mh Imid: Let's not get too much .
 There are, after all, many qualities and talents that simply can't be measured by quizzes . There are no easy answers to the most basic questions about your talents .
 Gregor, a freshman at the New Hampshire College of Tanning and Belles Lettres, has never passed a single test . All who know him agree that he is studded with talent like a ham .
 He smokes them one at a time, settling back, getting comfortable, savoring each tasty puff . He smokes each puff as he savors each one .
 Gregor Sigafoos was an artist, humanist, philosopher, smoker, Marlboro smoker, and freshman since 1939 . He has been a student at the University of Columbia since 1939.
 Anna Livia, a classmate of Gregor's, had no talent, no gifts, no brains, no personality . Gregor: "Anna Livia had no talents, no talent. She had no gifts. She was no personality."
 She would cram like crazy before a test, always get a perfect score, then promptly forget everything she had learned . She would then forget everything else she learned .
 She left college no more educated, no more prepared to cope with the world, than when she entered . She graduated with highest honors and degrees by the dozen, but the sad fact is that she left college .
 Jerry Lee Ainsworth's 13 foot speedliner boat is powered by a 50-horsepower Mercury engine . The boat is a speedliner with a 13 foot boat with a 15-foot engine .
 Misfortune found him twice this summer as he overturned ms speeding boat in races . He overturned his speeding boat twice in the summer .
 At present the boat is being readied for a 6 hour Christmas race in Miami, Florida . The boat is currently preparing for a Christmas race .
 First, second and third place winners of each division will win identical motors to the ones they have on their racers . First and second place winners will also receive identical motors from the ones on their race cars .
 Pit crew for the Jerry Lee “Special” n are Jimmy Farris, Jerry Newman, and Jimmy Williamson . Pit crew includes Jerrry Newman, Jimmy Williamson and Jimmy Frieser .
 Girls Find Out First-Hand Information About What’s Going On In Boys’Dorms R u I I I Kin a ovon --x_
 We are the first single females to spend the night in Southside, boys dormitory . Granted we aren’t the first, but we're the first .
 Monday night of last week we ventured to the south section of the campus, pillows in hand, and entered the male sanctuary . The male sanctuary is a male sanctuary at the University of Columbia .
 The lobby was, surprisingly enough, near empty with only one boy talking into the telephone in quiet and I secretive tones . The lobby of the hospital was almost empty .
 He did however, interrupt his conversation long enough to acknowledge our entrance by a look of disbelef .
 Boys passing by upstairs upstairs upstairs were shocked to see two girls bring bag and baggage into the dorm . Girls were shocked by the sight of two girls bringing bags and luggage into the room .
 Our hosts, Mike and Polly Ra| balais, showed us a few tricks of knocking on the wall . They also showed us how to communicate with each other .
 Mr Rabalais and Jimmy and Jerry Clark have a foolproof system that would put Alexander Graham Bell to shame . The pair say it would put the Bellator to shame.
 As far as Mr Bell is concerned, he seldom gets recognized at Southside . Mr Bell says he rarely gets recognized for his work at the club .
 Sophomore boys are too busy with football practice and English papers to stakeout in the lobby waiting for a phone call .
 Both commented on the quietness of a boys dorm and declared things couldn’t possibly be as quiet in th e girls dorm . The girls dorm is one of the most quiet dorms in history .
 Northside, Southside, Westside and Eastside are her favorite dorms . Northside is one of the most popular dorms in the world .
 When asked to describe in one word her opinion of the Southside boys, Mrs. Smith says, "Southside boys" is a word of love .
 Quietness rang from the rafters interrupted only by the constant ringing of the phone . Quietness was interrupted by constant phone calls and constant constant ringing .
 Our purpose for staying, to write this feature article, had proved to be an amaginzly quiet one . Our purpose was to write a feature article and to write it .
 Halfback Woody Martin intercepts an East Mississippi pass in third quarter of last Thursday’s football game .
 Lion End Tal DeCell charges in trying for a tackle while Eagle Guard Carl Sullivan looks on . Eagle guard Carl Sullivan is also involved in the tackle attempt .
 Hinds Eagles and Jones Bobcats of Ellisville will tangle with almost identical records . Playing at neutral Watkins Stadium in Laurel, Saturday, will be the first time the two teams will play each other .
 Jones County is one ahead of the Eagles in the win bracket with two against the Eagles one . The Eagles have four losses and a tie each, the Jones County squad has two wins and two losses .
 The Bobcats will be a slight favorite to win . Although the records are nearly equal, the Bobcats are expected to beat the U.S.
 Head Coach Sims Cooley will be fielding his ace quarterback, Mike McLellan, to lead the attack on the invaders . Head Coach Cooley's team will face a daunting task to defeat the Tigers .
 Billy Burnette and Jerry Bourg will provide the running power along with fullback Lester Aultman . Halfbacks Billy Burnettette and Billy Bourg and Jerry Burnette will play for the team .
 Hinds Head Coach Joe Renfroe is set to use his aerial attack in a slightly modified form this week . Hinds are set to play a modified version of their aerial attack this week.
 Jim Buell and Percy Boell will alternate as starting quarterback for the entire game . Mike Vincent will start for the first time in the game .
 In the halfback slots Ken Johnson and Woody Martin are slated to start . Larry Jones and Butch Greer will fill in as needed . Woody Martin and Larry Jones will start with Larry Jones starting .
 In the fullback post, converted halfback Dan Magee will start with John Stanley and Joe Patterson substituting . In the other halfback post, Dan Magea will start as John Stanley will start .
 Jimmy Dukes has been sidelined for three weeks with an injured foot and may be out for the remainder of the season . Regular starter Dukes is out with a foot injury and could be out until the end .
 Jimmy Clark, Richard Stacy, Rick Thrash, Larry Newell, David Jones, Carl Sullivan and George Benton at center . Starting on the line are ends Jimmy Clark and Richard Stacy; tackles Ricky Thrash and LarryNewell .
 The Bobcat line-up will feature Billy McMullen and Dayton Pridgen at ends, Bill Windham and Pete Evans at tackle, David Pope and James Stedman at guards and Larry Sullivan at center . Larry Sullivan will be the Bobcat's starting center .
 Passing, the game usually favored by the Eagles, was another story of woe with only eight of the 24 passes attempted conecting for a total of 62 yards .
 Lions settled down to slow, steady marches down the field but the hard-pressed Eagle unit held on several fourth and a few yards plays . Lions didn't score again until 50 seconds prior to half’s end .
 After moving the ball from their own 31-yard line to the Hinds four, fullback Richard Hubbard swept over tackle for the touchdown . After moving from 31-yards to the four, Hubbard scored the touchdown for the home team .
 Five times the Eagles moved inside the Lion 20-yard line and five times their drives failed . The Eagles had five drives that failed to reach the Lion’s 20-yards inside the end zone .
 Pass interceptions twice stopped the advances of the Lion line . The Lion line held on three other attempts to stop the advances .
 CopiahLine oln lost to Perkinston Saturday in Mississippi Junior College Grid Conference . Copiah line oln was previously undefeated in Mississippi JCC grid conference .
 Mississippi Delta whipped |t0 Fulton for a game with Fulton . East Central hosts Mississippi ^ .. .. ,, Delta and East Mississippi travels powerful Mississippi Delta . Delta .
 While the Wesson Wolves were losing to the Trojans East Mississippi was in the losing effort . East Mississippi is in a losing streak of six straight games .
 Raymond downed the STANDINGS Eagles 20-0 and thus putting the EMJC Lions in a tie for the top ' East Mississippi slot with Co-Lin . Raymond downing the Standings Eagles . The Eagles were defeated by Raymond .
 Pearl Perkinston River defeated Holmes 26-7 while Holmes Northwest ran over Jones 7-0 . Copiah-Lincoln defeated Copiah Lincoln 26-0 in other conference action .
 Pearl River Central wins first game of i Delta season and hands Southwest Southwest 4-6 Jones upset win . Southwest takes the cellar posiItawamba down to 4-4 Jones . Southwest is the bottom of the i Delta standings .
 East Mississippi’s Lions proved themselves “King of the Mississippi Junior College Conference” last Thursday with their 20-0 win over Hinds’ Eagles . First place East Mississippi Lions run Rampant Against Hinds .
 Hinds play their third game before a home crowd of the season . The Hinds crew couldn't match the power of the Lions .
 Quarterback Lester Smith pitched five yards to Brent Jackson in the end zone just four minutes after the opening kick for the first score of the game . The first score came from Lester Smith's five-yard pass to Brent .
 When Hinds did take charge, it was to no avail, as the powerful Lion defense kept the yards gained on ground total to 19 in the first Half and 54 for the game .
 Hinds Coach Joe Renfroe changed his pattern of substitutions during the game . The Hinds coach changed his patterns of substitution during the match .
 Most noticeable was the use of three quarterbacks instead of the usual one . Three quarterbacks were used instead of usual one in the game .
 Mike Vincent played with Jim Buell and Percy Boell alternating throughout the game . Regular starter Mike Vincent started for the first time in a row .
 Running at halfback was Woody Martin, Ken Johnson, Butch Greer and Larry Jones . Woody Martin and Ken Johnson were running halfbackers .
 Saturday Night Fireworks, Waterfall Lend Theme For Observatory’s Grand Opening . Lighting the sky during the halftime crowning of Homecoming queen Saturday night .
 Homecoming Saturday will be Queen Hilda Carmen Cotton, and Kaye Bullock . Sophomore maids will be Sharon Bearden, Port Gibson, escorted by Jimmy Chandler; An-' homecoming .
 Game time Bullock and Maids has been set at 7:30 and crowning ceremonies the left clockwise are held clockwise . Bobbye Jean Kitchens, during half-time, hosted the event .
 Hinds team of seven members was judged superior for their overall performance in discussion and excellent for their advocacy speaking . Hinds were judged superior in discussion, excellent for advocacy speaking. Today's Today's Show will feature the Hinds program .
 Hemphill scored, in individual awards, three superiors out of a possible five out of possible five . Hemphills scored three superiors .
 Barnett continued by outlining the recent economic advances made in Mississippi . Barnett continued to outline the state's economic advances . Barnett: "Mississippi is a state of economic opportunity"
 “We were the first to build a governor’s mansion and the last to remodel one,” he laughed . “It was a great job for the governor, but it was a bad job for us,’ he said .
 He won in the first two of three rounds of discussion and in the second round of advocacy speaking . He won the first round of discussion .
 Hemphill was a member of the state championship junior college debate team from Hinds last year . He was a junior college junior college senior debate team member .
 Also attending from Hinds were James Chandler, Vicksburg; Carol Fortier, Jackson; Woody May; Dawn McNeil, Jackson, Clinton; and Jane Land, Clinton . Belva Watkins, Jackson and Clinton also attended .
 Colleges participating were Harding, Lamar State, Louisiana College, Louisiana Polytechnic Institute, LSU, McNeese State, and Mississippi College . Colleges participating include Harding, . Louisiana College .
 Hemphill was the only member of the troupe ever to have debated against senior college squads . Hemphills was the first member to debate against a senior college squad . He was also the only person to debate with senior college teams .
 Julia Todd coaches the Hinds squad . Julia Todd of Clinton coaches the Clinton-Clinton squad .
 Freshman class will be represented by Kaye Bullock, Jackson, escorted by Ralph Hemphill . Carmen Cotton, Florence and Bobbye Jean Kitchens will be escorted by Joe White .
 Hinds Eagles will meet Itawamba at 7:30, with crowning ceremonies plus a special fire-works display . The halftime affair will be a special halftime affair .
 Band director Jimmy Morris said a few fireworks will be used in the pre-game color guard presentation . The main display will come during halftime, Morris said .
 Queen Bullock and her court will be presented to the visiting alumni at a reception in the girls’ physical education building immediately following the game . The Queen of the Court will be present to the alumni at the reception .
 Official grand opening of the new science annex is also scheduled for Saturday . The science annex will be open at the end of the year .
 Visitors may tour observatory any time during the afternoon, one hour before the game and one hour following the game . Visitors may also tour the observatory anytime during the day .
 Saturn and Jupiter will be viewed through the 12-in.ch reflector telescope . Weather permitting, Saturn and Jupiter will be seen through the telescope .
 The entire annex will be open for inspection, says chairman of science department . Stephenson: "The entire annex" will be available for inspection .
 Coffee will be available in the Home Economics Lounge throughout the afternoon . Coffee will also be available throughout the day .
 Hinds County Farm Bureau awarded Hinds Junior College President George M McLendon its Distinguished Service “Man of the Year” award last night . McLendon Accepts Award For Service From Farm Bureau from Farm Bureau Hinds .
 Mr McLendon was chosen to receive the organization's highest honor for having done more to promote agriculture in Hinds County than any other member .
 Senator John Stennis praised the group for choosing McLendon and endorsed them for having presented “this fine award, so well deserved” McLendon . Principal speaker for the occasion, Senator Stennis, praised McLendon for his work .
 Greaves, director of the Bureau, is a member of the Hinds Junior College Board of Trustees . Greaves is a former member of Hinds junior college board of trustees .
 Walter Gibbes, coordinator of Vocation Training at Hinds, was elected vice-president of the Bureau for the next term .
 Jack Treloar, Superintendent of Hinds Farm and Physical Plant, is outgoing president of the Bureau of Agriculture . He is retiring from the position .
 Featured during the program was Hinds student Kathy Kilby, District Miss Farm Bureau, and Ann Stephenson, Bureau talent winner . The program was held in Hinds .
 Flicker Time is like a roman candle or a giant explosive, says the author . Flicker time is like "a giant explosive"
 It suddenly bursts into flame, without warning, and then is usable no more . The flame burst into flame without warning and then burst into flames .
 A small boy timidly lights a holiday's roman candle and waits expectantly for the flood of brilliant light which ensues . A small child timidly lures a small boy to the light of a candle .
 He half expects the tube to explode in his hand, and is ready each moment to throw it down a$d run for cover . The tube explodes when it comes into contact with his hand .
 He no longer thinks only of fireworks and the fourth of July or shortlived Christmas fires . He now thinks of fires like Christmas fires and fireworks as a fire hazard .
 During his eighteenth or nineteenth year he begins his college education . During his 18th or 19th year he began his education. During his twenties, he was in college .
 Remembering bygone days, he still takes some delight in childish activities . He still takes delight in the childish activities of his childhood .
 Only four years or so will he spend getting his education ... just a short while and he will be depended upon to act as an educated, mature person . "Only four years of his education will be he will ... act as a mature person," he says .
 The process is stepped up, and he just waves the roman candle around, causing it to burn faster . The process was stepped up and he stepped up .
 "When the four years are gone, he stands alone, with an empty, burned-out tube in his hand"
 For the remainder of his life he will keep a tight grip on the used candle . For the rest of his . life, he will hold the candle .
 Perhaps if he had not been in such a hurry to see, the pretty fireworks the wonder would have lasted longer . Perhaps he had been in a hurry .
 Hinds students last week showed that they could and would support well planned social occasions on the campus . Hinds Students last week demonstrated that they would support social events on campus .
 Approximately four hundred students attended the program in the girls’ gymnasium . Approximately . 100 students attended .
 This idea has been stated and restated during the past three or four years . This idea was stated, restated in the past 3 or 4 years . It has been restated since then, but it has not been reiterated .
 It is up to the students as to whether other school programs of this type will continue . It is not known if other schools will continue to offer the program .
 Take every opportunity to encourage week-end activities of this sort . Also, take every chance to encourage people to take part in this sort of activity .
 The girls’ gymnasium is open every weekend for dancing, card playing, basketball, gymnastics and television viewing . The gym is open for dancing and card playing .
 This week marks the 50th anniversary of President Obama's election to the White House . The White House will host a panel of experts from across the world to discuss the legacy of the U.S. House .
 The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., at Hinds Junior College .
 The theme song of the Kennedy Administration seems to be Too little and too late, or too much too soon or too soon, or never enough at the right time . The Kennedy Administration's theme song is "Too little and late"
 To see what is meant by this, one has only had to profile the recent Cuban capers . The Cuban government has been accused of corruption in Cuba .
 If an accurate view of recent events in this sphere is desired at least two questions must be answered . If you want to know more about the events in the world's political sphere, answer the questions above .
 To get a true picture of the possible reasoning behind recent events, there must be a further sub-division of these two questions into two lines of thought . The answer to these questions is a simple question: 'What do you think?'
 This is an election year and there are a number of congressional and senatorial seats that could go Republican, and so by initiating a long-drawn-out affair, it will over-shadow some of his recent unfavorable policies and congressional defeats .
 This seemingly stern action may shift enough votes to return these shaky seats to Congress re-filled with Kennedy Democrats . Kennedy Democrats have been elected to Kennedy seats in Congress .
 If he would have acted in May, say, the Cuban crisis would probably be over, and most people have forgotten about it, or he could have gotten the United States into a worse jam by now . In answer to the second question, why did the President wait so long to take
 The second line of thought is that President Kennedy was really trying to protect us . President Kennedy may have been protecting us, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Kennedy was trying to help us.
 If the President was really trying to protect us, why did he embargo Cuba? Why did he give Castro a chance of putting the U.S. in a predicament?
 There is no answer or logical reason for waiting this long to take action in this area. Applying the same reasoning to this question, one speedily comes to the conclusion that there is no explanation for the delay .
 It seems that the Kennedy Administration is trying to cover its mistakes with better late than never linen . There is a lot of dirty Lenin in Russia to cover them with .
 HINDS-IGHTS map] School Days Kept Alive In Hearts Of Tree Carvers 1mm by LINDA BYRD .
 The trees are a little taller, the grill a little noisier and the people a little busier . You'll notice by looking about the campus that things have changed quite a bit since you last attended school here .
 Our new library is one of the finest in the south, the science annex a step ahead in scientific knowledge, the new dormitories a well-equipped resting place, and the girls gym a haven for body culture . The science annex is a step up in science knowledge .
 "Our faculty has enlarged quite a bit from your day, and by observation you can readily see that the student population has doubled if not tripled," the principal says .
 School buses now go to and from Jackson areas as well as Raymond and Vicksburg districts . "We have school buses now that go to . and from the Jackson areas," school says . Superintendent says school buses are now able to take students to school .
 Hinds has grown during your absence and will continue to grow long after this printed column turns yellow with age . Hinds will be proud to say, 'Yes, Hinds'
 The school spirit that resounds at football games, the war sounds at football . The warmth of the grill on cold days, the carvings on the tree bark, the fascination of a zoo laboratory, the world of books and the air of a college campus .
 Homecoming will remain a part of you, no matter how old nor how far away in miles you are from the campus . Because this campus remains as it was when you were here and because it has undergone a series of changes, homecoming shall remain part of the campus.
 Homecoming is celebrated not necessarily on the campus but is celebrated in the mind and memory of the students who once walked these grass covered lawns and carved their names on the bark of ageless oaks . Remember, homecoming is not only on campus but on the memory of those who
 George Earl was christened in the First Presbyterian Church, where his father is an Elder . George Earl is the son of an Elder in the church .
 Saturday night they attended a reception at the LSU Alumni House, where Tad is Alumni Director . Tad is Tad is LSU's Director .
 He works at Keith Press and is officially designated Pat Fairchild's secretary, since Pat can neither read nor write . Pat can't read or write .
 "I don't mean no harm, Mister, but my name’s Fairchild, and I ain’t kin to any of the others” were the words that first introduced him to one of Raymond's most colorful citizens . Fairchild is a former member of the
 Dressed in riding jodphers, an army coat, foots and spats and a Confederate cap, Pat Fairchild MONDAY NIGHT cart usually be found walking briskly down a Raymond sidewalk .
 He failed to appear at Keith Press for BSU Executives Select Activities For Thanksgiving, Christmas Time several days . Thomas Keith later reprimanded him because of his failure to report his whereabouts .
 Looking at Mr Keith, he pursed his lips and stated assuringly, "Mr McKeith, I am twentyone years old. I am 2021 years old."
 Mr Fairchild's conversation is usually centered around dogs . He is a well known connoisseur of the canine .
 Specializing in Blue Ticks, Redbones and Walkers, he has also owned some prize Jap hounds which ""come from Berleen, Germany”
 Once the Keiths had wood cut and hauled to his house which is located on the outskirts of town, only to have him come to town complaining of the cold . The Keiths say he is not afraid to come back to his home .
 October 29, and selected committees to make plans for gathering food for Thanksgiving baskets . October 29 is October 29 and October 31 .
 Plans were also made to promote the annual Lottie Moon Christmas Offering for foreign missions . Plans also made for the annual Christmas offering for overseas missions .
 Program plans were completed for students who planned to visit the Home for the Aged Tuesday night, October 30 . Program plans for students were complete for the visit .
 Ralph Hemphill gave the devotional at the Tuesday night program . Marcelle McLendon led the singing and Brenda Mullins accompanied on the piano . Brenda Mullin also sang on the program .
 Stage depicted a grill scene with students drinking Cokes and coffee . The stage depicted a grilled scene with Cokes, coffee and coffee.
 Judy Herring, Rosalind Healy, Lynn Earnest, Patsy Reed, Marcelle McLendon and Patsy McLendon take part on program .
 Two years ago, Fairchild revealed his feelings concerning physical hygiene . The Keith brothers decided to give Fairchild a hot water bath .
 Pat Fairchild often lives up the atmosphere with his direct philosophy on life . Fairchild is an everpresent person in the Keith Press scene .
 Fairchild, a permanent fixture around the press for over a half century, chats with Thomas Keith, Hindsonian publisher, during his lunch hour . Fairchild has been a regular fixture of the media for more than 50 years .
 Her high school life at Raymond High also involved music, as does her life now at Hinds . Her life now involves music .
 Kathy's vocal cords yield a sleepy-Southern sound typical of Raymond products . Raymond products are a source of delight to Kathy’s acquaintances .
 The dancing fingers aren’t left unused, however, since Kathy’s conversation is usually accompanied by various hand explanations . Kathy often uses her dancing fingers to explain her conversations .
 Miss Susan Brown, western, civilization instructor who is a friend and former instructor of Kathy, summed up this unusual girl, by saying, ""Kathy is a very capable girl," said a friend .
 Circle K Decides To Repair Entering Signboard At Hinds Junior College . Signboard at the entrance to the campus was the main object of business at Thursday’s Circle K supper meeting .
 The club which gave the signs two years ago, mentioned several improvements . Among them was replacing the picture of the eagle with a silhouette of a boy and girl in cap and gown .
 It was decided that any club may have its insignia painted on the sign by contacting a Circle K member and giving the necessary details .
 The dance would be held on the Friday night before Christmas holidays begin . Under the sponsorship of the freshman and sophomore class and Circle K Club, the dance will be held .
 A committee was formed to discuss various facets of the dance, including band, decoration, and concessions . The committee is looking at the band, decorations and concessions for the event .
 Freshman officers will be elected as soon as Freshmen officers are elected . More specific plans will be announced soon .
 Presidents Council Names Committees At Today’s Meeting Presidents Council met this afternoon at 4:45 in the private dining hall of the cafeteria for a special meeting .
 Committees were designed to set up Freshman Day rules for next year and work on a constitution for the Presidents Council .
 Reports made by each member/'president of a club, about the organization and activities of his group . Reports were made by members of the club .
 Robert Mayo met with the group for the supper meeting . Robert Mayo, administrative assistant, met with them for the meeting .
 Music has always been the language of life for Kathy Kilby, and once more her vocal cords and dancing fingers have brought honors to the Raymond sophomore . Raymond sophomore is a junior at the Raymond University .
 In the 16-county district Farm Bureau contest held in the Hinds auditorium recently Kathy was selected Miss Farm Bureau . Kathy is a member of the Farm Bureau in 16 counties across the state .
 The next step is the state contest on November 13, 14 at the Hotel Heidelberg in Jackson, Jackson .
 The same judging procedure will be used, but with only five girls in competition . Only five girls will compete in the competition at the event in London .
 The winner of the state contest will go to the National Convention in Atlanta later this year . The National Convention will be held at the convention in Atlanta .
 Other duties will include speaking at various luncheons, banquets and affairs of the Farm Bureau .
 Kathy won first place in the state-wide talent contest sponsored by the Farm Bureau last fall . Kathy won the right to perform at the National Convention in Chicago .
 The 19-year-old music major developed her knack for music early in life, becoming a pianist for Raymond Methodist Church at age 13 . She is currently a member of the church .
 Homecoming Queen Hilda dreams up to open a tamale can, but Bullock can open it up .
 Talkative Hilda regularly treats does take some originality . Northside suitemates to assorted rarities .
 Hilda Bullock has been selected by the Hinds student body to reign as queen of the Homecoming celebration this week end . Bullock is a bouncing, bubbling barrel of fun .
 The 19-year-old blonde has a mountainous list of other admirable qualities . Perfectly exemplifies the classic “Five foot two, eyes of blue,” this year’s blonde .
 Smith of Jackson, Jackson, began amassing honors while a student at Enochs Junior High . Smith is the sprightly co-ed of Jackson .
 She was a cheerleader, class officer, listed in Who's Who, and chosen Miss Enochs . She was also a class officer at school .
 Entry at Jackson Central brought titles from Miss Thermo-Jac to Miss Central High to Miss Junior Miss Jackson .
 A listing of Hilda's high school activities would take a lot of space . Hilda was a member of her high school team .
 Artificial flowers and pumpkin shaped candles contributed to the seasonal atmosphere at the event .
 A taffy pull proved to be quiet sticky, and some of the girls got wet hair from bobbing for apples . The girls bobbed for apples in a bobbing chair .
 Another game was to feed a partner chocolate pudding while blind folded . Another was to eat chocolate pudding blind folded while blindfolded .
 Steve Sloop, a senior at Belhaven College, is in charge of the Westminster Fellowship at Hinds . Sloop is a junior at the school .
 Hinds’ gay queen was also Homecoming queen for Central, serving as a member of the court three years . Hinds' gay queen also served as Homecoming Queen for Central .
 This year marks the third time Hilda and her younger sister, Kaye, have been members of the same court . Incidentally, this year marks third time the two sisters have been on the court .
 Hilda was a member of the 1961 Homecoming Court, a campus favorite, one of the top five beauties, and an alternate to Miss Hinds Junior College . She was an alternate for Miss Hind's Junior College and a campus favourite . Hilda also was a Homecoming Queen
 Hinds has shared its talented product with other parts of the state and nation through Hi-Steppers . Hinds is proud to share its talented talent with the world through the program . Hi-Stppers are a team from Hinds County .
 "Rarely does one see the doll-shaped face not in motion. And it must be so," says the author .
 November is the month of November for water skiing in the U.S. This year's water skiing season is the perfect time to take a break .
 Hilda: "I think everyone should be forced to vote —you know, like in Denmark" Hilda says she thinks everyone should vote .
 A self-described ""motor-mouth,"" she willingly continued to transfer to the virtues of old time best .
 Hilda does her part to correct that situation with a friendly word for all . "Hilda" is Hilda's first episode of a new series of American Horror Horror Stories .
 According to her Northside suitemates, after Hilda has virtually talked them to death she invites them over for potted meat canapes and chili .
 Still in doubt about her college after Hinds, Hilda will doubtlessly remain the same friendly, natural and talkative young lady she is today .
 Boyd McPhail, president of Circle K, remarked, "If I had a sister that is not really mine, it would be Hilda" Hilda .
 The award winner's farm on Spring Ridge Road is filled with agricultural interests . His farm fills many hours of work and pleasure for the award winner .
 President McLendon, an educator, has an avid interest in the land, its produce and animals that live off the land . McLendon: "Like the lawyer who secretly desires to become an actor, McLendon is an avid fan of the land"
 Many after school hours are spent in the planning, preparation and operation of his property and its cattle . The property is a popular cattle farm in South Australia .
 On several occasions, he journeys to his farm to check on his cattle and land before going home .
 He takes particular pride in his herd of 35 fully registered herefords . He takes special pride in keeping his herd alive .
 Mac Mac appears to have an interest in agriculture in the sixties . He has also seemed to make it an important part of his past . Mr Mac has a history of interest in farming in the 1960s .
 During the war years, he personally looked after the college herd—an outstanding feat for a college president . The college president personally looked at the college during the war .
 Hinds has been the leader in developing the agriculture program at Hinds . In reality, the feat isn't so outstanding, considering that he has developed the program himself .
 Mac's own cattle is sold to 4-H and to the FFA (Future Farmers of America) boys in This area and to cattlemen in the various counties of the state . Mac sells his own cattle to 4H and FFA boys in this area .
 President McLendon is one of the directors of the Hinds County' Livestock Association, in Edwards, Mississippi . He is well known for taking an active part in developing the facilities of the town .
 Mac Mac has been awarded a prestigious award for his role as President of Hinds . He also has time for his fascinating interest in southern agriculture . Mac Mac is also known for his interest in agriculture .
 President McLendon doesn't take kindly to shooting bulls of any kind, especially Herefords .
 HINDSONIAN Page 5: 1962 . Richard Adkins, of the science department, peers searchingly through the new 12 inch reflector telescope .
 Open house will be held for the public Saturday afternoon from 3:30 to 5:00 . Open house is also open for an hour after the ball game that night .
 According to science instructors, both Saturn and Jupiter will be visible at this time . The sun will also be visible in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Everyone from cheerleaders like Karen McBride to class officers like George Tannous. The class officers are a class of honor students .
 Their expressions will vary from worried-anxiety and grim-determination to smug-satisfaction and wild-exuberance .
 Some of the players, like Steve Erwin and Jimmy Tweedle, play to accomplish the impossible . Some of them play to achieve the impossible, including the impossible.
 The story goes that Steve will bid game with only four points in his hand, and Jim will make it . Jim will win the game, and Steve will win it, according to the story .
 Richard and Irene Adkins have been married for more than 20 years . Adkins are the owners of the Adkins' home in Richmond, Virginia .
 Both of the Adkins are avid bridge players and frequently invite students to play at their house . The Adkins often invite people to play bridge at their home .
 An invitation to play there, especially on a Saturday night, is something that no bridge player could ever resist . Bridge players can't resist a chance to play at the club .
 If it happens to be a Tuesday afternoon and you're hunting a game, try the accounting room in the Academic Building . The accounting room is located in Academic Building on campus .
 The school feels that the bridge playing may be just a fad, so they are sponsoring it on a trial basis . Bridge playing is being sponsored by the school in the hope it will be a success .
 If there is enough response, the club will be established as an official club . If there are enough response then it will become official club in the UK .
 A pay telephone has been installed in Central Dormitory . It was installed by Dean Benton, Dean of Men .
 The action reportedly took place in response to a petition by dormitory students a few weeks ago . The action was reportedly a response to the petition by the dormitory dormitory .
 Benton presented the paper to Bell Telephone Company in Jackson, Mississippi . Benton's paper was given by Benton, who presented it to Bell telephone company .
 1962-63 EAGLE Merchants & Planters Bank RAYMOND MISSISSIPPI Page 6 HINDSONIAN October 31, 1962 .
 Holmes and Jones were supposed to be powers according to the coaches' pre-season picks of the coaches . The pair are expected to be a major force in the 2015-16 season .
 Jones and Holmes are both exactly mid-way in the list of 12 schools in the conference . Jones is a junior at the University of Maryland . Holmes is a senior at the university .
 Copiah-Lincoln and East Mississippi turned out to be the powers . Pearl River, Mississippi Delta and Perkinston are running them a close race . Copiah, Lincoln, East Mississippi and Pearl River are also in the race .
 The Wesson Wolves have the best chance of topping the circuit this season . Looking over the three week schedule remaining this season it seems that the Wolves will be the best .
 This week they invade Holmes Bulldog territory followed by games with Southwest, Hinds and Hinds . This week's games will be the first time the team has played in this week's opening game .
 Barring any unforeseen injuries, they should come out with a final season record of nine wins against their one loss . The final season of the season should see them finish with nine wins and one defeat .
 East Mississippi, currently occupying the top slot with Co-Lin, is by-standers . Mississippi Delta will meet East Mississippi Delta November 15 .
 Holmes and Perkinston must be dealt with first, and either is capable of handing the Lions a loss . The shock could come earlier however, as Holmes and Perkinston must face first . The Lions are currently unbeaten in the Premier League .
 Perkinston gained their reputation at the start of the season, and injuries have taken their toll . The club are currently fourth in the Premier League table .
 It seems likely that the only scrap they have left will be with East Mississippi this week .
 So either the Lions or the Bulldogs are about to climb out of the race. So either of them is going to be able to do so .
 Pearl River should go undefeated for their remaining three games against East Central, Jones and Hinds . Mississippi Delta will roll over Jones and Northwest before meeting East Mississippi . Pearl River will play East Central and Mississippi Delta .
 Anything could happen in this rough and tumble brand of pigskin play . Upsets could throw all of the predictions out, and upsets may throw out the predictions .
 Referees put the ball back 15 yards during the Hinds Eagle vs. Jones Bobcat game in Laurel last Saturday . Referee: "Referee: The ball back is 15 yards, 15 yards"
 Coach Joe Renfroe will be using a complete freshman team as his starters this week . The freshman team is a complete freshmen team .
 Putting this group of men in action will give next years sophomores valuable game experience and provide an experienced batch of returnees for the 1963 season . Putting the group of players in action is a good way to prepare for next years .
 This right-minded type of thinking could make Hinds a power to deal with in future games . Hinds' right-thinking could make him a power in future matches .
 The Eagles are about to break a record set in 1958 . It’s interesting to note that the Eagles are breaking the record .
 During the next game or so it would be interesting to count up the passes and watch the mark fall .
 From the sideslines, the Baton Rouge boys seem to be a much better team . Jerry Stovall and Danny LeBlanc are better in this instance . From the standslines the LSU team seems to be much better than the New England Patriots .
 Both are fine, speedy runners that have made it a habit of breaking loose when a score is needed . Both players are fine but are not always going to score in the game .
 The Pelican State crew leads the SEC in rushing . This is one of the reasons why the SEC leads the nation's rushing ranks .
 The Rebels, although fielding a good grid team, have not met any real competition yet . Vandy, Houston, Tulane and Mem,phis State couldn't be put into LSU's class .
 The LSU cheerleaders, student body and band struck up the famous “Go to Hades Ole Miss” song .
 68,000 fans expected to pack the stadium for the clash with Manchester United .
 Wesson Wolves Teach Perk Bulldogs Valuable -But Costly Grid Lesson . When Wolves are on the prowl little Bulldogs should stay at home .
 Perkinston’s dog team was defeated 28-7 in the backyard of the Wesson Wolves . The Wolves beat the dog team in their backyard on Saturday .
 The Lions from Scooba retained their first place standing by taking Itawamba to the cleaners via a 20-6 score . The Lions took the win over the Itawambasians by a score of 20.6 .
 Perkinston will play East Mississippi on the Lions home field this week . The feature game of this week will pit the Lions against East Mississippi . The game will be held at the Lions' home field .
 Copiah Lincoln will travel to Holmes while Pearl River will play East Central . Copiah and Pearl River travel to East Central at East Central each time .
 If Perk lucks up and downs favored East Mississippi this week, five teams will be in first place . Pearl River and Mississippi Delta also win while Co-Lin loses . Next week's standings will find five teams in first position .
 Co-Lin is favored to top Holmes, and Pearl River is expected to dump East Central . Pearl River also expected to be dumped by Pearl River .
 East Mississippi 6 1 0 15654 Copiah-Lincoln 6 1 1 0 14894 Miss. Miss. East Mississippi is 6 1 . 1-0-0 with East Mississippi at Copiah, Lincoln . Miss. South Mississippi is one of the top two teams in the league
 Hinds and Jones were rated to be nearly equal by conference records . The score after the two teams met last Saturday in Laurel’s Watkins Stadium proved different . Hinds: Hinds, Jones: "It's not easy to say, but it's a good thing"
 Scoring in every quarter except the second, the Bobcats rolled up 32 points and held the Eagles scoreless . The Bobcats scored 32 points in 32-0 victory over the Eagles .
 Jones' manpower breaks loose after halftime to net two touchdowns in each of the final two periods . The well-balanced Jones attack produced three touchdowns running and two by air, with Jones’ manpower breaking loose .
 Halfway through the first quarter, the Bobcats scored their first touchdown . The Bobcats had a touchdown in the first half .
 After driving from their own five-yard line to the Eagle 28, the Bobcats pitched the six point toss . In a series of 14 plays and four first downs, the Eagle scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 David Pridgen grabbed the pass in the end zone from quarterback Mike McClellan throwing . The end of the season ended with a touchdown for the Raiders . The Raiders won the Super Bowl in 2008 .
 On the first Eagle play, the Bobcats regained control via the same route they had lost it, fumble-itis . However, the break was negligible, for on the second Eagle play .
 The Hi-Steppers paraded on and off the field before the Bobcats could score again . The Bobcats never scored again in the game .
 Jones forced Hinds to punt when three downs produced only ’ two yards . Fine kick-off return by Percy Boell remained uncashed .
 David Lyons stood in the end zone and received the pass from halfback Billy Burnette who also kicked the extra point . David Lyons caught the pass and ran in for the touchdown .
 For the second time in the half, the Eagles took the ball and gained no yardage on four attempts . They handed the ball over to the Bobcats on their own 26 . The Eagles gained no yards in the first half .
 Fullback Lester Aultman plowed through the center of the Eagle line from the 10-yard line to score a touchdown . Fullback Aultman scored the touchdown in the first quarter .
 Jones team led 20-0 at the start of the final period . Burnette’s kick was good .
 The Eagles regained control of the ball for the kick-off return and two plays, but a dropped ball was picked up by fullback Joe Mouney . Mouney picked up the ball during the Eagles' two plays .
 Hinds trailed only 10-4 in first downs at intermission, but was behind 16-4 at the end of the game . Hinds had 10-10 first downs, 10-0 first downs and 10-6 first downs in first half .
 Renfroe during his 15 year reign at Hinds has taken teams to the Little Rose Bowl, Spindle Top Bowl, Oleander Bowl and two Lions Bowl games . He has also won two of his teams to Little Rose and two other Bowls .
 Itawamba Indians Reported Out To Wreck Hinds Homecoming Contest This Saturday . Indians will be on the warpath this weekend in Raymond area, trying to wreck the Hinds Eagles Homecoming .
 Head Coach Joe Renfroe has completely changed his starting line-up for the Eagles . From the looks of past records they should accomplish this mission .
 Using an entire freshman crew the Eagles will field the nucleus of the 1963 edition of the Hinds team, giving them valuable experience in game action . The team will field an entire freshmen crew .
 Game time has been moved up to 7:30 for the contest instead of 8:00m. due to the Homecoming ceremonies at halftime . Game time will be moved up from 8:30 a.m. for the game .
 Quarterback Percy Boell, halfback Jim Buell and Butch Greer will start for the first time . Quarterback Boell leads the list of starters, with halfback Butch Guell also playing .
 The fullback slot is a question mark since freshman Jimmy Dukes is still out due to an injured foot . The fullback spot is a big question mark .
 Starting at center will be Oscar Teasley, John Couch and Robert Eady at guards, and Mike Mahoney and Rick Thrash at tackle . The new team will be based at center, with John Couch, John Eady, Robert Mahoney, Rick Th Thrash, Mike Mah
 Larry Newell, suffering from an injured knee, might take Thrash's place if he responds to treatment before game time . Newell might take his place in the absence of injured knee injury .
 Last week, the Eagles beat the Bobcats 32-0 in Laurel, Maryland . The Bobcats were the slightly favored Bobcats . The Eagles won the game in Laurel .
 The Eagles have been working on both offense and defense in preparation for the Indians . The Eagles were beaten by the Indians in their first game of the season .
 Line Coach Ivan Rosamond has been drilling the offensive blockers and defensive tacklers . Renfroe has taken the backfield men aside for special work .
 Backfield drills included intensive practice on rushing plays after the squad gained only 35 yards in last Saturday's defeat . The squad gained just 35 yards of yards in the defeat at Wembley last Saturday .
 Passing also received attention with an eye on the Hinds record set in 1958 . Passing also got attention with a eye on a record set by Hinds .
 Central beat Southside in MRA football competition last week 7-6 . Southside Dumped In MRA Football . Top ranked Central defeated Southside .
 Shangri-La defeated Eastside 19-6 during the past week’s intramural activities . Eastside defeated Shangri La 19-5 in the last round of the intramurals .
 Central was called off because of bad weather, Southside competed against Eastside today . Results are not yet complete, but results are still pending .
 Lynn Earnest, president of the Men’s Recreational Association, makes clear that girls who wish to attend the games may do so . Earnest: Girls may be allowed to attend games in the event .
 Five Hindsonian Staffers attended the annual fall conference of the Mississippi Junior College Press Association . Students traveled to Southwest Junior College at Summit for the conference .
 Delegates representing seven junior colleges were addressed by Miss Una Harris, East Central, former state advisor . Miss Harris was the state's first female state advisor in the state .
 The four divisions included elements of reporting and newswriting, headlining; editorial page; advertising; feature writing. Feature writing. Headlining; headlining, editorial page .
 All sessions continued Saturday morning, with additional meetings on sports writing and photography . All sessions were held Saturday morning .
 Highlight of the conference was the Friday evening buffet supper at Percy Quin Lodge near McComb . The conference was held in McComb, Arkansas .
 Guest speaker was Purser Hewitt, executive editor of the Clarion-Ledger . The Clarion Ledger will host a panel of experts from Mississippi Mississippi .
 He delighted the Hinds delegation by basing the text of his speech on a recent Hindsonian editorial, “Little Shots Grow,” by Ralph Hemphill . The Hindsonian is a Hindsonian nation .
 Joe White, executive editor of the HINDSONIAN and president of the MJCPA, presided . Joe White is the president and executive editor . He is also the president of a national magazine .
 Conclusion of the conference was a luncheon at which Glen Jones, former MJCPA president now associated with Mississippi Chemical Corporation gave the main address .
 Modern Language Club held its regular Thursday night meeting October 25 in the Audio Visual Room . Language Clubbers travel to Mexico via Trip Pictures .
 Miss Hilda Ree Davis, sponsor of the organization, conducted the program, showing slides of Mexico . Miss Ree Davis was a member of the group .
 Miss Davis highlighted the pictures with vivid details she learned while studying in Mexico .
 The club, which meets every other Thursday night, will not meet next week due to tests . The club will meet again next week but will not be in action until September .
 Announcements will be made soon concerning the date of the next meeting . Announcements are expected to be made about the date for the next meetings .
 Modern Language Club is open to all students taking a foreign language . Club is also open to those interested in learning more about other countries .
 Abigale is Dean Billingham, played by Robert Everett, a freshman at Vicksburg .
 Following six long weeks of rehearsals, the curtain will rise tomorrow evening at 8:00 o’clock in the Hinds Auditorium . The show will be held at 8.30pm .
 Newman Club met Monday night, October 29, in the Administration Building . Newman Club is the largest campus club in the United States .
 Discussion was held on plans for a dance on November 15 from 6:00 to 7:15m. in the Recreation Hall . The dance will take place in the recreation hall on Nov. 15 .
 Richard’s Parish in Jackson will speak to the group November 26 at 6:00 m. in room 12 of the Administration Building .
 President Scottye Troyer invites all interested students to attend the discussion . The discussion will be held at 6 p.m. ET on Monday .
 Under group discussion was a series of films about health, which will be shown on the campus this year .
 Those elected were Kay Beasley, secretary; Mary Thomas, treasurer; and Jack Hayes, reporter . Those elected also elected were Mary Thomas and Mary Beasley .
 Of[ficers returning from last year are Walter Bishop, president; Carolyn McKey, vice-president; and Patsy Owen, program chairman . Patsy O'Neill is program chairman, Walter Bishop is president of the organization and vice-vice-president .
 The groups meets at 2A period Friday in the accounting room of the Academic Building .
 Hinds’ WAA met Thursday night, October 25, to elect two freshmen representatives to the official council and to make plans for the Freshmen-Sophomore Powder Puff football game . Hinds' WAA also made plans for a freshman-sophomore game .
 Freshmen Ann Strickland and Ann Graham were selected for the official council . Ann Graham was the first woman to be named as a member of the council .
 Freshmen girls chose Ann Pharr and Ann Strickland captains for the freshman football team . Freshmen football team captains are Ann Phar and AnnStrickland . Ann Strrickland and Ann Phrarr were captains for freshman football .
 Jane O’Neal, Frances Pickett, and Patsy Roberts will captain the sophomores . Jane O'Neal will be the captain of the sophomore class .
 Membership in the Women’s Athletic Association is not necessary, president Frances Pickett explained . Pickett said membership in the WAA was not necessary for women's athletes .
 Hinds fall production of “Mother is a Freshman’ is presented in the college auditorium tomorrow night .
 Hinds production of “Mother is a Freshman” directed by Fred Brooks . The production has been in rehearsal for the past six weeks and is ready to hit the boards and gain the applause .
 Playing the lead in Thursday's staging will be Paula Jo Hopson, as Abigale, the mother who desires an education for financial reasons . The play is set to be re-imagined as the mother of a student seeking an education .
 Portraying the fashionable and available professor on campus, who enjoys teaching an older woman, will be Warren Nybo . The show will be based on a professor who likes teaching older women .
 As the play progresses, Susan, Abigale’s daughter, played by Peggy Smallwood, loudly professes, “I’m a sophomore.” The play is set in New York .
 Contact lenses fitted and lenses ground to your Doctor's Prescription . Artificial eyes fitted . Sunglasses fitted • Sunglasses • Frame Adjustments FL 2-7625 .
 If Susan had known the sensation her good-looking mother would cause when she hit the college, she would have wailed even louder . Susan's mother was a model for the school .
 Playing the part of Dean Gillingham in the college production will be Robert Everett . The college production is set to be held at the University of Cambridge .
 Others include Sylvia, played by Sanna Fortson; Bill portrayed by Bill Forester and BoBo played by Mike Oliver . Others are Sylvia, portrayed by Sannas Fortson and Bill portrayed as Bill .
 John Leggett will portray Howie Howie; Harry Jacobson as Jack; Diane Abernathy as Mrs. Mrs. Howie . Diane Aberstathy will play Mrs. Jack in the new series .
 Claudice Dees Rosedale as Carrie. Miller; Marie Dollar as Helen; Ann Stephenson as Bunny; Carol Maxwell as Clara; Libby Allen as Marge. Marge; Liby Allen as . Marge .
 BRANCH OFFICES at WESTLAND and MEADOWBROOK up will be headed by Mary Ellen Edwards .
 Opening night promises to be a successful one for the play cast and the audience . Opening night of the play will be a success for the cast and audience .
 At least it makes the student realize what would happen if their mother were a freshman . At least the student realizes what would be the same thing as their mother .
 Jimmy Arrington's son, Jamie Arrington, revised by his son, October 1, 1962 . Arrington died September 29, 1957, at the age of 60 .
 The King was afraid of the Barnettites, as a people of the southern kingdom, lest they mark him and close their sunny football fields to him . The King said he feared spending his days on the bleak and dreary island .
 King John spoke the words given unto him by Little Brother Bobby saying, “Hearken unto me, my people, and give ear unto me”
 Throughout the kingdom I command that all men, the white, the black, the red and the red, the yellow and the beasts of the earth and the cattle and everything that creepeth shall no longer follow after their kind . I command all men and the black of the world, the
 The sheep shall lie down with the lion, the mice with the cats, the dogs with the crocodiles. The dogs with crocodiles, the sheep will lie with the lions, the cats with the dogs, the animals with the animals .
 The Trace Association re-elected drive in the 1930’s which made the dream of the Trace a reality . King John closed his ears to their protests and a people rose up and smote him .
 Historian says he doubts nation or Mississippi realizes significance of the Parkway .
 The Trace, he says, has carried Andrew Jackson’s democracy on into the White House . The Trace has carried the legacy of Andrew Jackson's democracy into the presidency .
 Local Clubs Plan Concession Stands At Saturday Game j Circle K and Phi Theta Kappa will sponsor concessions at the Homecoming game this Saturday night .
 These two groups conduct the program at each home football and basketball game . The program is conducted by each team at each game .
 Approximately eight members have been selected to work in the concession stands and circulate through the bleachers . Approximately eight of them will work in concession stands .
 Miss Mildred Herrin and Jack Treloar will supervise the work, as sponsors of the clubs . The clubs' sponsors will also supervise their work .
 White explained that the edition dll consist of approximately tweny pages and a full color cover . White explained the cover will be approximately two pages long .
 Special editorial articles and reorts from citizens and students like will be presented . Students will be able to share their views of the school .
 Co-operaion between Hindsonian staff nd English department will suply creative features . Co-operation between the Hindsonian . staff and English department .
 Students contribute literary articles through their English instructors or by giving their work to a member of the HINDSONIAN staff . Students will contribute .
 There will be no restriction on content, though Christmas features will be given precedence . There will also be no restrictions on content in the festive period .
 The magazine supplement will be folded and inserted into the regular Christmas edition of the newspaper .
 Other such literary editions will be an annual publication, an nounces Kent Prince, Public .
 Hilda Bullock and her sister Kaye serve as double Hinds Honeys for this week . Hilda, Kaye Bullock, Hilda and Kaye are double Honey sisters . The pair are celebrating their 30th anniversary of their first appearance .
 Four Mississippians recently returned from touring industrial education centers in North Carolina . Robert Mayo, Hinds administrative assistant, was among a group of four . Mayo was a member of the group .
 Purpose of the trip was to study the building designs, equipment, preparation, and administration of the Twenty industrial centers .
 Sponsored by former North Carolina governor Luther Hodges, now Secretary of Commerce in the Kennedy administration, the technical program began four years ago .
 Center training in skills range from very elementary to highly complicated skills . Skills include medical technology, civil technology, electronics technology and practical nursing .
 Tests given to each entering student, with those regis tering higher scores placed in tech nical training .
 North Carolina does not have a junior college system, but these centers were built by local funds and is by local school units and the state education board .
 Mayo stated, “If we incorporate such a plan into our junior college system, we can do it for less than North Carolina because we have the laboratories already," Mayo said .
 Mayo continued, “There are no public tax-supported junior colleges in North Carolina, but as a result of the establishing of the industrial centers, people are requesting that at each center a junior college be established to add academic work to technical work . Mayo continued to say that there are
 A visiting team from North Carolina is expected to visit Mississippi next summer to study the junior college system . A Mississippi junior college team will visit next summer .
 Expansion of the North Carolina program is planned, and the centers will supply over 7,000 technicians and 20,000 skilled craftsmen, within the next three years .
 Hinds Junior College self-study program has moved into high gear with completion of departmental evaluations . Emphasis now turns to committee studies and detailed evaluations .
 Roy Bozeman, center, serv^ uctl0n ^ er o f the project, and offered for sale articles ranging from truck bodies to cars .
 Dr. Fortenberry, president of Copiah-Lincoln Junior College and a member of the Mississippi Junior College Commission, spoke at the event . Dr.Fortenberry: "I'm a college president. I'm a junior college student. I love my students. They're
 Russell Levanway, an associate of the Mississippi Technological Research Commission, made the three-day trip with Mayo . Mayo is a member of the state's Technological Commission .
 Nominations for freshman class officers were made Monday in a special class meeting . The freshman class meeting was held in honor of freshman class members .
 Eddie Livingston, Vicksburg, will be listed on the ballot as a write-in candidate . Eddie Livingston will run as a candidate for the seat in the state of Mississippi .
 Nominated for vice-president are Bill Dunlap, Ray Sullivan, Terry; and Jim Toombs, Jackson, Jackson . Nominated also for president of the Jackson area .
 Seeking the office of secretary are Elaine Birdsong, Edwards, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Vicksburg; and Ann Stephenson, Raymond . Seeking the position of secretary is Elaine Birdsongs, Edwards; Vicky . Birdsong is seeking the job of secretary .
 Nominated for treasurer are Margie Lee, Jackson, Jackson; Carole Maxwell, Raymond; Sandra Weaver, Utica; and Joy Williams, Jackson . Nominated also for treasurer is Margie .
 Mr and Miss Hinds Junior College were chosen today in the annual Who’s Who election . Voting takes place today . The annual Who's Who election takes place at Hinds junior College .
 Petitions distributed as students filed out of the general assembly . Petitions were distributed to students as they left the assembly .
 Debate Teams Earn Superior , Excellent At Ruston Tourney in Louisiana . Hinds debate squad members received superior and excellent ratings in debate competition .
 Members of the two Hinds Teams j attending were Belva Watkins, Jane Land, Carol Fortier, Edith Brummett, Woody May, and Ralph Hemphill . The Hinds Team also attended .
 Hemphill was a member of the state champion junior college debate team from Hinds last year . He was a pre-law student from Jackson, Mississippi, and a junior college junior college senior .
 Resolved that the NonCommunist Nations of the World Should Establish an Economic Community . Resolved . that the nonCommunist nations of the world should establish an economic community. Resolved: Noncommunist Nations should establish a community .
 Self-study procedure is designed to help colleges and universities reassess their objectives, measure success in attaining them, explore ways and means by which educational efficiency may be improved and prepare for the everincreasing demands of higher learning .
 Second annual Hinds ‘Parade of Beauty’ scheduled for December 6 . Petitions available Friday to students .
 Petitions for nominations will be available in the public relations office Friday, November 16 . Nominations must be returned to Kent Prince by November 30 .
 The identity of the top beauty will remain secret until the release of the yearbook . Top five beauties will be selected from the nominees, with the identity remaining secret .
 Alon Bee, director of HiSteppers, will supervise the pageant presentation . The pageant will be held in New York City .
 The Eagle stage band, directed by Jim Morris, will perform several numbers throughout the evening . The Eagle band will also perform during the performances .
 Other Hinds talent will be presented while the audience awaits the judges decision . The audience will also be shown a selection of other talent talent .
 Judges for the ecent will be announced at a later date . The program is intended to clarify and evaluate purposes of schools .
 The Manual for the Institutional Self-Study and Periodic Visitation Program is being used as a guide . The manual for the institutional self-study and periodic visits will be used in the guide .
 Questionnaires have been sent to virtually every teacher concerning organizations, library facilities, financial conditions, physical plant, and faculty personnel . The committees are also looking at the physical plant and physical plant .
 Final drafts of major committee reports are due March 1, 1963, with the committee visitation in November of that year . Committee visitation is due in November .
 Circle K Completes Repairing Of Signs At School Entrance . Main signs on highway 18 at each entrance of the college have been repainted .
 Circle K furnished half the money needed and the college provided the rest . Circle K provided the money for the project .
 Circle K, a service club, purchased and erected by Circle K five years ago . Circle K are the service club who own the signs . The signs belong to Circle K and Circle K .
 President McPhail also announced that organizations wishing their name or insigna to be placed on sign should contact any member of the group . Organizations wishing their names and insigna are also encouraged to contact any .
 Circle K designed the signs to keep up with the modernistic advances made by the college . Circle K designs the signs for students and students .
 After I studied almost thirty minutes for each test they still flunked me. After studying for 30 minutes, they still failed me. "I studied almost 30 minutes a day for every test," she said .
 Wig Now Becomes Popular Apparel At Hom$, Campus . Little Man on Campus .
 After all, I’ve only been five or ten minutes late for my history class six times, I've only been 5 or 10 minutes late six times . I'm not always late for history class, but I've been late for class .
 "Every time she says something I’ll smart off about it and get the class to laugh at her," she says . "I’m not scared of her. She’s not afraid of her,” she adds .
 You should get part of your knowledge from social activities and parties. Well, I happen to belong to the class of society which believes that you should get all your knowledge out of social activities .
 Gone are the jumping on me about something or other. And it’s the same way at home ... my folks are always j te * f,rel, 9 hf * , , ,, . , , . ,, x x .
 The author's roommate was a Phi Theta Kappa member, straight A’s and all. And that silly roommate of mine ... a Phi theta Kappa Phi Phi Phi member .
 "I don’t know how he finds time to do that after studying every afternoon," he said . "I'm not sure how he found time to study," he added .
 Centuries ago a working man could kiss his brunette wife goodbye, return at lunch, and again at dinner . His wife would still be a brunette, not to his surprise .
 Later, with the use of bleaches, the unsuspecting husband would kiss a brunette wife goodbye in the morning and kiss a blonde hello in the evening . The use of the bleaches would also be used to disguise the appearance of a blonde .
 In the 60's, the married male population has stopped expecting the usual and has begun to expect the unusual . Now, in the fabulous 60's , the married men have become accustomed to the unusual things .
 According to this editorial, the name is punctuated correctly without an apostrophe . The name should be punctuated without a apostrophe, the editorial says .
 It is not run by any one person, but rather by the president of the sopomore class . It is directed by the students' president .
 Yesterday an announcement was released by the Presidents Council itself . The announcement was made by the President of the United States .
 W days a woman’s head remained the same color throughout her adult life . The color of a woman's head is often the same colour throughout her life . A photo of the color of her head was taken from a photo taken at a museum .
 To keep her husband and to protect what little sentiment and romance that remained in her marriage, the housewife usually refrained from bleaching her hair .
 She shops in her favorite department store and purchases inexpensive wigs of any color or style . Instead of buying wigs, she shops in a department store .
 Mondays it’s back in place as a wig and the husband is back in his steady habit of expecting the unusual . Mondays it's back in .
 Campuses, Hinds included, are the scenes of blooming blondes and ebony-topped coeds . Campuses are filled with blondes, co-ops and blondes .
 Romney outdistanced Democratic incumbent Swainson for the Governor’s seat . Romney won the Governor's seat in 2012 .
 Rodger Owenby, Ralph Hemphill and Vaughn Vamado are featured in this week's iReporters' weekly feature .
 Slide-Rule Course to be offered to Hinds students beginning Monday, November 19 . Hinds science department chairman announces course in slide-rule .
 The special course will be nonacademic credit . Classes will meet each Monday and Friday during the 2A period . The course will meet during that period .
 slide-rule not offered until second nine weeks period, thus enabling freshmen previously engaged in Education 10 to begin the course . General custom has been that slide rule not be offered until the second nine-week period . The new senator from Massachusetts will be a freshman senator .
 The Kennedys and Lodges have been battling for political predominance in this state for half a century of more than 50 years of more .
 The Lodges have a long way to go on the come-back trail before they will be strong enough to compete again on this level . Judging by this particular outcome, the Lodges still have a lot of work to do .
 Attorney General McCormick, who was Ted's Democratic primary opponent, probably set forth the shrewdest observation made in many of the campaigns . McCormick said, "Ted's primary opponent was shrewd"
 If Ted’s last name had been Jones instead of Kennedy, his campaign would have been a farce, he said . He pointed out that if Ted had his last name been Jones .
 Richard Nixon didn't see the handwriting on the wall in November of I960, when he lost the presidency, now he has surely seen it now . Richard Nixon was a Republican in the mid-'90s and '90s .
 Pat Brown, by defeating a former Republican Presidential candidate, might well have placed his name in the Vicepresidential slot on the 1964 Democratic ticket . At the same time, Pat Brown would have been a Democratic Vice President candidate .
 The people who talked Vice-President Lyndon Johnson into accepting that position and leaving the Senate, may well find themselves wandering where their relatives are when they talk about the government sues .
 At first, one might think the candidates were afraid to commit themselves. But they did commit themselves . The candidates have shown no hesitation in committing themselves .
 This assumption may be correct in some elections, but not in the above three or any other significant elections this year . The assumption may not be true in some election campaigns, however .
 Candidates were starved for something to say or attack . The opposite prevailed, the opposite prevailed . Candidates are starved for an attack on each other .
 There were two embargoes levied by the Kennedy administration; one around Cuba, and another around election deciding issues . The real reason no real issues came to light was that they were snowed under a barrage of ""Castro has missiles"" propaganda right at election time when platforms were being
 The girls’ Day Room in Main Dormitory is undergoing a gradual face-lifting . To see oursel's as it hers Day Room In Main Undergoes Uplifting
 It has put on a new coat of winter paint and new curtains adorn its walls . It is the first time it has ever been painted and decorated in the style of a museum .
 New tables and chairs have been ordered to add to the comfort of the day time home-away-fromhome . New chairs and tables have also been ordered .
 More improvements are being planned to make easier the already comfortable girls’ day-room . More improvements will be planned for the girls' day room .
 Roger Williams, world-famous pianist, will present “An Evening For You’s in concert at City Auditorium in Jackson Wednesday November 28 at 8:15m. Tickets available to Roger Williams Concert in Jackson .
 Williams will begin the show with ""Nola"" and ""Exodus/' and will perform in the styles of well known pianists . Williams will perform at least one of the most famous pianos .
 Campus Residents Voice Opinions Following Release Of Test Grades SgiSjStHrsSSS Hi-Steppers Model Wood-Pulp Dresses for Forestry Association November 9 .
 Hi-Steppers last Friday modeled dresses made completely from wood pulp at the Edwards Hotel before the Mississippi Forestry Convention in Mississippi .
 From all over Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas, members gathered at noon Friday to discuss the new fabric . The fabric promises to open up a whole new industry for wood . Governor Ross Barnett of Arkansas was among those at the meeting .
 Crowning of the queen this evening will climax two days of competition . Crowning will be the first of two days to take place in the world's largest event .
 Contestants will be judged by evening gown appearance, talent performance and in1 1 1 # ■ ■ a ^ V _ ■ in late August . Contestants are being judged by appearance and talent performance .
 The judging procedure was the same as on the state level . Sixteen counties were represented in the judging procedure .
 When it is perfected, the fabric, which appears to be a mixture of knit and tweed, will be stronger than cotton . The fabric is believed to be the fabric used to create a fabric that can withstand cotton .
 Contest winner will attend the National Convention in Atlanta scheduled for later this year . Kathy i s representing the West State contest winner will go to the convention in Atlanta .
 Hnn,ce Kae J ©rnigan, former the Farm Bureau throughout the Miss Mississippi, now secretary to ^ a * e * Dr. Dr. Kae . She will appear at luncheons, banquets and affairs of Miss Mississippi .
 Alon Bee, who narrated the show, reported that most of the apparel modeled were basic dresses with jackets, traveling dresses, plus hats also constructed from the fabric .
 As is always the case, midsemester exams revealed a certain number of exceptional grades, but at the same time showed that some students have not reached their full capacities . Annice Rae Jernigan, former President of the U.S. Department of Education, was awarded a
 We asked instructors and students for their opinions as to the cause of the failures . We asked several instructors to share their thoughts on the failures of students .
 M'ke Rabalais, psychology instructor, said the majority of students have the ability to do satisfactory work, but are obviously lacking motivation .
 I feel that some lack motivation because they don't have any definite goal or purpose . Some lack this motivation because of lack of a definite goal, purpose . I feel this motivation is more important than any other motivation to achieve .
 Miss Susan Brown, western civi zation instructor, answered, "I think that people are not willing to make the sacrifices necessary for good grades"
 There seems to be little desire to really learn something -- the goal is just to get by . The goal is to learn something and get by, not to learn anything .
 "On the whole, our students seem to be victims of the grand ole American average," says LZ Granderson .
 Boyd McPhail, Jackson sophomore replied, “The main reason that people are failing (speaking ior the sophomore class) is that we just have not settled down and started studying. “We just have just settled down," he said .
 Some students aren't used to essay tests, for one reason, student says . Darrell Slack, Jackson sophoniore, said, “Some students aren’t used to essays tests,” Slack said . Slack: "Some students are not used to writing tests. They
 J R Harris, political science instructor, answered, “The problem is wholly psychological.” He said the problem is "wholly psychological"
 This is the first time irt my teaching career that a trend has been this extensive. This is first time I've seen a trend like this in my career. I'm not surprised at the extent of the damage caused by this trend .
 Kathy is also a state Farm Bureau talent winner, and performed at the National Convention in Chicago last fall .
 Models Jo Schaeffer, Hilda Bullock, Becky Hollingsworth, Sharon Bearden, and Gloria White were models for the Convention . James Sparkman, and Hi-Step. Hi-step.com .
 Hinds Eagles, Wolves Prep For Closing Game To Be Played Thursday Night At Co-Lin . Copiah Lincoln, Hinds, Lincoln meet Thursday night .
 The final game of the season for both teams will be held on the Wesson Wolves’ home field . Both teams will play on the home field of the Wolves .
 Co-Lin has a much better season record (six wins and three losses) The Eagles, posting a season mark of three wins, five losses and a tie, are looking for an upset .
 Earlier in the season, Hinds met and defeated Southwest Southwest on their home field . Hinds defeated Southwest earlier this season .
 Hinds Coach Joe Renfroe is set to use the same team that has worked so well during the past two games . Hinds are looking to bounce back from a 0-0 loss loss at home .
 Quarterback Mike Vincent, with Dan Magee at fullback, leads the list . Quarterback Vincent and fullback Magee are the quarterbacks .
 Jimmy and Jerry Clark will control the ends with Richard Stacy filling in for additional pass catching duties . Richard Stacy will play for the rest of the season . Jimmy and Richard Clark will play the ends .
 Tackle posts will be manned by Mike Mahoney, Larry Newell, Oscar Teasley and Rick Thrash . The tackle posts will also be manned in addition to the tackle box .
 On quard duty for the Eagles will be John Couch, Carl Sullivan, and David Jones . John Couch and Carl Sullivan will be on duty for John Couch .
 Several new plays were introduced in last week's game with Pearl River and will be carried over into the Wolf battle, Renfroe reports . The Wolf vs. Pearl River will be the first time the two teams have met in the past week .
 Trip Hinds All-Star volleyball teams pitted skills with Belhaven College Monday night . Girls’ Volleyball Teams lose match in Belhaven .
 Team A consisted of Patsy Roberts, Ann Graham, Frances Pickett, Mary Thomas, Barbara Clack, and Sharon Beardon . Team A included Patsy . Roberts and Ann Graham .
 Team B consisted of Gerrye Sanford, Dottie Darling, Ann Pharr, Ann Strickland, Ginny Reed and Ginny Reed, Sandra Weaver, Jane O’Neal, and Olga Sue Deaton . Team B was the first team to win a gold medal in the
 A return match will be staged Monday night, November 19, in the Hinds girls’ gymnasium . The match will take place at Hinds Girls’ Gymnasium in Hinds .
 Eagle fullback Dan Magee almost clears the mass of Pearl River tacklers out to “stop him” in last Saturday night’s game . The Eagle's Nest is home to the Jackson-Mississippi Eagles .
 Magee scooped the ball and carried it for a major gain . The Pearl River team had just punted to Hinds’ 20 yard line . Magee moved the Eagles out of a tough position .
 Hinds Eagles romped over favored Itawamba 22-6 two weeks ago . Hinds’ Homecoming was a mudsplashed, happy affair .
 Fumbles handicapped both sides and the turf was soft and slippery . The turf was wet from rains that began before daylight, and the surface was slippery .
 The first touchdown came when halfback Woody Martin took a four-yard pass from quarterback Mike Vincent ran the conversion to clinch the contest .
 Before the half-time ceremony, Ken Johnson scored from the four yard line to give Hinds a 14-0 lead . Before half time, Johnson scored a goal from four yards line .
 In the third period, Vincent passed to Richard Stacy for the final tally, and Dan Magee ran the conversion .
 Itawamba’s only touchdown came in the second quarter on a four-yard pass from Russ Maxie to halfback Buster Brown .
 Pride And Reputation Fall As Top Teams Drop To Secondary Position . Living on pride and past reputation just doesn't pay-off in the fast Junior College grid loop .
 Three teams occupying first place positions in the conference were dropped by cellar dwelling opponents last week . This was proved last week by dropping three teams from first place to second in the league .
 Copiah-Lincoln, Pearl River and Perkinston found out the hard way FOR FAST AND QUALITY Photo Finishing TRY our service Either in Color or Black and White .
 This puts the conference first place slot in a two-way tie instead of a five place battle, as was I was I the case a week ago . This is the same as last week's five-place battle .
 Mississippi Delta and East Mississippi play each other on Thursday . The key game this week will be Mississippi Delta vs. East Mississippi .
 Hinds at Co-Lin, Southwest at Perkinston, and East Central at Northwest at Northwest . Other games on the same day are Hinds, Co.Lin and Southwest . Hinds and Southwest play each other .
 Hinds handled the pigskin 80 times, while their opponents took control for 44 plays . Hinds managed to control the ball throughout the game, handling 80 times .
 Pearl River grabbed the first touchdown after an Eagle fumble on the Wildcat's 30-yard line . Pearl River took the lead in the first quarter after a fumble was recovered by the Eagles .
 It took just seven plays and two minutes for the visi, tors to grab a 6-0 lead . The visi-tors grabbed the lead in just two minutes .
 A bad snap from center in the Pearl River end zone and an Eagle recovery put the Hinds team ahead early in the second period . The Eagle recovered from a bad snap in the end of the first period . Hinds scored two points in the game .
 Vincent pushed across from the one yard line to end a 60-yard drive . Vincent's performance was the highlight of the halftime show . Vincent scored a touchdown in the first half .
 Halfback Joel Pigott picked up a six-pointer for the visitors during the third period . Halfback Pigott scored from the two yard line over tackles .
 The Eagles marched from the Wildcat 45-yard Hne to the one-yard line . Helped by a 15-yard clipping penalty, the Eagles marched down the field . The Eagles won the game by a score of 14 points .
 Bobby Van Calsen pushed over from the two late in the fourth period for the final Pearl River score . The game ended in a 2-1 victory for the Pearl River River team .
 Hinds gathered 14 first downs against Pearl River, 10 for Pearl River . During the contest Hinds collected 14 first down downs .
 Eagles find firm footing for their running attack for first time this season . Eagles running attack finds firm footing this season for the first time in a row . Eagles have won the AFC East East Division in the past two weeks .
 Dan Magee, halfback Woody Martin, and safety man Percy Boell picked yard on top of yard straight up the middle . The Eagle's hard hitting offensive linemen, Dan MageE, Woody Martin and Percy Boells, picked yard and yard up the center .
 Defensively, the Eagles smashed through PR's protective shield with comparative ease . The Eagles consistently flattened the unwary Wildcat quarterback before his receivers could even get to the flats . Eagles beat the Wildcat in the Super Bowl on Sunday .
 Op* FEMININE FOOTBALLers would like to see some of the girls playing in the Powder Puff Football tournament gain practice each day on the regular grid turf . Would appreciate the help of the Op* team .
 Annual r Powder Puff’ Football Scramble Scheduled For November 20 In Stadium . Annual r 'Piff Puff' football scramble will take place November 20 .
 Wayne Fields and Nick Nichosome 50 HJC feminine grid-stars meet to prepare for November 20’s annual all girl game. las las . las.
 The powder wiU fly and lipstick wiU smear took place at 4:15 Tuesday afternoon (the day before school recesses) in the Hinds stadium in Hinds .
 Ann Stricklin, freshman team captain, says her team is ready for anything the Sophomores can dish out . The freshman says she and her team are ready to take on anything Sophomorees can dish .
 Each afternoon the girls practice and polish up their basic skills of passing, punting, and ruiv ning .
 The game, sponsored by the WAA, will help finance their trip to the coast . The game will help raise money for the team .
 At 3:30 and before the girls enter the scene the MRA All-Star football game will be played . At 3,30 and . before the . girls entered the scene, the . MRA . All-Stars will be in attendance at the event .
 Half-time will feature the provocative all-Male High Jumpers at half-time . Combs, Montgomery, will be in action at half time .
 Last week Southside took over first place in the standings when Central was upset by Eastside, 12 to 7, and Shangri-La was defeated by Southside, 24 to 18 . Southside is now first in the league .
 All-Stars from the teams meet the top rank team in the standings November 20 . The top-ranked teams meet each other in a game on November 20. The teams meet at the top of the standings .
 A committee, properly led and directed, can be a great force for good, author says . Committee system is just an excuse for inaction, he writes . Committee is an example of a committee being used in student government .
 Last week the Student Council met at the Duluth College of Veterinary Medicine and Belles Lettres to discuss purchasing a new doormat for the students union .
 Janitor of the students union threatened to quit unless a new doormat was installed immediately . Students union janitor Sherwin K Sigafoos threatened flatly to quit if a new dormat had been installed .
 Mr Sigafoos is much better off without the wart hog, who tusked him viciously, at least once a day . But companionship of 22 years is not lightly relinquished .
 The Student Council met, discussed the doormat for eight or ten hours, and then referred it to a committee . The student council met for eight to ten hours before deciding on the issue .
 Invictus Millstone was the doormat in the days before he died . He was the first person to be heard of by the Doormat . He is now the only person to have ever been heard of in the history of British sport .
 Invictus Millstone, chairman of the doormat committee, was a man of action . Millstone was naturally a smoker of Marlboro Cigarettes .
 Active men and women don’t have time to brood and bumble about their cigarettes, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Active men, women don't have time for bumble .
 In brief, dear friends, they need to be sure it's Marlboro—for if ever a smoke was true and trusty, it’s Mlboro . In brief: They need to make sure they need the smoke be true and trustworthy .
 Marlboros are true and trusty though Marlboroos are, your pleasure will be limited unless you light them . Get matches too, because you need to light them up .
 That the college build new schools of botany, hydraulic engineering, tropical medicine, Indo-Germanic languages, and millinery . The college will also build schools of engineering and tropical medicine .
 The college drop football, put a roof on the stadium, and turn it into a low-cost housing project for married students .
 That the college raise faculty salaries by $5000 per year across the board . That would be increased to $5,500 per year .
 The question of a doormat for the students union should be referred to a subcommittee . That the question of the student union is referred to the subcommittee .
 The big sweepstakes is starting now . It keeps going and growing through the school year .
 Detach your serialized L&M Grand Prix 50 License Plate from your entry blank . Detach the serialized license plate from the entry blank. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you need to feature on CNN iReport .
 Tear off the bottom panels from 5 packs from L&M King or Chesterfield King . Tear them off from the bottom of 5 packs of L &M King, L&m Box, Chesterfield Box or Chesterfields .
 Menthol smokers can enter with Oasis. panels, or acceptable substitutes (see entry blank) must accompany each entry . Oasis . panels must be accompanied by acceptable substitutes .
 Mail us the panels and your serialized entry blank ... it matches your license plate . Mail us a blank entry blank . It matches your plate .
 As your entries are received they become eligible for all subsequent drawings . As your entry is received, it becomes eligible for every subsequent drawing .
 These words, small in number, represent the purpose and spirit of man’s Thanksgiving season .
 Centuries ago, when the first ‘day of thanks’ was set aside, men were recuperating from a bleak and white winter . The first “Day of Thanks’s’t set aside’ is set aside to help recuperate from a
 There was no thanks in their hearts because, at the time, there was little of which of which to be thankful . There were no thanks to the people who died in the war .
 The turkey gobbled his way to the head of the pilgrim's menu, and there he’s stayed, throughout the centuries . The turkey has been known to gobble his way into the top of Thanksgiving menus .
 Our winters are often equally as bleak and our spring harvest just as sweet . Our winters often come as bleak as our spring crops do, but our spring can be sweet .
 The turkey is still a fowl's fowl and the pumpkin pie and mince meat paint pictures of rustic cabins, open fires and open fires .
 The men of yesterday listened to soft songs sung around crackling fires . We sit comfortably, warmed by central heating and listen to a traditional program . Perry Como's Thanksgiving Special .
 Thanksgiving is a season so filled with thanksgiving and goodwill that it is second only to Christmas . We’ve changed a lot, but we seldom sway from the basic concept of the season .
 Perhaps we have strengthened our belief and enjoyment of this time, through our changes, says the author of the book . We hope we can continue to enjoy this time in the UK .
 81 per cent of the 1256 academic-day and vocational students are from Hinds, Warren or Rankin counties . According to Miss Mildred Herrin, registrar of the school, the majority of students come from either Hinds or Warren counties .
 Only 30 students are from out-of-state, and only three students from foreign countries . Only 30 of the students are out of state, and three students are foreign .
 Forty-four per cent commute, either in private cars or on buses furnished by the college .
 A new girls dorm is under construction and will be ready for occupancy by second semester . A new dorm is also under construction at the University of Columbia University .
 The freshman class quietly chose officers for the current session during final elections Monday . Frosh Select Montgomery Prexy in Monday’s voting .
 Billy Joe Montgomery of Edwards, was selected president on the first ballot last Friday . Montgomery was selected by the Edwards County Board of Representatives . Montgomery is a member of Edwards County Council .
 Bill Dunlap, Jackson, defeated Ray Sullivan, Terry, for the vice-presidency . Dunlap defeated Sullivan for vice-presidential post .
 Billy Joe Montgomery was elected president of the freshman class Monday . In a close election, Montgomery was the only freshman to reach the top spot .
 Vicky Hazzlerigg, Klare Parker, Mike Rabalais, sponsor, Billy Dunlap and Carole Maxwell selected . Other officers selected were, from left-to-right, Klarke Parker, Vicky .
 Hinds Representatives to Attend Youth Congress At State Capitol . State of Mississippi will be i in Jackson on November 30 . Hinds representatives to attend Youth Congress .
 The annual Mississippi Speech Association sponsored Youth Congress meets . Mock session of the legislature will continue through December 1 . The annual conference will be held in Mississippi .
 The House of Representatives will be taken over by high schools from throughout the state . High schools from all over the state will be represented in the House . The House will be filled with high school students .
 Other senators from Hinds will be Woody May, Carol Fortier, Edith Brummett, Dawn McNeil, Belva Watkins, and Jane Land .
 Vicky Hazzlerigg, Vicksburg, won over Elaine Birdsong, Edwards, and Ann Stephenson, Raymond . Fred Brooks, head of the speech department, will accompany the delegation .
 Carole Maxwell, Raymond, edged Sandra Weaver, Utica, for the office of treasurer . Maxwell edged Weaver, U.S. senator, for office of secretary of state . Weaver was elected to office of state treasurer .
 Klare Parker, Vicksburg, defeated Kay Bullock, Jackson, in the race for reporter . Parker, Parker and Bullock both won the reporter contest .
 Mike Rabalais, psychology instructor, was chosen as sponsor for the class . The class was sponsored by the University of North Carolina Psychology .
 Posters, decorative and informative bills lined the walls and even the floors of campus buildings . Posters and informational bills were posted on the walls of the campus .
 The necessary personal campaigning accompanied the visible display . However quietly, it was not all that was visible .
 Nominations, for .officers took place Monday, November 12, in a special class meeting . The .officer class meeting took place November 12 at a special meeting .
 Forty-one students earned all A’s and Bs during the first nine weeks, according to registrar .
 Margaret Bonney, Hilda Bullock, Jackson; Carol Charlton, Louisville; Nancy Clayton, Jackson, Sheila Corbin, Vicksburg; and Jo Ann Gardner, Jackson .
 Mary Geiger, Columbia; Stewart Gibbes, Learned; Sylvia Gipson, Jackson; Johnny Hannon, Raymond; George Haynes, Utica; Patty Hebler, Vicksburg; and Patty Herring, Raymond . Gayle Holaday, Florida; Juanita H
 Martin, Greenville; Carolyn Melton, Clinton; Linda Murray, Jackson, Jackson; David Neal, Vicksburg . Mary Louise Polk, Prentiss; Lynn Powers, Utica . Lynn Powers and Lynn Powers also attended the service .
 Alice Shuff, Raymond; Bettye Simmons, Wiggins; Darell Slack, Jackson; Hartman Stanley; Hollis Thomas, Jackson . Martha Thompson, Philadelphia; Peggye White, Pelahatchie; Peggy Wilbanks, Carthage; Frank Wilson, Vicksburg .
 November 21, 1962 Students Ignore Selves . Students still gripe about it .
 "It seems to be a tradition on our campus as well as in other colleges throughout the nation ... the lack of social activity," she says . "It's a tradition," she adds .
 There always seems to be some excuse on the student’s part to cover up his portion of the blame . The student was charged with failing to report the incident .
 Groups of organizations try diligently to plan a form of recreation, dances, etc. Groups of groups of organizations plan to plan activities . LITTT F, MAN ON CAMPUS — .ujjja .
 No one will dispute the fact that the faculty doesn’t plan varied social functions. Nothing could be further from the truth. The faculty is planning varied social events. The University of Cambridge, Massachusetts, has a history of socializing .
 "They are here to instruct and guide, not to keep a lot of teen-agers happy and carefree twenty-24 hours a day," says the author of the book . "They're here to guide and guide," says author .
 Their workday begins at eight in the morning and usually continues until eight the next morning . The children's workday starts at eight a.m. and usually ends at 8 p.m., the next day .
 Students ignore the fact that the question should be directed toward themselves . Students ignore fact that they should be answering the question themselves .
 As long as students gripe and complain about affairs, nothing will be done . Students should not gripe about affairs and not complain about them, says professor .
 Double congratulations are in order for the Eagle squad and students who attended the Hinds vs. Hinds . Someone Struck Out -By RALPH .
 The Eagles have won three straight games and should be congratulated for their activity . Eagles have also won three consecutive games in a row .
 If it were not season’s end, the cooperation would surely last toward a championship . If the cooperation were to last, it would surely be toward a title .
 Rodger Owenby, Ralph Hemphill, Jdirian May, Belva Watkins, Vaughn Vamado, Scottye Troyer and Dannie Evans are among the winners .
 But there’s no joy in Mudville tonight; the losers were the ones who were right . The loser was right, and there's no joy there for Mudville fans .
 The returns show a Kennedy victory when tabulated according to the number of pro-Kennedy seats filled in the Senate . The returns are based on the pro- Kennedy seats filled by the Senate in the 1980s .
 A well-worn coalition of Southern Democrats and conservative Republicans is the only hope for the preservation of individual sovereignty . The only hold-out against self-suffocating socialism is a coalition of Democrats and Republicans .
 He was the only one with the national stature that could have brought the election deciding issues of taxation and fiscal policies, the role of the national government in local affairs, and foreign policy into the light .
 The GOP has been relying on the national popularity of war time patriots to win for them . The GOP relies heavily on the support of war-time patriots for its success .
 The long run ineffectiveness and weakness of this strategy is currently glaring them in the political face . The long-term in-effectiveness of the strategy is now glaring out in the face of the government .
 The Republicans are now without a strong presidential candidate for 1964 . The Republican Party is looking for a strong candidate for the White House .
 The GOP has no effective program or plan of action that can be used to fake-down the left-wing of the Democrats . The GOP concentration by the GOP on the national leader technique has left them without an effective plan to attack Democrats .
 The significance of these ""off year"" elections is both candid and crystal clear . The significance is both clear and candid .
 Medicare will be resubmitted to Congress again this January . Medicare is expected to be re-submitted again to Congress .
 Another thing the nation can expect is certainly an even more leftist attit , (ie v at the U.N. by Stevenson and Co. Inc. Another thing to expect is a more leftist attitude .
 This will probably be carried out under the assumption the U.S. should try to offset some its recent “rightists’ actions concerning Cuba . This will likely include the assumption that the U S. should offset some recent "rightists" actions .
 On the domestic scene, the South can expect more civil rights legislation to deck the halls of Congress . Civil rights legislation is expected to be passed in the South .
 NAACP and CORE have been pressuring the President quite frequently to seek some further congressional action backing up their positions . The NAACP has been pressing the President to seek more congressional action .
 Kennedy has held up rather admirably, considering the strain which must have been on him . Kennedy has been in the limelight for more than a decade .
 The states righters can expect this kind of treatment to end in the near future .
 In retrospect, Kennedy said he wouldn't campaign because of the Cuban crisis . Kennedy said in retrospect, he wouldn’t campaign due to the crisis .
 President Kennedy, being the politician he is, couldn't help but realize this . President Kennedy said, "I'm sure you're going to be a hero in the history of America"
 Another incident, probably in Latin America, again, because of its location, to color the 1964 Presidential campaign . So the American people can expect another incident . The incident is probably due to the location of it .
 Autumn leaves are but little chil dren who wave their arms in the wind . Autumn leaves will be left on the ground for the next few weeks .
 Just small, silent playmates balleting on wobbly toes, posing frail hands, then grandly strutting away . "Just small playmates," she says of the pair .
 And how magnificently they do perform when the wind returns, finds them incumbent on the earth . The wind returns to the earth, and how magnificent they do .
 Song of Autumn is the master choreographer, the Wind . It is the work of the Wind, the composer and choreographer of the piece .
 The air becomes full with the sad but happy whistle of Wind, and when the crescendo whistle has ar rested the universe, the leaves shake the dust from their fragile bodies . Then ascend into the haze of autumn air and sunlight .
 "How quickly, how gently, how very exquisitely they master the intricate pirouettes and dips and bows," says the British singer .
 They gambol and sway, making light of every thing, even their bruised and torn bodies . Seemingly unconscious of their beautiful art, they gambol, sway and sway .
 And they perform, oblivious of time and * 1 2 flying music, until their act is but mere silhouettes of gaunt stems . They perform oblivious to time and flying music until they are gone .
 Their once lithe and graceful forms now appear rugged, al most awkward, and the Wind, in its reguiem stillness, softly, softly gives them back to the earth .
 No, they are only aged and decrepit spirits which struggle to escape the monsoons of Winter . No, these are aged and . decrepit . spirits which . struggle to . escape monsoon rains .
 "So helpless, so effete, they tenaciously grasp and plead for sturdy stalks and leaves to wrap around their cold and dying bodies," the author says .
 The stalks are too strong, they will not bend, and the leaves they can hear only the Wind, luring voices of a Siren . But, the stalks, too strong— they will . not bend .
 So quietly, as quietly as did come the green buds in spring, do the withered actors fade into the earth, until at last they are a part of the vast nondescript .
 The light-toed-touch of fresh autumn leaves is irrevocable pushes the dead distorted players into further blackness . And the light toed-to-touch is irreinvable .
 "Down, down, they sleep, soon forgetting that little children wave their arms in the Wind. Down, down . They sleep," says the author of the book .
 Billy Joe explains the time in Pensacola that he flipped a gocart they said couldn’t turn over . The time when both his parents were in the hospital and he had a wreck on his way to visit them .
 The six-foot blond is interested “in a little of everything,” but especially sports, she says . She is interested in sports and sports, including sports .
 Billy Joe played basketball and was captain of the tennis team at Raymond . Billy Joe also played tennis and played basketball at Raymond High School .
 Denton, long time sponsor of the freshman class, talks about plans for the coming year . The freshman class president is Billy Joe Montgomery . Denton is a long-time sponsor .
 Raymond High School graduate claims to be prone to accidents . The 18-year-old jokes that the biggest "accident" was being chosen president in Monday’s class election .
 He plays with a five-piece dance band occasionally at high school dances, “but we aren’t very professional,” he says .
 Like most males, the new president likes to “fool around with cars, to dance, and to talk—about what people should do and should not do,” he says . The president also likes “to fool around” with cars and to dance .
 Billy Joe has worked the past two summers as a compliance reporter with the Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service in Raymond . Billy Joe's job is to report on agricultural issues in Raymond, Texas .
 At Hinds the talkative fellow is a member of Westminster, Engineering Club, Presidents Council, and “the powder puff homecoming court” at Hinds . He is a senior member of the Westminster Engineering Club .
 Stage Band and Hi-Steppers presented a floor show at the Sun and Sand for the Jackson Lions Club . Band, Hi-Stppers Set Season Dates .
 Hinds Eagle Band and Hi-Steppers will perform in a series of Christmas parades . They will go to Columbus on November 26 and Yazoo City on December 3 .
 Immediately after a performance in Newton on that date, they will rush to Vicksburg for a repeat performance in the Christmas parade . The group will also perform in the town’s Christmas parade, which will take place on December 25 .
 Selah, pastor of Galloway Methodist Church in Jackson, spoke to the Hinds student body in today’s general assembly . Selah spoke to Hinds students in the general assembly.
 Selah Selah has been at Galloway since 1945, and has become syiUnymous with the term Methodism in Mississippi . Selah is a member of the Galloway, Mississippi Methodism, which means Methodism .
 He has twice addressed the World Congress of Arch Masons and was the Grand Chaplain in 1956-57 . He has also addressed the world .
 He was also a delegate to the Tenth World Conference of Methodist Churches in Oslo, Norway in August of 1961 .
 Selah received his B.A. from Central College in Fayette, Missouri, and his doctorate from Yale Divinity School in 1923-24 . Selah also received a doctorate degree from Yale University in 1925 .
 Who's Who Finals To Be Held Today . Final run-off elections of Who’s Who at Hinds are being held today .
 Ballots were again distributed as students left the general assembly, and will be available throughout the day at the voting center . Ballots will also be available at the center of the election .
 In the run-off for Mr Hinds Junior College are Ralph Hemphill, Jimmy Chandler and George Tannous . Ralph Hemmphill, George Chandler and Ralph Hemiphill are in the run for Mr Hemphills Junior College .
 Nominees include Ralph Hemphill, Fred Peyton, Boyd McPhail and Jimmy Chandler . Nomineers are Ralph Hemhphill and Fred Peyton .
 In the run-off for boy freshman class favorites are Bill Dunlap, James Gross, and Billy Joe Montgomery . In the race for boys freshmen class favorites, Dunlap and Gross will go head-to-head with Montgomery .
 Miss Hinds Junior College, girl sophomore and freshman class favorites were chosen in the first election last Wednesday . The first election was held at the Hinds JCC campus in the early hours of Wednesday .
 Sandra Jabour calms her sizzling Thanksgiving bird with an equally saucy baste . She warns the "Tom" that he must simmer ’till Thursday .
 Miss. Coke"" IS a REGISTERED TRAOE-MARK BOTTLED under . authority of the COCA-COLA . Company by Jackson Jackson .
 Eagles take Final Game, Over Grid Circuit After Final Games . Eagles take final Game, over Grid Circuit after Final Game . Eagles beat Giants Giants Giants 4-2 in Super Bowl final game . Eagles win Super Bowl 51st game in New Jersey .
 The Mississippi Delta Trojans have captured first place in the Junior College Conference . It'll be another year before revenge can be had for the Mississippi Delta Trojan .
 Perkinston beat Southwest 77-6, Jones dump Pearl River 14-6 and Northwest beat East Central 37-6 . Other action came from Jones, Northwest and Southwest .
 In the final standings there are only eight slots this year due to ties for second, third and fifth . Only eight slots will be left out of the top 10 due to tie for third, fourth and fifth places .
 Second place goes to Perkinston and East Mississippi while a threeway split exists in third place . East Mississippi is the only team with a record of three wins .
 CopiahI Lincoln fell into this group via a j loss to Hinds in the last game . Pearl River got the same treatment I a week before . CopiahLincoln and Pearl River both fell into the same group .
 Hinds and Northwest tied 6-6 at season’s start and are tied for the fifth slot in the 12 team circuit . Hinds, Northwest tied at season's start and tied for fifth place in the circuit .
 The Eagles beat the Redskins to a narrow victory over the Eagles . Mike Vincent's strong right arm and pass snagging ability kept the score from the scoreboard .
 Field general Vincent pitched three touchdown tosses for the team . Richard Stacy, Ken Johnson and Jimmy Clark received receiving for the win .
 Wolf signal-caller Clifton Reed threw touchdown passes to Bobby Wallace and Dicky Knight . Reed also threw a touchdown pass to Wallace and Knight .
 Co-Lin’s only touchdown of the night which was scored on the ground was by fleet-footed Wallace on a 53-yard sprint . Wallace scored the only touchdown in the game .
 The Eagles tossed 24 times and connected 12, with three being intercepted . Three interceptions were intercepted by the Eagles in the first half .
 The Wolves pitched 31 times, completed 13, with two being stolen . Laird kicked good on the j conversion . Halfback Jim Buell raced 72yards before being hauled down on his own 20-yard line .
 Halfback Ken Johnson took an eighty yard toss for the score . Two plays later Halfback Johnson took a eighty yard pass for the touchdown .
 With only 1:30 seconds remaining in the first half Jimmy Clark grabbed a 36-vard pass on his fouryard line and stepped across for another Eagle tally . Clark grabbed the 36-yard pass on the four-yard line on his own .
 Neither team could manage a scoring threat in the third period . Most of the action was centered on the mid-field stripe .
 Richard Stacy added point-insurance by taking an eight-yard pitch from Vincent . Early in the fourth period Richard Stacy scored a late goal .
 Wallace took an 11-yard pass from Reed from Reed for a touchdown in the first quarter . The home crew led off with a touchdown just 16 plays from the start of the game .
 Hinds jump back into the game only minutes later with their first score by Jim Buell . Hinds jumped back into their first half of the game with a score of 2-1 .
 The Eagles were behind 7-6 at the end of the first period of play . The Eagles' point-after attempt was no good, and the Eagles were 7-5 .
 Halfback Wallace raced for his crowd-thrilling score mat two minutes into the second period . Wallace scored for the first time in the game .
 As we all know, conversation is terribly important on a date . HAPPY TALK is a must-have conversation .
 When lulls in the conversation run longer than an hour or two, one’s partner is inclined to grow logy . Even sullen, one's partner grows logy, says author .
 It's difficult to keep the talk going, especially when one is having a first date with one . But occasionally one finds it difficult to talk to one .
 When Harlow is going to take out a new girl, he makes sure in advance that the conversation will not languish . He makes sure that Harlow's new girlfriend is not languishing .
 Before the date, he goes to the library and reads all 24 volumes of the encyclopedia . He transcribes their contents on his cuffs .
 He makes sure that no matter what his date’s interests are, he will have ample material to keep the conversation alive . Thus he makes sure he has plenty of material to talk about .
 Harlow’s first date with Priscilla de Gasser was a fine, strapping, blue-eyed broth of a girl . The pair met on a date at the end of the 1950s in Paris .
 Harlow was prepared when he called for Priscilla, and, as always, he did not start to converse immediately . Harlow did not begin to talk immediately, but was prepared to do so .
 First he took her to dinner because, as everyone knows, it is useless to try to make conversation with an unfed coed . First he went to dinner with her because he wanted to make her a friend .
 Also, her stomach rumbles so loud it is difficult to make yourself heard . Also, she rumbles loudly enough to make you heard .
 So he took her to a fine steak house where he stoked her with gobbets of Black Angus and mounds of French fries .
 Dinner was over and the waiter brought two finger bowls . Then, at last, dinner was over .
 And Harlow—poor Harlow!—looked upon his cuffs and broke out in a night sweat and fell dumb . And Harllow—Poor Harlow, poor Harlow .
 With that she flounced away and poor Harlow was too crushed to protest to protest . She flounced off and left the scene .
 The Executive Council is composed of Jimmy Morrison of Mis-1 sissippi College, Alton Wasson, from j Millsaps, and Jack Lynch from Ole Miss. The Executive council is composed .
 There will be sessions including j the delegates from junior and senior colleges together, as well as separate meetings for the two colleges .
 Presiding as speakers at the convention will be some of the state’s outstanding leaders and educators . The convention will also be held in New Hampshire .
 Billy J o e Montgomery, Billy Dunlap, Bill Dunlap and Vicki Hazzlerigg are freshman vice-president . The freshman class is freshman president, vice-presidents and secretary .
 A delegation will be accompanied by Robert M Mayo, administrative assistant . The delegation will travel to the U.S. State Department .
 Jimmy Chandler, Jimmy Chandler and Hilda Bullock were chosen Mr and Miss Hinds Junior College in student Who’s Who voting . They were recently chosen by students at the junior college .
 National President and National First Vice-President of Phi Theta Kappa visited the Hinds campus last week and discussed plans with local officers . McLendon views bulls bulls as a threat to students .
 College College in Corsicana, Texas, and James Pennebaker, National First Vice-President of the honorary scholastic organization were returning from a regional meeting .
 Navarro Jr. Jr. was playing in the Hospitality Bowl in Gulfport, Mississippi, on Saturday . Navarro Sr. is a senior at the University of Mississippi, Mississippi .
 Miss Mildred Herrin, sponsor, Henri Lou Coleman, president, and Marianne Neal, treasurer of the local chapter, toured the visitors around the campus .
 Phi Theta Kappa officers discussed this year’s study project, “The Image of the Junior College,” and various problems facing all chapters . Officers also discussed the problems facing the chapter .
 The delegation attended the opening session of the one-day program of the Southern Association of Junior Colleges in the Baker Hotel on Monday .
 The day's program included reports and panel discussions on the various committees of the association .
 Committees include administrative, legislative, student personnel, and curriculum . Committees include administration, legislative and legislative .
 President George M McLendon and superintendent of the farm and physical plant attend the Texas Oklahoma Hereford Sale .
 Tuesday’s program was highlighted by a discussion of the twelve month academic calendar . Summer session equals one full semester, in which the summer session equals a full semester .
 Discussion led by superintendent of education of Florida, where the system is being tried . Discussion was led by education superintendent of Florida .
 Schedule included special sessions for specified administrative officials, such as registrar . Schedule for Wednesday included special meetings for specified officials .
 High school portion, with panel discussion of high school college relations, ended the annual meetings . The high school portion ended the meeting .
 The second annual Beauty Revue, sponsored by the Eagle yearbook, will be held Thursday night, December 6, at 8:00 .
 This function is the major program of the year sponsored by the yearbook . The yearbook yearbook is the year's major program .
 Contestants will be presented in small groups of small groups, each fol[ lowed by a trio of folk singers ri,m S Aumrrl from Jackson . Contestants are presented in groups of three folk singers .
 This group reijivete Awaru |places the college stage band To President Mac which was first designated to p perform . This group is the college band to perform .
 111 Lhapel ed b y one °f the local radio sta* tions, announces Belva Watkins, editor of the Eagle . Emcee will be provid111 longhouse ed .
 Rankings of beauty will be judged cently awarded to the Hinds Eagle i f n . tlr f y ° n , beauty and poise; no Marrhin* RanH anH Hi-St*nn Prc talent wl11 be Presented by the conJim
 Columbus Jaycees held the best band, best marching unit, best float, and best participating unit . Awards were presented to the best bands, marching units and floats .
 The field of contestants will be narrowed to fifteen semi-finalists, then five finalists . The finalists will be announced at the end of the week .
 Most participating unit, the equivalent of 'n a sweepstake trophy, will be recognized . Most participating units will receive a trophy .
 More than fifty units, including bands, floats, and dancing groups, appeared in the annual parade held on November 26 . The parade was held in honor of President Obama .
 Popular groups performed in the Christmas parade in Yazoo City, Mississippi, on Monday .
 Hinds delegates were I high school football field preceeded by Robert Mayo, administrative as1 the downtown parade . Further dates include the Newton Christmas parade on Friday, December 7, where they will give additional performance .
 Miss Mildred Her-1 Hi-Steppers will travel to Vicks Carmen Cotton . Miss Fay Mar-1 burg will present the half-time show at the Red-Carpet Bowl . Miss Mild Red Her-Her-1 will be the dean of women .
 Walking music for contestants will be provided by a small local musical group, not yet selected .
 Twenty signatures of students were required to officially register the petition . Twenty signatures were required for the petition to be officially registered .
 Gene Saucier, clarinetist, will be presented in a concert in the main auditorium on December 13 .
 Joan Melton Lynch, music theory instructor, will accompany for the recital at the end of the month . Music theory instructor will accompany .
 Lynch was the accompanist for Saucier in recitals he presented at Ole Miss during the past two years . Lynch was an accompanist in the recitals of the former Ole Miss pianist .
 Sonata for Clarinet and Piano, Lynch; Piece en forme de Habanera, Ravel; and Three Pieces for Claret, unaccompanied, Saucier . Sonata . for clarinet and piano and piano, Lynch. Sonata. and Piano . for piano,
 W. Dixon, Wanda Dai lay, Donna Huffman, Veronica Haydel, Veronica Hazzlerigg, Vicki Hazzerigg and Wanda D. Dixon are among the stars .
 Patty Hebler, Mary Elizabeth House, Sue Howell, Jean Junker, Sandra Jabour, Bobbye Kitchens, Marty Knight, Pat Kochi, Dot Lyons, Patsy Musselman, Carolyn McKey, Carol Maxwell, Shirley Morris, Karen McBride, Susan will appear
 In addition, the tradi tional student recitals will be pre-1 Nicholson sented beginning after Christmas .
 The program is open to the pubj erh# J 0 Schaeffer, Freddie Jean Sones, Libby Seitz, Jan Simpson, Marianne Strube, Joy Williams, and Sandra Weir . I Also, Patty Roberts, Sandra Robi, Sandra Weir, and Patty
 Admission for the pageant will be 50 cents for students and one dollar for adults . Admission for students will cost 50 cents . Admission will cost one dollar .
 Proceeds from this event will go toward financing the college yearbook . Proceeds will be used to finance the college's yearbook.
 Hinds music department will present a series of concerts at Hinds . Concert will be the first of a series presented by the Hinds Music Department .
 School pictures will be distributed Friday, December 7, according to an announcement made by Bill White, class editor of the Eagle . Throughout the year various guests artists will be featured throughout the year .
 Distribution will be handled by annual staff members from the hours 8:30 to 3:30 through windows of the book store . The book store is located in the auditorium building .
 Pictures were made this year by School Pictures, Inc., a division of Howard O Pippen Studios in Jackson, Mississippi .
 Personality factors are of paramount importance in selecting students for college and university honors programs, says Allan 0.0. 0. 0 . Personality factors must be important in selecting college students for honors programs . Ann Arbor, Michigan, says personality factors are paramount importance .
 While creative students tend to be very intelligent students also, not all persons who score high on ability tests are necessarily creative . Creativity students are more intelligent students, according to experts .
 Honors programs involve more advanced course content, greater use of seminars and classroom discussion as well as increased opportunity for independent study . The honors programs involve such significant elements as more advanced content, such as seminars and discussion .
 Non-honors students, generally speaking, hold honors students in high esteem . He notes that non-honor students are favorably disposed to the program itself .
 Pfnister believes the emphasis in honors programs should be on enrichment . He says the emphasis should be providing depth rather than allowing the student to complete his program more rapidly .
 A certain amount of acceleration is inevitable because the superior student gets through his material rapidly . The superior student is always going to be at the top of his class, he says .
 A recent report showed most honors students (60 per cent) believe that the level of instruction in honors classes was better . 60 per cent of honors students believe the level in honors class is better .
 A great majority believed that indepenent thought was encouraged more in honors classes . The American impression of guided somewhere along the way,” the French people has been misstated .
 The economics instructor spent twenty-eight months in Southern France during his Army tenure . He spent the time in southern France during the Army .
 Mazes Make Mirrors mmmmmrn mm . ClbSS&!' —» * HMM an HINDS-IGHTS ^- ^ .
 We stop to attempt an answer when suddenly we are caught in soft, shiny hands and pushed into a maze . We stop trying to find out what is the best way to get around the maze .
 Mazes are always so confusing—they exist only as long as they can deceive . Mazes were always so confused, they exist only to deceive. Mazes must be so confusing, they must be confused.
 "How clever we are, and what a dim-witted scientist the mazemaker is," says author . "These are the dreams which absorb the shock of reality," he says .
 Lamplighters recently installed officers in a dimly-lighted room in the formal procedule . Officers have been installed in the dimly lit room in a formal room .
 Joy Ferguson, Ann Birdsong, Elaine Birdsong and Ditto Reed are the current members of the Women's Club . They are also the treasurer and secretary of the board .
 To the average U.S. citizen, thousands of miles from the scene, this may seem the extent of the recent invasion of India by China by China .
 This conflict embraces much more than several thousand square miles of land along the now disputed border between China and the U.S. It also covers several thousand miles of territory .
 The initial reason given for this aggressiveness on the part of the Chinese is their present internal troubles, not the least of which is wholesale famine, is the famine . China's current internal troubles are internal, with the least being caused by wholesale famine .
 If so, how could this timing have methods to develop by, from the status of a free India and a communist China? Free India and communist China could be at the same time .
 As long as China was ahead in economic development they got along fine fine . China and the U.S. have been at odds with each other for decades .
 She is out to down her rival militarily, and India is certainly not a match for China . So, she is . She is . out to . down her rivals militarily .
 China will not need to conquer India to prove her point and win this round . India will not be necessary to conquer China to prove their point, says CNN.com correspondent .
 China merely has to quit when ahead (before massive U.S. aid arrives) and keep what she takes . For China to come out ahead in the eyes of the underdeveloped world, she must quit when she is ahead .
 The Red bosses would have succeeded in covering up their economic setbacks, and providing that China is stronger than India . Thus the Red bosses . would have . succeeded in . covering up economic setbacks .
 If Nehru and democracy are to survive in India, neither must be allowed to happen . Nehru was assassinated in 1953, but democracy is not to be allowed in India .
 It would introduce 'the possibility of a nuclear conflict, which the communists wish to avoid right now. Also, it would introduce . Also, It would . introduce the possibility of . a nuclear . conflict, he said .
 Despite Chinese boasting to the contrary, they really are afraid of an Atomic War . They would have waited until their military position was much stronger when they could have used nuclear pressure to frighten Nehru .
 If the western leaders realize the above, this encounter may well work out, ultimately, in our favor . If the leaders realize that, it may work out in the best interests of the West .
 Our praises bound against the thick walls of the maze -- some ricochetting into the open air . But only to be smothered by the ridicule of laughter .
 We cannot see, but there is the bizarre sensation that we are being whirled through space in one perpetual circle . The sensation is that we cannot see . We cannot be seen, but we feel like we are whirled around .
 CNN.com: "All in a moment, the air is not laughing, and we are no longer spinning" CNN's John Sutter: "But all in a . moment, we are not laughing. We are not spinning," he says .
 "We are plummeting into the maze where the violent floor of deceit pounds us into the chaos of reality," says David Cameron . "We're plummeting," he says .
 Lamplighters also sent delegates to the Mississippi Home Economics Association held November 2 at the Heidelberg Hotel in Jackson .
 Ramona McClelland was elected state reporter of the college clubs section . Ramona is a member of the state's college club section .
 Lamplighters have decided to redecorate the home economics department by purchasing new drapes and accessories . For the year’s project, the students have purchased new home economics accessories . The project is part of the year's project for the students .
 Lamplighters meet every fourth Wednesday in the home economics building at 3:30 a.m. ET . Lamplighter meet with students at home economics at the university .
 Miriam May, Belva Watkins, Danny Evans, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Jim Toombs, Klaire Parker, Dawn McNeil, Lela Canada, Dianne Nelson . The full interview will be aired on Sunday at 8pm on BBC One Live .
 Views expressed in this paper are not necessarily the views of the faculty and administration of Hinds Junior College . The views expressed here are those of the staff and faculty at the college .
 The old library building, as well known as Scarlett O'Hara's Tara, is being remodeled, cleaned out and modernized . The library building is known for its role as the inspiration for the film "Tara" The building will be remodeled and cleaned out .
 Past records and objects found in the two-story brick building make the renovating seem more like grave robbing .
 Faded pages of the Hindsonian yellowed with age and frayed on the edges were found laden with dust, forgotten through the years . The Hindsonian will be published in the next edition of this year's edition of the book .
 The old library was Hinds . The library was built in the 1970s and 1980s when it was new .
 Hinds represented a beginning, a beginning that is now being prepared to meet the future . It was Hinds because it represented a start, and it was a beginning . Hinds is being prepared for the future, and the future is here .
 When our parents attended school here, the business office and registrar’s office were both in the old building . Our parents went to school in the same building .
 The four-columned structure has the distinction of never being completely vacant, completely unused . Because of its vastness it's not surprising that it's never been completely vacant .
 English's books were left when the new library was built, but he stayed . Even though the books left, English stayed at the library, he was able to read them .
 The building has and perhaps always will house the teachings of the English language . The building was built in the 1930s and '60s .
 Room after room of freshman composition and sophomore literature keep the walls vibrating and the halls filled . The halls of composition and literature are filled .
 Who knows how many important people have stood on that stage or walked down those aisles? Who know how many people have done so?
 Committee meetings had been held to consider pending legislation . That morning, committee meetings were held in Washington .
 Sen. Mike Oliver of Hinds presented his bill on “Sanitary Disposal Systems for Municipalities” Oliver was a member of the social welfare committee . Oliver's bill passed the senate unanimously, to a committee he was on .
 The bill was referred to the Business and Industry Committee, which he was chairman, and later passed the senate . This bill was passed by the Senate, which passed the bill .
 Some students even take the time to examine the old library’s face lifting on their way to class .
 The library has received its secditions ond stock of new books this vear I Also fane fane ^ tx which range in scope from football James' and Henry to philosophy .
 Future scientists can spend an inspiring evening ploughing through Physics in the Soviet Union, Regular Solutions, and Colloid Chernistry .
 Edith Brummett and Jackie Williamson were alternates in the senate . They were also serving as alternates, and also serving in the Senate .
 Oliver tied with Sandri Norton of MSCW and James Moffett of MSU for the sweepstakes award . Each had received five superiors during the congress, each receiving five superiors .
 S. S. PP/futh Congress, having overdue books needed in the  library, must be returned immediately .
 After this notice, the erring students’ names will be given to the deans for executive action . The erring student participated three years in the Alabama House .
 The other award presented to Hinds was a superior for Best Bill by Hemphill . The other prize was the Best Bill .
 The business at hand was the nomination and election of the presiding officer . The presiding officer was elected by a majority of voters .
 Oliver was nominated for this position by Hemphill, with a second from Bullock . Oliver is nominated for the role of secretary of state at the end of the year .
 Guest speaker was Attorney General Joe Patterson, who spoke on the opportunities and responsibilities of the young people of this state and nation . Attorney General Patterson was the guest speaker .
 He humorously observed that the Youth Legislature carried on business in a more adult and orderly manner than the real legislature . The Youth Legislature carries on business with an orderly manner .
 In the second session McPhail amended the ""Civil Defense Bill"" to include ""Instruction by Qualified Personnel,"" which was seconded by Chandler and passed by the senate . The bill was amended to include instruction instruction by qualified personnel .
 The United States had a flavor cigarette with a filter on the end . The filter filter was added to the end of the cigarette .
 Today the whole place is Marlboro country—land of the filter cigarette with the unfiltered taste . The filter cigarette is now the most popular cigarette in the world .
 Richmond recipe of ripe tobaccos and white Selectrate Filter . Richmond recipe is famous for the pure white filter .
 Canterbury Club will hold its regular meeting Thursday at 3:00 m. in the Administration Building to plan a Christmas party for the club .
 All members are urged to be present, so an approximate number of people attending the party may be determined . Each | member will be pictured in the ; yearbook, Dahduh said .
 SOPHOMORE FAVORITES were elected in final run-offs as sophomore favorites . Ralph Hemphill, Jackson, Sharon Bearden, Port Gibson, Sandra Jabour, Vicksburg, and Fred Peyton are among the favorites .
 This year’s freshman class favorites include Billy Joe Montgomery, Jackson, Carmen Cotton, Florence, Kay Bullock, and Bill Dunlap . Vicksburg is one of the U.S. colleges of choice in the world .
 Regina Goodwin, Hinds circulation librarian, has announced the policy for checking out books over the Christmas holidays . Regina Goodwin: Check out books during the holidays .
 Students who do not have books currently overdue, beginning Monday, December 17, may check out books to be kept until Wednesday, January 2 . Students who don't have books that are overdue can check them out until January 2.
 A penalty of 25 cents will be added on all books kept over the holidays without permission . A penalty will also be added if books are kept over Christmas without permission.
 Students who have overdue books or owe fines must clear records before they will be eligible to check out books over the holidays . Students who owe fines or overdue books must clear their records .
 Names of students with overdue books or a fine record will be posted on bulletin boards in the administration building and the li brary lobby .
 1963 version of the Eagle is beginning to show definite signs of potential All-American greatness . Yearbook staff rushed to meet deadline number one .
 The extensive pictorial portrayal of life at Hinds is due largely to a new method of printing being used this year .
 Contact lenses fitted and lenses ground to your Doctor's Prescription . Artificial eyes fitted . Sunglasses fitted . New photographic equipment added to public relations department .
 Annual staffers are using as stimulating guide books other yearbooks published by the Hurley Yearbook Company of Camden, Arkansas, publishers for the second year .
 The 1963 Eagle will again run nine by twelve, divided into three major sections . Fall, Winter, and Spring are the three major themes of the year .
 Fall division, nearing completion, includes registration, faculty and administration, freshman day, homecoming, football, and other highlights of the current season . Fall division includes registration and faculty, administration, student day and freshman day .
 Winter's section will contain features, basketball, the Christmas dance and parties, open house, and additional events of the winter months . Winter's sections include features of basketball, Christmas dance, parties and open house .
 Spring's allotment will record awards day, classes, track, tennis, Miss Hinds Junior College pageant, and graduation . Spring’s allotment includes awards day and classes .
 Much prior planning and study have been made by staff and advisor of the 1963 Eagle . The 1963 Eagle was one of the world's largest landmarks .
 Editor Belva Watkins, accompanied by associate editors Joe White and Bettye Simmons, attended the annual Hurley Yearbook Workshop in Camden held in September .
 From all indications, this year’s Eagle should be well worth waiting for . The Eagle is expected to be released in November .
 Alon Bee, director of HiSteppers, recently addressed the Maid and Matrons Club of Jackson . Bee spoke to the club's members .
 She intrigued her audience with personalized inside details of the Miss America Pageant . She intrigued viewers with personal details of her pageant .
 Bee Bee related many of the exciting experiences she has had in her capacity as official Miss Mississippi chaperone . Bee said Miss Mississippi has had many exciting experiences in her role as Miss Mississippi . Bee also shared her thoughts on Miss Mississippi's Miss Mississippi experience .
 Freshmen welcomed and congratulated for outstanding achievement by chapter president Henri Lou Coleman . Freshmen welcome and congratulated .
 Margaret Bonney, Ted Boswell, Donna Breitling, Carol Charlton, Nancy Clayton, Jo Ann Gardner, Mary Rebecca Geiger, Sylvia Gipson, Gay Holaday, Carolyn Melton and David Neal are among the winners .
 Martha Thompson, Peggy Wilbanks, Winnie Sue Winters and Rebecca Presley also on the panel .
 Miss Carmen Cotton is Homecoming Court member, Who’s Who, Hi-Stepper, beauty extraordinaire . She is already a wheel on campus after arriving this year as a freshman .
 Carmen's statistics appear to be the ideal of the reducing salon . Wheeling on the exercise bike seems a bit unnecessary, however, .
 Linda is a senior at Delta State College in Cleveland . She was one of twenty students to receive this honor . Linda is one of 20 Delta State students at that college .
 Hinds Eagles have a string of five returnees to pace their attack in Mississippi Junior College basketball competition this year .
 Another returnee, Johnny Hines, was honored along with Wade by being selected for honorable mention on the All-State roster . Hines was honored with honorable mention .
 George Puckett, Clarence MacMillen and Leslie Carter are among the other returnees . Clarence Macmillen, Leslie Carter and Leslie .
 Barnes and Jerry Legg are among the freshmen crew members . Buddy Dollar, Ronnie Helmock and Ed Fortenberry are also expected to see action . Barnes and Legg will be the first freshmen to join the team .
 Gary Carpenter, another yearling member, was on the South Mississippi High School All-Star team that played the Northern kingpins prior to school’s start .
 Troy Ricks is head coach of the group with Jim Sessums serving as assistant coach . Jim Ricks also coached the group at the University of Albany .
 In what was described as a “spectacular play,” he lunged at a ball carrier and tagged him . After the play he told friends he heard his stomach ‘pop,’ the DAILY KANSAN reported .
 Hinds 1963 edition of thumpballers has hit the courts . After one scheduled game and a scrimmage contest, the Eagles are undefated .
 Will Wade scored 24 points for the Eagles in the Saturday night battle at Scooba . Wade scored 10 field goals and four foul shots for at a total of 24 points .
 Hinds pushed the Lions during the first half, allowing the home crew only 31 points while picking up 42 for themselves . Hinds allowed the Lions to only score 31 points .
 CopiahLincoln fought the Eagles down to the final buzzer, but after it was all over the one point difference was in Hinds favor . Copiah's victory over the Eagles was a one-point margin of one point margin .
 Coach Troy Ricks shrugged off the narrow win as a nervous, unorganized game played too soon . All-Star Billy Joe Montgomery drives for a gain against Southside last Wednesday .
 Shan Arender is a defensive specialist for the defending champion Southsiders . Shan are the defending champions of the South'siders . Arender will be the only player to stop the play .
 Wade again led the Eagles in scoring action although this time this time the points were gathered on the white line . Wade led the scoring action again for the Eagles .
 The top scorer added four field goals for a game total of 19 points . Picking up 11 tosses via fouls, the top scorer picked up 11 fouls .
 Johnny Hines tallied 14 points with Leslie Carter contributing eight . Leslie Carter contributed eight points for Johnny . Hines scored 14 points for Hines .
 Standard Photo MAIL ORDERS INVITED Write or call for Free Film Mailers Account MISSISSIPPI .
 We take a simple, beautiful and blessed holiday, transform it into a complex, ornamented and even dreaded season, only to ultimately return to that original, uncomplicated spirit . We take the simple holiday to a complex and beautiful season, but return to its original, unplicated
 As late as a decade ago, the Christmas season began around the first of December . Today the first day of November would be a more accurate estimate . The Christmas season, as late as 10 years ago, began as early as December .
 All preparation for Thanksgiving has been accomplished by Thanksgiving, say merchants . Thanksgiving is a good time for Thanksgiving shoppers, say experts .
 Street and store decorations are up, extra help has been hired, and a jolly old Santa greets kiddies in every store on Main Street . Extra help has also been hired to help out Santa Claus in the town .
 The American Greeting Card Association really begins early, deciding in May if Santa or Cherubs will adorn the cards . The three billion cards will soon start flooding the mails .
 For 1962 it has been decreed that Santa will reign, playing a harp, bass fiddle or honky-tonk piano . Santa will also be wearing Western boots, top hat or Bermuda shorts .
 Housewives will go into frantic panics pondering if they’ve forgotten anyone on that enormous card list . Housewives go into panic over whether they've forgotten anyone .
 This concentrated commercialism will continue to build, constantly bombarding every American until, at last, it does become a chore and we do start to wonder what's the purpose of it all . The American people will be bombarded by the constant commercialism .
 We've done the best we can and now we sit back to reap our two-month’s struggle. We’ve done the . best they can. We sit back and reap our . two months of struggle. Now we sit . back and sit back .
 This has always been Christmas, but every year our complex circle widens before we finally reach our -real Christmas in all its simplicity . This year's Christmas will be the first time we've seen the simplicity of Christmas, says author .
 Hinds debate squad members earned superior and excellent ratings in debate competition . Hinds debated at the Mississippi College Novice Tournament on Friday and Saturday .
 Jackie Williamson, Jimmy Chandler, Belva Watkins, Edith Burmmett, Edie May and Edie McNeil are among the original cast members .
 Receiving ex-ellents were Jimmy Chandler, Dawn McNeil, Carol Fortier, Belva Watkins, Edith Brummett, Jane Land, Woody May, and Jackie Williamson .
 Hinds girls in Main Dormitory decorate annual dorm Christmas tree . Julia Todd of Clinton is coach for the Hinds squad .
 Varied activities have been planned for and by Hinds students during the Christmas season . Activities include dance, choir, dinner and Christmas dinner .
 Pre-holiday activities are in full swing, and committees have set to work planning and decorating for parties and festivities . Pre-Holiday activities are already underway in the city .
 Friday night, December 14, a campus social will be held in the girls gymnasium from 9:00 until 1:00 . The social will take place at the gym from 9 to 1:30 .
 The Presidents Council is sponsoring the event, with cooperation from the freshman and sophomore classes . Students from the Presidents Council are also participating .
 January Graduates o' Given Instructions Through Registrar Miss Mildred Herrin, registrar, announced this week . Students who expect to graduate in January and obtain diplomas should begin making application in the registrar’s office .
 Graduates entitled to exemptions from exams providing they meet graduation requirements . Graduates are entitled to exemption from exams if they meet requirements .
 Students should fill out second semester schedules and complete them in registrar’s office . Also, Miss Herrin said, students should fill in second semester schedule forms .
 Students who complete their schedules now will have a varied choice of class periods, teachers and sections, since most classes are not yet filled . Most classes are still filled .
 A fine of $5 will be imposed for students who do not complete schedules before January 28 . A fine will also be imposed if students don't complete schedules .
 Hinds Delegation Observes Confab Of College Governments’ Council Mississippi Inter-Collegiate Counj Dr. Dr. James Dr. Hinds attended the Confab .
 The present arrangement of adminisannual conferences at Mississippi | tration was adopted . Betterswirth stated that it cil, an association of college' govj wasn’t until later, in Paris that ernments, held the first of its bi1 Paris
 Bettersworth, speaking in the plenary session, discussed the origins of colleges and their growth .
 The first universities were organized and run by the students, he said . He pointed out that it was the students who selected the faculty and established the rules of the state .
 McCain addressed the second plenary session on the role of higher education in the state . McCain spoke at the second session of the legislature .
 Delegates from Hinds were Vicky Hazzlerigg, George Tannous, Ralph Hemphill, Billy Joe Montgomery, BillyJoe Montgomery, and Billy Joe tMayo, administrative assistant .
 Monday afternoon, December 17, open house will be held in the girls’ dormitories from 3:30 to 5:00 . Monday afternoon will be December 17 at the Girls’s dormitory .
 Suite and room doors will be decorated for Christmas and prizes will be given in each dormitory for the neatest rooms and best decorations . Prize winners will also be given for neatest room and best decoration .
 The public is invited to attend at this time, along with male students, faculty members, faculty and the board of trustees .
 The annual Christmas dinner will be held Monday night, beginning at 5:00 p.m. ET .
 Carolyn Bowen, Main dormitory matron, decorated the cafeteria with two floral arrangements . Carolyn Bowen is a former dorm matron .
 The two decorations are set up in the private dining room and above the central water fountain in the main cafeteria . The decorations are also set up at private dining rooms .
 Clarinet concert of Gene Saucier scheduled for tomorrow has been canceled . Concert canceled .
 Due to the illness of the clarinetist, the program has been rescheduled . The program was originally scheduled to be postponed .
 The time will be announced at a later date . It will be presented by the choir in the college auditorium .
 The stage setting will depict three different aspects of Christmas — the home scene, the carolers outside, and the sacred portion . The home scene is set to depict the home scenes, the sacred portions and the carols outside .
 Among the sacred numbers will be ""The First Christmas Candle,"" (including a narrator, Mrs. Mrs. Mrs. and a narrator) among the sacred songs .
 Featured soloists are Peggy Smallwood, Brooks Noble, Beth Ponder, Brenda Mullins, Billy Barefoot, and Donna Breitling . Featured soloist is Brooks Noble and Beth Pond .
 Open house will be held in the boys' dormitories for the general public . Tuesday afternoon, December 18, will be open house in the dorms .
 Northside dormitory has no organized party, but separate suite celebrations will be held . separate suite parties will also be held in separate suites .
 Classes will end for the Christmas holidays Wednesday, December 19, at 3:30m. Classes will begin at 3 p.m.
 More people are likely to be using the nation’s highways than ever before .
 The initial procedure for preparing to leave a college for weekends and holidays seems to be a vast overloading job . The first step is to prepare for a college student to leave college for a weekend and holidays .
 Not over six people should ride in a car, says the state highWay patrol office . The state highway patrol office says not over six should be allowed to ride together .
 Six people aren't saved from 1 accidents by having belongings piled on them and around them . And those six people aren’t saved from accidents by piling on them .
 No doubt, patrols will be doubled and trebled for the onslaught of citizens on the highways . Police will be doubling and trebling to protect citizens .
 "More than normal care will be exercised by all law enforcement officers," police say . More than normal police officers will be exercising their authority .
 Various radar stations will be posted along the highways around all colleges of the nation . Needless to say, various radar stations are posted along .
 No matter what you hear from the tall children, called adults, the jolly old man with laughing eyes does not exist . No matter how tall children are, they are tall children called adults . Jolly old men do not exist, says the author .
 He doesn't breathe, no eyes have seen him, and no ears have heard his voice . Therefore he is not real, nor is he important to us. He doesn’t breathe . Therefore, therefore, he isn't real .
 The only thing that is of real Importance is that which we can see, that which . we can feel and that which which we . can, in time, possess . The only Importance of life is that that we can, as well as that we are able to see,
 The adults that supposedly rule this world are mere children, and weak ones, and that they are weak ones . The adults who supposedly rule the world are merely children, says the author .
a hoax that makes life cleaner and more worth living. It is hard for them to live without a hoax. It's hard for the world to live with a hoax .
 Virginia, you and your fellow children are the victims of man’s weakness . Virginia, Virginia, is the victim of man's weakness. Virginia. You are the victim, Virginia .
 Your father and mother and their parents all conspired to and Jackson, as it has been during the past few months . Your father, mother and . their parents and their . parents and theirs all conspire to and . Jackson, Jackson, will be remembered for his actions .
 Confusion says that no one at Hinds knows what an absentee policy is . Confusion over why Hinds has no absentee policy . Someone Please Explain .
 The reason for sueh a mix-up is the recent change of policy for absences, the school has said .
 Some sources say that an absence directly before or after a holiday counts as a double cut . Some sources have said that a holiday count as an absence .
 Others say that this practice was done away with when the policy of ‘three absencies’ was begun . Others say this practice has been done away since then .
 It is sad that people, millions of them, can be so engulfed with an image, a dream, that they forsake peace for jingling bells .
 Some argue that the Christmas season is one of beginning again, of reviving old friendships, and bandaging past arguments . Some will argue that it's a good time to revive old friendships and bandage old arguments .
 Do you know that if all the tinsel, trees, lights, cards, and gifts were taken away, man would still have Christmas? If all these were taken from man's Christmas list, he says .
 The Soviet Union now finds itself in a position usually reserved for the U.S. Russians Straddle Fence .
 In the past it has been America that’s had to abandon a proven ally in favor of a more liberal footing on something .
 The Soviet Union is abandoning her ally, Red China, bf deciding to fulfill its agreement to send Mig Jets to India . Now it’s the Soviet Union that is abandoning .
 These jets are to be used against Khrushchev’s oriental typhoons in Peinping, China . These jets will be used to protect China from typhoons .
 Circle K will present a film on Telstar Thursday night at 6:00 in the visual aids room of the Academic Building . Circle K also presents a film about Telstar on Thursday night .
 President Boyd McPhail invites all science and enginefiring students to attend . Students are invited to attend the event .
 Miriam May, Belva Watkins, Danny Evans, Vicky Hazzlerigg, Jim Toombs, Klake Parker, Dawn McNeil, Lela Canada, Dianne Nelson . The full interview will be aired on Sunday at 8.30pm ET .
 Circle K began making plans for a date night meeting to be held in the Rec Hall some time after Christmas . Circle K has been making plans to hold date night meetings .
 Circle K project committee is investigating the possibility of having bells installed in Southside dormitory . The committee is also considering installing bells in the dormitory at Circle K .
 These bells will ring 5 minutes earlier since Suthside is so distant from other school buildings . The bells will also ring earlier because of the distance from other buildings .
 Canterbury Club members celebrated the coming of Christmas with a party at the lodge on December 10 . Circle K resolved to procure a CANTERBURY CLUB .
 James Butler supervised the party. first to invade India, and second, to announce the withdrawal of his troops. Butler was in charge of the party .
 China might have invaded India in hopes of presenting a dilemma to the more liberal Russians, who seem to interpret Marx differently than they do . China might be trying to present the dilemma to Russia .
 Chinese belief must have been that Khruschev would cut off aid to India and throw-up a screen of neutrality . If this could have been achieved Mao would be without a rival for Soviet affections .
 Since the U.S.R. has apparently sided with India, the Chinese invasion is a farce, which probably explains their announced troop withdrawal . The Chinese invasion probably explains the withdrawal .
 Under present circumstances there could possibly exist some jealous rivalry between Red China and India in their relations with Russia . India and Red China could possibly have a jealous rivalry .
 Both are being watched by the under developed countries to see which method (Indian democracy or Chinese communes) is the best method to develop themselves with. Both are seen as the best way to develop .
 Khrushchev has found himself in the position of aiding India by-pass China . The situation is, since Red China ordered all Soviet technicians out in I960, since . Red . China ordered . all Soviet . technicians out of the Soviet Union . in the aftermath of I960 .
 India is helping a non-communist nation, India, defeat a communist nation, China . Now, he is helping India defeat a Communist nation . He says, "Now, he's helping [India] defeat [China] now"
 The eternal triangle might best describe the predicament the two heavy weights of communism, China and Russia, find themselves in today in their association with India .
 No matter differences in Soviet and Chinese interpretation of Marx, we must remember they both still read Marx . No matter the differences in . differences in their interpretations of Marx .
 Views expressed in this paper are not necessarily the views of the faculty and administration of Hinds Tunior College . The views expressed are those of the staff and the faculty at the college .
 This talk about annexing Wales and Lapland is, incidentally, not just idle speculation . This talk is not only idle speculation, but it's not idle talk .
 Great Bntam needs a desert desperately on account of the tourist trade . Great Bnam needs to be more popular with tourists on the island .
 Tourists are always coming up to the Prime Minister or the Lord Privy Seal or like that and saying, “I’m not knocking your country, mind you.” Tourists often say, ‘I'm not knocking [the country]’
 The American plainclothes force is called the FBI after Frank B Inchcliff who invented fingerprints . The FBI is called FBI after the FBI who invented fingerprint technology .
 Before Mr Inchcliff’s invention, e’verybody s fingers were absolutely glassy smooth . The invention of this type of finger was invented in the 1930s .
 This, as you may imagine, played hob with the identification of newborn babies in hospitals . This, however, was not the first time a baby was found to be born .
 From 1791 until 1904 no American parent o( ever brought home the right baby from the hospital . The baby was born in 1791 to 1904 . No American parent brought home a baby from a hospital .
 Swedes refuse to bring their babies home from Swedish hospitals . Identification of babies in Swedish hospitals is so haphazard that Swedes flatly refuse to take their children home .
 There are, at present, nearly a half-billion unclaimed babies in Swedish hospitals . Some of the babies are well over eighty years old .
 We were talking of Christmas gifts which naturally put us in mind of Marlboro cigarettes . We were speaking of Christmas presents which naturally reminded us of the brand .
 Any time, any season, when you light a Marlboro you can always be certain that you will get the same mild, flavorful, completely comfortable smoke . Any time of any season you can't be certain you'll get the . same mild and flavorful smoke .
 There are, of course, other things you can give for Christmas besides Marlboro cigarettes .
 The Low-fi phonograph is a revolutionary new development in phonographs . It is designed to give music lovers something to give them a music lover .
 The Low-fi, product of years of patient research, has so little fidelity to the record you put on it . If you put “Stardust” on the turntable, “Melancholy Baby” will come out .
 Judges announced the top five campus beauties on campus . Judges also announced the best campus beauty of the day .
 Three sophomores, Sharon Bearded/ Port Gibson; Hilda Bullock, Jackson; and Una Jo Schaeffer, Jackson, were given approval by the panel of judges . The panel also gave approval to three other sophomorettes .
 Two freshmen, Randa Bumgarner, Clinton; and Carmen Cotton, Florence, rounded out top five . Carmen Cotton also made the top five in the country .
 A1 Simmons of Jackson and Glen Worthington of Brandon, director of the Brandon pageant, attenders of the pageant . The pageant was held in Brandon, Mississippi .
 Randa Bumgarner, Sharon Beardon, Kay Bullock, Carmen Cotton, Mary Elizabeth House and Kathy Kilby are featured in a special edition of this week's iReporters' weekly show .
 Sandra Jabour, Bobbye Jean Kitchens, Dot Lyons, Patsy Musselman, Jo Schaeffer, Jan Simpson, Sandra Weir and Jan Simpson . Joy Williams is also on the panel .
 Sponsored by the Eagle, college yearbook, the over-all winner will be announced with the release of the annual. annual .
 Entertainment was provided by Doug Sullivan and Ann Stephenson, both Hinds students, and by the Sundowners, folk singing group from Millsaps .
 Woodie Assaf of WLBT served as master of ceremonies at the U.S. vs. URS .
 Hints Honey Randa Bumgarner of Clinton welcomes in the Christmas holidays with decorations galore .
 Phi Beta Lambda Elects Editor of TABS, a paper to be edited and published by Hinds Junior College’s Department of Business Education . Robert Owens, a student from Clinton, was appointed editor .
 This news bulletin will be sent to high school seniors, will be distributed to the business students at Hinds .
 It will contain news of students enrolled in business education classes at Hinds and in the local high schools . Extra-curricular activities in which students participate include “Commerce Day,” social outings, and field trips .
 Hinds College of Business Education will celebrate its 100 years of success . It will also carry the honors and degrees awarded instructors and students, sketches of outstanding people .
 Two issues of TABS will be published each year, one in spring and one in the fall . TABS is published in the spring and the fall each year .
 This organization is devoted to the enrichment of the mathematics curriculum and to the upgrading of accreditation of teachers .
 Publication of the special Christmas magazine supplement to the Hindsonian has been delayed because of photographic and engraving difficulties . Special Magazine To Be Distributed .
 See the world’s fastest and roughest sport in this regular season Eastern Hockey League Game . The New England Patriots play the New Jersey Devils at 8 p.m. on December 18 .
 Eagles jump to a 3722 intermission lead before storming back on the courts to whip up a 17-point final margin . Eagles jumped to an 18-point lead in the first half of the second half .
 Spencer Schreiter, Glen Lusk and John Gayden shoot back in first half . Ole Miss stayed in the game during the first half via the shooting of three players . The game was tied at 1-1 at the start of the second half .
 Two Eagle members topped the Bulldog highpoint man in the scoring column but couldn’t manage enough to tip the balance . Eagle members scored enough to win the game for the Bulldogs .
 Barnes led with last year’s Southern division 21 points, and Will Wade racked 17.5 points . Barnes led the Southern division with 21 points .
 If you hold any of the 5 winning numbers, claim your Pontiac Tempest LeMans Convertible in accordance with the rules on the reverse of your license plate . The winning numbers are the 5th and 7th .
 Alt claims for Tempests and Consolation Prizes must be sent via registered mail, postmarked by Dec.,1962 and received by the judges .
 If you hold a consolation prize number, you win a 4-speed Portable Hi-Fi Stereo Set, ‘The Waltz” by RCA Victor . The Waltz is a classic music video from the Waltz, starring in the film "Waltz"
 Hinds basketball crew will travel to Wesson tomorrow for a Christmas Invitational tournament . Copiah-Lincoln Invitational Christmas Tournament will be held in Wesson . Hinds will play in the tournament .
 Thursday night Hinds will be paired with Southwest and the little Rebels will meet Co-Lin’s Wolf crew . Thursday night will be the first time the Rebels have been paired with the Wolf .
 For the Friday finals, the 1 Thursday winners will meet for championship with the losers cla ing in a consolation contest . The winners of Thursday's finals will meet Friday for championship . The losers of Friday's finals are the losers .
 Coach Troy Ricks’ Eagle c] is a pre-tourney favorite and spi only one loss in four starts . Friday trounced Ole Miss, 91 . The Eagles have not met South Carolina .
 This is the first of a proposed series of Hindsonian supplements . The supplements will be issued at the end of each semester . They will be published at end of the semester .
 This magazine does not necessarily express the views of the faculty or administration of Hinds Junior College .
 THE COVER, photographed by Daniel Fazekas, is an evocative expression of the spirit of jazz .
 See other interesting expressions of the spirit of creativity at Hinds . Also in this issue see other interesting expression of the creative spirit .
 Over a hundred years ago in the tiny village of Arnsdorf, Australia, the beautiful words of a Christmas carol were born . The Story of 'Silent Night' was born over a century years ago .
 Father Josef Mohr, the parish priest, was troubled the night before Christmas Eve . Father Mohr was troubled by his parishionionion . Mohr: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not surprised"
 Because the old pipe organ in his little church was broken, there would be no special music . The old organ was broken and the church had no music .
 This must have been the way it was in Bethlehem on that silent, holy night when Christ was born . This is how it is in Bethlehem, Bethlehem, on the silent night of the birth .
 As he read over the words, Franz felt the sacred beiauty of that first holy night . Franz felt that he felt that night, and that night was sacred . Franz read the words in his book .
 He began to sing, and those who heard him knew that they were listening to an immortal song . He began singing, "Those who heard his song will always be listening to him"
 The Christmas Doll a short story by Miriam May . The year was 1960 . The story is about the Christmas Doll .
 The traffic was terrible - she was almost afraid to try to weave her way to the opposite side of the busy avenue . She was also almost afraid of trying to dodge her way through the busy street .
 It was Christmas Eve and it seemed that everyone had forgotten the last item on his shopping list and was rushing to purchase it before the shops locked their doors for the weekend .
 Because the twenty-fifth fell on Sunday, most of the city was taking Monday off . Because of the day off, many of th city's residents took Monday off.
 A kindly gentleman in a gray tweed suit bravely stepped out into the middle of the street and raised his hand as policemen do to allow poor pedestrians to cross through the jungle of cars . The incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Sue wondered who he could be, Sue thought further; probably a cop in civilian clothes doing one last job before going home for the holidays . Sue thought that he was probably a police officer . Sue wondered if he was actually a cop .
 Sue spotted a familiar head on a well-built body that was pushing and writhing to get through the swirling crowd of shoppers . Sue’s left foot joined her right on the other curb, she spotted the familiar head . Sue was able to pull through the crowd to find the
 His husky voice ate its way through the noise and din of the gift-minded people . The gift-gift-minded community was in attendance at the event .
 Despite the hustle-bustle and rush of the yuletide season, the air, neverthelss, was still . The air was still as still as it was at the time of the holiday .
 It was filled with the usual Christmas smells of cedar, pine and fir trees that were yet to be sold, the thick aroma of coffee brewing on the sidewalk stands .
 A rainbow of colors ran together into one titantic blob of vermilion, emerald, and silver . The blob of color was the result of a rainbow of color running together into a giant blob .
 Sue closed her eyes, almost afraid to listen to the words that would come next . Sue was almost afraid of the words she would hear from her daughter's mother . Sue had been in the hospital for more than a decade .
 She and Neal had been married 13 years and at every Christmas had hoped to have someone to play Santa Claus to the next child . She said she and Neal were married thirteen years and hoped to be Santa Claus .
 After years of hoping, nature wasn’t going to allow them one of their own, so they had firmly decided to adopt one .
 Neal had been there to get the final word on a little girl . Neal: "I want to know what happened to her when I was in the hospital"
 It had been only three weeks ago that a lawyer friend of theirs, Bill Hobson, had called with the news that a young man and woman had been killed in a four car accident . The couple were killed in the crash .
 Neal and Sue's little girl was thrown from the car, but she was alive and safe . Neal said he thought Sue and Neal would be interested to know that the couple’s little girl had also been in the wreck .
 He went on to say he had heard that she had been turned over to a local children’s home and was being put up for adoption .
 Her name was Tandy, just like the big walking dolls that had been planted in the store windows to catch the hearts of little mommies . Her name is Tandy .
 She had black hair that fell in springy curls about her ears and gray-blue eyes that twinkled like tiny stars . She also had gray- blue eyes that looked like tiny little stars .
 She was unusually small but despite a slight lisp in her voice, she had a remarkable hold on the English language for a three-year-old .
 It is natural to assume that the foundations fell also . However, one remains today on the Hinds campus . The Hinds Foundation is located in Hinds .
 This foundation is tottering, gi weak and granted, granted, hut it still stands . This foundation still stands. It still stands, but it's still standing.
 Each day this ancient relic—the wooden podium in Mrs J RHarris’ literature c l ass _supports the historical world of yesterday . Each day the podium in J.R.Harris' literature cl ass is used in her work .
 Its downfall is inevitable, like the downfall of the Roman Empire, but it is inevitable . And yet its downfall is like that of the Empire, says the historian .
 During the first class meeting this year the aging warrior gave a light gasp, and two of its weak legs folded under . Two of the warrior's weak legs fold under . The aging warrior was a member of the class .
 First aid was applied immediately via the shoes of a handy male student . The incident occurred at the school in the early hours of the morning .
 Slings and tractions did their part toward patching up the old pillar of knowledge . Slings, tractions helped patch up knowledge of science .
 The old warrior stands at a sixty degree angle and barely can hold himself up during class periods . However advanced the medicinal field, it cannot perform miracles, so the old warrior .
 Sophomore lit s t u d e d e n t s watch each day as a last remnant of ancient history declines . Students at the University of Cambridge, Massachusetts, watch each other as they try to keep the flame alive .
 Harris, who proclaims, “Maybe T can get it hammered back together in the vocational shop”
 The old bridge is now alone now. Its frame is rotten and black from the smoke of millions of trains that have passed .
 The old bridge stands now as a reminder, a sentinal tombstone to time and people gone forever . It was built in the 1930s and is now a memorial to those who have left it .
 The river flows under the bridge, splashing again at its stone foundations . The bridge is one of the world's oldest bridges .
 The river people who worked on the boats and docks filled these smoky, one room bars . The bars were filled with smoky and smoky one-room bars .
 "There were bands in all of them, playing the blues and the music of the river," says author .
 The river still sings the blues for those who listen, and at night, down on the old bridge you can hear an old man, bent and wrinkled by age, blow out an old battered horn .
 The Father, a Known King, and the Son, a Prime Prince, lashed out at each other with words . They did lash out with words. The Father and Son lashed out, but not with words, the Son did .
 The one son, he did beg for his rights to be free For to wed the young girl born to know poverty . He did beg . for his . rights to wed . For the sake of his . life .
 The young prince pled his cause; he did think of his love, For the poor, unknown girl had none worthy of kin . For the young prince, he did not think of himself .
 The jazz world is a small world. Easterwood David Jones, Larry Lauderdale, Bill White and Bill Easterwood are among the jazz world's biggest names .
 For the first time in history, the Hinds Stage Band will perform in a concert . The Hinds stage band has never performed in a public concert . Hinds is a young band .
 Winter Jazz Concert 10 will feature original numbers played by the 19member group . The program will consist of various original numbers .
 In 1955 the band was only a few members of marching band organized to play pep songs . In 1955 only a small group of members of the marching band played pep music . The band was organized to perform pep dances .
 The type of music they played depended on the type of performance they played . Slowly it grew and it grew to be a national band .
 Big band was organized to meet requests for a small number of musicians and Hi-Steppers to perform . Then the big band was arranged to meet the requests .
 At first, the band planned to follow the pattern of the big groups such as Stan Kenton, Duke Ellington, and Count Basie . At first it was intended to be a big group like Stan Kent on the big bands such as Duke Ellton and Count Count Bas
 They tried a free offer from Bob Siebert of trombone-rythm sets, found them cool swingers . Now they stick mostly to Siebert scores .
 All these arrangements were written specifically for stage bands by such men as Seibert of the Stan Kenton group, Johnny Thompson, and Mickey Tull of the late 1960s and '60s .
 Hi-Steppers have appeared with the band, but this time the band will solo it . In the past they have performed with the group . This time they will be solo soloing .
 The show will be free and everyone that comes is sure to be premeated by the cool, vibrant sounds of a new thing at Hinds . Hinds will be the first time they have played at the Hinds.
 Several public appearances are in line for this year, and the band promises to fulfill these with vitality galore .
 They have made approximatey 25 appearances, including programs ‘or the Miss. Miss. or Miss. A Miss. B’ . Thus far, they have made about 25 appearances .
 The band is set to unveil their new uniforms at the end of the year . They will be using their stage band stands for the first time .
 Composing the saxophone section are Howard Quinn, lead alto, Libby Smith, alto; Ann Stephenson, tenor; Jimmy Goodwill, tenors; and Conrad Dove, baritone . Howard Quinn leads alto and Ann Stephenson plays tenor tenor .
 Five trombones are Milton Moore, lead; Buddy Thrash, Eddie Armstrong, Douglas Sullivan, and Ray Sullivan . Milton Moore is the lead trombone . Eddie Armstrong is the leader of the band .
 The trumpet section seats Mike Jones, lead; James Stokes, Jerry Cogdell, and Wayne McIntyre . Mike Jones leads the band .
 John Tompkins and Bill Dunlap are percussionists . Bobby McCool and Jimmy Scoggins play the string bass and piano respectively . John McCool also plays string bass .
 Even though I give my life I’ll always be in debt. The price He paid has bought my soul. And this I can’t forget That even though I gave my life .
 I bow my head in grateful thanks and search my heart within, And ask the Saviour of the world To cleanse my soul from sin . I I bow in . grateful thanks .
 Let one of JACKSON STEAM LAUNDRY’S Agents pick up your laundry weekly during 1963 . Make a New Year’s Resolution now .
 On Christmas Day 39 years ago President George M McLendon was a nervous prospective bridegroom . McLendon's wife was the president of the University of California .
 Dec. 26, 1923, he married the gracious Louise Boyd of Montgomery county . Dec. 23, he died of his injuries in a nursing home .
 A native of Jones county, the Hinds pilot received his B S. and M A. degrees from Peabody College in Nashville .
 McLendon was superintendent at Phoenix Consolidated School in Yazoo County, Mississippi . McLendon met his future wife while he was superintendent . He met his wife while serving as superintendent at the school .
 Hinds’ First Family has seen many Christmases pass since the first one 39 years ago . 24 of them have been at Hinds, 24 of which have been since .
 McLendon serves as official hostess to various civic and college functions throughout the year . McLendon takes great pride in her Christmas decorations. McLendon is a hostess at various civic, college functions .
 Her door, which last year won recognition, will again be adorned with an original painting by Mrs. Mrs. Gwyneth . Her door will again receive a painting of her by the artist .
 This year the McLendons will celebrate Christmas with one of their daughters . Mrs. McLendon: "This is the first time we have been together since 2004. This is the second time we've been together."
 The remainder of the holiday period will be spent at home with their other daughter, Mrs. Mrs. Barbara .
 "I know that all I truly yearn to hold Is you, who brings to me all happiness," she writes . "But until that hour when death doth claim my soul"
 Although my love for you is wrong, I know My wayward heart still clings to one design. Although my . love for . you are wrong, it is wrong. Although . my love . for you, it's wrong. I know
 The pain I feel I cannot bear to show, For life, though sweet, can never make you mine . For life ... can never be made you mine, she writes .
 May I be strengthened by the One above . For naught is lost if I but have His love, I pray for strength .
 VANCE STYLE SHOP JEWELRY TO MATCH $1.00 up LINGERIA $4.00-$10.98 SWEATERS $5.98-$ 10.98 EDWARDS SHIRTS _$2.97-$3.
 Some folks in these parts say he's dead and some say he’s gone up north, but I can’t believe that, because you see son, that old man, he hated the north . Some folks say he is dead and others say he has gone north .
 In the summer he used to Sit right up there on his porch and tell all us yoims about how the Yankees took Atlanta and how they marched down this very road, a whole regiment of them, took his pigs .
 I could almost see tears In that old man's eyes when he I used to tell us kids about them Yanj kee.s offering him that pork. I could see tears in that old eyes when I told us kids . I could also see tears when he used to offer him
 My Uncle John, he used to say that’s why the old man never had no family —he was filled with too much hate, Maybe that's why he never smiled, maybe because he never had any family . My Uncle used to tell me that maybe that's because he
 "My Paw told me to stay away from him. Why, he’d got so rowled up just talkin’ about Yankees," he says . "He’s got so roiled up talking about Yankees that my Paw told him to stay out of him,"
 I guess Paw was scared he'd get so mad, he’d think us younguns were Yankees. He’s scared he”d get . mad,” he said. ‘I guess Paw’ was scared . He was scared that Paw would get
 1 don’t guess there was a day went by I didn't see him. But we weren't scared. 1. 1 don't guess there’s been a day gone by I’ve seen him. 1 . 1. Don’re scared. But
 We used to see him on his porch as we passed, but when us hoys grew up and left home, the old man left too . He used to be a member of the family but now he's gone .
 I guess it did, but we never did;tell tkn old man how much we loved him. Tell him how much you loved him, he said .
 Four boys crouched around a hole in the concrete floor of the wellhouse . Four boys are crouched in the hole in a hole on the floor of a wellhouse. Four boys were crouched inside the hole .
 A fire at one end of the wellhouse provides heat, as the day is dark, rainy, and windy . The wellhouse is located in a wellhouse in the middle of the day, which is dark and rainy .
 A boy in the well, hanging on a network of ropes, a rope ladder, and a makeshift harness, ties another rope around a large board and yells to the others to pull it up . The boy is hanging from a well in a well .
 The rope is hoisted and the board is thrown on the pile of debris already cleared out of the abandoned Civil War hole . The board was thrown on a pile of rubble already cleared .
 Let's see if I can get a rope through the hole I’ve cleared in the debris. Let’s see if it can be used to get through this hole . Let's go to the rescue .
 The rope is lowered, and Harvey guides it through the hole in the trash hole . Harvey guides the rope through a hole in trash .
 Bobby lets the rope slither through hsi hands, as Harvey, about 5 feet down the well, watches expectantly . The rope slinks through Bobby's hands as Harvey watches .
 It had been rumored to the boys that the well was about 35 to 50 feet in depth . It was rumored to be about 35-50 feet deep .
 Under the debris, which they had been extracting, was 75 feet of water . The debris was under 75 feet under water .
 They were jubilant at finding its bottom, but their happiness was covered by a layer of quiet . The family was jubilation at finding the bottom of the river, but they were quiet again .
 Harvey suggested that they stretch out the rope to see just how deep the well was . Then Harvey suggested they stretch it out to see how deep it was .
 Everyone bubbled over with excitement as they realized what could have happened to them in the deep, dark hole in the ground . Suddenly everyone bubed over .
 Everyone had come to Cooper’s Well, knowing that it was dangerous to do what they planned . Everyone knew that it would be dangerous to go to the well .
 The boys were freshmen at Hinds Junior Colleg'e . Harvey Moore, boy in the well; James Rodgers, only other person to enter the well . Bobby Gardner, who provided the transportation; Fred Fry, Fred Fry and Dannie Evans. Fred Fry . Fred Fry was Fred Fry
 In addition to their discoveries in the well, they had also come upon some other constructions .
 They had found a circular foundation which they thought to be an observatory . They thought it was a circular structure which they had found in the area .
 In and around it were found bottles of varies shapes and a china plate . The incident happened in the early hours of December 31 .
 What they had found was only a beginning of what was there, waiting to be discovered, scientists say . What they discovered was only the beginning of the story .
 Bill had had to go to Chicago for seven days and because they had chosen him to take care of all the business, his being gone slowed them down somewhat . Bill had been chosen to take over the business .
 They had hoped to get her sereval days before Christmas, but the usual red tape that always pops up in such cases, put her homecoming further off . Red tape has prevented her from returning home to her native country .
 Neal had tried all week—but in vain —to get permission to bring her home for Christmas day . Neal had been trying all week to get permission for her to come home . Neal: "I don't want to spend Christmas with my daughter, I want to make her happy"
 Bill had sent word for Neal to come tonight, Christmas Eve . At any rate, yesterday Bill sent word that Neal would come tonight—Christmas Eve .
 She couldn't believe it—a child at last, a little gift of joy at Christmas time . No, she couldn’t believe it, she said . She was surprised to discover she had a baby .
 She was lost in an unbelieveable dream—all at once an emptiness had been filled . She was found in a dream. All at once she was lost .
 Jim smiled his lucid smile and closed his eyes as he reached up and turned the collar of his overcoat up to keep the raw wind from hitting the back of his neck . Jim smiled as he turned up to turn the collar up to stop the wind .
 He reached over and took four neatly wrapped packages out of his young wife’s arms and motioned for her to start walking . Without moving a foot, he reached over to take them out of the arms .
 They had stopped and were standing under an enormous raindeer head that protruded from over the door of the French Flair Dress Shp. Shp . They had been standing under the head of a rain deer head .
 The deer, supposingly Santa’s Rudolph, had a big red nose that blinked on and off . The deer was supposedly Santa's Rudolph, with a big nose .
 The colored light cast ruby-shaded rays across their faces as they stood and looked each other squarely in the eyes . The color of the light was reflected in their faces .
 People don’t think fairy tales happen in real life, but they do . People don't really live ‘happily ever after’—but they do, and do .
 It was almost an hour later when the driver pulled the cab to a screeching stop in front of Bill’s modern castle .
 Sue immediately got out and as i Neal fumbled around in his wallet for the right bill, she leaned down and stuck her head in the front window . Sue then got out of the car and got out .
 The driver ended the conversation with a wave of his hand and he was gone into the still blue night .
 Neal had gone after Sue, the head of the children’s home had gone into Tandy . Tandy was found dead at the age of 16 at the end of the night .
 T^e child had just about gotten used to Bill’s home and the officials thought it would work out nicely to tie the final knot there . The couple tied the knot at Bill's home .
 Neal hesitated at the big double doors that opened into Bill’s “receiving room” as he called it . Neal hesitated before the doors opened into the ‘reception room’
 This accounting machine is one of four instructional machines which will be offered to both day and night students . The accounting machine will be available to students in both day or night .
 Committees have been appointed to arrange preparations for the day-long event . Committees have also been set up to prepare for the event in London .
 The big sound is coming to Hinds tomorrow evening at 7:30 in the college auditorium . Representatives from business machines companies will be present to display their latest business equipment in the Workshop .
 Hinds' stage band will present their first public concert at the end of the year . Hinds will be joined by his stage band at the start of the tour .
 The band will offer a full evening of what is described as “big band jazz."" individually and as a performing unit . Under direction of Jimmy Morris and A1 Rowan .
 Warm reception expected of Hi-Steppers who appear at con-i for the 8 rou P from Jackson i azz ventions, civic club meetings and fe as wel1 as <>am P u f enthusiasts .
 The Stan Kenton Jazz I ln the main auditorium . Arrangements used are the big band iazz vein, mainly by Bob .
 Novices are promised an exciting introduction to new sounds. academic building building building. Novices will be able to hear the sounds of new sounds .
 Visitors will be taken on tours of the campus Thompson and Mickey Tull . After each delegate to the event has been greeted and supplied with identification cards .
 Included in the repertoire will be such jazz originals as “Browsin’,” “Swing Now, Pay Later” and “To Beat, Too Beat, Two Beat” Members of the local Phi Beta Judy will perform .
 He suggested IBM furnishes engineering service through their Jackson offices . IBM has a history of providing engineering services in Jackson .
 The course is the only one of its kind offered in the heavily industrialized three county area that Hinds serves . The course was set up through special arrangements with the International Business Machines Corp. It is set up in conjunction with the IBA .
 Instructor Harry Brister will teach the first semester of data processing classes . The classes will focus on data processing data processing .
 Upon completion of the course, students will be prepared to assume positions in business and in dustry where IBM data processing equipment is being used .
 Instruction will be given in four machines, the alphabetic printing key punch, the sorter, the accounting machine with one digit selector, and the . reproducing summary punch .
 Denton students are requested to come by Denton’s office to get applications . These students will be required to apply for the position . Denton is seeking students to be involved in the program .
 Deadlines for registration are set for January 26 and March 30, respectively, respectively .
 Denton also urged sophomores to take advantage of the opportunity to take the exam if they have not had it .
 Most Mississippi senior colleges require the test for transferring students . The test is required by students at most senior colleges .
 Milton Moore of Liberty, lead; Buddy Trash, Eddie Armstrong and Douglas Sullivan, all of Jackson; Ray Sullivan of Raymond, Raymond . Buddy Trash and Eddie Armstrong of Jackson, all from Jackson, lead. Buddy Trash of Liberty of Liberty; Buddy . Trash of Jackson .
 Hinds debate squads will meet at Millsaps College in Jackson this week end for one of the largest forensic tournaments in the nation . Debaters to attend Forensic Competition on Millsaps Campus .
 Hinds will face some of the best college and university debaters in the country . Hinds is one of the few junior colleges entering into the competition .
 Last year over 86 teams from California to Iowa, Iowa, Kentucky and Ohio to Florida, entered the Millsaps contest .
 Hinds student named Mrs. Wayne McIntyre of Jackson, Mississippi . Mrs. McIntyre named a Hinds schoolgirl . Mrs McIntyre was named in a zine created by Hinds students .
 Wilhelmina Porter of Vicksburg, as the 1962 Woman of the Year in Mississippi . Porter was awarded the title in 1962 . Porter won the award in 1962 for her efforts to become a woman of the year in Mississippi.
 Porter is the southern 1 regional advisor to the National Home Demonstration Council . Porter is named for her outstanding service to rural women of the state . Porter was named for outstanding service .
 The past president of the Mississippi Home Demonstration Council is the recipient of the Five-Diamond Pin . The award is the highest award presented to a home demonstration woman . She is now in her fourteenth year of active home demonstration work .
 In 1959, she represented the Mississippi Council at the Association of Country Women of the World in Edinburgh, Scotland .
 It was during this trip, which she also toured parts of Europe, she decided to return to school to study languages .
 Mrs. Cogdell is a member of the Women’s Cabinets of Public Affairs, State Family Life Council, Country Women's Council of the U.S. She is a student, housewife and mother . She is also member of Associated Country Women of the World
 John Tompkins of Yazoo City and Bill Dunlap of Jackson, alternating percussionists, Bobby McCool of Jackson . Bobby McCools of Jackson string bass; Jimmy Scoggins of Jackson piano . Jimmy Scogin's Jackson, piano. John Scoggin's Yazoo
 Rehearsals for the two-day contest have been underway throughout the semester . Directors are reported more than pleased with the musical development of the students .
 Speech contests will also be conducted in interpretative reading, oratory, and exemporaneous speaking . Other speech contests will be held at the event .
 Hinds stage band, in their first public concert, will present exclusively jazz — nothing more . Hinds will perform exclusively jazz, nothing more, at the Hinds' first concert .
 Bob Siebert of the Stan Kenton Jazz Workshop plays the songs . The arrangements include numbers by Siebert and others by the jazz group .
 Big band jazz will greet the audience at 7:30 tomorrow evening in the college auditorium . Previous to this concert, the unit limited appearances to accompanying small groups of Hi-Steppers .
 In fact, only a handful of students actually disagree with the cost of their education . The cost of college education is so high that only a few students disagree .
 The cost per taxpayer for each student at Hinds Junior College is approximately $500 . The cost of the college is approximately about $500.
 This may seem like a huge lump sum at the moment, but let’s see where the money goes when it leaves the taxpayer or the entering student . Let's see where it goes when the money leaves the taxpayers or the student .
 Gigantic funds are necessary to build classrooms, dorms, cafeterias, libraries, etc. The funds will be used to build dorms and dorms . The funds are needed to build new buildings and facilities .
 The average American gripes about having to pay so much when he builds a home, but you don't see him sparing any effort when he decides to construct a business . The average U.S. citizen doesn't see any effort in building a business, he says .
 If he uses his money, intelligence, and education well he can become successful, he can be successful, says CNN.com .
 If he decides to scrimp and sell shoddy, cheap merchandise, he may find himself soon in a state of bankruptcy . Or if he decided to sell cheap merchandise he could find himself in bankruptcy .
 Thousands of dollars worth of equipment and books included in the operation . This is not mentioning the thousands of dollars of equipment .
 Perhaps one of the most important costs in education is' through personnel . The cost of education in education can be seen through personnel, according to a report .
 They, like businessmen, cannot work ,f ™ ay we,) . be # the most . most fa ^ -i without being paid . Businessmen cannot work . They cannot work without being . paid .
 The ""announled wasting any money by overpaying them. No one would say that the taxpayers are Z^rn hutory"" The ""Announled waste any money," says the government .
 The state GOP has a wealth of campaign ammunition at its finger , tips . Most of this money comes from the govern[well qualified, and, what will probstatement by the founder of Russian Communism himself, Lenin .
 Lenin wrote that of all the governmental systems he had studied 1 , the one most acceptable to him was the one in use in our 'sovereign' state; because it embodied his ideal, a one party system . Lenin wrote in a letter that he was most satisfied with the one
 Regardless of the man chosen, he will be faced by the same basic problem that has plagued past governors of this state . The governor will have to deal with the same problems that have plagued previous governors .
 Mississippi is only one generation away from the plow . The problem is, frankly speaking, that Mississippi is . Only one generation is not far from the state's plow.
 Students gripe about the $35 they have to pay each j actlon f of the candidates when the month to attend Hinds . This can be accounted for by the fact that students pay $35 a month for each act .
 Most colleges that dropped Saturday classes in the past are now returning to them so that students can have a more detailed education . There attending college don't use the time they have, there is a possibility though that he has .
 Stu( reached his zenith because of his stand on legalizing liquor liquor . Many schools are changing to tri-semester schedules .
 If these were all the candidates running for the state’s highest ofdents can graduate more quickly and leave room for others . Also, why should the government and taxpayers have to raise Safe JUSt ^ reverse more money for buildings .
 They can't save money if buildings and facilities are idle three months out of the year . They can’t save money, they say, if they’re idle 3 months a year .
 Hinds Junior College may add classes into its schedules . Hinds junior College may also add classes to its schedule .
 The announcement by Rubel There is a j Phillips, a Jackson attorney, that enters Saturday he will run for governor on a Republican ticket . Phillips' announcement should be heralded by all believers in a two-party system .
 The metallic clicking sound is not the sound of typewriters or the pitter pat of little feet . It's the newest of college fads --knitting . Knitting is the latest of the fad fads .
 The method and stitches are the same, though somewhat improved from 40 years ago . The method of stitching is the same but somewhat improved since then .
 A few simple stitches, two needles and a scan of yarn can be made by simple stitches . Sweaters, afghans, scarfs and scarfs can be easily made with simple stitches and two needles .
 Millsaps was one of the first to accept the knitting craze on college campuses . Millsaps is a small college town in Millsaps, Mississippi .
 Hinds has two or three who keep the “beat” via the clicking of knitting needles . A few at Mississippi College are trying the fad . Hinds is one of a handful of schools in Mississippi .
 A famous love-lorn editor received a ""distress signal" from a young woman whose boyfriend had become so interested in knitting that he took his yarn and needles everywhere . The craze was undoubtedly in the northern states .
 The girl was disheartened because the boy never paid any attention to her—only to his knitting . The girl became disheartening because he never paid her any attention .
 The writer promptly answered the letter, telling the girl not to worry . He told her to drop a few of his stitches and if that didn't work, steal his knitting needles .
 The advice was drastic but it undoubtedly worked, since the girl never wrote again . The girl never writes again .
 The boy just might have presented his girl with a luscious hand-knitted sweater .
 In fact, she looks as though she was quite mad because she had to put down her knitting long enough to pose for the photo .
 Most coeds hate to lay their knitting aside long enough to attend classes . Since knitting is both time consuming and enjoyable hobby, knitting is an enjoyable hobby .
 Selected were sophomores Rick Thrash, Bobby James, Mike Vincent, and George Beiton . Selected were freshmen and sophomorettes Bobby James and Mike Vincent .
 Renfroe was selected president of the junior college coaches association for the sixth straight year . He is dubious about selecting All-Star teams because of his inexperience .
 Vincent Vincent was an outstanding passer and ground gainer during the season . Vincent broke several of Hinds' passing records before the season was over .
 Renfroe said that under the present round robin schedule, there’s not anything to do about it . The junior college Coach of the Year Jim Randall said he would not change the schedule .
 Randall, in an interview with the Jackson Daily News with Hindsonian sports editor Jim Bonney, advocated cutting the regular season from ten to eight games . Randall: The regular season should be cut from ten games to eight .
 Randall attributed most of the injury problem to the shortage of players . Randall attributed the problem to a lack of players on the field . Randall: "It's a tough time for the players to come back from injury."
 He attributed losses during the season to game action, injuries and the new conference rule . The rule limits players to residents of the junior college district .
 Randall’s comments follow his statement that injuries toward the end of the season had kept his team from winning the junior college title . Randall: "Injuries kept my team from previously winning the title"
 Hinds would play out-of-^tate teams if they could work it into their schedule . Renfroe, commenting on other aspects of the junior college grid circuit, said that Hinds are looking to play out of-the-area teams .
 Mississippi junior college teams not playing interconference games has resulted in their being barred from the Junior Rose Bowl unless they compete in other conferences . Mississippi junior colleges have been barred from playing in the game .
 Renfroe said the reason Mississippi teams don’t play more out of state teams is because of expenses . He said the expenses are the reason for the state to play out more .
 “It’s not bad, really,” she said, lighting up her second stogie, “until you get to the end.” She said, "until you’re in the end."
 Hinds were third-to-last in the final standings in the Premier League . Hinds left them coughing. in their last two games, yet Hinds was third to last in the standings .
 In previous publicity, James' name was listed with the outstanding ends . James was listed in previous publicity .
 Teasley was chosen for his work at center, tackle and as Hinds kicker . Teasley also sparked the Eagles from tackle and from tackle .
 Regina Goodwin, librarian, announced today that students must obtain library clearance slips before they will be allowed to take semester examinations or check out of school at semester’s end .
 Will Wade appears determined to hold onto the ball as a Mississippi Stater heads for it in the exhibition game . Lists of students with overdue books have been placed in the administration building .
 Linda Breese is one of the 250,000 children born in the U.S. each year with a significant birth defect . She was born with a birth defect, which is a major birth defect in the United States .
 She was one of the first treated at The National Foundationsponsored Birth Defects Clinical Study Center at Children’s Hospital .
 Linda’s just about as active and exuberant as any other little charmer m her part of Ohio . Today, Linda is still active and happy in her hometown .
 She wears her braces outdoors and at school, but in the house they’re often laid aside . To be on the safe side .
 There are thousands of other Lindas, victims of birth defects, arthritis and polio . Lindas were born with birth defects and polio. Lindas are victims of polio and birth defects .
 Your dimes can give to support research, and to bring medical care of the highest quality to every community in the nation . They need the help .
 Denton, counselor, engaged in discussions relating to problems between junior colleges and universities . from the | there are more job opportunities. from D.C. to D.J. Denton .
 The rethough training usually will upgrade employment salary, Gibbes said . Gibbes: The re-training usually will increase employment salary .
 Earlier in 1962 a six-week course in metals was held in the Jackson city schools . Central Mississippi area job contracts have already been made from as far away as Texas .
 Students study electronics two hours each day and office machines four hours a day, five days a week . They study electronics, office machines and computers two hours per day .
 The program is a result of the 1962 Federal Man Power Division . Future programs in are being planned, Gibbes said .
 Well Mississippi’s first nine-month vocational re-training program successfully moved out of its introductory phase . Special Federal Vocational Class Progressing Well Mississippi .
 The program trains men whose civilian occupational specialty needs to be changed for gainful employment . The program, a federally supported venture, is being conducted through the Hinds Vocational Department of Hinds .
 20 students being re-trained were chosen by state employment services and the Trades and Industries Division of the State Department of Education to study electronics and office machines . The students are now in their fourth week .
 At the close of the course they will be qualified to go into the field of business machines in either sales, service, adjustment, mechanical, or related fields . At the end of course the students will be able to go on to become a professional mechanical engineer .
 In conjunction with this national program, a member of the Department of Labor visited the campus on Monday, discussing the program with Gibbes .
 Gibbes commented that several Hinds vocational students who graduated as regular college students earlier in the same field are operating their own office machines business in this area . Gibbes: "Several Hinds students now own their own business"
 Gibbes explained that the re-training program is different from the regular vocational college training in that it is highly accelerated and that subject matter is limited to electronics and office machines . But Gibbes said that the program is more accelerated than the regular college training .
 In regular vocational training at Hinds, studbnts are required to study corollary reading courses from the liberal arts .
 Interest in the history of Hinds was sparked with the release of the 1962 Eagle . It illustrated in both pictures and prose the rise of the Hinds from 1917 to 1962 .
 This week a beloved human part of the campus and its history made his return . Well, this week he made his way back to the University of Columbia .
 Otho Glaze retired from twenty years' service in the Army and returned to his home in Raymond, Raymond . Glaze: "I got the worse whipping of my life down under that tree near the library"
 Otho Glaze’s father, Oscar Glaze, became the chief cook when this institution opened as a County Agricultural High School in 1917 . The school opened as an agricultural high school in 1917 and became an agricultural college .
 Oscar Glaze brought with him his two children, and both attended school in Raymond, spending play time on campus . Glaze's two children attended school, spending most of their time at school .
 I loved to build things so I was making a mud chimney with mud and sticks . I made the chimney out of mud, sticks and mud . I was a child who loved building things and wanted to build them .
 During his twenty years of service, he was stationed in England, France, Belgium, Japan, Korea, Germany, and numerous places throughout the United States . During his 20 years, he served in many different countries .
 He usually hated to leave his camp, and his companies hated to see him go . "He usually hated leaving his camp," he said. "His companies usually hated seeing him go"
 When he was transferred from Fort Lee, Virginia in I960, his company gave him $50 . He was transferred to Fort Lee from I960 to I960 .
 The youthful looking 50-year-old man wants to find a part-time job, being off on weekends .
 Dorothy Glaze Catchings is the maid for Northside and Westside dorms . Catchings was a maid for two dorms in the North and West dorms at the time .
 From now on, the cards Otho Glaze used to send to Hinds each time he moved will be in person . Hinds' cards will be sent to him in person instead .
 Eagles captured only one victory among the five games played before Christmas holidays . Eagles capture only one win in five games before Christmas holiday games . Eagles won only one of their five games against the Eagles .
 Mississippi State freshmen and CoLin Wolves trounced the Eagle group one time each . The Wolves beat the Eagles three times each in the game .
 Hinds topped Ole Miss freshmen at the CopiahLincoln Invitational Tourney . Hinds beat Ole Miss freshman at Copiah Lincoln Invitational .
 Southwest Bears defeated Summit Eagles 10894 on the Summit court . Eagles were downed 10898 on the court . Southwest Bears were victorious in the game .
 Will Wade led the scoring barrage for the Eagles by netting 23 points on 11 field shots and four free throws . Will Wade netted 23 points in the Eagles' win .
 Hinds put up a rough yet fruitless fight in Copiah-Lincoln tournament at Wesson . Hinds had just lost to Lincoln the night before .
 Eagles trailed only three points at halftime period . Bears and Eagles scored 39 points for the Bears and 36 for the Eagles . Eagles led the Bears only by three points .
 Barnes ripped the nets for 21 points and Harlan Stanley dumped 12 for the only double-digit scores of the night . Barnes scored 21 points, Stanley scored 12 .
 In an exhibition game with the freshman Maroons from Starkville, the Eagles had the opportunity to play in the spacious Mississippi Coliseum in Jackson, Mississippi .
 John Franklin paced the attack with 12 points and Johnny Hines and Leslie Carter captured 10 points each . John Franklin scored 12 points for John Franklin . Leslie Carter scored 10 points for Leslie Carter .
 Only two points separated the Wesson Wolves and Hinds during their first game of the season, played on the Co-Lin court . Hinds and Wesson .
 Johnny Hines stretches tall in a jump during the exhibition at Mississippi Coliseum in Jackson with the freshman Mississippi State team . Mississippi State is ranked No. 1 in the nation's basketball history .
 Hinds Five Favored In First Game On Eagles’ Home Grounds Saturday Basketball comes to Hinds Satur-f Pints Miccicei™ Basketball . East Mississippi Lions invade Hinds Saturday for the first time this season .
 Have one of Jackson Steam Laundry’s agents pick up your laundry and dry cleaning in the dorm each Monday and Thursday nights . The Eagles will be a slight favorite because of their defeat of the Scooba crew in the season opener .
 Defensively, despite the insurmountable problem of lack of height around the backboards, the Eagles have been polishing their man-to-man work . The Eagles have won their first two games of the season in a row .
 January 9, 1963 Job Training In Vocational Department Creates Skilled Personnel For Industry . McLendons Host Faculty Couples, Staff For Dessert .
 George M McLendon hosted three faculty couples and members of the Hindsonian staff at a dessert party at their home . McLendon Tuesday night hosted three . faculty couples, members of staff and faculty .
 Miss Margaret Lucas and Jimmy Morris, who will be married next month, were honored . Miss Lucas and Mr Morris will marry next month . Also honored: Miss Lucas, Jimmy Morris .
 In keeping with the ‘marriage’ theme of the party, Linda Byrd entertained guests with a humorous poem . Linda Byrd performed the poem .
 Tea and party favors were served from a table decorated with silver candlebra with white tapers, and centered with a white and green floral arrangement . Tea was served at a table with a silver candle bra and white floral arrangement. Tea was also served at the party .
 Miss Byrd and Bettye Simmons were honored with the Hindsonian staff . Miss Byrd was accompanied by Miss Simmons . The Hindsonian editor Joe White and Dwayne Cox were also present .
 Two Hinds debate teams debated the national topic before the International Relations Club Wednesday night . The debate team debaters made their first public appearance before the Hinds student body .
 Hinds debate teams have journeyed to LSU, Ruston, and to the Mississippi College Novice Tournament . Hinds Debate teams have traveled to Louisiana, Louisiana, and Mississippi College .
 Hinds will unveil its vocational exhibit at the Coliseum in Jackson, January 10 . Hinds students will be shown what it has to offer to vocational minded students .
 Hinds and Ole Miss will let the public know what opportunities lie untaken in the many fields of industry and business . The exhibits will include exhibits from various industries and Hinds .
 The industrial exhibition will be sponsored by the Jackson Chamber of Commerce and local industrial development groups . The exhibition will take place in Jackson .
 Hinds' exhibit will attempt to show that such facilities as those Hinds has are a step toward eliminating the problems that now exist in industry . The exhibit from Hinds will try to show how such facilities can eliminate the problems now exist .
 Problems include the idea of jobs looking for men, while at the same time men search for jobs . These problems include the fact that men are looking for jobs in the same place as men .
 There are thousands of jobs available for skilled personnel, if only there is skilled personnel to fill them . In other words, there are jobs for skilled people .
 Hinds Vocational Department coordinator: "For many years, colleges have trained the brain only. College has trained brain only"
 Hinds Vocational Department helps prepare vocational and technical students to qualify for the best jobs possible . It gives students practical problem-saving in those fields .
 First, a technical program has a greater holding power than a strictly academic course of study . Technical programs have a greater hold power than academic ones, experts say .
 Hinds' program provides the possibility of training the hand and mind simultaneously . Also, a program as that which which . which which Hinds offers provides the . possibility of . training the . hand and the mind simultaneously, Hinds says .
 The vocational co-ordinator noted that an article in the Readers' Digest entitled “Why Johnny Can’t Get a Job,” was a justification of technical education .
 It is more logical for a two-year college to give such instruction than a four-year senior college, it is said . It's more logical that a two year college should offer such instruction .
 The junior college has been deemed anonymously as the instrument to do this training . Therefore, the junior college is deemed anonymously .
 About-to-be vocational annex expected to be finished by September, at a cost of about $310,000 . President McLendon and others of the administration are overflowing exurberance .
 Sigafoos was a keen, ambitious lad, and when he finished high school he wished mightily to go on with his education . He wishes to continue with his studies .
 R L. L.’s father could not send the boy to college because a series of crop failures had brought him to the brink of disaster . The boy's father was forced to take care of his son because of the weather .
 He had a deep-seated fear that the task would be too great, that he would never be able to carry on a full, busy college life and still find time to do odd jobs and make money . He said he had a fear of the task being too great .
 "One day, walking and brooding, he came upon a park bench and sat down and lit a Marlboro cigarette," he says . "He sat there and lit himself a cigarette," the author says .
 R L. was suddenly interrupted by a small, quavering voice which said, “My boy, you are troubled.” He was sitting on a park bench and smoking a Marlboro .
 Seated beside R L. was a tiny, gnarled man with wispy, snow-white hair . Seated next to him is a tiny man who has wisped white hair .
 His skin was almost transparent, showing a delicate tracery of fragile bones beneath . His skin showed a fragile, almost transparent layer of skin .
 I, for example, used to get up at five o’clock every morning to stoke the furnace at the SAE house. I used to go to work at 5:30am every morning .
 At eight I had my ears pierced so that at nine I could tell fortunes in a gypsy tearoom . At eight she had to have her ears pierced to be able to tell fortunes . At nine she was able to read fortunes in the tearoom at the age of nine .
 Registrar Mildred Herrin reports 42 new day student and approximately 20 new dormitory student applications have been approved . 42 new student applications were approved .
 Hinds students wait patiently for the completion of registration — payment of tuition and board — to be paid . Hinds is the only school in the world to offer boarding boarding and tuition for students .
 The students in the front section are smiling because they near their goal . The last few don’t seem to be in such a gay mood. Maybe the students in front section were smiling because of the goal .
 Fire began when elevator motor either overheated or caught fire in six-story dorm . Fire began after elevator motor caught fire or motor overheated in dorm .
 Black smoke fills the building, causing little material damage but great alarm . Black smoke filled the building causing little . material damage .
 Fire fighting crews from the university and adjoining Starkville, Columbus and West Point quickly assembled to battle the blaze . Firefighters battled the blaze in the early hours of Thursday morning .
 A rapidly-spreading fire destroyed the kitchen and caused extensive damage to the main dining area of State's cafeteria . The kitchen was destroyed by the fire . The State of New York City's cafeteria was destroyed in the blaze .
 Governor orders National Guard and state Civil Defense officers to set up emergency feeding operations on campus . Extent of damages could not be determined, but Governor Ross Barnett quickly issued orders .
 Registration for the new IBM Data Processing course at Hinds is almost complete, with vacancies left only in night class . Hinds faced some of the country's country s country s most difficult colleges .
 With one of the four machines installed, the new course is receiving fast response from students . The course is getting fast response .
 Names are still being taken for the day course and are added to a waiting list in case of conflicts or drop-outs . Names are being added to the waiting list if there is a conflict or drop out .
 Sixty persons are registered for the day course, not including waiting list . Sixty people are registered, not included waiting list, are registered .
 Unprinted stories from 'Supplement' held for Owners held for owners . Hindsonian students may pick them up in Public Relations Office . Unprinted articles not printed in the Hindsonian Christmas Supplement may be picked up .
 Use of the content from this article has been published in the past two years . This article includes an article which was used by the author . In the past, the author of this article was able to use the use of the word 'spark' in the headline of this week's
 Students interested in one of the under-staff positions should contact Editor Joe White or Prince in the Public Relations office for an interview .
 Other positions include two associate editors, sports editor, exchange editor, art editor, photo editor, news writers, and feature editor .
 Course work in journalism is not a pre-requisite to Hindsonian staff work, although it is desirable . Course work is not an essential pre-requisites for Hindsonian journalism .
 Prince said the currently enrolled student body has registered for second semester . Prince said that the majority of the current students have registered for the second semester. Prince said he hopes the students will be able to continue to attend the university next year .
 Miss Herrin commended the students for their cooperation in pre-registration . She also praised the students' cooperation with the teachers .
 Students not completing second semester schedules by this date will be fined $5, Miss Herrin said . Students will also be fined for not completing schedules by the end of the year .
 These courses will follow a completely varied second semester schedule . The courses will be followed by a completely different schedule .
 Final figures not yet complete on registration for special students, vocational students and enrollees for day and night classes . Final figures are still not complete .
 On January 11, 26 entering students completed day-long freshman entrance exams on campus . The exams were part of a day of preparation for students entering into college .
 Students meeting graduation requirements are automatically exempt from exams if they apply by 'the 18th', according to Miss Herpunch, accounting machine with | rin.
 Only two sophomores have apone digit selector, reproducing j plied for graduation for graduation to date, Sandra summar punch, and sorter . Only two Sophomores in history have had a digit digit selector .
 Hinds debaters topped squads from Hardin-Simmons, David-Lipscomb, and Middle-State Tennessee . Hinds debate debaters won the state championships . The state's top debaters also won the championship .
 Watkins and Land retired from competition in a close decision against Iowa State . Watkins, Land and Land face Iowa State on Saturday . The pair were retired after the game .
 Hinds was represented by Carol Fortier, Dawn McNeil, Woody May, and Ralph Hemphill .
 Art Department hopes to encourage art appreciation among Hinds students . Private collection of music instructor Rex Tatum 'this week is being exhibited at the library .
 The collection includes 21 paintings dated from the 17th Century, most of them Italian and American . Most of the paintings date from the 16th Century . The collection is based in New York City .
 Tatum, who began collecting as a college freshman, prefers American work . He intends to restrict his acquisitions to that field in the future .
 The exhibit is the first of a proposed series to be shown in a newlycompleted art department located in the library .
 Harry L Brister, associated with the International Business Machines, will instruct special sections of IBM Data Processing when the course is added to Hinds’ day and nigh't programs second semester .
 Brister handled IBM assignments since 1950 . Brister has worked with various firms in different sections of the country .
 He graduated from L.A. City College with highest academic average for a male graduate in 1957 . He graduated with highest Academic average for male graduates .
 He has worked with IBM machines in operations, wiring, installation, design, instruction, and supervision . He has been involved in operations and wiring of IBM machines .
 Even while in the Army, the 31-year-old man served as wiring operator and unit instructor on IBM equipment . Even while he served as a wiring operator, he was a unit instructor .
 Junior colleges were formed in 1963 after educators agreed something definitely had to be done about the lack of colleges .
 "They evolved naturally to fill a need, and since then have assumed more and more responsibility," the author says . "Since then they've assumed more responsibility. They evolved naturally, they evolved naturally," she says .
 The ordinary American believes ‘junior’ connotes an actual junior or son of a college . The ordinary Americans believe “juniors” connotes a college junior or a college son .
 Junior and senior colleges meet each year to work out required curriculums . Junior and Senior colleges meet side-by-side to discuss required curriculum .
 The only difference in the two types of colleges is name and number of years offered . Only difference is name, number and year offered .
 Freshmen and sophomores number many more than juniors and seniors . Classes dwindle in size as they progress through college .
 Junior colleges are not babies; they just teach the same things for half the time . Junior colleges don't need to be babies, they're not babies, says President Obama . "Juniors college is not babies. It's not babies," says Obama .
 Their status is growing and perhaps tomorrow will produce another duty for them to fill . Perhaps tomorrow will be another duty to fill.
 Junior colleges are not inferior to senior colleges and should not be classed as such . Junior colleges should be able to compete with senior colleges . Junior college students should be allowed to take part in the college experience .
 Local boys' gymnasium filled to capacity Thursday night, January 10 . Local boys’ gym was filled with noise . Local high school gym filled with plenty of noise .
 About 40 boys and three girls shouted, ranted, and stomped until the walls shook . The walls shook as 40 boys, three girls ranted .
 They cheered and hissed, more than students at conference basketball games . They cheered, hissed more often than students did at conference games . Students cheered and hesed more than anyone else at the games .
 The crowd wasn’t as large as usual, of course, but the spirit was higher . The crowd was as big as usual .
 This was an intramural basketball game . Perhaps it was higher because spectators were closely connected with players on both teams .
 Southside dormitory was pitted against the day-students’ team in a rough and tumble game . The game was played between Southside and the day students from Southside .
 The contest was held immediately before the stage band jazz concert in the auditorium . Contest was held before the band performed a jazz concert .
 Conference ball players know how to toss a pointer or escape a guard . Never let it be said only conference ball players knew how to throw a pointer .
 Vocational students made up the major part of the cheering section . A cheering contest stole the spotlight from the game .
 Watching an intramural game can be as interesting as viewing a humorus yet exciting movie . Watching intramorial games can be interesting as watching a comedy movie .
 W Surgery vs. Sugar As Kildare Loses In Love, Marriage -"" .
 "Kildare,” a question was raised as to which is more important to a woman—career or marriage . Kildare: Career or marriage is important to women .
 "I have become an avid fan of the young doctor, but not to the extent of selling my volume of neuro-surgery edited by Dr. Dr. John Defterios .
 Jim Kildare fell sweetly, tenderly in love with a codoctor, who just happened to be blonde, quick-witted and attractive .
 The “impossible” element had to be added to this budding romance . The writer chose to let the girl be an aspiring young surgeon .
 To make a simple plot simpler, the girl had to choose between profession or a professor, or surgery or sugar .
 To those who saw the program, the opinions were varied as to whether or not the girl made the right decision . Those who saw it said it was a mistake .
 Even though the story was an imaginary one, the plot is more controversial in the 60's when women are being educated and are holding important positions in business than it was in grandma's day . The plot was more controversial when women were being educated .
 It is important because we are the ones to make the decision, not some heroine in a TV show . It's important because "it is important" for women to have a voice in deciding whether to vote for the president .
 We shall, possibly, one of these days have to decide between a marriage or a career . We may have to choose between marriage or career. We will be happy to say goodbye to our marriage.
 Of course millions of women are combining them and doing so quite successfully . Millions of women have been combining the two worlds .
 Perhaps we can learn to combine the two or decide which we want the most . Perhaps it's time to decide which is the best .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Friday .
 The third term wil lno't be compulsory, and in it a student may take from six to eight semester tour . In it, students may take between six and eight semester tours . Third term will be compulsory .
 Fulltime students could, with two other terms, take up to Albert Dahduh50 credit hours a year, completing his degree in less than three calendar years . Students could, Jim Bonney j with two terms, complete their degree in under three years .
 This announcement corresponds with an editorial in last week’s Hindsonian.com . This announcement coincides with a Hindsonian editorial .
 Columnists, historians, statesmen, and politicians have already begun to choose up sides . Columnists and historians are already beginning to choose sides .
 Events will be channeled in the direction of a single, timeworn statement . Regardless of the vicinity one chooses, events will be directed towards a single statement .
 The trick is to find an acceptable technique that will enable the West to go forward simultaneously at home and abroad . The West needs to find a technique that allows it to go ahead simultaneously at both sides of the debate .
 It is highly improbable, in today's world, to have one without the other, it is impossible to have both .
 If this statement is not interpreted to mean a loss of American individuality, then it should be interpreted 'to be a step in the right direction, even though it is probably premature', says President Obama .
 In this vital area, we should not underestimate the value of propaganda and fts impact on an illiterate mass . We should never underestimate the importance of propaganda .
 We should express our attitude toward other peoples (that’s what our foreign policy should be) that inhabit other nations in a language that is both attractive and understandable . We should be able to express our attitudes toward other people that inhabit our nations in an attractive language .
 While not overlooking the overseas diplomat, we shouldn’t ignore the masses either. We shouldn't ignore the mass either, we should not ignore the overseas diplomats either .
 If 'the United States will set out using these three as the pegs of a progressive policy in the fight for peace, we will have something to hang our leftists — termed ‘warlike” ‘tactics in Cuba and Berlin on. If the U.S
 It is this kind of influence and sway that the communists cannot compete with or against. It is the kind of sway they have that it can't compete with, or against .
 They can make missiles like sausages and frighten the world, but they can’t make them like missiles and free the world . They can't make sausage like missiles, they say, but can't free world, they claim .
 It's when one begins talking practicalities that freedom's opponents lose out and liberty's opportunities win out . It's also when you talk practicalities about freedom's opportunities and freedom's enemies lose out .
 When endeavors of free-enterprise economy are seen, the masses will get wise and join the free world . America’s surmise. Not to be forgotten is when endeavors . are seen . The masses will follow America‘s surmise .
 Intermediate badminton competition pits Barbara Clack against Jackie Snaders and Frances Picket against Sandra Weaver . The competition was held in the Intermediate Intermediate Badminton Championship . The final round of the competition will be held on November 11 .
 In the losers' bracket, Jane O'Neal meets Sandra Vaughn, and Linda Hill faces Klare Parker . Linda Hill and Sandra Vaughn also face each other in the loser bracket .
 In beginners’ badminton, Olga Deaton battles Ann Pharr for the championship . Olga deaton is competing in the first round of the tournament . Ann Phar is the first woman to win the tournament in beginners' category . The tournament will be held in London
 Connie Roediger and Francis Pickett clash for championship of intermediate ping pong . Pickett won the championship in the final match of the World Series .
 Jackie Sanders meets Carrie Bliss in beginner’s ping pong competition . Barbara Clack faces Linda Hill in the competition . Jackie Sanders faces Carrie Bliss .
 January Features Encore Of ’62 Snow, Temperatures, thunderstorms, 'tornadoes, freezing rain, ultra-low temperatures .
 Sleet began falling early Saturday afternoon and became mixed with light snow later that evening . Sleet fell in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 College Knowledge Not Always Useful On Test Questions . Sandra Roberts, a pretty Jackson freshman, has pleasing eyes, but IS pleasing to the eyes .
 Miss Margaret Lucas, assistant registrar, will be honored tomorrow afternoon at a bridal shower given by Miss Susan Brown, Mrs. Brown .
 Miss Lucas and Hinds band director Jimmy Morris will be wed Feb. 23 at State Line, Miss. 23 . Miss Lucas will be married to band director and Miss Morris . The ceremony will be held in Raymond, Mississippi .
 The shower, set for 2m. in the home economics building, is miscellaneous . decorations will be provided by Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The shower will be held at the school's home economics department .
 Vicksburg, Mississippi, students learn many things while in college . Miss Frances and Miss Frances Morris, both of the Morris family, both attended college . The Morris family is proud of their heritage .
 The acquired knowledge too often has nothing to do with questions asked on tests . Trouble is, the acquired knowledge often has no reason to be asked questions on tests.
 Mr -is a bald-headed man who can clean your house and everything that’s in it . He can clean everything that's in it.
 Do not pass --, do not collect-dollars. enough to build snowmen or have traditional battles, but it did revive a memory . Do not collect --, or build --enough-enough-to-build snowmen, but do .
 It was on January 12, 1962, that the thermometer dropped one degree below zero in Jackson, Jackson, and a blanket of snow from one to five inches deep enveloped the state .
 Hinds was open, and sophomores—for the most part—havj^ fond memories of the few happy days when girls wore slacks to classes . Other girls provided laugh'ter for onlookers with spills on the slippery ice .
 The 1963 sequel was less funsome, however, producing a rash of minor accidents and generally hazardous driving throughout the state .
 Those disappointed in the 1963 performance, can probably find comfort in the newness of this year . Those disappointed can look forward to likely repeats of this past weekend .
 Big Hinds' Eagle In Final Stages, Editor Discloses . One of 'the major sections of this year’s Eagle is now in the process of final proofing .
 The Eagle will be published this summer and will have a circulation of more than 1400 people .
 Dave Gardner, the quick-thinking Tennessee comic, will perform Sat., Jan., at Municipal Auditorium in Jackson, Tennessee .
 January 16, 1963 Student Competition TOTALS OFF THE BACKBOARD . Center Leslie Carter, 6’ Eagle from Raymond, nets two points for Hinds .
 High-jumping talent as his part of the decisive victory . Carter Carter contributed* high-jumper talent as part of his team's victory .
 Hinds aces use a fast break during the first half of play . A fast break was employed during the play by the Hinds team . Hinds won their first match of the season with a score of 8 points .
 The Eagles pushed the Lion members aside at the bucket and controlled the backboards . Eagles pushed members of the Lion into the boards at the end of the game . Eagles dominated the backboard at the start of the quarter .
 Will Wade and Johnny Hines led the scoring for the victors netting 17 tallies each . Will Wade scored 17 of the 17 goals for the win over the Tigers . Hines scored 17 goals .
 Keys Currie of East Mississippi took home the high point honors for the night . Key Currie won the award for her efforts .
 Hinds roundballers play two home basketball games this week at Hinds . Hinds will host a pair of home games at home this week. Hinds has won two of its last three games this season .
 John Dickens and Rick Stewart are the top point scorers for the Bulldogs . Jay Johnson leads Pearl River . John Dickens, Rick Stewart and Jay Johnson lead Pearl River in scoring .
 The Eagles sported a 3-5 won-lost record prior to Tuesday’s game at Jories . The Eagles are currently sitting at 3-4 won-loss record in the league .
 It will be the first meeting between Hinds and either Pearl River or Holmes . Hinds will meet Pearl River and Holmes in the first time .
 Circle K selects a number of nominees to be invited into the organization . The number of selected students is decided at the meeting, generally ranging from fifteen to twenty . Circle K is a national youth organization .
 Billy Barefoot, Billy Joe Montgomery, Bill Dunlap, Bill Watts, Harlan Stanley, Jimmy Buell, Larry Hill, Joe Campbell, Jerry Legg, Chris Sparkman, Dwight Middleton . The team won the title in 1991 .
 Billy Lee, Jerry Smith, Woody May, Jack McCaskill, Johnny Hannah, Jackie Williamson, and Billy Lee were among the stars of the day .
 Selectees will show their acceptance of the offer by attending the regular meeting of Circle K tomorrow night at 4:55 in the private dining hall of the cafeteria .
 The Sundowners, new vocal group from Millsaps College, will present their first full-scale concert in the Hinds auditorium tomorrow evening at 7:30, sponsored by the Hindsonian .
 The group has already appeared at Hinds during the Beauty Review in November . Tickets for the group are going fast, says Hindsonian editor Joe White .
 Trio arranges their own numbers for their unique blend of one male and two female voices . Using predominantly folkflavored music, the trio arranges themselves own numbers .
 Sundowners guii tarist was a member of the now defunct Millsaps male quartet last year . Most of their selections come from re-arranging well-known folk songs .
 They began singing together in September during spare time at the Millsaps choir retreat .
 Since then they have appeared in numerous campus spot appearances . They have performed for such public attractions as the Jr. Jr. and Jr. high school . The band has also performed for other public attractions .
 Tickets are on sale in the Public Relations Office, but will also be sold at the auditorium door tomorrow night . Special price of 50 cents has been set for Hinds students . Tickets are also being sold for students .
 Hindsonian business manager Dwayne Cox, business manager, is in charge of ticket sales . Jimmy Chandler, Jimmy Chandler and Hindsonian's stage manager are also in charge .
 The program will last approximately one and one-and-half hours, White said .
 Dottie Breakfield discovers an easy method of moving into the recently completed $85,000 Northside annex . Breakfield finds easy way to move into the newly completed annex . The annex is located in the Northside section of the city .
 A mobile X-ray unit will be set up on campus tomorrow from eight o'clock until twelve o’clock and from one o‘clock until five o”clock .
 All teachers and students are urged to have an X-ray made during this time by the college nurse . This will be the last semester checkup of the semester . This is the last checkup .
 Sixty-Five students earn Honors As Herrin Lists Semester Grades . President's List, Dean's List and thirteen students are listed on President’s List . One all-A's list includes five A's students .
 Listed on the Dean's List were Hi-Stepper Director To Judge Contests In Various Schools . Business Students To Visit Campus For Annual Commerce Day Feb. 14 .
 Epsilon Eta Chapter of Phi Beta Lambda sponsors its annual Commerce Day on February 14 . The day-long visit will begin with registration, followed by tours of the campus guided by members Mrs. Eta .
 HiSteppers director Alon Bee will judge in the Phi Beta Lambda Beauty Pageant at Murrah High School in Jackson . The pageant will take place on February 7 .
 Jo elected by P ° pular VOte Bryant, Hattiesburg; Hilda Bullock, Jackson . Edith Brummett, Jackson; Edith . Brummet, Jackson, elected by Jo elected . Hilda . Bullock was elected by a majority of voters .
 Randall Everette Carney, Nancy Carol Clayton Clayton, 'Jackson,' Henri Lou Coleman, Mendenhall; Billy Herschel Cook, Jackson; Becky Cooper, Jackson, Vernon Dawson, Jackson . Also, Lucy Nell Felder, Jackson and Johnny Franklin, Redwood; Ann Garner,
 Sylvia Gibson, Jackson, Alabama; John M Hathorn, Jackson; George W Haynes, Utica; Patricia Hebler, Vicksburg; Ralph Hemphill, Jackson . Ralph H. Hemphills, Raymond; Juanita Hilderbrand, Jackson. Juanita
 Mary Jane McDonald, Diane Mahaffey, Sandra Marble, Jo Carolyn Martin, Greenville; Becky Massey, Goshen Springs, David Neal,11 Goshen Spring . Marianne Neal, Vicksburg; Mary Louise Polk, Prentiss; Carol Puckett, Jackson
 Darrell Slack, Harlan Stanley, Judy Statham, Mary Ann Stewart, Utica; Pete Taylor, Raymond, Raymond; Judy Thompson, Clinton; Faith Walker, Crystal Springs. Darrell Slack; Harlan. Stanley, Jackson, Jackson; Judy St.atham, Jackson .
 Patsy Warnack, Lela Ann Wilkinson, Frank Wilson, Vicksburg; and Winnie Sue Widers, Jackson . The Jackson area is home to many of the Jackson area's residents .
 A business exhibit in the academic building will display the the latest business equipment . The exhibit will also be a business exhibit at the university .
 Companies to be represented included Burroughs Corporation, InOn February 18, Mrs. In. Mrs. Barbara Bush was represented .
 Previously, the girls have been nominated and pany. i also on the day's agenda will be entertaining . Also on the agenda is entertaining .
 The first segment will explain the local chapter of Phi Beta Lambda, and the second part will deal with the Hinds business department . The first part will be the first part of a segment to explain the chapter of Delta Delta Delta .
 Following lunch and further tours, guests will be treated to a social at Raymond Lake Lodge .
 Clinton, Raymond, Jett of Vicksburg, Puckett, St. St. Louis and Raymond schools expected to attend . Schools expected to be at the event .
 All high schools in the Jackson area have been invited and others may answer the invitation before next week . The invitation has been extended to all high schools across the region .
 All Hinds students may attend exhibits during the day . Maybelle Furness, sponsor of the chapter, emphasized that all Hinds pupils may attend the exhibits . The exhibits will be open to all students .
 These honored students will be presented awards in an upcoming chapel program . Students will also be presented with awards in a chapel program in the fall .
 The idea originated last year before publication of the 1962 Eagle . Top students from various departments will be featured in the magazine .
 Selections made from all-round attitudes, grades, grades and cooperativeness, with each department adding requirements necessary for its field . Selections are made from attitudes, . grades, . co-operation, and each department adds requirements necessary to its field.
 This is the only major program on the Hinds campus which endorses high-ranking students . Aside from Phi Theta Kappa, national honorary society, this is the most prestigious program on campus .
 It gives recognition where it is due and encourages students to perform better in classes and in extra-curricular activities . It also gives recognition to students who are performing well in school and beyond .
 Top students in one division will not receive the award for another division also . Care has been taken that top students in another division not be given the award also .
 It would be good to have open competition, such as a special exam, when there are indecisions or ties for the top student . Perhaps it would be a good idea to have an exam when there is indecision or ties .
 Recently a contest was staged on campus, in which an attractive 19 inch Motorola television was to be given away .
 They will end the contest in the Grill between 3:30 and 4:00 Tuesday, April 2 .
 A minimum of 1,000 empty packs of Alpine, Marlboro, Parliament or Phillip Morris cigarettes must be submitted to qualify . The cigarettes must have a minimum amount of empty packs .
 An entry of 1,001 empty packs might win the person or club a television . In other words, an entry might win a TV . The winner of the contest will be announced on Monday .
 Some suggest that the set be won and placed in the college grill . Some suggestion has been made that it should be placed in college's grill .
 Club, organization, or individual may collect packs on their own initiative . Or, if some club, organization or individual wishes to obtain the television set .
 It’s not often that someone gives something away, especially not a valuable television set, but when they do it seems smart to take advantage of the opportunity . The TV set was donated to charity .
 Views expressed in this paper are not necessarily the views of the Faculty and administration of Hinds lunior College . The views expressed are those of the faculty and administration .
 Millsaps College folk singers, appearing at 7:30 m.m. in the auditorium this Thursday, will be honoring Hinds, its students, and faculty with their first full scale concert . The popular Millsaps college folk singers will be honored with a full-scale concert .
 The group performed at the Beauty Review a few months ago . Those who attended the event will remember the rousing applause .
 This concert, however, promises to be even greater than their other appearances . This concert will be the first time the band has performed in the U.S.
 Time for songs like, ‘If I Had a Hammer,” ‘The House of the Rising Sun,’ and many others . Time for song like “If I had a Hammer” and ‘House of The Rising Sun’
 At present a university without its own group of folk singers is like burlesque without strippers . At present, the university has no folk singers and is struggling to find a way to get its own .
 Many of the records are merely folk songs . Listen to the radio or songs in the grill -- yes, clod darling .
 You'll like those songs, too, and I'll bet you my “Peter, Paul and Mary” album that you’ll be standing in the aisles asking for more .
 Staff of this paper will be on the first row of the Sundowners concert . The staff of this newspaper are sponsoring the concert .
 Sundowners will be welcomed and enjoyed, especially since their Alma Mater is a local college . Many students are avid fans of folk singing an dits singers, the Sundowners singers .
 Don't be among the clods who sit in the dormitory listening to the rattle of the open space between their ears . Meanwhile back at the auditorium, don’t be among those who sit there listening to rattle .
 Rise up for your beliefs, and go to the Sundowners concert . Tell them Byrd sent you—no, you better not . Rise up and go .
 The whole crux of the problem seems to be Britain’s insistance on Adenauer of West Germany 1 some kind of special invitation; quickly came to England's aid including some parts of her ecobut not rescue .
 He is in favor of admitting Great Britain to the Inner Six . Lucembourg, Belgium, Netherlands, and Italy are also in favor . Belgium, Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands are in the inner six .
 Only the Grande Ole Man of France stands against the tide, and ignores the knock of MacMillan for English admission to the Common Market . Only France stands by the tide of French opposition to the EU .
 Britain isn't the only one who has been disturbed from her markets and lost her trade to this new neighbor . What’s more, Britain isn’t the only . It's more than a matter of days before it comes to an end, the UK has lost its trade
 Even the 'quietest' citizens of this busy community (Sweden and Switzerland) have become alarmed at the activity behind the Green Door .
 Hi-Stepper Director Bee Returns After Three Day Hospitalization . Mrs. Bee returns from three-day hospitalization .
 Hi-Steppers’ director, Alon Bee, returned to work this week after several days absence due to illness . Bee was ill-advised to return to work at the end of the week .
 This is the reason de Gaulle gave for his recent no-thank-you note to Her Majesty . De Gaulle: "I'm not going to thank Her Majesty. I'm going to tell her I'm sorry"
 de Gaulle's stubbornness towards English admission is not the only reason for his decision . Regardless of the Common Market, one must go outside of pure economics to find the real reason for the decision .
 It probably all boils down to the Grande Ole Man’s desire for a Grande Alliance headed by a Grande France .
 If England is allowed a ‘brick house’ in the community and everyone else retains one of the ‘shingles, this Grande Idea may be thwarted . England may be able to have a 'brick home' in a community .
 England still thinks she is a hundred dollar bill, when actually she's only about a fifty . So, looking at the situation from de Gaulle's position, England thinks she's a hundred dollars .
 This would allow British entrance into the Common Market and preserve de Gaulle’s Grande Idea . It would allow Britain to join the Common European Union . This would be a boost to the French economy .
 The circumstances seem to dictate an eventual united Western Europe though, despite de Gaulle’s delusions of grandeur .
 Rubel Phillips officially announced his candidacy for governor with this unique provision—that he would run as a Republican . Phillips is a Republican, breaking a century-old precedent .
 Phillips was introduced to Hinds students at last week’s assembly . Phillips explained more fully his unique position in a special interview with the Hindsonian .
 He said there would be an improvement in our relationship with the federal government and in our fiscal program . He said he would like to see a change in his relationship with federal government .
 A Republican could go to a national convention with some respect and an opportunity to speak . A GOP convention could be a place to speak at a GOP convention, says Rep. Rick Santorum .
 Phillips announcement was the first official announcement of the 1963 election . Phillips announcement came amid a political upheaval in Mississippi .
 Phillips seems to hold the stirring stick in this traditionally one-party state . In any case, Phillips holds the stir stick .
 S H O N E Y 'S WESTLAND PLAZA campaign will not be Barnett's administration or the Ole Miss crisis, but Mississippi's relation with the national government, and education highways, and state finance .
 Charles Sullivan, who made the liquor question a lively issue in the 1960 campaign, announced his candidacy again as a Democrat last week . Charles Sullivan made the issue in his 1960 campaign .
 The 37-year-old Jackson attorney expects to have as many Democratic supporters as Republican supporters . Already termed ""The Republican," he is already known as 'The Republican'
 With the advent of a Republican in the Mississippi gubernatorial race, state politics enters a new era . Mississippi politics enters into a new state of uncertainty .
 Rubel Phillips spoke to the student body last Wednesday in chapel . Phillips is the GOP candidate for the Republican presidential nomination . Phillips has been in office for three years .
 International Relations Group Views Film On Communist Growth . The history of communist expansion was the subject of a documentary film recently viewed by the International Relations Club .
 Main Auditorium — HINDS students-soc students-Society ADults—$1.00 TICKETS ON SALE at MillsAPS and HINIDS Public RELATIONS OFFICE expansion . Main Auditorial — HinDS students andsoc. ADULTS—$
 Party bosses used tactics and strategy in taking over country after country, right on through the Cuban Revolution in 1959 . Starting with the conquest of the Soviet Union, it pointed out the tactics and strategies used by the party bosses .
 At a business meeting prior to the film, the club chose its symbol and pin, and placed orders for them . The club chose the symbol, pin and symbol for the film .
 ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITHO NEGATIVES & PLATES . MATS P.0.0 . Mats P. 0.1 .
 Young Lebanese Sacrifices Homeland For Medical Education In The States . Gloria Conerly provides a charming contrast to the mass of machinery .
 Cardinal Newman Week Staged With Catholics’ Unity Theme . The way home is said to be a hard one, and for Joseph Scrhen, it will also be a long one .
 Many of us will be married and parents before Joseph again sees his family and homeland, for he has sacrificed both for a medical education . Joseph's parents will never be able to see him again until he returns home .
 Both bags and heart were filled—one with clothes, the other with pride . Both bags were filled with clothes .
 Joseph's family of three brothers and three sisters is one of Joseph's favorite subjects . Joseph has three brothers, three sisters and three brothers .
 Joe plans to continue his education at a California university after graduating from Hinds . His father, a wholesale merchant, financed the trip to the United States and is also “footing the bill” for his education .
 Newman Club will mark Cardinal Newman Week Feb.-March 2 with Christian Unity . Newman Club is a friend from high school days, Newman Club says .
 Included will be the recitation of the Rosary on Wed., Feb., Feb. at the Catholic Church in Raymond .
 Newman Clubs and Centers are seen today in the United States . Though unable to carry out his plan for Oxford, Newman's idea is seen today .
 George, as president of the sophomore class, is the first student of foreign birth ever elected a class president . George is also the first foreign-born student to be elected president of a class .
 English, French, algebra, algebra and physical science will keep him busy while at Hinds . His five years of English should help him a great deal .
 Joseph doesn't want to return to his homeland to practice medicine . Joseph says he wants to stay in the U.S. to study medicine .
 It will be four to six years before he returns, but the advantages gained will help make up for the sacrifices . He will be back in the U.S. for four or six years .
 19-inch Motorola Television Console for Hinds Junior College . Motorola TV console was purchased by Hinds junior college .
 Empty packages of Marlboro, Parliament, Philip Morris and Alpine cigarettes must be submitted in order to qualify . Empty packages must also be submitted to qualify for the competition .
 Prizes will be awarded to any recognized campus group or individual submitting the largest number of empty packages of Marlboro, Parliament, Phillip Morris and Alpine cigarettes . The prizes will be given to students submitting the most empty packages .
 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT opportunities and some projected needs . Schools will have reported training facilities and facilities .
 Russell Levanway, consultant to the Mississippi Research Commission, engages junior colleges as chairman for each area study . He is chairman of each study . The Mississippi research commission is based in Mississippi .
 In the initial meeting a broad representation of employers, legislators, school administrators, and for the study. In the first meeting, a broad . representation of . employers, . legislators, and school administrators .
 Hinds' program is the fifth project to actually reach working level in the state . Hinds says it's the fifth program to reach working-level levels in the program .
 The project at Holmes has almost reached conclusion, and those at Itawamba, Perkinston, and Delta are well underway . Project at Holmes is almost finished, and the project is almost complete .
 The remaining junior colleges in the state are working toward planning meetings with area industrialists, Dr Levanway reported .
 Various students combined talent for a dance held last Thursday by the Lendon Players in the Recreation Hall . When the documentation is complete, it will be presented to the legislature for appropriation of local talent .
 Leroy Stockdale, Eastside proctor, sings a number with accompaniment furnished by other Hinds students . Survey already completed by Ole Miss and Mississippi State already done .
 Levanway noted that in this program, acutal participation by the . significant parties will yield more results than similar surveys in which there is no direct participation . education funds .
 It will also be used in attracting new industry and filling positions now vacant in already established industry . The government will also use it to attract new industry recruits .
 Have one of JACKSON STEAM LAUNDRY’s agents pick up your cleaning each Monday and Thursday night between 8:00 and 10:00. The agency will pick up the items between 8 and 10 a.m. on Monday and Friday .
 Rubel Phillips entered the gubernatorial race as a Republican this year . Phillips has been a popular and controversial subject in the past . Phillips is running for governor in Florida .
 Hinds students say they think the entry of a Republican into the governor's race will affect Mississippi . They say they are concerned about the impact of the Republican's entry into the gubernatorial race .
 Harold Mitchell, Vicksburg sophomore, says he thinks it will be good for the school . Harold Mitchell says he hopes the move will help the school's students .
 The greater majority of Mississippians will accept this step toward a two-party system and be proud of it . Shelia Troyer, also a Vicksburg sophomore, said, "The greater majority will accept it" The state will hold a state legislature in 2015 .
 A change will help Mississippi, and I think Phillips will get somewhere, says Phillips . A change is needed in the state, Phillips says .
 Fred Peyton, Vicksburg sophomore, says he's afraid that right now there will be no change, but it is a start . Fred Peyton: "I’m afraid that ... right now, there will no change" Fred Peyton says, "I'm afraid that there will
 Mike Rabalais, psychology instructor, said, “There will be very little effect.” He said .
 Sandra Jabour, Vicksburg sophomore, replied, "No, I don'f think there will be any change. I don't think there is any change"
 Belva Watkins, Vicksburg sophomore, said, “It will be a good effect because Mississippi has hackee^ the Democratic party since the Civil War and when we realize that this is not the same party that fought the Civil war, then we have begun . Clay Co
 McLendon announced that more political speeches will be featured in the weekly meeting . McLendon also announced that the meeting will feature more speeches from politicians .
 Harlan Stanley netted eight free throws and two field goals for 12 points . Stanley scored 12 points in the first half of the game .
 Wildcat ace Frank Necaise scored 31 points for the Eagles . The Wildcat had a 31-0 lead in the first half .
 Pearl River Hinds had trouble with Pearl River on the Wildcats home court Jan 24 and fell foe to the Poplarville based team . Hinds lost the game on the home court to Pearl River .
 Hinds held the edge during the first half but couldn’t control the win minded Wildcats during the second half . Hinds had the edge in the first and second half but struggled to control the game .
 John Franklin led the Eagles with 13 points . George Puckett tipped in 12 points . John Franklin also scored 13 points for the Eagles . The Eagles won their first game of the season .
 Gary Smith got hot for the visitors in the second half and contributed 17 points during the period . Gary Smith also scored 17 points for the hosts .
 Bobby James nets two points for the intramural football team’s basketball squad . Bobby James scores two points in the basketball team's exhibition with the vocational team .
 Johnny Stanley (back to camera) and Carl Henry Sullivan protect James as he shoots . Johnny Stanley and Carl Sullivan protect him from harm .
 Leslie Carter was ace of the night with 10 field goals and single free throv^ for 21 points . Leslie Carter scored 21 points in the first half .
 Barnes and Johnny Hinds bucketed 16 and 15 points to trail in the scoring column . Barnes and Hinds also scored 15 and 16 points respectively .
 Hinds hit 79 percent of their charity tosses while the Jones crew hit 67 percent . Hinds and Jones hit 79 per cent of their charities tosses .
 Hinds cage schedule is almost finished with only two games remaining on the slate . Only two games remain to be played in the cage .
 Holmes Bulldogs of Goodman take on Holmes Bulldogs Thursday . The first of the contests is an out-of-towner against Holmes .
 The Mississippi Delta Trojans will invade for the season finale . The following Tuesday, Feb. 14, will face the Mississippi Delta . The season finale will be Feb. 16 .
 Eagles must be ready for anything, Eagles coach says . He says both opponents will be tough to defeat and they must be prepared for anything . Eagles must also be ready to take on any of their opponents, he says .
 Tomorrow will be the first meeting of the Hinds and Delta crew, though the Eagles have hosted Holmes in a previous game .
 Intramural Basketball Merchants & Planters Pk. FL 3-9915 CURB SERVICE DINNERS ITALIAN PIZZA PO-BOY SANDWICHES STUDENTS welcome .
 You probably don’t rej tines and gifts of flowers and candy, j fields at well at well . You don't rejtine and rejine tines .
 Phi Beta Lambda To Sponsor Day For Ten Schools . Approximately ten high schools in the Jackson area will be represented tomorrow . Commerce Day is sponsored by the Epsilon Eta Chapter of Phi Beta .
 Maybelle Furness, business instructor and sponsor of the chapter, explained the purpose of the meeting . Furness also explained the meeting's purpose .
 Valentine's Day is not a celebration exclusive to our generation, or even to our parents . The earliest known valentine, dated 1415, is pre-1790 . One of the first appeared in 1790 .
 Commercial valentines started as “In addition, we want to acquaint them with our organization, and the opportunities the club can offer,” she said .
 The addition of mechanical valentines—with served in the British Museum in London—has been added to the museum .
 Gera message, written by Charles man manufactured and common in Duke of Orleans, was common in his possession . Charles was held prisoner in the Tower of London while he was held in prison .
 A medieval belief held in England and France that it was at the start of the second fortnight that the birds began to mate . Another popular belief is that the celebration owes its origin to a medieval belief .
 Two Phi Beta Lambda members prepare for tomorrow’s annual Commerce Day . The Phi Gamma Lambda chapter of Phi Phi Phi Beta Lambda is a member of the Phi Phi Alpha Lambda Phi Phi Kappa Kappa Kappa Phi .
 Karen McBride and Ronnie Moore work on displays which will pus tours and a two-part’original, decorate the sta § e as a P art of the da ylon g affair skit .
 Seven Jackson business equipment companies will display the latest equipment in a special exhibit in the academic building . The exhibit will be held in Jackson, Mississippi .
 Today the celebration of Saint Valentine’s Day is confined largely to the United States . American gentlemen have a wide selection of cards from which to choose .
 Commerce Day is one of several projects Phi Beta Lambda undertakes each year . Commerce Day was an annual affair, Commerce Day one of many projects . An annual affair is held annually in honor of members of the fraternity .
 Gamma Lambda Chapter of Phi Theta Kappa will conduct formal initiation of twenty-four new comers on Tuesday, February 19 . Having been invited every year since their organization, the group this year will perform at the Krewe .
 Required for acceptance into the national honor society is a 2.2 grade average for freshmen, and a . cumulative average of 2. or better for sophomores . Required for admission is a . 2.3 grade average .
 Seven freshmen and seventeen sophomores will take the member‘ 1 ’ ‘ vows administered by Henri Coleman, chapter president .
 Freshmen invited to join are Donna Breitling, Johnny Hannon, Raymond; Carolyn Melton, Clinton; Carolyn Pounds, Rebecca Presley, Lena; Connie Rodiger, Montana; and Larry Slack, Jackson, Jackson . Freshmen invite to join include Donna Breitsling
 Carol Lott, Carol Easterwood, Jo Ann Gardner, Carole Killingsworth, Carol Kill-worth and Carole Lott are among the winners .
 Also in Alabama: Patricia Reed, Linda Rogers, Bettye Simmons, Vera Smithhart, Vicksburg; Eugenie Stogner, Tylertown . Frank Wilson, Frank Wilson and Mike Oliver, Salma, Alabama .
 Members are chosen on the basis of the unanimous rcommendation of character and citizenship by the active members of the chapter and a faculty committee .
 Carrollton Carnival Ball is elite club ball of prominent New Orleans natives . Carrollton is a New Orleans club ball .
 Floor show program will feature new acts and new costumes . With the theme of famous musicians, their floor show program is set to be new .
 Last year the group attended Mardi Gras as one of the marching units of the official 13-mile opening parade . Alon Bee said last year they were marching units in the parade .
 Last Saturday the groups were featured on the television program ‘Teen Tempos,’ over WLBT-TV, Jackson .
 The popular teen show spotlighted most of the group’s regular stage show, including solos, duets, and trios .
 Buses will leave New Orleans around midnight to return the group for classes Monday morning . The group will return to school in New Orleans at around midnight Monday .
 Upholstery Class Resumes In Reply To Many Requests in Raymond-Clinton area . Hinds will resume night division instruction in upholstery this week .
 Taught two years ago but discontinued last year . Includes instruction in upholstery of all kinds of objects from automobile seats to furniture .
 Registration will be open on Tuesday and Friday nights until February 22 . Walter Gibbes, vocational division co-ordinator, announced that registration will open on February 15 .
 Volume 29—Number 16 HINDS JUNIOR COLLEGE, RAYMOND, MISSISSIPPI . During recent weeks much unfavorable publicity has been directed toward Hinds Junior College .
 At least eight Hinds students have been connected with burglaries in the Jackson area . The burglaries have occurred in the past year .
 Newspapers and radio stations in this vicinity have been exceptionally cooperative during the past few weeks . Newspapers, radio stations and newspapers in this area have been cooperating .
 Hinds Junior College is the name of a junior college where the boys attended . The boys were disconnected from school until they could no longer disconnect the boys from the school . Police ignored a flashy lead for the burglary stories .
 News media saw that no good could come from playing up the name of the college . These news media saw no good come out of playing up college's name .
 They can no longer separate the two, and possibly they think of Hinds as a breeding place of juvenile delinquency . Hinds is no longer a place for delinquency, but it's a place to be a breeding site of delinquency. They can't separate them .
 Nothing has been said about the other part of Hinds’ student body, the 99.44 per cent pure . The honest students go to college to gain an education .
 Hinds has always been known as one of the finest and fastest progressing junior colleges in the nation, and we don’t want this to stand as a blot on our record . Hinds is known for its fast-growing junior colleges, and it is hoped this will not stand
 If someone’s impressions of the present situation needs correcting, please correct him. Please correct him .
 The wild goose may go where the wild goose goes, but Canada is not dry . W. W. L.A. Canada is home to the largest goose population in the world .
 Canadian politics moistened up a bit when Prime Minister Diefenbaker’s government received a vote of no-confidence from the Parliament . The vote was the result of a vote by Parliament of no confidence .
 This means there must be an election to decide whether a new government must be formed, or if the conservative party of the Prime Minister wins the most seats in Parliament, retaining the present one . Even though Diefenbaker received a vote of no-confidence, he has retained his
 The government was toppled by a combined vote of the opposition parties, social credit and the liberals . The opposition parties took control of the government in a joint vote of opposition and social credit .
 The reasoning behind that last statemnt is based on a comparison of French-Canadian and English-Cahow the voters feel, nadian population growth combined with their respective political views . This simply means—trying to stay in office by outmaneuvering your opponents by
 So far in modern Canadian history, the English descendants have been the most populous, best educated, and consequently have determined Canada’s political and cold war course . The English descendants of the English have been most populous and best educated .
 French hegemony has been reversed in all but the field of education by the French decendants . Recently, this hegemony was the issue on which centered the issue .
 Their rising rate of population in the last 15 years has outdispute that undermined Diefenbaker . Their rising rates of population was outdispution that undermined the former premier .
 Diefenbaker, a political pro, has seen the handwriting on the census-taker’s notebook, and is reacting accordingly . He is reacting to the results of the census, which he says is a mistake .
 The results of this election will be significant out of all proportion to its true importance in world affairs . The election will take place in a world of significance, says David Cameron .
 If Diefenbaker’s anti-U.S. stand prevails, it may well set the tone for Canada . Also involved was a note from j stripped the English by a rate of trend, started by the United States State Department .
 At stake in coming elections is the future of the North American Defense Alliance . Canada and the U.S. are members of the alliance . The alliance is the two largest economies in the North America .
 Politically he may be right, but militarily this stand weakens the defense of North America from j nuclear attack . The U.S. has been weakened by this stand, he says .
 This maneuver can be comoared to de Gaulle's rerent rejection of a United States offer to share its ""nuclear wealth" The liberal and social credit parties, stands are pro-American on this issue .
 To understand the significance of this crisis in Canada, one has to know the existing circumstances in Canada . To understand this, one must know the circumstances in the country's circumstances, the author says .
 There is an increasing trend in Canada, as we have long past experienced in South America, that the United States is the Colossus of the Western Hemisphere . Further, there is a growing trend that the U.S. is now the Colossus .
 "Shut up singing and get on with the movie.’’ was to discover that a movie, that was the recipitant of 10 academy awards, actually deserves all 10 of No, Frank nains didn't say it . West Side Swings .
 West Side Story made me rise early, miss lunch and stand in a long line of convention delegates . It would take something spectacular to make me miss lunch, but it did just that . "West Side Story" is a classic musical .
 The loss of sleep was taken care of the next night, a dismembered ham sandwich eaten in the darkened treatrere provided lunch . A loyal friend who stood in line as a proxy made the afternoon an enjoyable one after all .
 Letters to the editor must meet certain requirements to be sent to the Hindsonian . The Hindsonian is a proud member of the world's largest literary community .
 Authors must sign their names to these letters or they will be rejected . Authors must also sign the names of the authors of these letters .
 W BETTYE SIMMONS is an associate editor and business manager . She is joined by Joe White, Linda Boulden, Lela Canada, Vicky Hazzlerigg, and Vicky Toombs . The story is the work of a Pulitzer Prize-winning editor and
 The singing was a little too much to stomach in some of the scenes, such as the death scene . This is a compliment to the show’s actors .
 In West Side Story, the characters have such good lines, and the actors deliver them so well, that singing sometimes acts as an unwanted intruder . In most musicals the motto is, ""stop all the talking and get on with the singing,’’
 Russ Tamblyn turned in the same quality performance as George Chakris, who won best supporting actor award for best supporting role .
 She totally, completely and shamelessly, deserves her best supporting actress award . She totally deserves her award .
 Mr Beymer was his usual self and was saved only by the good graces of Miss Wood .
 Both the Jets and the Sharks had illustrious characters for members, especially the white gang of Jets . The Jets and Sharks were the Sharks' most famous teams .
 Their song on why they were bad is a classic piece of musical satire on today’s juvenile delinquents . The song is about a group of young delinquents who have been in trouble .
 For those who have seen or will see West Side Story, notice the unique way the credits are given . The credits are shown in the film .
 February 13, 1963 HINDSONIAN Page 3 SAGBY HAIL RAMBLER . Would appreciate ft® Opportunity of Doing Business With Ail The People In Raymond end Hinds.
 The letters can only be held a short time before they are returned to sender . The letters are only held for a short period before being returned .
 Mississippians Called To Fight For Heart Fund During Month SNOW STUDIES . Hitting Ronnie Mollere instead of the books, a group of winter comics take part in snowball war .
 Students were mobbed and rolled in Tuesday’s one-inch snow as they attempted to attend classes or enter the grill . Students rolled in the snow as students attempted to go to class or enter a grill .
 HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITHO NEGATIVES & PLATES P.0.0 .
 Hi-Steppers turned teen Tempos on Jackson station WLBT into colorful public relations stint for Hinds .
 The state of Mississippi will attack heart disease, the state's leading killer, in an all-February drive for the Heart Fund . Heart disease is Mississippi's leading cause of death .
 Hinds County residents will be aiming for $35,000 in the heart fight as their share of a $205,000 state goal . Local residents are aiming for the goal of $25,000 .
 Half of all deaths in Mississippi are caused by heart disease . Half of the 1963 Heart Fund will be spent for research into its causes and cures .
 The rest of the money pays for heart education and community service, Stennis and Scott say .
 Women volunteers will finish their neighbor to neighbor collections on Heart Sunday, February 24 . Heart Sunday is Heart Sunday .
 A series of special events throughout the county will combine heart fun with Heart Fund . Heart Fund is a fundraiser for the county's Heart Foundation . The events will be held in conjunction with a Heart Fund fundraiser .
 Queen of Hearts benefit tea in the Governor’s Mansion on February 15, and Tri-College Concert at Millsaps on February 22 . Businessmen from Jackson, George Bailey and Paul Faulkner, are co-chairmen of a special gifts appeal . Joe Latham is heading
 ‘Hinds students are urged to participate in any ways they can . Students urged to help in any way they can.
 Iranian Gives Talk To Relations Club On Politics, Customs, Economy and customs . Shahla Azordegan, Hinds student originally from Persia, gives talk .
 The living conditions, education, and dating customs of Iran will be the main topics . Subjects such as the living conditions and education, will be discussed .
 Iranian politics and the Shah’s land reform program will be analized by the speaker . Also, the recent upheavals in Iranian politics will be discussed . The speaker will also discuss the Shah's land reform .
 President's Council passed resolution concerning Freshman Day procedure . Council makes new hair cut rule for future Freshman day celebrations .
 McLendon and Mildred Herrin said it would be inserted in the Freshman Handbook .
 It has been found advisible through past experience to expect all incoming freshmen, without exception, to participate in Freshman initiation activities . It is not advised to expect freshmen to participate .
 On a day not later than the fourth week in school, all male freshmen are to be escorted to the campus barber shop for hair-cutting ceremonies .
 Out of each hair-cut, the School of Barbering shall receive twentyfive cents . The student treasury will receive twenty-five cents for each hair cut .
 There shall be a special pep rally during activity period at which the prizes bought with the treasurer's portion shall be awarded . The prizes won't be sold at the time .
 Immediately following his haircut, all male freshmen shall report to the grill to purchase their official Hinds’ beenie . The Hinds' beenie will be available for purchase .
 The student executive in cooperation with the cheerleaders, and possible faculty advisors, shall be responsible for dispensing with the foregoing .
 Our nation has an ample supply of dependable electricity . MP&L have planned and built ahead, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . Hammond .
 Brothers Slack Study As Separates, But Snag Similar Scholastic Citation . Brothers Darrell and Larry Slack study as separate but not as separate .
 Larry, 18-year-old freshman, was invited to join Darrell, 20, as a member of Phi Theta Kappa, national honor society . Larry was recently invited to become Larry's roommate . Darrell is a sophomore at the University of Wisconsin . Larry is a freshman at the university
 Larry registered a 2.2 average and Darrell earned a 2 .2 average . Larry registered an average of 2.3 on the first semester honor list . Darrell registered his 2.4 average on the list .
 The boys are transplanted Yankees, having spent most of their lives in Missouri and Michigan . Now day-students commuting from their home in Jackson, Jackson, they are day students .
 The elder brother attended most of his high school in Flint, Michigan, but graduated in Missouri . His family moved to Missouri after his family moved from Michigan to Missouri .
 Darrell said, "There is really not a lot of difference" between northern schools as compared to southern . Northern schools are more specialized, he said .
 I took three years of drawing and courses related to my major, engineering, be* fore graduation from high school . I took classes related to engineering, including drawing, before graduation .
 What they considered the largest difference in the north and south was, without doubt, climate . Climate .
 While unfrequent snow fell on the Hinds campus, the two fellows sat and talked of Mississippi’s warm climate . The two fellows talked of the warm climate in Mississippi .
 Miss Mildren Herrin, registrar and sponsor of Phi Theta Kappa, said this of the young men . The young men will be at the top of the Phi Phi Phi Kappa scholarship .
 Darrell and Larry Slack study together in the library, quite an unusual thing . Darrell andLarry Slack study with each other at the library . Darrell, Larry Slack: "It's quite a strange thing to do"
 Approximately 80 girls are learning to square dance this nine weeks as a part of the physical education program . The program is part of a nine-week program for the girls .
 Those who are less accomplished may attend instructing sessions on both Friday and Saturday . Those less accomplished can attend the instructing session .
 Manning and Nita Smith of College Station, Texas, national round dancing instructors, will conduct these sessions . Manning and Smith will conduct the sessions .
 The applicant may be a college student, a senior in an accredited high school, or a recent high school graduate . Applicants may be college students, senior in accredited high schools, or recent graduates .
 Most lengthy is a typewritten autobiography of not less than 1000 words stressing interests and plans for the future . Most lengthy autobiography is a typed autobiography of about 1000 words .
 High school recommendation containing scholastic record to date must be included . Record from the college registrar on work to date is also required . Also, high school recommendation must be submitted to include .
 The application form includes data on community activities and honors in high school . It includes community activities, honors and community activities .
 Denton, Director of Guidance, released a list of the best jobs for the future from the U.S. Department of Labor’s latest Occupational Outlook Handbook .
 Greatest demand will be for school counselors, engineers, technicians, physicians, dentists, nurses, librarians, and teachers, says handbook .
 A rapidly increasing demand for all kinds of engineers, especially in the fields of computer technology, rocketry, and nuclear energy, will provide many new openings for engineers .
 Salaries for beginners range from $5,335 to $7,400 a year, Occupational Outlook Handbook says . Highest offers in electrical machinery and electronic fields, says Handbook .
 Training usually includes two-year college course leading to a degree of associate in arts . Training usually takes place at the University of Cambridge .
 Industries that employ chemists are expanding at a rapid rate and creating vast opportunities for chemists . Chemists need to be on the lookout for new opportunities in the industry .
 A bachelor’s degree can expect about $490 a month to start; with a doctoral degree, about $763, says the handbook . A doctoral degree is also expected to start at $763 a month .
 The demand is for more physicians, registered nurses, pharmacists, dentists and optometrists, says the handbook . In the medical profession, perhaps some of the highest paid professions, there are more doctors and nurses .
 Other excellent jobs for the future listed from the Occupational Outlook Handbook are for physicists, mathematicians, economists, accountants, architects, lawyers, librarians, dietitians, home economists, commercial artists, newspaper reporters, programmers, statisticians, pilots and co-pil
 Prizes must be sent via registered mail, postmarked by February 23,1963 and received by the judges no later than February 25,1963 . All claims; far i Jem pests amt amt Co n so lat ion .
 B234707 bM GRAND PBIX 50 Sweepstakes for colleges only only . More than 50 times the chance to win than if open to the general public .
 Jonathan, the black and white cat seen every day in the vicinity of Main Dormitory, is a permanent fixture on campus . Jonathan is the cat seen daily by students at the university .
 He told me he has been here longer than either Tripod or Pooch . Tripod and Pooch are two other members of Hinds distinguished menagerie .
 They fight for a place to sit, turn the television set so loud that it hurts my ears, and then of all things, force me to vacate my favorite rocking chair . They turn the TV set up so loud it hurts the ears, it forces me to move out of my
 It seems that he was a stray cat, and someone took him in out of the wind and weather . The cat was taken in by someone who took him out .
 Calvary Baptist Church of Jackson will conduct a one-day study of Communism on Saturday, February 16 .
 Frew, Director of the Baptist Student Union, urges all students to attend this course . Frew: "I am happy to have this course available to all students"
 Johnny Hines has his hands full trying to grab the ball from a couple of Mississippi Delta Trojans during the game .
 There will be an important meeting of all team Captains at the 2A period, 10:05 the Men's Gymnasium . The meeting will be held at 10:00 the Men’s Gymnasum .
 Westside 2nd floor stormed to the lead last week in the annual Round-robin Basketball Tournament sponsored by the Women’s Athletic Association .
 Westside 2, Westside 1, Main, Northside 1 and Northside 2 are the five dormitory teams competing in the dormitory competition . The dormitory team consists of five dorms .
 Barnes takes a dive for the j floor after he tried in vain to block a shot by a Holmes Bulldog in last week’s contest . Barnes dives for the floor as he tries to block the shot by the Bulldog .
 Barnes and Johnny Hines scored 21 and 20 points each for the win . Barnes and Hines were the two leading scorers in the game .
 Barnes led the Eagles in their first half scoring spree with eight field goals and two cha tosses for a total of 18 points . Barnes scored 18 points in the first half .
 In the second period, the ace arched an additional five points to become the game high point man with 23 . In the first period he scored five more points to set up the game's high point .
 Close behind in the point count was Harlon Stanley with 15 in the first half and four in the for a game count of 19 . Close behind Stanley with five in the second half .
 Johnny Hines opened up in the second half and took control of the backboards . Hines opens up in second half to take over the backboard .
 Hines sacked three field goals and five free tosses . Besides grabbing key rebounds, Hines also made five field goals .
 Johnny Franklin and Leslie Carter contributed six points each . Gary Carpenter netted two points . Johnny Franklin scored six points .
 The Hinds choir will sing for the choral division of the Mississippi Education Association . A series of performances at various churches in the Hinds district are scheduled .
 The Girls’ Ensemble sang for the Bolton Rotary Club Ladies night last Monday . The Girls' Ensemble performed for the club's ladies night .
 The choir is made up of 10 to 12 girls from the regular choir . The group is directed by Mrs. Mrs. J. Smith, a teacher at the school .
 Later this school year the student body will hear the choir's Song Fest . Later this year the choir will hold a Song Fest in the school .
 Reeves said he expects it to be the apex of an especially good spring concert series . The date has not been set, but Reeves said it will be the climax of the series . Reeves: "It will be a great spring series"
 Reeves' choir is still accepting invitations to sing at area churches . He urged that any student interested in having them sing for his church .
 Boyd McPhail, Circle K president, released plans for the upcoming sweetheart election . Boyd Mcphail: Circle K sweetheart elections will be held in February 2015 .
 The dance will be held in the Girls’ Physical Education Gymnasium Thursday night, March 7 .
 Hilda Bullock, present Circle K sweetheart, will be present at the affair and take part in the corwning . The event will be held in honour of the Circle K Sweetheart .
 The new sweetheart will attend the Circle K Convention in mid-April, along with other members of the group .
 Benton, Tuesday discredited rumors about new restrictions for male students at Hinds . Benton discredited rumors that new restrictions were imposed on male students in Hinds school .
 A few Hinds students have been involved in Jackson burglaries, an old rule that no male student leave or arrive on campus between midnight and six in the morning has been enforced . Benton said no new rules have been added, despite rabid grill talk .
 The situation will continue as it was before, Benton said . Music Department Imports Saucier For Clarinet Concert February 25 told in dormitory meetings .
 There is no truth to the rumor that students cannot return to campus on Saturday after leaving Friday . Students will be allowed to leave campus again on Saturday .
 He added that students who have legitimate reasons for trafficking after midnight should present those reasons to his office in writing .
 This year will mark the Hinds president’s final year as a member of the vital administration committee . The committee is concerned with developing new junior colleges, educational facilities, and every phase of junior college administration .
 The committee is comprised of sixteen educators from throughout the United States . The committee meets biannually .
 The 1963 convention will include special forums on the role of the Board of Trustees, transferring students, testing, technicians for industry, and other important matters related to the junior colI lege of today .
 The president and his wife left Raymond Sunday morning, taking a personal tour of the West . They are on their way to Seattle, where they will head to Seattle .
 Their itinerary includes overnight stops in Dallas, El Paso, Tucson, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Portland . They will arrive in Seattle on Monday, February 25 .
 Following the convention, they will return by way by way to Boise, Salt Lake City, Cheyenne, Denver, Amarillo, and Dallas .
 Stage Band and Hi-Steppers will furnish entertainment for two conventions in Jackson, marking their 38th performance for the year . Band , Steppers will perform at conventions on Friday and Saturday .
 The Friday evening performance will be before the National Tile Convention meeting at the King Edward Hotel . The performance will take place before the meeting .
 Miss Mississippi, Charlotte Carroll, and Miss Hospitality, Loren Ormen, will serve as hostesses . Miss Mississippi will be the first to host the pageant .
 The Saturday show will be for the Mississippi Lions Club Convention meeting at the Hotel Heidelberg . The show will take place at the hotel heidelberg.
 The same troupes who performed in the New Orleans Mardi Gras will appear in these two shows .
 Hi-Steppers and stage band members provided entertainment for the annual Rambler Who’s Who contest .
 Gene Saucier, clarinetist, will be presented in concert Monday evening at 7:30 in the main auditorium .
 Lynch, accompanied Saucier the past two years in his recitals at Ole Miss . Lynch, who has been with the Ole Miss band for two years, accompanied him in recitals . Lynch: "Saucier is a great student. He's a great athlete. He is
 Hinds Music Department's program is open to the public . This is the latest in a series of presentations by the Hinds music department .
 Phi Theta Kappa will conduct their annual Freshman Talent Show in the college auditorium on February 26 .
 President Henri Lou Coleman says varied talent has been planned for the event .
 Twenty-four members were inducted into the nation scholastic group in a dignified hour-long program .
 This editorial is dedicated to these people — the complacent complainers . This editorial was dedicated to those who complain about the government .
 This year the Presidents Council has set new precedents, explored new areas for student participation, and worked with the administration in furthering the progress of this institution . This year's Presidents Council is the first year of the Presidents' Council .
 It has set new precedents, in cooperating with the sophomore class, by sponsoring the Freshman Day Dance last fall . It has also helped the freshman class .
 The Council has also sought to halt some students from ignoring the rights of others by breaking ahead in the cafeteria line .
 Another precedent-setting decision by the Council was a rule on hair-cutting, to be employed during next year’s freshman initiation ceremonies .
 A relapsed activity at Hinds, a Christmas dance, was inaugurated again this year . The Christmas dance was also inaugurated this year in a relapsed tradition .
 Council’s efforts in exploring new areas for student participation will be felt by the Council . The Council is looking at new areas of student participation in the community .
 A constitution for Hinds will be ready shortly, a committee from the Council has been working steadily on a constitution . Hinds is a member of the Hinds Council .
 These steps have culminated in a more wholesome atmosphere of administration — student body cooperation . Students are encouraged to work together in order to improve the school environment .
 In 1923, eight of the world's most successful financiers met in Chicago . H SECOND SPHINX SECOND GUESSES CURRENT EVENTS Arabian Knights Cheer Dawn Of Revolt .
 Charles Schwab, the President of the largest independent steel company, died bankrupt, living on borrowed money for five years before his death . Schwab lived in debt for more than five years, living off borrowed money .
 President of the largest gas company, Howard Hopson, became insane . Hopson became insane after becoming president of the biggest gas company in the world .
 Albert Fall, a member of the President’s Cabinet, was pardoned from prison so he could die at home . Albert Fall died at home after being pardoned by the President .
 Jesse Livermore, the greatest 'bear'' on Wall Street, committed suicide . Livermore committed suicide in 2009 . He was one of the most successful hedge fund managers in history .
 The head of the world’s greatest monopoly, Ivar Krenger, committed suicide . He committed suicide at the end of his career .
 Leon Frazier, the President of the Bank 'of International Settlements, committed suicide . Leon Frazier committed suicide at the end of last year .
 The Hinds are the world's oldest newspaper, and the best known for their stories . They are the work of an award-winning reporter and photographer . They have been together for more than 30 years .
 Arabian Knights brightened up a bit last week in the glow of an army revolt in Iraq . The Arabian Knights have been in the forefront of the revolt .
 Iraq, a desert coated oil field, has had its share in internal dissension since 1958 . Iraq has been plagued by internal strife since then-civil war .
 To get an insight into the present problem one must look to the past, 1952, when Nasser came to power, says Nasser . Nasser was in power in 1952 when he became Egypt's first president .
 Since then he has stated his stated goal is to create an 'Arab World/ dominated by you know who. You know who' Since then, he has said he wants the Arab world to be dominated .
 That year witnessed the establishing of the United Arab Republic . Yemen, Syria, Yemen, and last but not by any means least, Egypt .
 Then came the rival union of Arab States which was set up to maintain the balance of power in the Arab world . The Arab-Arab Union was created in order to maintain balance in the world .
 This union met its destruction one hot July morning in 1958, at the hands of Karim el Kassam . The union was destroyed by the death of El El Kassam, a member of the Palestinian Liberation Party . El Kassan's death was the first of its kind .
 Kassam followed a course of trying to use the communists to develop his country, stay in power, and at the same time, hold the pyramid of Arab politics—Nasser—at bay . From 1958 until this week, Kassam tried to use his country to develop and stay in
 In 1961, Syria revolted against Nasser and succeeded in gaining its independence . U.A.R. helped Syria to become independent from Nasser .
 The Sultan of Yemen has died and his leftist leaning son has taken over . Since then, the Sultan has died, the son of the former dictator has taken control of Yemen .
 He has begun severing the ties between Yemen and Egypt in his first few months on the throne . He has been severing ties between the two countries since taking over in January .
 At first glance and judg ng by pro-U.A.R. statements of the leaders of the ruling unta in Iraq, it seems that the pendulum has swung back in Nasser’s favor .
 As far as the west is concerned, this could very well be true in the Arab world, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Radio Cairo has been unusually quiet this week . By “unheard sounds” it is meant that Radio Cairo is unusually quiet . Radio Cairo was unusually quiet last week .
 Besides the expected favorable announcements of the Iraq revolt, it has neither praised nor pilfered the leaders of the unta. The revolt is expected to be a success in Iraq .
 I though, that military men like only interpreted to mean only one thing: silence . Since the tactics of watchful wait foreign policy, this silence can be interpreted as one thing .
 The Egyptian Sphinx—Nasser—has looked at junta leaders over and done some second guessing . Undoubted, the Sphinx has looked at the leaders over .
 From reading on the Egyptian leader, one finds that he is an avid chess player . Egyptian leader is also a chess player, according to reports .
 Chess players can out-guess their opponents' position by looking at the position of their pawns . Chess players should be able to play a chess match against their opponent in a chess tournament .
 If his pawns are staggered, watch his bishops; if they are lined up straight, watch your knights . If his bishops are staggered or not aligned, they will be watched by his knights . Watch his knights. If they are standing straight, they'll be watching .
 Pawns are straight across the board, meaning the junta is stacked with military men . Applying this to the present Arabian circumstances, one discovers that the pawns are .
 There has been some speculation of an alliance between Egypt and Iraq . True, there has been speculation of a possible alliance with Iraq .
 There is some reason for this speculation, because military men like alliances, because they like alliances . Also true, there are some reason that this speculation is true .
 From the Iraq junta’s viewpoint, there are little or no advantages of an alliance with Egypt . The fact must not be overlooked ly, from the Iraqi junta's viewpoint, is little or . no advantages .
 Egypt has the highest birth rate in the world and is in economic trouble over the Asian High Dam . Egypt's birth rate is the world's highest, and the country's economy is in trouble .
 Nasser gleaned Syria and put her economy in an economic straight jacket . To the Iraqi military there can certainly be no advantages of a union with Egypt, says Nasser .
 In light of the circums-ances, this revolt will probably trim out in favor of the west . The revolt is likely to be trimmed out of favor of west .
 Iraqi army was trained and equipped by the British army . This is said because the Iraqi army is trained and is equipped by British forces .
 "I didn't understand the part about the Zen priest . # how they find the meaning to life in the monastery or whatever they call them," she says .
 Jett Hl S h school, Vicksburg, students inspect the latest equipment during the annual Hinds Junior College Commerce Day held last Thursday, February 14 .
 The punched cards are fed through a ""card reader"" which ""corrects"" all exams taking roughly V /2 seconds each . All exams are completed using a card reader .
 If professor sees that almost no one got question 5 right, he may discard it . Professor may discard question 5 if he sees that no one gets it right . Professor: "If you get it right, it's not a good idea"
 If he sees that virtually everyone got question 27 correct, he may also discard this, because he can see that neither questions performed a useful function . He may also discarded question 27 because of the fact that almost everyone got answer 27 correct .
 Presidents Council Reactivates Committees To Keep Group Active . President George Tannous named a steering committee to serve in coordinating capacity for rest of year .
 The committee on organizations will work closely with campus clubs, and keep the council informed as to planned programs and projects, and as to ways to be of assistance .
 Committee on chapel recommendations will investigate ways of promoting student interest in the programs . Committee will cooperate with administration in diversifying talent presented .
 Committee on attendance will be the responsibility of the committee on attendance .
 The council passed a rule on attendance at last week's council meeting . An organization is allowed to have two regular meetings without representation .
 If an organization’s representative misses two council meetings, that group will be suspended from the council for the remainder of the semester . The council can also be suspended if a group misses two meetings .
 Next week, a report from the constitution committee will head the order of business . The constitution committee is expected to hold a meeting next week .
 Tannous urged all organizations to send a representative to this important meeting . He said all organizations should send representatives .
 What the professor aims for is a bell-shaped frequency distribution curve . Professor aims for a bell shape of the curve .
 The highest point of the bell is the most frequent grade obtained by students taking the test . The bell is a bell with the highest point being obtained by a student .
 If a reasonably symmetric bell-shaped curve is formed by the histogram, then the test is considered to have been sucessful . The test is then considered to be a success by the Histogram .
 If the hump of the graph is too far below or above or above the defined passing grade, the exam was either too easy or too tough . The hump is either too high or too low, or too high, according to the graph . The exam is either easy or tough, or
 An instructor can, for example, more easily justify marking the exam on a scale . An instructor could, by example, mark the exam with a scale. An instructor may have used the scale to justify marking students' exam .
 Next week Lebanese George Tannous will discuss middle Eastern state of affairs . Next week he will discuss Middle Eastern state- affairs .
 Iran has three television stations, four radio stations, and four airports . Iran has four airports, two commercial and two military airports, she said .
 Iran has a population of two million people, she says . But to use these facilities, Iran has to use it, she said . Iran has the population of 2 million people .
 American girls and Iranian girls both like new hair-dos and new dresses, says Iranian girl . She says there is little difference between the two .
 Iranian girls thought an education was more important than getting married . She did say, however, that Iranian girls did not want to get married . Iranian girls are more interested in education than marriage, she said .
 In Iranian high schools, boys and girls are segregated into separate classrooms . Iran has 10 universities and, if a special examination is passed, attendance is free of charge .
 The club members received their diamond shaped membership pins which had been ordered at the preceding meeting . Prior to Shahla’s talk, the club members had received their membership pins .
 A new presentation of material will be used, blending artistry and musical sense of humor . New presentation will blend artistry with a new musical style .
 The duo has been represented on more than three dozen LP records . They have played to rapturous reviews and standing ovations in every state .
 They have also displayed their humorous approach to music on top radio and television shows . The band is one of the best-known musical attractions on 4he current scene .
 Tickets are priced $2.50 and $3.00 for reserved orchestra seats, $1.75 for balcony seats . Tickets are available for orchestra seats .
 Patricia Ann Martin, known by her initials PAM, poses as this week’s Hinds Honey . This week's photo is of this week's "Hinds Honey" She poses as a lady dressed as a honey .
 Ten representatives met at Hinds last week to discuss plans for a new technical curriculum to be added to the Hinds Vocational Division . Local, state and national representatives met to discuss the plans for the program .
 Ten men began laying plans for a possible re-training program in agriculture . Ten men laid plans for the possible program for agriculture in the U.S.
 Hinds is cooperating with the state employment service by re-training men for the business machines field . Presently Hinds has re-trained men in the business machine field .
 The vocational program, as part of the 1962 federal Man Power Division and Training Act, does not offer college credit . It re-trains persons in a vocation where more job opportunities exist .
 The plans discussed were in addition to the $600,000 expansion of vocational facilities now in progress . The plans were also discussed .
 There are now no known programs in agriculture through the 1962 act, stated Jack Treloar, Supintendent of Hinds farm and chairman of the meeting .
 Plans are for a terminal re-training course which would teach the student a particular phase of agriculture . Upon completion of the course he would be prepared to take a specialized job .
 In addition, a terminal two-year program in farm management will be set up . The program will also focus on farm management and farm management .
 This course, involving two nine months school years and one summer, will begin first semester next year . This course will take place during the summer and summer of 2014 .
 It consists of nine semester hours in the classroom and three semester hours on-the-farm laboratory each semester . The program is required to take part in the spring and summer .
 Robert C Lunardini, employee of Michael Baker, Jr., Inc., was the guest speaker in today’s morning assembly . He is a member of the Mississippi Society of Professional Engineers, and a Jackson engineer .
 Using a film, Lunardini discussed the engineering world and its future . Lunardinis used a film to discuss the future of the engineering industry .
 He is a registered professional engineer in both Mississippi and Illinois . He is also a registered engineer in Mississippi .
 Soon buds the crocus, soon trills the giant condor, soon come the new spring fashions to adorn our lissome limbs . Soon comes the spring of the year, says the author .
 Gather round, you rascals, and light a Marlboro Cigarette . Enjoy that fine mellow tobacco, that pure white filter, and possess your souls in sweet content, and listen .
 One of the highlights of the season turns time backward in its flight . The highlight of this year's season has been a highlight of American football's season .
 This charming accoutrement, too long neglected, has already caught on with in undergrads everywhere . It's already catching on with students everywhere .
 On hundreds of campuses the bossa nova is giving 4 way to the minuet . patriotic undergraduates are dumping British tea into the nearest harbor .
 According to reliable reports, George III has been stamping his foot and uttering curses not fit to reproduce in this family newspaper . This, as you may imagine, does not sit well with King George III who, according to reports, has been stampeded his foot .
 There has even been some talk about the American colonies declaring their independence of England . For that matter, a lot of our own people are steamed up too, and there is even talk about their independence .
 She relies on us for turkeys, Marlboro Cigarettes, and Route 66 . She, on the other hand, relies on her fellow Americans for Route 66 and turkeys . She says she relies on turkeys and Marlborough Cigarettes .
 Let not our British cousins mistake this willingness to negotiate for weakness . Let's not mistake the British cousins for weakness, it says. Let's hope that this is not a sign of weakness .
 "We were smoking Marlboros and talking about spring fashions. O, get some!—we were, I say, smoking Marrboros . O' get some!"
 The season’s most striking new featurepneumatic underdrawers . Let us turn now to the season's best new feature .
 The pneumatic underdrawers kept him alive for seven days . He suffered no injury when he struck the sidewalk, but it is feared he will starve to death .
 The recent Iraqi revolt by the right wing of the army against the left has attracted much attention in western capitals and the Soviet Union . The revolt is the latest in a long line of events in the country .
 George Tannous president of the sophomore class and a native of Lebanon, was recently button-holed by this reporter on his views of the present situation in the Middle East . He was recently asked about the situation in his country .
 Tannous has maintained a rigid neutralists stance throughout the conflicts . Kept informed by bundles of newspapers regularly received from his parents at home .
 The issues of the conflict seem to pivot on whether Iraq will join Nasser's Egypt in the fabled Arab Union . The issue of Iraq joining the Arab Union seems to be the key to the conflict .
 Tannous points out that joining depends on the authority given to the new president . He says how many members of Parliament or military officers are in favor of the union .
 The future of the Iraq government depends on the outcome of the Parliamentary elections that have been widely predicted . Iraq's foreign policy is likely to depend heavily on its foreign policy .
 Tannous said that the revolt will be recognized in Lebanon, but will meet mixed reactions in other surrounding countries . Having only been away two years from his native Lebanon, he said that it will meet with mixed reactions .
 This profound statement is repeated over and over by those who attend Jackson’s newest contribution to the arts . The Capri Theatre is Jackson's newest addition to the theatre .
 The Capri is a breakthrough for foreign films in the film industry . It is the first time the Capri has produced a film in the cinema industry .
 Colleges have tried to show foreign films in the past, but have met with little success from the public . Colleges have shown foreign films at their campuses in recent years .
 Now the Capri makes the scene, appealing to the elite as well as the working man who enjoys variety in his film diet .
 Irish Italian spaghetti, beef Stroganoff, Pennsylvania Dutch hot shredded cabbage, and French bread, is served with a variety of dishes .
 Making the bread and preparing the rice for the beef Stroganoff were Ramona McClelland, Sara Stewart, and Marilyn Hutchinson . Making the rice and preparing for the meat was made by the trio of women .
 The Capri offers a lot and seems to demand nothing . What a change this is from the downtown theatres where seats are so close that crossing your legs means bumping and bruising both of them or maybe one of them .
 Those who attend one of the foreign films usually return a second, third and fourth time . Those who return to the film usually return for the second and third time .
 This paper is especially happy about the Capri’s opening, since a column was written earlier in the year, expressing the need for variety in the films and theatres in the Jackson area . The Capri's opening will be the first of its kind .
 The new moviehouse is being offered a variety of different types of entertainment . The new theater has been opened to the public for the first time .
 Pick-up on every MONDAY AND THURSDAY NIGHTS ON CAMPUS BETWEEN 8-10 P M, All work done to your SATISFACTION MISSISSIPPI ENGRAVING CO, HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS .
 Hinds enters the Southern Division Junior College play-offs Thursday night at Summit . Hinds will play Summit in the play-off round of Southern Division JCCs .
 Eagles meet Pearl River in opening series of elimination games . Eagles have won four of the last six games . Pearl River has won the last five of last six matches .
 Jones tangles with host Southwest in the only other clash scheduled for the opener . The only other game is scheduled to be played is that of Jones vs. Southwest .
 Wolves will meet the Hinds-Pearl River winner, and Perkinston meets the Jones-Southwest winner . Wolves will also meet Hinds and Pearl River winners in finals .
 Saturday the two remaining teams will meet in the finals for the southern division championship . Saturday's finals will be the final two teams in southern division of the Southern Division .
 BRANCH OFFICES at WESTLAND AND MEADOWBROOK or Mississippi . COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITHO NEGATIVES & PLATES MATS MATS P.0.0 .
 Basketball is the oldest sport in the world . The oldest sport is the most popular in the sport's history .
 Track, the sport of ages, is set for a full series on the Hinds fields starting with a six-way Magnolia Conference High school meet March 27 .
 Junior College thinclads will dash for the tapes three days later when Mississippi Delta invades on Saturday the thirtieth for Hinds’ first contest . Mississippi Delta will play Hinds on Saturday .
 Eagles will meet Perkinston and Jones at Ellisville April 2, and will host Scooba and Northwest on the sixth . Eagles will also play Scooba, Northwest and Ellisville on April 6 .
 Co-Lin and Holmes will run against the Eagles on the Raymond track April 9 . The Eagles will run on the track at Raymond track on April 9.
 Saturday, April 13, Jones and Marion Institute will meet the Eagles at Marion Institute . Marion Institute is a junior high school in Marion, Arkansas .
 Four junior college units are entered in the Northwest Meet on April 20, and the 27th will find Hinds at Perkinston . Hinds is a junior college member .
 Delta will host the Eagles 4 in the final meet before the state J.C. meet on the 11th . Delta will be hosting the state championship meet on November 11 . The Eagles 4 will be competing at the state championships .
 May 7 has been selected as the date to run any event which was rained out during regular schedule . May 7 will be the date of the event which is held during the regular schedule.
 Intermixed between the junior college events are eight high school meets . Intermixture of junior college meets is eight meets from high school high schools .
 Westside first scored 42 points against Northside first’s 25 Thursday, February 14 . Westside 1 l l Main i i Northside 1 0 1 Northside 2 0 2 Westside .
 Eastside 2nd Floor vs. Football Team in intamural basketball contest . Rodney Duke arches a fancy shot for two points in the contest .
 Phi Theta Kappa sponsored its annual Freshman Talent Show last night . Freshman talent ranging from single vocals to jazz combos highlighted the evening .
 Mistress of ceremonies Ann StepHenson introduced thirteen varied acts to a large receptive audience in the college auditorium . The college held a large audience of students .
 Proceeds from the talent event will be used to help finance the Gamma Lambda Chapter’s annual trip to the national convention . Proceeds will go to the annual convention of the chapter .
 The 1963 convention will be held in Miami, Beach, Florida, from April 3-5 .
 Approximately thirty Hinds students will begin the trip April 1 and return to the campus April 7 . The trip is scheduled to take place on April 1 .
 The talent presentation represented much planning on the part of PTK members . The talent show was a success .
 Various committees solicited talent, sold tickets, and publicized the event . The event will be held in New York City, New Jersey .
 The Faculty Talent Show is scheduled for March 7 . The freshman show will be held at the University of Columbia .
 "The cries, in turn, produced men whose footprints were forever etched among their great deeds," says President Obama .
 Hinds planned to answer, so the rumor went last week, and the echo of memorable names resounded . Hinds plans to answer the question, but the answer is still not yet .
 Latter Day Dan’l Boones, are running things into the ground. Meanwhile, Latter Day . Boones . Meanwhile, the Latter Day. Boones are running . into the . ground .
 First student music recitals of the semester will be presented by Beth Ponder and Winnie Sue Winders Tuesday, March 5, at 7:30 in the Music Auditorium .
 Miss Ponder, Jackson sophomore, will sing various selections including works by Monteveide and Carissimi . She will sing at Jackson High School .
 She will present two groups of folk songs with settings by John Edmonds . She will also present two sets of folk song with settings .
 Piano works to be presented by Miss Winders are by Bach, Haydn, and Brahms . Piano works will be presented at Miss Winder's Piano Works .
 The convention is attended by members of PBL chapters from colleges and most Mississippi high schools . The convention will feature various contests, meetings and election of officers .
 Walter Bishop will compete in public speaking, Kay Beasley and Ronnie Moore in the Mr and Miss Future Business Executive voting . Betty Turner and David Hintson will compete for the Miss and Mr and Mr Future Business Teacher contest . Walter Bishop and Betty Turner will also compete for public speaking .
 Frances Brown and Ronnie Moore will enter the Vocabulary relay, Mary Berryhill in the talent contest, and Kay Beasley in the Hinds project report . Frances Brown, Ronnie Moore and Mary Berry Hill will also compete in the Talent Contest .
 Others attending will be Kathleen Martin, Shirley Patton, and Gene Jackson . Others attending are Kathleen Martin and Shirley Patton .
 Hindsonian, Eagle offices will be moved into the cafeteria building later this week . Ree Hall Offices Renovation is almost complete so that the Hindsonian and Eagle offices are moved .
 Groups will occupy the front portion of the recreation hall which once housed the college post office .
 Offices will be maintained there until the construction of the student union building in the next few years . Offices are maintained there .
 At present the groups work out of the school public relations office in the school's administration building .
 Plans were made last year for separation of student publications and school public relations . But extra space was not available until now .
 College Business Manager Grady Sheffield has made arrangements for remodeling of the new room . The new room will be located in the College of Arts and Designated Designated Services .
 The Mississippi Historical Society will hold its annual meeting in Vicksburg . On the eve of the hundredth anniversary of the siege of “The Gibraltar of the Confederacy,” the siege will take place .
 The program will include lectures, tours, the entertainment, all centered on the anniversary of the seige . Scheduled for March 1-2, the program will be centered around the anniversary .
 An active movement is underway to encourage and transport Hinds students to the program planned for Friday . Since the program is open to the general public an active movement has been underway .
 On Friday at the first general session, beginning at 10:00, there will be a series of talks with modern Mississippi history .
 Included will be a report on the ‘'Excavation of the Grand Village of the Natchez” by Robert S Neitzel, Mississippi Department of Archives and History .
 Complimentary coffee and dessert will be served at the Old Court House Museum . Tour of the Vicksburg National Military Park will begin at the museum .
 The ever-popular melodrama, “Gold in the Hills/’ opens another season at 8:15m. in the theater . The show will be back in New York this fall .
 Hinds has provided many performers for this production . Over the past few years Hinds have provided many of them .
 At the general session Saturday featured speakers will be Donald Rawson, Northwestern State College of Louisiana and Dr. Dr. John Sutter of Louisiana . Dr. Rawson will also be a speaker .
 The Society was first organized in 1858, with the current organization coming into being in 1952 . The Society is the oldest organization in existence .
 Any persons interested in the objectives of the . objectives and activities of the Society may attend the 1963 meeting .
 Hinds students should contact any member of the social science department faculty . Students should contact Hinds social science faculty at Hinds .
 Forensic Team Travels To MSCW For Two-Day Speech Tournament . Hinds debate team travels to Columbus this Friday and Saturday for two-day tournament .
 Besides debating, the squads will participate in all other major competitions . The squads will also take part in the other major tournaments .
 Jane Land will represent Hinds in Oral interpretation, and Dawn McNeil, George Tannous, and Ralph Hemphill will enter the field of original oratory . Dawn McNeill will represent the Hinds, and will represent them in oral interpretation .
 Carol Fortier and Woody May will present original after dinner speeches . Dawn McNeil, Belva Watkins, George Tannous and Ralph Hemphill will speak extemporaneously on current event topics to be drawn from & hat ten minutes before .
 Six entrants in the Phi Theta Kappa Freshman Talent show last night prove what a success the venture was .
 Ann Stephenson swings out with the ever popular “I Enjoy Being a Girl” She shows dance talent as well as vocal talent . Ann Stephenson is a multi-vocal artist .
 Kaye Bullock wanted to deck herself with suds and sing in an old fashioned tub . The actress was inspired by a popular record “A Little Bit of Soap”
 Phi Theta Kappa Faculty Talent Show will take place next Thursday . The show is being prepared for the annual Faculty Talent show . More talent will be prepared for next week's show .
 HINDSONIAN February 27, 1963 First Freedom Denied . For every privilege, there is an equal and accompaning responsibility .
 Mississippi will witness the denial of this freedom to a lot of young, eager junior college students . The state will be witness to this freedom, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Speech activity abounded on the junior college level last year in the state . It is certainly not the students’ fault, but it is not their fault . Speech activity was abounded at junior college levels last year .
 The nation and the state spend millions teaching the youth of the magnolia state to acquire an inquisitive mind and to be able to express themselves . No, the nation spends millions on educating the youth to acquire inquisivistic minds .
 In spite of all of this effort, there will not be a Junior College Speech Festival in the state this year .
 This generation, our generation, is often criticized for not being willing to expend the effort to get the facts and express themselves constructively . This generation of young people has been criticized for being too shy to express their views .
 There are plenty of eager, able, and knowledgeable young people willing to get the facts and express themselves constructively . Yet, there doesn’t seem to be any adults willing to make the 'sacrifice' to sponsor a speech tournament .
 These contests feature orations on American principles, reading of great American literary works, and debating topics of national and international significance . The contests are held in the United States .
 Besides providing a wholesome activity, it teaches America's youth the needed ability of public deliberation on important issues .
 One of the most amazing quirks of human nature has flourished among Hinds students again . H Procrastinate No More . H procrastinate no more .
 It was evident about this time last year, and earlier this year during football season, this year, it was evident . It's evident that this year's football season has already begun, and last year's was evident, but now, it's more evident .
 The quirk is student attitudes toward sports and recreational activities, according to interviews with students . Students are more likely to be interested in sports, recreational activities .
 More students clamored to attend basketball games last week than probably have all year . More students attended and clamored for basketball games than ever have attended .
 Most of the reason could have been the finals, but seemingly this sort of student attitude occurs every year . The student attitude seems to be more like a typical college student .
 Toward the end of any season — basketball, football, whatever — student attention is focused on the one specific activity . Student attention is often focused on a specific activity, such as basketball or football .
 No one has ever completely explained why we Americans love to put things off until the last minute . No one can explain why we're always putting things off like this .
 It could not be entirely true that we are lazy, for even if we choose to do anything at the last moment possible, we usually put a great deal of effort into it . We are not lazy, but we are usually put in a great effort into doing anything, says the author
 This week will end Hinds participation in state basketball tournaments . Hinds will be out of state tournaments this week .
 The Hindsonian iis published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., at Hinds Junior College, Raymond .
 Shifting Shades Of Blue, Green Saturate 1 Being . Everything was blue — the moon, the water, the earth .
 He, too, would have been blue, but the green of the eyes dominated the blue blue .
 So there he stood—green with only a distant blue and there she stood—so blue. So there were he and she stood, so blue. He stood in front of her in a green light .
 Make me red or green, or a soothing beige, but release me of this blue dinge . Make me a red or a green or a blue, or even a beige. But release me from this dinge.
 'I can run like a free gypsy and stamp the earth and clap my hands. Then I can run ... then I can stamp my hands,' she says . 'I'm going to stamp the Earth and stamp it'
 Make me a dark brown so I can creep with the black night and be almost invisible. No, make me dark brown . Make me make me a darker brown so you can creep . No. I'm not afraid of the dark .
 Let me be a persian cat, with long, silky hair, and deathly claws . Let's be a Persian cat with long hair .
 "Yes, yes let me have sharp claws that bite into the flesh and leave their infernal mark," she said . "Yes yes. Yes, yes . Let me have . sharp claws," she added .
 He would be a great blue splash with two dashes of green and a monstrous red slash cross his middle . He would also be a monster red slash with a giant red slash .
 He would cry to the gods, but the gods cannot compete with an evil, conniving cat . And he would cry for the gods . But the gods can't compete with the evil cat .
 I’d watch him walk toward the blue waters like a glimmering sapphire . And I‘d watch . He'd watch him .
 Everything is bathed in green—the moon, the stars, the earth, and I am blue—deathly, ghastly blue .
 Earlier in the week the ""slow"" signs, normally a bilious shade of yellow, had been painted white . No new printing had been placed on their faces .
 Building and grounds men were out early the next morning trying to remove the bold black letters from the building . Building men were working overnight to try and remove the black letters .
 Efforts proved unsuccessful until several coats of white paint were used to cover the printing . Efforts were made to cover up the printing of the book's pages .
 The board of regents approved the ban to alleviate congestion and provide for the safety of all students . The ban was approved by the regents to alleviate traffic congestion .
 Parking is available for disabled students and for faculty and visitors . Parking is also available for faculty members and for visitors .
 This area of agreement is the administration’s policy in the Congolese crisis .
 Congo achieved independence from Belgium from Belgium in June 1960 . Conditions have deteriorated since then .
 At first, Patrice Lumuba flirted with the Communist camp . Lumuba was an opportunist . He became a leader of the Lumuba movement .
 Later, he was gilled and replaced by Kasavubu and Cyrille Adoula in central government .
 Moise Tshombe led a fight for Katangese (a province of the Congo containing 80% of its wealth) independence from the central government . Meanwhile, Moise led a stubborn fight for the province's independence .
 Some Americans believed the U.S. should back Tshombe’s move, on the basis that he was pro-western, and financially independent .
 Kennedy steered the U.S. into backing the United Nations’s policy of trying to put Humpty-Dumpty Congo back together again .
 Other African nations whose national boundaries cross tribal boundaries could not have lasted either . If this were true, then it follows, that other African nations who crossed tribal boundaries couldn't have lasted .
 Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria, Tanganyika, and virtually all of the former French possessions national boundaries cross tribal boundaries . National boundaries cross national borders .
 Africans have had no trouble maintaining their national boundaries . Yet none of these African nations have had any trouble maintaining national borders .
 It is seen that the tribal trouble in the Congo has been caused by a lack of authority on the part of the central government . The opponents of the Kennedy policy have weakened by supporting Katanga’s bid for independence .
 The U.S. should support Katanga which has no communists, he says . The central government is infested with communists, so the U S. should back Katanga, he adds .
 It is true that while Lumumba was in power back in 1960 that some communists did infiltrate the Congo . The Congo was ruled by the late president of Congo in 1960 .
 He gave the Czechsslavakian embassy officials (where the headquarters of comm units activities were) twenty-four hours to get out of the country . The embassy officials were given a 24-hour deadline to leave .
 Congolese President Laurent Laurent Laurent Gnau was assassinated in 1994 . He was assassinated by a coup-de-Congolese army coup in 1995 . The Congo was then occupied by Laurent Laurent Sarkozy's regime .
 The Central Government, with the help of the U.N., backed by the United States, has been working to bring the last seceding province back into the Congo, where it belongs .
 The opponents of our present policy say we are giving the whole Congo to the communists . Opponents of the current policy say it is giving the entire Congo to communists .
 The truth of the matter is that if Katanga’s wealth isn’t kept in the Congo, she will go communist . If Katanga's wealth isn't kept, she’ll go communist, she says . The truth is that she will not be able to
 Tshombe wants to keep all of his province’s wealth to develop his own domain and not share it with the rest of the Congo . That is the real reason for the resistance, he says .
 If he had succeeded in this pol icy, it would be the same as a rich state like California, not paying taxes to the federal government, to aid poor states like Mississippi . If he succeeded, he would be backed by European owners of Katanga's wealth .
 Congolese policy, one sees if their facts are wrong, it follows, that the reasoning based on those facts is also wrong . Congo's policy is based on the facts and the reasoning behind those facts, one says .
 Hocks might be the term applied by an average person to the collection of minerals now on display in the Library . James Smith, the owner of the collection, knows more than the average person .
 James recently won 3 first places, 3 second places, and 2 third places for his displays of minerals in the adult division of the fourth annual Mississippi Gem and Mineral Fair . He recently won three first and three second places .
 In the major class of minerals he entered eight of the nine divisions and received eight ribbons . He entered eight divisions and won eight medals in major class minerals .
 James holds more ribbons from this fair than any other member of the Mississippi Geological Society . James holds the most ribbons in the history of the fair .
 Last summer at Durham, North Carolina, James placed Best in Show and Best in Class for collection of minerals .
 At this time he competed with collectors 18 or younger from throughout the eastern part of the U.S. He was competing in competitions with collectors .
 The Assistant Curator of the Smithsonian Institute complimented James for having one of the best collections that he had ever seen in the junior division . The assistant Curator said that James' collection was the best he had seen .
 When asked if he spent his spare time hunting for minerals, he replied that he worked in spare time so that he could afford to buy the minerals he wanted .
 James likes to explore for minerals when he has time to do so . He likes to look for minerals while on vacation .
 Last summer while hunting for prehnite in North Carolina with a friend, James got trapped on a cliff under an overhanging rock . James was trapped on the cliff under a rock .
 This mineral is more radioactive than the radium on watches but not dangerous . This mineral has been found in the U.S. to be found in China .
 James Smith, owner of the collection now on display in the library foyer, prefers to call his possessions minerals .
 Impressive Candlelight Ceremony Promulgates Phi Theta Kappa Initiation . The impressive candlelight ceremony took place February 19 .
 P PI evening gowns are red, orange, green, yellow, and blue .
 All members, with the exception of of of Henri Lou Coleman, president, wore blue robes . All members of the . exception of . Henri Lou . Coleman, the president of . the . Confederacy .
 Miss Coleman leads the new members in their pledge . She wore a robe of yellow satin .
 She was accompanied by Brenda Mullins, who also provided organ selections throughout the ceremony .
 To be eligible, an average of 2.2. for freshmen and 2.3. for sophomores is necessary, says sponsor . Miss Mildred Herrin, sponsor, says students must average 2.5 to qualify .
 A portion of President Kennedy’s much-talked-about physical fitness program has reached the Hinds campus . Mile Hikes rather Unpopular with locals .
 A group of freshmen boys are contemplating taking the famous fifty mile hike . Now a group of freshman boys is contemplating .
 We questioned several Hindsonians for their opinions concerning the President's program, and if they would be willing to walk fifty miles . We asked several Hindsians about their opinions on the program .
 Girls’ physical education instructor: "I think it’s a good program. Polly Rabalais said .
 The minimum of fifteen minutes vigorous exercise is required to be vigorous exercise . However, many people have misinterpreted the minimum of 15 minutes of vigorous exercise, according to the doctor .
 Miss Susan Brown, social science instructor, said, “I think we should have a physical fitness program, but walking fifty miles won’t prove a lot.”
 Social science instructor Patrick Patrick, social science instructor, answered, ""In the first place, it's not a physical fitness program," Patrick said . Patrick, said, "It's not an exercise program"
 Getting people to walk fifty miles achieves nothing but blisters for those people . Getting a few people to . walk fifty . miles achieves . nothing but . blisters . Getting people . to walk 50 miles .
 Leon Stewart, Crystal Springs sophomore, said, “I think it’s a good idea but is not being carried out in the right way.” Leon Stewart said .
 Mary Ann Hearst, freshman coed, shows the transformation taking place in the weather . She is a freshman at the University of Washington .
 The enlarged area taken from the photograph at left, illustrates the process used by newspapers to make pictures print . It is warm enough to sit on campus benches and soak in the sun .
 The raised dots are covered with ink and then pressed to paper to leave the impression of continuous tone reproduction . They are then covered in ink and pressed onto paper to create a continuous tone .
 Without pictures a newspaper would be almost lost—alone in a world of words . Without pictures, a newspaper is almost lost .
 Process of printing pictures has passed through a transitional period since the invention of printing centuries ago by the Chinese .
 In that time, much has changed, but the procedure is the same as it was with the first wood block prints . The first wood blocks prints were made in the 1930s, and the first were made from wood wood .
 When a flat surface is covered with ink and pressed to paper, it leaves its print, a solid splotch the color of the ink . The print is the result of a printing process that leaves a solid print .
 By cutting away areas that are not to print, outline pictures can be printed, as was done in the making of the first wood cuts .
 The printing of photographs requires that different tones be urinted . Different tones of photographs must be printed with different tones .
 A process was discovered that would allow solid black ink to give the appearance of printing gray through a screen . It was composed of lines running vertically and horizontally to form squares on its surface .
 The accompanying picture shows how the sizes of the dots vary as the tones of the picture change . The picture was taken by a team of volunteers in the UK .
 In engraving, the areas that are to be printed are left raised, and the areas not printed are routed out, just as in wood cuts . Engraving is the same process used to print the HINDSONIAN and most newspapers .
 The process has been streamlined through the use of photography as a substitute for manual engraving . Today the process is streamlined through using photography .
 When the photograph with the image of dots has been completed, it is transposed to metal, which has been prepared with a light-sensitive coating . The image is then transposed into a metal with light sensitive coating .
 The image is exposed to light, the metal is put in acid, and the exposed areas are eaten away, leaving the raised dots to come in contact with the ink and paper .
 The use of color was developed on the principal that the three primary colors contain all the tones to make any color if they are mixed properly .
 Pictures speak a universal language, attract attention, arouse interest, convey ideas, illuminate and clarify text . The demand for illustrations in printing is constantly increasing .
 Photoengraving shows a steady growth in the number of establishments, about 1420 including newspaper plants, with an annual output valued at approximately $175 million in 1956 .
 American Photoengraving Association is constantly watching and evaluating all new inventions, developments, materials, processes, and devices that lend to better service .
 Plans released yesterday from the Registrar’s office indicate beginning work on the 1963 summer school . Enrollment In ’63 Summer Session Expected To Top Last Year’�s Mark Expected to Top Last year’'s Mark .
 Even more students than last year’s 271, are expected to enroll for the summer session .
 The program is designed to last ten weeks . Special courses will be offered in English, Mathematics, and reading, to aid in a strengthened background .
 Other courses offered in the summer are identical with those of the regular session . Summer work from Hinds is recognized wherever is is transferred, she said .
 Students’ high school principal must furnish an official transcript showing grades and high school graduation date . Students must also furnish a transcript showing grade and graduation date from high school .
 To be official the record must be sent directly from the high school to Hinds . The record must also be sent from Hinds.
 High school graduation is necessary for college admission except for students over 20 . Students over 20 may be admitted on the basis of satisfactory scores on the General Education Development test at the high school level .
 Hinds requires the American College Test score for freshman admittance . Hinds, along with the majority of colleges in the nation, requires the test score for admission .
 A freshman expecting to enter Hinds should contact his high school principal or counselor for details regarding the ACT test, Miss Herrin said .
 Any student enrolled in summer school must be enrolled for the entire ten-weeks term, must earn 12 semester hours of credit, and must achieve a quality point average of not less than 1.0.0 .
 June 9, dorms open; June 10, registration in morning and classes in afternoon . June 12, last day for late entries and for changing schedules . July 12, end of first term .
 July 15, second term begins; July 17, last day for entry and for changing schedules . July 15 is second term . July 17 is last day of entry .
 Staff revisions will be made on the Hindsonian during the upcoming week, editor Joe White announced today . Beat Revamps set at Friday Meeting Staff Revamps Set At Friday Meeting .
 The staff will meet Friday, 2A period in the Public Relations Office for instructions . Staff will meet in the afternoon for instructions on how to proceed .
 White: No drastic changes will be made, but writing positions will be classified so as to have specific beat reports each week . White says the changes will not be drastic .
 All present workers and any persons interested in writing for the Hindsonian are advised to attend the meeting . The Hindsonian will hold a meeting at the end of the month .
 After next week, Hindsonian meetings will be held in new Hindsonian office, located in cafeteria building . Regular meetings remain slated each Friday at the 2A period .
 Second gravest problem confronting college students today is inferiority feelings . Inferiority can be fun for college students, college students say . College students today have to deal with inferiority .
 Let us today look into the causes of inferiority feelings and their possible cures . Let us look at the causes and cures for inferiority .
 Let us start with the feeling of physical inferiority, perhaps the easiest to understand . The feeling of being physically inferiority is perhaps the easy to understand, say experts .
 We're inclined to feel inferior to the brawny football captain or the beautiful homecoming queen . Naturally we are inclined to think we're inferior to those who are attractive .
 Look at all the people, neither brawny nor beautiful, who have made their marks in the world . Look at the people who have never been beautiful or brawn .
 You can't always tell what’s inside a package by looking at the outside . What I mean is that you can’t always tell . What's inside is the inside of a package? Ask the author for help .
 Just one glance at that jolly red-and-white package, you know it has to contain cigarettes of absolute perfection . One look, I say, at this paragon of packs and you know they have to contain a cigarette of perfection .
 Marlboro filter will give you a smoke to make the welkin ring, whatever that is . That pure white filter, that fine, flavorful blend of tobaccos, will help you make the ring ring .
 You can settle back and smoke your Marlboro and, at the same time, continue to gaze rapturously at the pack . Then you can settle . Back to Mail Online home to find out more about the pack.
 The Sigafoos brothers, Claude and Sturbridge, were students at Wake Forest . The brothers were both Wake Forest students .
 'It was always assumed that Claude was the more intelligent just because he knew more than Sturbridge about the arts, the sciences, the social sciences, and the humanities, and like that'
 Claude Sturbridge was ten times smarter than Claude when he tied granny knots . Sturbridge, on the other hand, was 10 times smarter when tying the knot .
 Everybody looked down on ‘Stupid Sturbridge,’ as they called him and looked up at ‘Clever Claude,” as they did . But no matter, everybody looked down .
 A better way to handle financial inferiority is to accept H philosophically . But a better way of dealing with it is to deal with it philosophically, he says . The U.S. should accept it, he adds .
 Others may have more money than you have, but look at all the things you have that they don’t, says CNN.com’s John Sutter . Sutter: “Look at all of the things that you don't —debts, for instance,
 The popular rumor was quickly discredited by long-time members of the Hinds faculty . Long-time faculty members quickly discredited the rumor .
 Cattle were running loose and at some times as many as thirty or forty cows would invade the campus . Cattle would be running loose at times .
 McKenzie reminisced, "One night the cattle came in, and not having as much judgment as I have now, I got my shotgun to scare them away," McKenzie said .
 Psychology instructor recalls fence around campus . Herring: "We used to have a fence around the campus. It used to be around campus. We used to use a fence," Herring said .
 A poor boy would have to dig a stump in order to work off ten demerits, says the judge . The judge says he will not be able to use the demerit system to get a better result .
 Girls wearing heels are a conversation piece, or unexpected traps for girls wearing heels . Well, you might say they’re an unexpected trap .
 Once the main entrance to Hinds’ campus, this almost deserted cattle gap is a reminder of the past . Hinds' cattle gap was once the entrance to the main campus .
 In 1932 the arched roadway was much trafficked, but today college instructors use it as a handy parking area . In 1932, it was used as a convenient parking spot for students .
 Hinds vocational deptrtment moved closer to securing modern training equipment for machine shop and refrigeration curriculums .
 Two advisory committees — composed of men from industry — called for government-purchased machines to be installed in the new three-building unit now being planned, and for industrydonated refrigeration equipment .
 Machine shop committee almost completed a list of 75 mach-, ines and tools which they consider should be included in the new building . Committee is in its third meeting this year and has almost completed the list .
 The refrigeration committee and the American Society of Heat, Refrigeration, and Air Conditioning Engineers agreed that industry should furnish the college with models and cut-away samples of the machines students will have to service after graduation .
 A special study called for better instructional equipment at Hinds . Two pieces of equipment are already in the refrigeration department .
 Hinds established policy to keep a direct contact with industry itself . Vocational Co-ordinator Walter Gibbes emphasized that both meetings were indications of Hinds' policy .
 If the programs talked about are carried through, they will result in better instructional equipment and an upgraded education for better workmen .
 A guy goes Pishing and what does he catch? ...his Grandmother f • © I960 BUDDY’s Drive in 4105 Robinson Rd.
 V' Hinds cagers landed a berth on the state Junior College Tournament roster last week . They placed second in the southern division play at Summit . The team earned a berth in the tournament .
 This Friday the Eagles will play the host team and winner of the northern division tourney . The Eagles will be matched against the host of the tournament and the winner of it .
 The winners of the two contests will meet Saturday for the championship . The losers will vie in a consolation match for third . The opener will pit East Central, number two team from the north, against the number one team .
 Hinds have spent this week polishing their defensive tactics in preparation for the high-scoring Ranger crew . Hinds is ready for the action and has spent the past week preparing for the game .
 Coach Troy Ricks is optimistic about the game and says that despite Harlan Stanley's broken no$$ he will start him in a forward post . Ricks says he will be optimistic about starting Stanley in the game .
 Stanley suffered a broken nose in a collision early in the first half of the game against Southwest Saturday . Stanley suffered the broken nose during a collision with Southwest's teammate .
 The Eagles missed 15 consecutive field goal attempts following the accident . The Eagles have missed 15 of their 15 field goals in the last two weeks .
 The Bears had taken advantage of every scoreless rebound in the first half . By the time they recovered, the Bears were in front for good .
 Eagles fought a defensive battle from the first . Eagles fought off a slow start to get off to the win .
 Southwest leads 15-4 early in the first half of play . They never really seemed to recover from the early lead . The team never seemed to be able to recover .
 Eagles had been steadily improving as they added experience during the season . Eagles went into the tournament with a flurry of late-season wins pushing them on .
 Southwest could meet Southwest again in the state tourney . By a quirk of fate, they could meet again .
 The Eagles were stunned to ineffectiveness by the loss of Harlan Stanley in Saturday’s contest . The Eagles lost to the Eagles in the first half of the game .
 Stanley suffered a broken nose in a mid-court collision early in the first half . Stanley suffered the injury in a collision with a player on the court .
 By the time they had recovered, the Bears had been stashing away security points . The Bears had recovered enough to take advantage of the security breach .
 Hinds managed to steal a tie-score on a 30-foot field goal by Johnny Hines, but Southwest soon stretched beyond reach . Southwest eventually stretched beyond the reach of Hinds .
 Southwest increased their lead in the second half . Southwest was red hot in the first half and continued to dominate .
 If Southwest beats East Central, and I Hinds takes Northwest, the Eagles will get another chance to beat the Bears . The Eagles will have a chance to do so again if they beat East Central .
 For Southwest, Jerry Travis laid in 23 points, Paul Rushing 22, and Oliver Young 16 points .
 Johnny Hines jumps two points against Pearl River in the opening game of the South Division Tournament last Thursday . Hines jumped two points in the first half of the game .
 Hinds toyed with the Wolves for 10 minutes before taking complete command . Hinds took control of the Wolves in the first half of the game .
 Larry Hill’s two charity tosses as time ran out led the team to a big lead . Larry Hill's charity tosss as time runs out were crucial for Larry Hill .
 Hinds will play Co-Lin in the semi-finals after defeating Pearl River . Hinds first had to defeat Pearl River in the first round of the tournament .
 Barnes pumped in 22 big points for the home crew . Johnny Hines and George Puckett sacked 14 each for the win .
 Eagles came from behind late in the first half to turn a close ball game into a rout in late stages of the contest . Eagles came back from behind to win the game in the second half .
 Barnes, Eaglp eager with ball, dribbles in for a shot while a determined Co-Lin player tries to guard him . Barnes is eager to play for Eaglp . Barnes was a big part of the Eaglp team .
 Faculty’s Talents Promise Comeback In PTK Program . Instructors and administrators will retaliate with the freshman Phi Theta Kappa talent show tomorrow night .
 Talent will be staged ranging from vocals to group dances to imitations . Sponsors include Miss Mildred Herrin, sponsor, sponsor of the event .
 A highlight in the evening’s entertainment will be a fashion show of the latest styles . Rumors have it that the show will be visited by ""Minnie Pearl/ 7"
 Freshmen who have not had the opportunity to see teachers perform other than in the classroom will be quite surprised at the versatility of their instructors . Freshmen will be able to learn from their instructors' versatility .
 Proceeds from the program will aid in defraying costs to the National Phi Theta Kappa Convention held in Miami next month . Proceeds will be used to aid the costs of attending the convention .
 Thirty members from the Hinds chapter will attend the convention which will be held April 1-7 . Thirty members of the chapter will be attending the convention .
 Perkinston, Pearl River and Pearl River, Jones, Co-Lin, Meridian, East Central, Holmes, Delta, Northwest, Northeast and Hinds .
 Foltz, who also directed the festival last year, is author of ""She Walks in Beauty/ 7 one of the selections to be featured .
 A select group, chosen from the massed choir, will perform the same program as will be given Saturday night for the first general session of the Mississippi Educational Association March 13 .
 Students and choir directors who attend the festival will be housed in dorms, Reeves says .
 Arrangements have been made with students whose rooms will be used, he said . Arrangments have been set up with rooms used by students .
 Choir director Leslie Reeves announced yesterday that the movie “Imitation of Life” will be shown Tuesday night, March 12, in the college auditorium . Choir to Sponsor First In ’63 Series of Campus Movies .
 Showing will begin at 6:30, and the 50 cent admission price will be donated to the college choir . Admission price is 50 percent .
 Terry Dusting Service of Helena, around 24 government men are.staArk., has selected the college airtioned .
 Some of the port as base for a vast fire ant ant 1 government men are soil conservadusting program for the Terry amL tionists . Some government workers are using the port to protect the land .
 The group will operate in this tlon pr °J ects ha ve taken interest in area about two months under feddus ^ n S work . UtlCa area ' L College students enrolled in avia ‘ folk song;V‘Ain’t That
 Several choirs, including Hinds, will present three numbers each in an informal concert . At 11:00 and 1:00 Saturday, several choirs will present 3 numbers each . Saturday's concert will be a free concert .
 Each choir will present one selection, and the amassed choirs will sing seven . The amassed choir will sing one selection each .
 Bach, “She Walks in Beauty,” “Fanfare for Christmas Day” by Martin Shaw . “I Know Where I’m Goin’ ” an Irish eral funds. Bach, Martin Shaw, "I Know where I�
 Fire ant annihilation has been stressed in Hinds County since last year . The insects infested the area last year and became uncontrollable . The infestation has stressed the area .
 Radio units have been set up to transmit location information to individual dusters . Radio units are set up in a bid to locate dusters in the desert .
 Four pilots, a dusting service representative, an overseer, and  ering daily to watch the low flying aircraft maneuver between clusters of bright balloons . Mrs. Mrs. Johnson was a college instructor in North Carolina .
 State chairmen from Kentucky, West Virginia, North Carolina, Maryland and Mississippi attended the workshop . They met with national officials of the AAUW from Washington .
 The theme was “How to Strengthen the Arts Program” in each state represented . Each state represented was represented by a member of the U.S. Senate .
 Denton led a 45 minute panel discussion on ""How to Strengthen the Relationship of Chairmen to State Branches" Denton said .
 Her function is to co-ordinate and report the art works of all branches . Her role is to report and report works of art works to the art gallery .
 Denton: "This is an attempt to get schools in Mississippi below college level to introduce art and art courses" Denton says art courses are aimed at students in junior and senior high schools .
 Hinds President McLendon returns to Hinds after two-week absence from convention . McLendon attended American Association of Junior Colleges in Seattle, Wash. McLendon said it was the most enjoyable convention he had ever attended .
 McLendon and his wife traversed 15 states in the course of the journey . McLendon returned to Raymond Monday, McLendon said .
 On the way they traveled by bus, interrupting their trek frequently to view points of interest .
 The return trip was made by train, following a last-minute change in plans . The return journey was made via train, after a last minute change of plans .
 McLendon closed an eightyear tenure on the important National Committee on Administration at the meeting . McLendon said he would continue to work with the Association in the future .
 While on that committee, he worked with the developing of new junior colleges, educational facilities, and other phases of junior college administration . He worked with a committee of junior colleges .
 He noted that one of the emphases of the meeting was vocational-technical education as it applies to the junior college . The meeting was held in New York City, New Jersey .
 McLendon has a $600,000 improvement to the Hinds program almost ready for construction . McLendon is recognized in Mississippi as a leader in junior college vo-tech programs .
 The four-day convention included special forums on the role of the Board of Trustees, transferring students, testing, and other important matters .
 Cigarette Company Giving Away TV To Holder Of Most Empty Packages . Empty cigarette packs collected in the grill are to be given to anybody who wants them .
 Prize for the contest is based on the saving of empty Marl* boro . The winner will be announced at the end of the month .
 The 19-inch Motorola Console TV set is displayed in the grill .
 Hinds was the only school in the area that did not have a winner . Kimball noted that Hinds is the only high school in Hinds County that didn't win a medal .
 Others have not counted theirs lately . Philip Morris Tobacco Compam offers TV sets for smokers .
 Students from all Mississippi junior colleges will represent their schools in the annual choral festival on the Hinds campus this weekend . Deadline for the contest is April 2, 3:30 Page 2 HINDSONIAN MARCH 6, 1963 .
 Hinds has one of the most modernistic and progressive campuses in the South . Hinds is something any student would be proud to claim .
 Be sure to talk with visiting students about our scholastic and extracurricular program and get information about theirs .
 The opinions they gain will be carried back to all parts of Mississippi . The opinions will carry back to Mississippi, Mississippi .
 Take part in the activities offered this weekend and let them know that you are also interested in their well-being .
 The 1962-63 Choral Festival was held in New York City, New York, New Jersey . It was the first time the festival had been held in the city .
 After completing the third week a student may still be able to get by without missing seriously the prerequisite . The prerequisite is required to complete three weeks of the program .
 It was felt that by the end of the fourth week, however, a student should know better what is expected in the class and can drop it at that time .
 A student finds a course unnecessary for his program, especially if it is merely repetition of earlier classes . A second reason for dropping a class as indicated by Scott was if a student finds it unnecessary for him .
 The second proposal adopted by students was presented by Tom Hinthorne, forestry senator . The proposal was presented to students at the University of Forestry .
 The Mississippi capital of the state has long been recognized as a center of cultural entertainment .
 One of the finest Little Theatres in the South has Jackson as its home . The Little Theatre is located in Jackson, Mississippi . The theatre is one of the world's finest Little Theatre .
 College players, especially the Millsaps Players, have added greatly to the city’s entertainment value . College players have added to the entertainment value of the city, especially Millsaps .
 Jackson’s culture doesn’t begin in college; it begins in grammar school . Jackson's culture begins in college, but it starts with grammar school, he says . Jackson: "I’m not going to be surprised if you’ve heard him talk about
 School libraries as well as state libraries are today better equipped than at any previous time . School libraries are now better equipped with more resources than ever before, says author .
 Today's child is schooled in the usage of libraries and most of them use this knowledge to the greatest extent . Most of the child is most likely to use library knowledge to their greatest extent.
 The printed word is the beginning of any civilization's culture . Not only do they learn the workings of ""the storehouse of books,"" but they also learn to love the printed word .
 The average elementary grade child participates in the prouction of plays and pageants . Along with their enjoyment of books, children also participate in pageants and plays .
 If he doesn’t get a part, he becomes a valuable assistant behind stage . If he gets a part he could be a valuable behind stage, he could become an assistant director .
 The Mona Lisa, now on tour of the United States, was visited by thousands of children . Thousands of children marveled at the quiet beauty of the painting . It is now on its first tour of America .
 The painting was painted in the 1930s and is now on display in a museum in New York City .
 High schools provide fertilization for seeds to be fertilized . Fertilization fertilization is a form of fertilization . The fertilization process takes place in high school classrooms .
 Jackson's three high schools have long been recognized as well equipped schools and more than that, as producing well rounded students . Jackson's high schools are well equipped and well rounded schools .
 Art courses, choral activities, hundreds of books are all accessible to students . Art courses and choral activity are all available to students at the school .
 Jackson high school productions are some of the finest in the state . Jackson High School productions are known to be the best in the city .
 "You say that they are only high school productions, so they can't be too good," she asks . "They are only a high school production, so I'm sure they're not too good"
 They all attend, not because they know one of the actors, but because it is enjoyable . It is a showplace of the city's talent, and most of all because of its quality .
 See why this state, this nation is on a ""cultural kick" and plans to stay on one . See why state is on cultural 'cultural kick' and wants to stay one .
 Once in Communist heM North Viet^ nam, and again in U.S. backed South Vietnam, he says . He says the United States backed North Vietnam in Vietnam .
 As the sun rises it shines on a strange struggle between the ideolJ ogies . The story of the struggle between art and art is told in a new book .
 On the one hand are the communist guerillas of the North, i penetrating, it sometimes seems, as the sun’s rays, through the jungles of the South . On the other hand, i.i penetrating, i . seems to be the sun's rays,
 A rifle crack screams out and copter and cargo sink into a swamp . A rifle cracks screams out . The copter's fate is forgotten, but unforgivable .
 This is the sinister situation the United States finds itself in today in Southeast Asia . The U.S. is in the region of Southeast Asia for the first time ever .
 Fighting the 'oldest type' of warfare with the newest type of weapons, and losing . The U.S. has lost its battle with the latest type of warfare .
 It seems if the U.S. and Soviet weapons systems become more sophisticated our tactics become more elementary . The United States and the Soviet Union's tactics become elementary, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In the age of Buck Rogers we find ourselves fighting like Roger’s Rangers . The Rangers are fighting like Buck Rogers .
 Neither him nor thee relishes the idea of total nuclear involvement; alias civilized disaster . Neither me nor thee . relishes . the idea . of total . nuclear involvement . alias "civilian disaster"
 America missed her chance, if she ever wanted to take it, of all out military activity against the Soviets . The U.S. missed its chance to take on the Soviet Union in the Cold War era .
 In those days, when the Strategic Air Command was the synonym of Soviet suicide, the U.S. had the balance of power stretched across this nuclear fulcrum .
 Today this powerful arm of free -1 world diplomacy is ill and lies dying of obselescence . Today it is ill, but it is still powerful, and is dying of its own .
 Soviet surgeons are operating on their sick system and removing some of its vulnerable virus and replacing it with a jumbo size dose of intestinal fortitude . Meanwhile, Soviet surgeons removed some of their vulnerable virus from their system .
 Neither side wants a 'real war' here, and the side that realizes this first, and uses it first, might well win on this forgotten, but if lost, unforgivable front .
 To realize the importance of this conflict, one only has to look at a map of the area . The conflict has been a major source of tension in the region .
 If the United States loses South Vietnam it also will lose Southeast Asia . The U.S. will also lose South Vietnam .
 With this under the communist belt, they will have a red dagger between the ribs, attached to the backbone of free world defenses . The U.S. will be able to use this to strengthen the foundations of the world's free world defense .
 The day dawned twice in Vietnam this morning, and if the lesson of Cuba doesn’t dawn on Washington, and shine in Southeast Asia, the day may dawn twice in America tomorrow .
 Ticket prices have been set at $1.00 for adults and 50 cents for students . Ticket prices for the event have been raised to $1,000 for adults .
 No reservations are necessary, since tickets will be available at the auditorium preceding the concert . No reservations will be necessary .
 A special vocational-technical training study is now being conducted in state junior colleges by the Mississippi Research Commission . Friday about 30 men from the three-county junior college district will discuss developments in a special training study .
 Hinds’ newly inaugurated IBM program, one of the few college programs of its kind in the state, at present offers only the four basic IBM courses . Hinds is one of only a few colleges offering IBM courses in the area .
 The advisory committee is composed of men from outside the college . The committee will discuss a more complete curriculum including advanced courses in business data processing .
 Russell Levanway, consultant to the Research Commission, will consider results of a previous meeting which began studying the vocational and technical training needs in Hinds, Warren and Rankin counties .
 Levanway is directing similar programs in each of the state's junior colleges . Levanaway is directing . similar programs .
 Questionnaires are sent to industry to document their present employment and their job opportunities and projected needs .
 After the documentation is complete, it will be used to plan junior college vocational training programs .
 Levanway said that returns from the qestionnaires will not be complete for the Friday meeting . A representative number of industries have already responded, he said . The meeting will be held on Friday .
 The group will study the numerical distribution of job opportunities named in those forms which were returned .
 Much time will be spent comparing the needs for technicians and semi-skilled workers, Levanway says . Much time is spent comparing needs of technicians and workers, he says .
 He noted that that 72 replies have been received from Hinds county alone . He added that 72 responses have been made to the survey .
 He termed the response ""sizable"" and said he was confident that an even larger response would be noted during the next two or three weeks . The response was described as 'sizable'
 Questionnaires sent to nearly all of the industry in three counties . Questionnaires were sent to almost all of them .
 Most of the major organizations in Rankin County have replied, too, he said . Even more are expected from that area also, he added .
 Only one other meeting, about the first of April, is planned for Hinds Junior College .
 It's that season of the year again — when everyone’s got spring fever . HINDS HONEY: Spring fever is a sign of spring .
 Jackson sophomore Wanda Dailey typifies this mood by standing here doing NOTHING — everyone’s goal for the month . Dailey is a sophomore at Jackson High .
 Hossley is at present a preengineering student at Hinds and a part time employee of the Mississippi Power and Light Company . Named by Senator James O Eastland for candidacy to the Air Force Academy at Colorado Springs, Colo., and by Senator John Stennis for the Merchant Marine Academy
 He was vicepresident of the Catholic Youth Council, secretary to Warren County Safety Council and representative to Mississippi Boys’ State . He also served as secretary of Warren County safety Council .
 Selective Service Testers Taking Applications For Exemption Exam Exam are now available to college students at the Selective . Service local boards throughout Mississippi . College students can now apply for the test .
 The test, to be given April 18, will be held locally at Millsaps College in Jackson .
 Scores made on the test will be considered with other information by the local boards in determining whether to defer individual registrants from the draft .
 SATISFACTION CAMPUS AGENTS DWAYNE COX Stadium, HAROLD MITCHELL, JERRY SMITH and SONNY CURTIS Shangri-La . March 28.
 The test is administered by the Science Research Associates, of McHenry, Ill. Used since 1951 in determining questions of student deferment .
 To be eligible to take the test, the applicant must be satisfactorily pursuing a full time college course, under-graduate or graduate, leading to a degree . The test will be available to anyone who is interested .
 Junior college students will qualify if their course of study is satisfactory for transfer of credits to a degree-granting institution . Junior college is a junior college program that offers students a chance to transfer credits .
 The applicant must be a Selective Service registrant who intends to seek deferment as a student . Applicants are required to be in the U.S. for deferment purposes .
 At present, "Mississippi local boards reach men for induction at about age 23 and one-half,"" Col. Col. John Sutter says. "At present, men for inductions are about 23 and half"
 Such a build-up could lower the age at which local boards reach men for induction . It could also reduce the age of men being inducted into the military .
 "In such an event, a deferment might be necessary to finish undergraduate work,"" he said . In such a case, the deferment may be necessary, he said.
 La Dolce Vita is a weekly Italian magazine dedicated to Italian culture . It is the first Italian magazine to offer a weekly feature on the cover of this week's top 10 best magazine .
 A third versatile room, used for classes, film strips and exhibition gallery, is included in the new department . The new department includes a gallery and a room used for film strips .
 Still to be completed are two outdoor patios adjoining the painting and drawing rooms . Still to go on the patio of the rooms .
 New Art Department Looks To Future; Includes Custom Planning By Denton . Art students claim it is spacious colorful, airy. Art students say it's spacious colorful .
 Hinds art department has a completely new art department at the centre of a new museum in London .
 Only this school year did the department leave the cramped tworoom location in the administration building to occupy their present quarters which encompass the greater part of the ground floor level .
 The 14 studenta were accompanied by Andy Bond, field representative from State, and Mrs. Mrs. Bond . The 14 students were accompanied .
 Frances Lee, former Hinds’ Dean of Women at State, is now the dean of women at the University of Washington . Lee is the current dean of Women . Lee was a member of the faculty at Hinds College in Washington, DC .
 Bond was on campus during the day counseling with students planning to attend State next year . Bond was also on campus to talk about the growing housing shortage . Bond: "It's a good day for students to get counseling"
 In addition to two large drawing and painting rooms, there is a versatile audio-visual room which is also used as a classroom and exhibition gallery . The gallery is also a classroom, exhibition gallery and classroom .
 Katherine Denton, art instructor, helped design the lay-out for the new department . When it is completed, it seems lttle will have been forgotten .
 Drawing and painting rooms are located so that there is excellent northern light . The drawing and painting room is located in the north of the house .
 These rooms are equipped with the latest art supplies, including portable individual lockers which roll out to where students are working .
 "We are using the room for panel discussions in the art appreciation course,"" said Mrs. Giffel . The room is being used to hold panel discussions for art appreciation courses .
 The audio-visual room will also be used to foster interchange of work between students and college departments . Students will be able to use the room as a place to interact with college departments.
 In the near future the architecture and drafting classes will display some of their work . The architecture classes will also display their work at the school .
 Even a kitchenette was built to accommodate open house guests, workshops and exhibits . Open house guests are welcome to the museum .
 Two roomy closets contain slide and film projectors and other visual aid equipment . Two closets hold slide projectors, other visual aids equipment .
 Still to be completed are two outdoor patios which will join the drawing and painting rooms . The rooms will be joined by two outdoor patio rooms .
 Sketching horses stored in the drawing room waiting to move to the patios . Sketch horses are stored in a drawing room .
 Next year the department will offer twice as many courses, the instructor said . The department will also offer more courses next year .
 Hinds students and two instructors attended the annual meeting of the Mississippi Historical Society last Friday in Vicksburg, Mississippi .
 Hinds debators journeyed to the MSCW campus last Friday and returned the next day with another successful record in the debate tourney held there . Banton, associated with the Vicksburg National Military Park, gives debaters several victories at the tour .
 Hemphill also rated superior in several debates of individual performance . Hemphills rated superior to others in the debates .
 George Tannous, Woody May and Woody May all made excellent in individual events . Woody May needed only 10 more points for excellent to make excellent in the event .
 Dawn Me Neil, Carol Fortier, Jane Land, Belva Watkins attended the tourney . Also attended were Dawn Me and Carol Me Neil .
 Approximately 35 art works by students at Mississippi College went on display today in the exhibition room of the Hinds Art Department . Art display hung in Hinds Library .
 Presented in cooperation with Sam Gore, department head of art at Misissippi College, the exhibit gives a cross-section of the work being done at the school .
 The talk was presented in the court room of the Old Court House, adding to the exciting ab mosphere . The talk is presented in a court room .
 A tour of the park traced both the Confederate and Union lines . The group traced the Confederate lines .
 Miss Susan Brown and Thomas Stricklin attended a banquet Friday evening on the Steamer Sprague . The social science instructors attended the banquet .
 St. Strode is the author of two published volumes dealing with the life of Jefferson Davis . Strode: Davis' life in the U.S. has been a model of American history .
 A portion of the group remained in Vicksburg in order to see the melodrama ""Gold in the Hills,” also presented on the Steamer Sprague .
 According to the instructors, "This was the best meeting of the Historical Society we've attended" The instructors said it was the 'best meeting' of the historical society .
 The workshop is designed to give students interested in music a basic vocal foundation and an idea of how musical production is put on the stage .
 Theatre students will get tips on fundamental action, stage movement, and practice in theatre production . Students will learn about fundamental action and stage movement and practice .
 Dr. Charles M Getchell of the Department of Speech and Theatre will conduct the theatre wing of the workshop . Dr. Getchell is also expected to lead the workshop at the University of Cambridge .
 Mark Hoffman of the Department of Music will direct the musical activities . Mark Hoffman will direct musical activities at the event .
 Students will produce a total of five or six plays during the summer . Jointly, the students of music and theatre will produce five to six plays each summer . The students will also produce five plays in total .
 The two divisions of the workshop will present plays, concerts, chamber music and other performances separately .
 Joint productions will go on tour during the summer, and will be-seen in Jackson, Vicksburg, and Meridian . Joint productions are set to tour in three locations .
 A student may be selected to work primarily in one phase of the program . He will have an opportunity to work in both areas during the months of the workshop . Students will be able to work on both sides of the course .
 Music students will also receive instruction in how to organize and arrange musical activities . Students will also be taught how to use musical instruments and instruments .
 Theatre students will be coached in voice and diction, styles of acting, techniques of actors motivations and stage lighting . The students will also be taught how to use stage lighting and voice .
 Students interested in participating in the workshop should contact their music or speech instructor for application forms . The workshop will emphasize actual experience, emphasizing actual experience .
 "The soul selects her own society, then shuts the door,” says the poet . Westland and Meadowbrook offices are located at Westland stores in New York .
 "Pretty sneaky soul, with a second story door; that’s really select society. Pretty sneaky soul," she says .
 1500 students from 50 colleges in a dozen states will attend the 14th annual Student Missions Conference . The conference will be held March 8-10 at Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary, Ft.W.S. Baptist .
 Baker James Cauthen is executive secretary of the Southern Baptist Foreign Mission Board . The Southern Baptist foreign mission board is based in Atlanta, Georgia .
 Others will be Chester Swor, Glendon McCullough of the Southern Baptist Home Mission Board in Atlanta . Ancil B Scull, Southern Baptist foreign missionary to Indonesia, will also be on the program .
 NttP THK NATIONAL FOUNDATION Two Hinds Staffers Scheduled to speak at Secretary Meet . Two of Hinds’ faculty members, Mrs. Mrs. and Mrs. Smith, are scheduled to meet at Secretary of State .
 Alon Bee and Miss Belle Lindsey will be presented along with other outstanding speakers at the Secretarial Workshop of the Vicksburg Chapter, National Secretaries Association .
 Bee has served as official chaperone to three recent Miss Miss Mississippis . Bee will be the official Miss Mississippi Miss Miss Miss Mississippi .
 Other speakers will include Frank Everett of the firm Brunini, Everett, Grantham, and Quinn, who will discuss opportunities for the secretary in law . Dr. Dr. John Sutter will also be a speaker .
 Tom Mitchell of the Street Clinic will talk on the role of the secretary in medicine . Tom Mitchell will talk about his role as a secretary in the NHS .
 Westinghouse Electric Corp. will discuss incentives for the secretary in industry . Maj. McFarland, production superintendent of W.E. Electric Corp., will also be on the panel .
 President of the Mississippi River Commission will speak on secretarial opportunities in government .
 Elnora A. Cawthon from the Louisiana Polytechnic Institute at Ruston, La. The professor is a member of the Louisiana State University of Louisiana . She was awarded the title of the award for her work at the LPI .
 All secretaries, stenographers and students may attend for a fee of $2.50 . All secretaries and stenographers may attend the event at the event .
 Sophomores Reynolds Ridgley and Bobby Dickens eject their thumbs and hold high their sign in quest of a ride to State Junior College Basketball finals in Senatobia . The duo are hoping to make it to state Junior College basketball finals .
 Hinds Falls In Tournament Against Northern Champs, Northwest . Hinds’ hopes for a Mississippi Junior College Basketball Championship dashed .
 Johnny Franklin topped the scoring for the local crew as he bucketed 21 tallies . Johnny Franklin was the star of the night .
 Mississippi’s Junior College basketball crown for the 1962-63 season is at home in the Southwest trophy case . Mississippi defeated northern division champion and host, Northwest, Northwest .
 Southwest departed from their usual fastbreaking offense to a slowdown and-shoot-when-times-areright type of play . Southwest's usual fast-breaking offense has been replaced with a slowdown .
 Northwest, off their usual shooting percentage, hit only 26 percent of their field goal attempts . Northwest hit just 26 percent on 26 percent field goals . Northwest, of Northwest, hit 26 percent shooting percentage .
 During the first half the two teams see-sawed with the lead never going more than three points in either team's favor . The two teams go into the second half of the game .
 The tournament officially closed Junior College basketball for the season . The tournament was officially closed on Friday .
 Today let us examine that much maligned, widely misunderstood, grossly overworked, wholly dedicated campus figure— the dean . The dean of the University of Columbia University is a much misunderstood figure .
 He is a counselor and guide, a haven and refuge for the troubled student . He is also a guide, guide, and guide to the students .
 The dean is characterized chiefly by sympathy, wisdom, patience, forbearance, and a fondness for homely pleasures like community singing, farina, spelldowns, and Marlboro Cigarettes .
 The dean (from the German Deange machl to poop a party) is fond of Marlboro for the same reason that all men of good will are fond of Mlboro, because it's an honest cigarette . The dean of the dean, from Germany, was fond of
 Marlboro tobaccos are honestly good, honestly aged to the peak of perfection, honestly blended for the best of all possible flavors . They are honestly aged and honestly blended to the best possible flavors. They're honestly good and honestly aged .
 You too will flip when next you try an honest Marlboro, which, one honestly hopes, will be soon . But I digress. 'iw it iiotddryeye in Yidh'
 Dean Sigafoos was visited one day by a freshman named Walter Aguincourt who came to ask permission to marry one Emma Blenheim, his dormitory laundress . The pair were married at the end of the night .
 To the dean the marriage seemed ill-advised, for Walter was only 18 years old and Emma was 91 . Walter was 18 when he married Emma, 91 . The dean was shocked by the marriage .
 Emma had invested her life savings in a transparent rainhood to protect her from the mist at Niagara Falls . Walter agreed with the dean, but said he felt obligated to go through with it because Emma had planned to spend her honeymoon there .
 With steam billowing back at the old lady, she would find a rainhood very useful—possibly even essential .
 Agnes Yucca, 72, married a girl much nearer his own age . Emma Yucca's husband was freed from unwanted liaison .
 Walter is now the proud father— stepfather, to be perfectly accurate—of three fine, healthy boys from Agnes’s first marriage-Everett, 38; Wilhelm, 43; and Irving, 55 . When Walter puts the boys on a lead and takes them for a
 He too is happy to spend long hours in his little office, giving counsel without stint and without complaint, doing his bit to set the young, uncertain feet of his charges .
 Clarke Memorial College will host the equivalent to the traditional State Junior College Speech Festival Saturday, March 23 . The speech festival will take place at Clarke Memorial's campus .
 Hinds Forensic team and speech department will enter all events . Hinds forensic team and Speech Department will enter events . Oser Presents Versatile Concert In Artists Series .
 Hinds’ paper was one of two junior college newspapers in the nation to receive the top Medalist “publication of distinction” award . Hinds' paper received the top medalist award for its publication of distinction .
 The Miss Delta of Delta State College won first place . The Chieftian from Itawamba Junior College made second rating .
 Based on content, make-up, headlines and other phases of journalism in all papers published from Easter to Christmas this year, the award was decided .
 Hindsonian sponsor, Kent Prince, attended the convention and received the award for Hinds. The Hindsonian.com convention was held in New York .
 Joe White, present editor of The Hindsonian, also edited the 1961-62 publication . Joe White was editor of the Hindsonian from 1961 to 1962 .
 Editor and business manager of the award winning Student Printz are both Hinds alumni . Both are now graduates of Hinds .
 Tommy Nance, editor, and Jean Rogers, business manager, were sports editor and editor of The Hindsonian during the 1960-61 school session . Nance and Rogers were sports editors during the school year .
 Denton urged sophomores to take advantage of this opportunity since it will be the last test before students transfer to a senior college . Denton: Sophomores should take advantage since it is the last exam before transferring to senior colleges .
 Another concert in the Department of Music’s Artist Series will be offered Tuesday evening, March 26, at 8:00 in the college auditorium .
 Arthur Kreutz, composer, conductor and violinist, will be presented . Mrs. Kreutz will be accompanied by Mrs. Mrs. Krzutz .
 The latter part bases its main theme on a swing figure often heard on the dance drummer's ""hi-hat" cymbal . The dance drummer is often heard to play the swing figure .
 She has appeared as concert pianist and vocalist with symphony orchestras . She has sung leading roles in contemporary opera .
 Last year the festival was divided into three divisions; a north and south Mississippi tournament, and a final playoff . The festival is held in Mississippi .
 Clarke Festival is now a single major event for the Clarke Festival . Division tournaments were eliminated in favor of the event . Clarke Festival will be held every year .
 Co-sponsored by Perkinston and Jones, the festival was arranged a few weeks ago to fill in for the abeyant state tournaments . The festival was held in honour of the state tournaments held earlier this year .
 Featured will be oratory; oral interpretation; after-dinner, impromptu, and extemporaneous speaking; and debate . Oratory, oral interpretation, after dinner and after dinner will be featured .
 Jane Land and Belva Watkins will negotiate the affirmative side of the national debate question . Woody May and Ralph Hemphill will also negotiate the negative . Jane Land will be the moderator of the debate .
 Frances Pickett and Mike Oliver will participate in original oratory . Bill Forester and May Forester will also participate in afterdinner speaking .
 In the girls’ division of oral interpretation, Margaret Nunley, Frances Pickett, and Jane Land will express three selected writings . The girls will express the writings of three selected writers .
 Watkins and Hemphill will compete in impromptu speaking . Contestants draw a topic and aire and are allowed 15 minutes preparation .
 Dawn McNeil and Hemphill will enter exemporaneous speaking, which allows one hour for preparation . Dawn McNeill will enter the contest with one hour of preparation for speaking .
 After 25 years McLendon returns as Prexy By Unanimous Vote Of Board George M McLendon . McLendon currently completing his twenty-fifth year as president of Hinds . State Retirement Board grant permission for him to serve on to mandatory retirement age .
 Evans, Presley Selected To Head Hinds Magazine Spring Edition Editing the Spring Hindsonian.com .
 All persons who have material that may be of use are urged to Jackson, with Rebecca Presley, Brandon, serving as business manager . bring to the Student Publications Office in the Cafeteria Building .
 The winners in the afterdinner speaking contests will address the group . Conclusion of the festival will be a banquet Saturday evening at which winners will address .
 At the banquet, superior and excellent awards for other categories will be presented .
 Highlight of the event will come with the announcement of debate and sweepstakes trophies . The event will be held in New York City, New Jersey, at 8 p.m. ET .
 Hinds won the sweepstakes trophy at the Southern festival last year, and a week later won state championship . Hinds also won the state championship last year .
 The group will be accompanied to Newton by Fred L Brooks, speech department head .
 The magazine will be a separate student publication, apart from either the newspaper or yearbook . The magazine was chosen last week following submission of applications .
 Only other issue of the Supplement, published at Christmas, this year, was a project of journalism students and the regular Hindsonian staff .
 The initial issue of the magazine was literary in style, but the Spring edition will focus on features and news features, Evans said .
 Work with a strictly literary nature will be given important space, he said . However, he noted that works with a literary nature would be given an important space .
 Spring edition, to feature all types of material, will be inserted in mid-April issue of the paper . Spring edition will be published by April 1, 2015 .
 He also pointed out that a phases of graphic arts will be used in designing the magazine so that it will have the most effective look possible . The magazine will be launched in September .
 In the Christmas issue a few pages were elaborately processed as an experiment . A few pages of this Christmas issue have been processed as a result of the experiment .
 Freshmen Danny Evans and Rebecca Presley, recently chosen editor and business manager ol the spring Hindsonian Supplement, have announced that manuscripts, art-work, creative photography, and other pertinent material is being accepted for the mid-April magazine . Clark Memorial College, Perkinston, and
 This event will give a lot of young peopie in Mississippi an opportunity to develop their talents . The event will be a great opportunity for young people in Mississippi .
 Recently an editorial was run in this paper pointing out the fact that many eager and capable junior college students were being denied their freedom of speech . The editorial pointed out that students are being denied the right to speech .
 This approach may have glamorized to some, but not to the people it affected . This approach was not glamorizing to some of the people affected by it, but it affected others .
 A tip of the hat and sincere appreciation goes out to all of the judges, time keepers, and sponsors of this speech festival . The speech festival was held in March 2013 .
 If there is anything the state of Mississippi needs now and for some time to come, it is and will be the ability to express ourselves constructively to others, in other states, throughout this nation . Mississippi needs to express itself constructively with others, the state says .
 A decision has been reached regarding baseball at Hinds for the 1963 season . There will be none . Kennedy Misses Argentine Boat . Kennedy misses out on Argentine boat .
 This decision by the athletic department and the administration won’t come as a surprise to those who know the background behind the move, but to newcomers it might be puzzling . The move by the Athletic Department and administration may be puzzling to newcomers .
 Only two junior colleges in the state are fielding teams and a schedule this limited is out of the picture . Only two of the state's junior colleges are currently fielding teams .
 Since they are located near the state line, they can play out-of-state teams . And since they're located near to the state border, they have a right to play out of state teams .
 Baseball has been removed from the Hinds campus since 1959 . A complete buying spree would be necessary to equip the team with uniforms, balls and bats .
 Baseball is a spring sport that comes at a time when students should be hitting the books and not the ball . Baseball is the spring sport and should be a time for students to hit the books, not the balls .
 Final exams are just around the corner and no student on campus is so secure on the academic roster that he can afford to try and participate in all the varied spring activities and be charging off on a series of trips .
 While Americans have been busy eyeing Viet Nam, events have been moving rapidly towards chaos in Argentina . Events are moving rapidly to chaos in the country's most populous country .
 History proves that in dealing with the communists the obvious is usually the thing to concern oneself less with . The obvious is not to concern yourself less with. History .
 In Viet Nam, while we built up a strong motorized military, the communists outflanked it with guerillas . In Vietnam, the military was outflanked by the communists, the government said .
 In Berlin while the U.S. busied itself with Checkpoint Char* lie, the communists built a wall . The wall was built by the communists in Berlin, while the United States was busy building it .
 Castro has blown up a Venezuelan oil field, throwing the whole economy into an uproar . While the U.S. concerns itself solely with ""offensive missiles/' While the United States concerns itself only with "offensive missiles"
 In Argentina the New Frontier has yet to make the scene, meanwhile, the communists are stealing the show . The New Frontier is yet to appear in Argentina .
 The Kennedy administration seems to think that Latin America’s problem can be solved, or at least pushed aside, with the stroke of a pen . That is, that is, the signing of the alliance for progress .
 It has been in effect for two years, and throughout South America it has been called everything from the alliance for chaos to Castro . Throughout South America, it is called everything . The alliance is called for chaos and for Castro for Castro . It is also called for the unity of South America
 Kennedy missed the boat in Argentina by not backing Arturo Frondizi nearly a year ago when he was ousted by a disgruntled military . The former president of Argentina was overthrown by the military last year .
 Frondizi came to power in Argentina's first democratic election in 14 years . He came in power in the first election in the country's democratic history .
 He followed ten years of Peron misrule and four years of military dictatorship . The former president followed 10 years of misrule .
 Under Peron everything from bombs to bobby-pins became government owned . Peron: Everything from bombs and bobby pins were government owned by the government .
 Argentina had the best diet in the world at the time of Person’s arrival . Person was born in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in 1945 .
 Under the military, following Peronism, the economy stagnated . Now they have one of the worst, says Juan Carlos Carlos .
 Buenos Aires, once one of the most beautiful cities in the world, today is drab with streets and public utilities in need of vast repairs . Buenos Aires was once a beautiful city of beauty, but is now ailing .
 Frondizi came in with democracy and instituted an austerity program to build up Argentina's trade credits . Then he instituted a program that built up the credits, he says . Argentina's economy has been hit hard by austerity measures .
 He started selling the state-owned industries and businesses to private industries . State-owned businesses were sold to private businesses .
 The agile Frondizi began a slow but sure policy of political stabilization through economic stabilization . He began with a slow-but-sure policy of economic stability .
 President Obama stepped on the toes of the only stable force in the country, the military . But he made the fatal mistake of stepping on the foot of the military, he says .
 Peron now had ousted a conservative democrat, Frondizi . The men who had ousted the national socialist, Peron . Peron had ousted Peron, who was a national socialist .
 If the Kennedy administration had put diplomatic, foreign aid, and organization of American states' pressure on the militariat and openly backed Frondizi, all indications are since the Argentine military is largely backed by U.S. military grants, he would still be in power .
 This time the U.S. would have been backing democracy, a man chosen in free election, in Latin America . This time, the United States would have backed democracy, in a free election . The United States is backing democracy in the Latin America, says CNN's John Sutter
 Those in Washington who are supposed to know, say we need a reputation of backing democracy and reform in Latin America, but the man those men advised let it die . Those men in Washington said we need to back democracy, reform, but that's not true, he says .
 A year after the fall of democracy in Argentina, the military fear a return of Peron more than they fear Frondizi . Peron is in exile in Spain and has three million active supporters in Argentina . It seems that now, now, a year after a year since the
 The military junta has asked the former president to form a popular front coalition and set up a government . This fact is indicated by the military asking the ex-president to form an opposition coalition, he says .
 Such a front would include the Peronistas as a compromise to the military, the military says . Such a deal would be a compromise between the military and the government, the president says .
 Peronistas seem to prefer full legality and recognition as a political party to a coalition . The Peronista party wants to be recognized as a party, not a coalition, as it is not a party .
 Peron is back in Argentina after the death of Argentina's first president . He was assassinated in 1972 . Argentina's president was assassinated by a military coup d'Orca in 1973 .
 Legality and recognition as a political party for the Peronistas and they join the popular front . They join a popular front. Legality .
 Another national socialist, Adolf' Hitler, joined just such a coalition with other nationalists just before his rise to power . Adolf Hitler joined a coalition of nationalists in the 1930s and 1940s .
 It is also rumored that Peron has promised the military concessions, just as Hitler did prior to his becoming Chancellor . Peron is rumored to have promised military concessions .
 It is also true that Peron has the organization in the streets to doublecross the military after reaching power, just as Hitler did . Peron is also likely to double cross the military, just like Hitler did, he says .
 If Argentina returns to the abyss of Peronism, it will be a painful blow to American prestige in Latin America . Argentina is one of the most powerful countries in Latin American history .
 A final thudding death to the alliance in progress, and a direct slap at the Kennedy foreign policy . A final final thud death to NATO in progress and a final slap at foreign policy. A full thud of the war in progress .
 Television has been called the “Shelly Berman’s” of the 20th century . Shelly Berman was the "Shey Berman" of the century .
 This weekend, television did more than peep—it took a good, long look at a man, a successful man in the entertainment world .
 Dupont forgot the masses and centered its sights on one man—Shelly Berman . Shelly Berman. Berman . Berman .
 It was a commentated news report on the unseen side of the stage, the actor, the comedian. It was also a commentary from the actor and the comedian .
 The viewing audience looked into the innermost part of the man— the inside . The viewing . audience looked inside the inner .most part . of the . man .
 The often quiet, sometimes turbulent guts of a man who makes his living off the laughter of others . "The often quiet and sometimes turbulent . guts of an artist who makes a living off laughing . off of others"
 Set in Florida, cameras followed Berman for two days as he prepared to open at a leading night club in the state .
 He was shown first as alone, not really talking to anyone but rather ordering them . He was later shown as alone ordering food from the restaurant .
 Those who previously thought of a “funny man’s’ as being a completely unorganized person learned differently via this program . Those who thought of him as a ‘funny’ man learned differently .
 It was shown that like an intricate watch with minute moving and swaying parts, the mind, body and soul of a performer must work simultaneously or he loses time . The mind and body of an artist must work together or he will lose time or he does not .
 No longer was the audience disconnected from the entertainer but they were actually inside his thoughts and actions . The audience no longer was disconnected from his thoughts, it was inside his actions .
 If this is a sample of what television does when it peeps then it should be allowed to peep more often . It's not just a sample, but it's a good example of how television peeps .
 Hinds Choir presented a concert for the student body in this morning’s regular assembly . Choir presents a concert at this morning's assembly .
 The same concert will be given Friday before Forest Hill High School students at Forest Hill .
 Sunday evening the choir will travel to Westmont Christian Church in Jackson to present a concert of sacred music for the evening service beginning at 7:00 . The choir will also perform sacred music at the Jackson Christian Church .
 The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by journalism students .
 Bobby brings two pigeons to Hinds campus and releases them . Bobby releases pigeons every Tuesday and Thursday . Bobby has been releasing pigeons for years .
 Bobby and .younger brother ""Humpy"" became interested in pigeons about a year ago when they found a pair of wild birds . Bobby and Humpy's older brother became interested about pigeons after finding wild birds in the wild .
 They raised them from babies and when they flew away never to return, they decided to buy homing pigeons . The pigeons were raised from babies to pigeons, and the family raised them as babies .
 At times the boys have had as many as 16 fowls, "but we sometimes lose them," the boys said . At times they have had up to 16 birds .
 Bobby thinks the answer is in some way related to the sun or to light since the birds never fly after the sun goes down . Bobby thinks that the answer may be related to light .
 His birds have registered 90 miles from Greenville to Vicksburg . Only a few days left his birds have flown 90 miles .
 The races start in Meridian, Georgia, and gradually will move as far as Augusta, Georgia .
 The larger ones will fty the last races which may take two days,” said Bobby. “Bobby’s last races will be the last ones,’ said Bobby .
 The Barlows have two coops for the pigeons and even a special one called the Prisoner's coop . The family also have a special pigeon coop for their pigeons .
 At present they have eight registered canines, including one field champion . One field champion is valued at more than $1000 . At present there are eight registered dogs .
 Five years ago he began entering them in local field trials— running rabbits . Five years later he started entering them into field trials .
 Later they entered the Pearl River Beagle Club and now they race ""Tip Top" in other states . Now they race "Tip Top” in various states .
 Trophies and ribbons from Ohio, Pa. Mass., Mass., La., Ind., Ind. Ala., Mo., and Miss fill the living room of the Barlow home .
 The Barlows have a house dog, a stray they picked up off the streets . They also have a stray dog, which they have since adopted .
 Staff photographer Dan Fazekas takes a look at the difference between homing pigeons and the common breed that clutter public places . The Barlow birds are the most common breed of pigeons in the world .
 A dual purpose will be served by a campus-wide social in the girls’ gymnasium tomorrow night . Circle K, Cheerleaders To Host Social Program Tomorrow Night .
 Circle K Sweetheart will be announced and crowned and basketball team members will be honored . Circle K sweethearts will also be announced .
 Originally it was intended that two separate functions be held, but time did not permit, officials of Circle K and the cheerleaders noted .
 Circle K has during the past month nominated six girls and kept their identities secret . Circle K is keeping their nominations secret .
 Club Sweetheart for 1963 will be voted on at 4:45 tomorrow night . The winner will be chosen from a narrowed-down field of three coeds . Club members will vote on the club sweetheart at 4.45 .
 Only three club officials will be present at the counting of secret ballots tomorrow night . The top selection will be a complete surprise at the end of the night .
 The winner will accompany Circle K on its trip to its annual convention in Bosier City, La., next month . Circle K's annual convention will be held at the center of the convention .
 Cheerleaders have made plans to honor the Hinds basketball team members . Hinds were in the play-offs for state basketball championship . The Hinds team won the state championship .
 Music for the dance will be provided by the Vis Counts of Jackson, a well known giroup of musicians . The Vis Count's of Jackson will perform at the dance .
 Concessions will be headed by Circle K, and a varied program will be planned . The event will be held in conjunction with Circle K .
 Have one of Jackson Steam’s courteous agents pick your clothes up in the dorm on Monday and Thursday between 8 -10 o’clock . Have one or two of your clothes picked up between 8 and 10 a.m. ET .
 DWAYNE COX CHARLES DUDLEY JERRY ""PEANUT"" SMITH SONNY CURTIS HAROLD MITCHELL to win in the college Brand Round-up . DEADLINE FOR CONTENT is APRIL 2, 2:30-3
 The late show isn’t blaring the re-runs of an old war movie; on the contrary, the war is a very much a present day one . No, the late show is blaring . It’s not a war movie, it's a present-
 Modern war doesn't have Japan art Russia as an enemy but the enemy is most assuredly red . Fought by men, the modern war doesn’t have Japan or Russia .
 The first attack, related in a recently published article, listed the enemies as immigrants from at least 30 foreign countries .
 A second aerial attack is planned against the imported enemies of fire ants . Fire ants are the main enemies of the government .
 For years, the red devils have eaten, pricked, and bitten their way into the American home, garden, land . They have interrupted work, pleasure, and more often reducing the family income, especially in the case of farmers .
 With progress came air planes and with planes came pilots, pilots who fly at amazingly low altitudes and distribute bait material to destroy the infestious inserts . Now, however, farmers may rejoice, for .
 The material, called mirex, is slow ating and is not harmful to humans, wildlife, animals, birds or fish . The material is slow-ating and not harmful .
 Thirty four thousand acres are being sprayed with the powder this week in hopes of completely destroying the pests . Last year, the pests became uncontrollable in this area .
 Applications are said to be more effective before or after the emergence of the winged forms of the ants . Applications are more effective when the ants are winged, according to experts .
 Hinds air base is being used as the headquarters for the dusting service of the Terry and Utica area . Financed with federal funds, the program will take approximately two months .
 About 24 government men are stationed at the airport now, carrying out the different phases of the program . Pilots, a dusting service representative, an overseer and a dust-service representative are among them .
 For those who have never seen, or rather should have felt a red ant — consider yourself among God's chosen few .
 Dixie Rubber Stamp Co. sells rubber stamps and plastic stamps . Children are especially vunerable to the in quality of the in-quality products .
 In infested areas, occupants may use insecticides to control the spread of the “fire’s” ants . Insecticides can be used to control spread of "fire ants"
 The red devils have no respect for money, position or social status . They would just as soon bite a rich man as a poor one . The red devil would bite a poor man as well as a rich person .
 Music Instructor Presents Recital Of Mozart, Verdi . Music Instructor presents Recital of Mozart and Verdi at Jackson's Music Instructor .
 Joan Melton Lynch, Hinds music instructor, was presented in recital last evening by the Hinds Department of Music . She presented a recital in a solo performance at the school .
 Lynch appeared as a part of the Artist Series, sponsored by the music department . Lynch appeared on the show as a member of the band .
 Lynch’s program included 'The Counte’aria' and ‘Porgi amor’ from Mozart's Marriage of Figaro . ‘Ah fors’e lui” from Verdi's La Traviata; ‘
 Lynch is presently instructor of music theory and teacher of piano and voice . Lynch is currently a music theory instructor and voice teacher .
 Douglas Sullivan, Jackson sophomore, will present in a recital by the Department of Music Thursday evening at 7:30 in the music auditorium . Sullivan To Voice Various Selections Of Many Periods .
 Included will be “Lasciatemi morire,” by Monteverde; “Stars of the Desert” and “You Are All That Is Lovely .” The Lady Who Loved A Pig, by Dougherty, will also be on display .
 Speaking in tennis terms, blonde Barbara Coward “loves the tennis court and the sunny spring weather Hinds is having’t .
 Lovely Barbara, a freshman art major, serves as Spring’s first Hinds Honey . Lovely Barbara is a freshman Art major .
 Hinds girls dormitories resound with such conversation, and the more conservative residents look astonished at the gymnastic and child-like feats of their housefellows . Hinds Girls' dorms resound .
 Male members of the campus are stuffing cars in their own version of fad-filled college life . Meanwhile, male students are stuffing their cars in a new fad car .
 Three Hinds coeds, Carol Vanlandingham, Ann Goodwin, and Hendra Moudy spent an afternoon behind the girls gym flying a kite .
 William Oakes, Hinds recreational director, unofficially lent his experience, and helped the trio overcome their difficulties . Oakes was Hinds' recreational director and helped them overcome difficulties .
 A student claimed he stuffed 23 people in a similar car and set out to prove his statement . He set out on a set of tests to prove the claim .
 So large is the following that ""bring your own crayons"" parties have been staged in some dorms . The parties are so large that some dorm rooms have been set up .
 UCLA students push a bed from Los Angeles to Las Vegas, to stuffing telephone booths, and spinning in electric dryers . Typical of college pranks over the nation, these fashionable idiosynctracies are Hinds answers .
 Ronnie Farmer, Hinds freshman, suggested that students use pogo sticks to travel between classes . Ronnie Farmer: "Pogo sticks are the best way to get to class"
 Students who wish to receive a junior college diploma must check out with the registrar and pay the ten dollar fee . Students must also pay the fee to receive the diploma .
 The fee covers all costs of graduation, including diploma, cap, and gown . The fee also covers the cost of graduation .
 NEGATIVES & PLATES grade for the semester . HALFTONES ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITH0 grade for semester .
 Finishing sophomores who do not take part in graduation may not be exempt, she said . Finishing sophomore students may be exempt from graduation .
 Miss Herrin emphasized that participation in all graduation exercises is required for the receiving of the diploma and associate of arts degree .
 Commencement will be Sunday, May 26, at 11m., and final commencement exercises will be held Friday, May 31, at 10:30m. Commencements will be Saturday, May 24, May 30, May 27 .
 Newman Club Picnic Raymond Lake Lodge APRIL 1, 1963 Club Members and Dates Only P.0.0 . Club members and dates only .
 Spring has sprung, and with it the individual sports scene here has burst into full blossum . Golf, Tennis Head Spring Sports Scene .
 Sports as tennis and golf are taking oveir as after-hours activities . Over the campus such sports as tennis are taking over from the university .
 Golf, a leading pastime among the male population, is the sweeping rage with the nine-hole campus course flooded each afternoon with duffers . Golf is also a popular pastime in the United States .
 Both beginners and “old pros’ are testing their skills on the course . The course adjoins Raymond Lake, which is located near Raymond Lake .
 Students are permitted to play on their student activities card while visitors are charged 50 cents for the nine-hole tour . Visitors are charged $50 per nine hole .
 Tennis is gaining interest as a campus sport with the recent change in weather . Tennis has been gaining interest among students in recent years .
 Both sexes are participating in the net action and the courts on campus are kept full daily . Courts on campus on campus keep full daily with both sexes participating .
 The scoring ace contributed 12 field goals and added four charity tosses for the total . He also contributed 12 charity field goals .
 Ann Strickland hit on three of four foul-line shots and hit 10 two-pointers . Strickman hit on 3 of 4 foul line shots, hit on 10 of four shots .
 Judy Thompson, a former AllStater from Clinton, sacked 17 points for the winning crew . Carolyn Grafton ripped the nets for eight points for Carolyn . Kay Beasley sacked four points for Kay Thompson .
 Carrie Bliss hooped 13 points in a losing cause as the Westside unit was overcome . Carrie Bliss also scored 13 points for the team .
 Carol Pounds put three two-point two-pointers in for six points . Ann Pharr rounded out the scoring with five points .
 Playing at guard for the victors was Sandra Jabour, Frances Pickett, Dottie Darling, Marie Dollar, Susan Barrett and Kay Beasley . Playing for the winners were Dotties Darling, Dotsie Breakfield and Marie Dollar .
 Joyce Hill, Ann Graham, Jane O’Neal and Sharon Warren defended for Westside . Joyce Hill and Ann Graham defended for the Westside. Ann Graham and Jane O'Neal defended Westside in the debate .
 C031599 L*M GRAND PRIX 50 Sweepstakes for colleges only . More than 50 times the chance to win than if open to the general public .
 The contest was this year’s equivalent to the traditional State Junior College Speech Festival . It was co-sponsored by Perkinston, Jones, and Clarke .
 Receiving superiors were Ralph Hemphill, Margaret Nunley, Bill Forester, Francis Pickett and Ralph Hemhphill .
 Mike Oliver, Ralph Hemphill, Woody May, Jane Land and Belva Watkins won four debates which gave them second place in the state .
 Officials of Tuesday’s Career Conference view Hinds between activities . The juniors and seniors, gleaned from Byram, Raymond, Terry, and Utica High Schools, met with select individuals .
 Hinds Chapter of Phi Theta Kappa arrives in Miami for annual convention . The conference is an annual event held for the joint benefit of the smaller Smallwood Presents Voice Recital .
 27-member delegation will participate in honor society’s coastal meet, joining students from all over the United States . Leaving, Monday bdfore dawn, the delegation will leave early Monday morning .
 Activities, luncheons, banquets, assemblies, and sightseeing are included in the convention’s busy schedule . The convention is scheduled to take part in a wide range of activities .
 Soprano Peggy Smallwood was presented Thursday in her sophomore vocal recital by the Hinds Department of Music . Smallwood is a junior in the Hind's Department of music .
 Accompanist for the program, held in the College auditorium, was Kathy Kilby, Raymond Raymond . Accompanyanist, Raymond, Raymond.
 A joint performance by Russell Harrington and Sandra Parkison was to be held April 4 . Peggy Wilbanks was to appear April 11 . A joint appearance by Russell and Sandra is scheduled for April 4 and 11 .
 These programs will be held later, according to department head Leslie Reeves . The department head says the programs will continue later .
 "I Hate Music" and "I Just Found Out Today" also included were “Solveig’s Song,” Grieg; “Thou Art the Night Wind” and “One Kiss,’ Romberg . “Let My Song
 J \ W Lee is chairman of the division of education and psychology at Mis | sissippi College . Lee is also a psychology professor at the college .
 Mrs. King, State Auditors Office, accounting; Billy Banes, Hinds Junior College, agriculture; Walter Gibbes, Hind's, auto mechanics . Mrs. Gibbes: "I am a proud citizen of Hinds County"
 Ray Sullivan and Sidney Pitts, State Employment Service, job opportunities in Mississippi . Sam Stafford, assistant superintendent. Ray Sullivan, homemaking. Sidney Pitt: "Homemaking is a great thing for Mississippi"
 Dr. Doris Bryant, Baptist Hospital, nursing; Morton Smith, Belhaven College, religious occupations; Genevieve Adams, Hinds Junior College, science; Kent Prince, Hind's, journalism . Dr. Morton Smith and Dr. Genevie Adams were honored at Belhaven
 State First Exhibit Of Technical Drafting Scheduled For Late April Show . Exhibit on technical drafting is being collected for showing in state junior colleges .
 It will later be shown at Copiah-Lincoln, and at other schools on request . The film will also be shown in other schools .
 A drafting instructor who was among the guests at the planning meeting last Thursday was among those at the meeting .
 The meeting was also attended by Walter Gibbes, vocational coordinator and Wallace Wall, drafting instructor, named as members to Hinds’ technical drawing advisory committee .
 Advisory committees are 1 a regular part of Hinds vocational instruction . Advisory committee is part of the school's vocational curriculum .
 The group is composed of persons from the professional world in accordance with state department of education specifications . They guide and suggest curriculums .
 Brandon sophomore dumped 1001 empty cigarette packs on the rec hall floor yesterday . Philip Morris Co. gave away the TV console in its annual College Brand Round-Up .
 Philip Morris will again sponsor a contest next year . Philip Morris has urged everyone to be saving packs during the summer .
 All copy for the spring edition of the Hindsonian Supplement must be submitted by Thursday, April 11 . Dannie Evans, editor, announced today .
 The dead-line was set for next week, Evans said . Since all copy must be processed before going to the printer, the dead-lines were set for Monday .
 Final allotments of space would save them for a future conhave not been made, he said, so test | any copy will be considered until the end . And he doesn’t even smoke .
 This phenomenon was entirely in accordance with the new Michigan Coordinating Council for Higher Education policy recently approved by the board of trustees . This is in compliance with a new policy that was recently approved .
 Aptheker is a man of little significance to students of Michigan State . He is a little known to the students of the university .
 Robert Thompson, also a Communist speaker, should have been a man of little significance to the students and faculty . Thompson was also a member of the Communist Party in the U.S. Then, one Robert Thompson was a prominent speaker .
 Thompson was denied—denied—because people in powerful positions beyond the boundaries of our campus refused to condone a Communist on the sacred soil of a state-suported institution . Thompson is denied, denied because people in . powerful positions .
 Suddenly, Robert Thompson became significant to the students and factuly. The Michigan State administration did itself succumb to the pressures and banned the Red Suddenly . Ultimately, the Michigan State .
 Robert Thompson did speak, however, in the back yard of the Delta Sigma Phi fraternity . Thompson was speaking in his fraternity's backyard .
 The two incidents clearly show how crackpots can create and warp issues . Moreover, the two incidents also show that crackpots are capable of creating and warp problems .
 The crack-pots didn't stand a chance this time, thanks to the new policy . Fortunately, the crackpots didn t stand a . chance this . time .
 Many are edging closer and closer to the end of their junior college education, and to them these last few weeks mean much . Many are now edging . closer and . closer to end of Junior College education .
 The students have the choice of raising or lowering their grade averages before the final tally is taken . They can raise or lower their grades before they are taken into account .
 All senior colleges analyze the grades of those transferring from junior colleges, before they are accepted or rejected . Senior colleges analyze grades before they accept or reject students .
 The employers are also very interested in knowing what kind of work they did in college . To those who plan to begin work after completion here, the employers will be very interested .
 It is very often representative of the kind of work they will do on a job . It is also representative of what a person will do when they are on the job .
 Students forget that these nine weeks are as important, if not more important, than the other 27 weeks of each school year . Students often forget that this nine weeks of school year is just as important as other weeks .
 Grades will soon be received for the first of this semester, and students will know exactly how they stand . Grades are expected to be received soon .
 One rotten apple spoils a whole basket of apples, so one bad nine weeks of school can ruin a year of education . Like one rotten apple, one bad school week can spoil a whole year of school .
 The Spanish Main no longer rules dermine. Zke UUCUfcciOAU Mighligkts of Minds . Spain No Longer Worldly .
 Editor Joe White is Executive Editor, Editor and Business Manager . White is also Executive Editor and Editor of the Daily Mail . White has been in the news for more than 20 years .
 Spain has descended into the deep and away from the arena of world powers . Spain has not been able to compete in the World Cup for the first time .
 A brief glance at this nation’s past can only reflect its importance and unfulfilled opportunities . The nation's history reflects the importance of the past and the opportunities it had .
 Spain was once, for a short while, the richest and most powerful world power . Spain is now the most powerful country in the world . It is also the most important country in Latin America .
 While she drained her colonies 7 gold and parasited on their wealth, the economic base of the 'mother country 7' failed to widen . The 'mother of the 7' has failed to expand her economic base .
 She could buy from other European countries the goods she needed with the gold that Europe hungered for . She could then use the gold to buy the goods from other countries .
 Britain had long before defeated the Armada in 1588, indicating a weakening of Spanish seapower . The Armada was defeated by Britain long before the defeat of the Spanish Armada .
 Without the South American colonies, Spain's economy withered like a disconnected vine . The South American colony's riches flowed back to Spain, its economy waned . Spain's economic boom was largely due to the colonies .
 In Cuba, a revolution in Cuba marked the ascendency of one new-world nation to the front ranks . In that year, one old-world power was relegated to the lower depths of diplomatic respectability . Cuba's revolution marked the rise of a new world power in Cuba .
 In 1935, Francisco Franco flew from Spanish Morocco in North Africa amidst wholesale anarchy against the monarchy, and organized a nationalist revolution . Then in 1935, he flew from Spain Morocco to North Africa amid wholesale anarchy .
 On the other side were the loyalists or Royalists, backing the monarchy . The loyalists backed the monarchy, backed by the British monarchy .
 With the help of the axis, Franco won out in 1939, and instituted a modified system of national socialism in Spain . As a passing observation, here we have the communists aiding a monarchy .
 Next, the Catholic church was made an instrument of the state, for perpetuating itself . The Catholic church is now a state instrument of its own, says Pope Francis .
 Franco utilized the differences between the allies at the close of World War II to stay afloat . The generalissimo, as Franco styles himself, is known for his use of the differences .
 Spain's economy and currency are backed up by the new world again today—American foreign aid . Spain's currency and economy are backed by the U.S. government .
 The lesson of Cuba indicates that, in the long run, the U.S. cannot back unpopular tyrants just because they are pro-western and maintain a positive and agile foreign policy . U. S. can't back unpopular regimes just because of their pro-Western policies, writes
 When Franco goes, those who replace him will not look kindly toward a nation that supported the regime they overthrew . Franco's regime was overthrown by the Franco regime, but his supporters are still loyalists .
 Lemmon Rates Movietown’s Top Award This Year . Lemmon rates MovietOWN’S Top Award this year . If Jack Lemmon doesn’t win the Academy Award, you can bet the awards are fixed .
 If the ballot men miss giving Lemmon an award for “Days of Wine and Roses,” I shall forever curse the Academy, its directors, its judges and its balloting . Liz Taylor missed her deserved Oscar for "Suddenly Last Summer" and was given a subsequent one for
 Any fool who missed seeing the range of Lemmon's acting ability is not only a fool, but a blind one . Lemmon is best known for his role in "Days of Wine and Roses"
 Lemmon gives Lemmon the chance to show on which side his bread is really buttered . Joe, the sweet, innocent raving alcoholic, is the sweet and innocent alcoholic . Lemmon is Lemmon's favorite alcoholic to drink .
 He's great in comedy, his first love, but as some have always known, he is also great in drama . Granted, he’s great in comedies, but he is great in dramas like this .
 Lemmon played the whole part with his face, more specifically with his eyes, in "Days of Wine and Roses" Lemmon was a big role in the film .
 The audience has a trick pulled on them by the camera and the great director of the film, says the film's great director . The audience is pulled out of the frame by the director and the camera, he says .
 One scene in the movie is the couple’s wedding scene and the very next scene is one year, one baby later . One scene is the wedding scene .
 Rapidity of plot progression is a most refreshing thing today, when movies like ‘The Longest Day’ are being made . Rapidity is a thing today's refreshing thing .
 Lee Remick was the star of the film, but Lemmon's name is synonymous with Remick . Mr Lemmon died in 1994 in a car crash in Los Angeles .
 Several remarks were heard in the theatre to the effect that Lemmon could not have possibly been sober during the drinking scenes . Lemmon's drinking scenes were played in the film .
 His eyes, his mouth, his movements, everything reeked with invisible liquor . His eyes and his mouth were the same as his eyes and mouth . He said, "His eyes, mouth, and his movements ... everything reeks of invisible liquor"
 Classes will not meet Friday, April 12, Good Friday, because of student cooperation . Student cooperation m not missing any classes during registration .
 Circle K president. CTowned cirili K SvSrthearf'es^^br'T’T” PhaU S S S a ^ UU0C . Circle K. president .
 Ann Stephenson was recently elected Circle K Sweetheart . Ceremonies highlighted the recent dance sponsored by the service organization out in spring .
 Circle K meetings may make her nervous, but surely not for long, since Ann will serve as the all-male organization’s official hostess . Ann will be the Circle K hostess for Circle K .
 She will accompany Circle K on its trip to its annual convention, in Bosier City, La., later this month . Circle K will host Circle K's annual convention in Louisiana .
 Anni was more surprised than anyone but added, “I was especially happy about the honor since my brother, who attends West Point, was here and attended the dance where I was crowned . Anni added that her brother was also at the dance .
 Ann's father teaches astronomy at Hinds and so far she has not had to take any subjects under him . Ann s interest lies only in looking through the telescope-not memorizing the constellations . Ann's interest lies in looking at the stars, not memorizing them .
 The pre-med student gets plenty of practice in Mr Beemon’s Zoo 'lab . She may change from pediatrics to surgery .
 If she decides against medicine, then perhaps teaching will claim her . Either way, she likes science, and it doesn’t take a chemistry major to know she will add plenty of combustibles to the Circle K members .
 Freshmen members of the regular Hindsonian staff assumed editorial responsibilities for this issue of the paper during the absence of several sophomore heads . Freshmen take over editorial duties during this issue .
 Sophomore editor Joe White as sociate editor Betty Simmons,’ and news editor Ralh Hemphill are attending the week-long national Phi Theta Kappa convention in Miami .
 Organization of the Phi Beta Lambda News Letter was set up at the recent meeting I of the business fraternity . News Letter will be published in spring and fall editions .
 I Kathleen Martin, Frances Brown, Elizabeth Oliver and Elizabeth Oliver are typists for the News Letter . The News Letter will be released May 1 .
 Gene Jackson, Jackson, sophomore, was elected vice-president to fill that recently vacated post . In other business, Gene Jackson was elected VP-elector .
 Standard Standard Standard Photo from St. Louis Photo Finish . Try our service in color or black and white . Use our service to print a standard standard standard photo of the day . Use this print print printout to create a custom custom-made photo .
 Hinds Stage Band and HiSteppers team perform at Jackson Veterans Administration Hospital, Jackson, for third annual performance there .
 Audience response was warm for the particular show famous for having been performed about 60 times in two years without noticeable changes other than the girls themselves . Audiences responded warm to the show .
 Free Admission Men’s Independent Adult Adult Basketball Tournament will be held April 3-6 in the Hinds’ gym . Independent Play Scheduled Here; Free Admission for Independent Play .
 Raleigh and Armstrong Corkers will meet in the first game tomorrow night . Morton and Pelahatchie will also play in the second game of the series .
 Hinds will vie the Intramural All-Stars . Raymond and White Oak will play each other Thursday . Hinds, Raymond will play White Oak, White Oak .
 Friday and Saturday will decide the winners, with semi-finals held Friday and the consolation and final games being played Saturday . The final games will be played Saturday and Sunday .
 Hinds track team scored an easy victory in their season’s opener against Copiah-Lincoln and Delta Junior Colleges . Eagle Thinclads Rolling; Win First Meet of Year .
 The Eagles won 10 of 13 events for 67 total points . They will host the Big-8 Invitational High School meet here Wednesday . The Eagles will post their record again at home Saturday at home against Southport .
 Co-Lin, their closest competitor, rallied with 41 and a half, while Delta had only 25 and half . Delta's closest competitor had 41 and half, the closest competitor with 41 .
 Percy Boell took the pole vault pole vault, and Larry Jones ran on both winning relay teams . Larry Jones also ran on the relay teams for the state championship .
 Third place winners for Hinds were Eddie Livingston on the mile, Leon Stewart on the high hurdles, and “Peanut” Smith on the 880run . Eddie Livingston won the mile and high hurdles .
 Jimmy Young won the high hurdles, high jump, and the low hurdles . Co-Lin was paced by their 6-3 runner Jimmy Young . Young won his three events .
 He also scored second and third places in the pole vault and broad jump . He also won the broad jump and pole vault .
 Larry Ethridge, the only other first place winner for Co-Lin, won the mile . Larry Ethridges, the other other first-place winner, won mile . The only other winner for co-Lin won mile for the company .
 Hinds was out in front by half a lap at the finish, but because of an out-of-bounds hand-off, they were disqualified . Hinds were disqualified for being out of bounds at the end of the race . The team was out of the lead by half
 Recreation director says any group or organization may field a team if they see him before Thursday afternoon . William Oakes, director of recreation, announced that any group of organizations may field team . Oakes: Any group or . organization may . field team if seen by Oakes on Thursday afternoon
 All games will be played on the field between the tennis courts and Southside Dormitory . Play is scheduled for seven innings, Oakes said .
 Contests are slated for 3:50m. following a schedule to be published weekly . Contests will be held at 3:30m.
 The end of any full inning which begins after 5m. will complete a game, Oakes said . Oakes says the end of the inning will complete the game .
 Season’s first tennis match is scheduled for Thursday afternoon on the east campus courts, Coach Howard Sessums announced .
 Until the end of the season the courts will be held on reserve for the varsity team, he said .
 The Eagles, who won all but one match last year, will meet Southwest at 3:30 . The Eagles won all of their matches last year .
 Team members are Boyd Me Phail, Billy Joe Montgomery, Tommy Axdale, Johnny Hines, Dickie Leggett, and Doug Sullivan . The team also includes Billy Hines and Johnny Hine .
 It is a scientific fact that girls reach emotional maturity earlier than boys . Now you can be YOUNGER THAN she is .
 For this reason freshman girls are reluctant to make romantic alliances with freshman boys, but instead choose men from the upper classes . Freshmen girls choose upper classes over boys from the lower classes .
 The freshman boys are left dateless, and many is the night the entire freshman dorm sobs itself to sleep .
 Upper-class men are being snapped up by freshman girls . The poor ladies of the upper class are reduced to dreary evenings of Monopoly and Monopoly .
 It pleasures me to report there is a solution for this morbid situation—indeed, a very simple solution . The solution is simple, and it's a simple solution to the problem .
 There is something of an age differential, but that need not matter. True, there was something of a age differential . True, it's not a matter of age difference .
 Albert Payson Sigafoos and Eustacia Vye have been married for more than 20 years . The pair's relationship has been described as one of the most contentious relationships in the world .
 Blinded by tears, he stumbled upon the supine form of Eustacia Vye, a senior in wicker and raffia, who was collapsed in a heap .
 Two Hinds coeds were injured Monday afternoon when their car was hit broadside on Robinson Road Extension by a speeding vehicle being pursued by a Highway Patrolman . The two students were injured in the collision .
 Second Annual Awards Day Scheduled For Early May . Second annual ‘Awards Day’ to be held May 8 .
 John Hannon was elected second national vice-president of Phi Theta Kappa at the national convention in Miami last week . Hannon is the third consecutive year a Mississippian has been selected a national officer .
 He will attend regional meetings this summer . He will represent the national organization at the American Association of Junior Colleges and Southern Association next year .
 James Pennebaker, Perkinston, served as first vice-president this year, and last year . He is also the first vice president of the United States .
 Hinds student Jack Roberts, now enrolled at Millsaps, served in the same position . Hinds students Jack Roberts and Jack Roberts now attend Millsaps University .
 Guest invitations are being sent to college women in Raymond who are not presently members of the college women's club .
 Denton Easter Miracle | Denton, Texas, mayor, mayor of D.C. City Council meets with candidates for re-election to be re-elected to the second general session .
 In concluding his speech, he expressed his beliefs in the opportunities and importance of the future activities of American youth .
 Hannon: "The symbol of juvenile delinquency is not the true symbol of young people today, but this is the one that is accepted" Hannon said .
 We, in this scholastic fraternity, should strive to make PTK a forerunner as a symbol of young America’s progress and willingness to assume responsibility .
 Sponsor of Gamma Lambda at Hinds, Miss Mildred Herrin, spoke highly of the new officer . Miss Herrin: "The new officer is a very special member of the community"
 She reported a long distance telephone conversation Tuesday with the national executive secretary . She was impressed with the whole slate of officers, and particularly Hannon, she said .
 Hannon has an outstanding record of effective leadership . Hannon is a graduate of Raymond High School . He has been nominated for an award-winning high school .
 He was president of the student body, student council, and a member of the Beta Club for three years . He also served as president of student body and student council .
 Upon his graduation from high school he received both the English and Math awards . He received both of his high school English and math awards .
 Other officers chosen at The national convention were Pat Lauderdale of Cameron College, Lawton, Oklahoma, president; Jerry Joyner of Chowan College, Murfresburo. Pat Lauderdale was Cameron College's president . Jerry Joycener was also chosen as Chowan's president; Pat Lauderdale
 Linda Jacks, driver, received multiple fractures of the skull, leg, and ankle . North Carolina, first viceI president; and Carol Smart of JopBaptist Hospital, N.C. Hospital Tuesday reported that Linda JackS, driver. received . multiple fractures .
 Kay Brasfield received multiple abrasions, but was released from the hospital Monday night . Brasfield was taken to a local hospital with multiple injuries .
 Smith was being pursued by the Highway Patrol for running a stop sign . Smith struck the Jacks’ car while being pursued . The Jacks' car was hit by Smith's car .
 Following the collision Smith and a companion fled their car, leaving a third unidentified person . Smith and his companion left their car with a third person .
 The two girls were returning from classes to their home in Jackson when the accident occurred . The accident occurred on the way back to their Jackson home .
 Academic honors have already been chosen by departments, officials say . Gold plaques are being processed for the ten outstanding studenTs scholastically .
 Other awards for meritorious performance in various fields will also be made during the program . Other awards will be made at the event .
 Academic awards will be kept secret until assembly . Awards will be based on criterions delineated by the individual departments .
 A representative of the department will present the award and explain its qualifications . The award will be presented by a representative from the department .
 Last year, Awards Day was instigated to publicly recognize all the excellent students in the various academic fields . Awards Day is a public recognition day for students in various fields of study .
 The program has been ^expanded somewhat, but will still keep the form of the one last year . This year's program will be expanded somewhat . The program will continue to be expanded .
 Next year, the program will probably come under the jurisdiction of the faculty instead of The Yearbook . The yearbook will probably be in the faculty's jurisdiction .
 Recipients of awards will be featured in the college yearbook, editor Belva Watkins said .
 Joe White lin Junior College, Joplin, Missouri, historian. Since deAN, since deAN has been at the center of the nation's history .
 This Sunday, all over the world, people will arise at the crack of dawn, dress carefully and neatly, gather their entire family and head to some distant hill or clearing . People will dress carefully, neatly and neatly and head toward some distant hills or clearing.
 If they are not a\Ved at the sunrise they will be by the quiet, simple ceremony to follow .
 This day has been set aside each year, just as Christmas, to honor the Saviour who proved that no mere mortals could keep God from having His way . This day was set aside to honor Jesus Christ .
 This miracle not only set an example of faith for the Disciples and their close followers, but for Christians of all eras . This miracle set a precedent for Christian faith in all ages, including those of all ages .
 The Bible clearly states these miracles, written by common men who were inspired to do God’s bidding . The Bible also states that these miracles were performed by common people .
 The arising of Christ signifies that nothing is impossible as long as one has belief . Christ's birth of Christ means that nothing can be impossible if belief is believed .
 Even Jesus’ disciples had fear and misgivings, proving that no man is perfect, and that we should always keep hope . Even Jesus Christ’s disciples had fears, and even his disciples had misgives .
 Attending the services of your choice this Sunday, you, too, will come to know yourself and your God better . Attending a service you choose this Sunday will help you understand yourself and God .
 You will certainly feel closer to your church and your fellow church members . You will definitely feel closer than your church .
 There’s a time to stand up and be heard, but the middle of an assembly program is not such a time . John HANNON National Officer HINDSONI AN Page 2 .
 Plain rudeness and lack of manners have been shown by Hinds students in regard to assemblies . For months, plain rudeness was shown by students at Hinds school .
 Sophomores, who are example setters, set such examples as talking during assembly, shuffling their feet and just walking out of the program if it doen’t suit them . Sophomorees are example setsters, who often walk out of assembly .
 Students are only proving their ignorance and their lack of training . Either their parents didn't teach them any better, or they can’t remember what they’ve been told . Students only prove they are ignorant or lack of knowledge .
 Freshmen sit with heads bowed in reverence to their history books, Birk and Birk, and other texts, but that makes them no angels . Freshmen are no angels, but they sit with their heads bowed with reverence to history books .
 The mass exodus at last week’s assembly was understandable, but nevertheless indicative of the boorish urge to bolt from the auditorium at the slightest provocation .
 Absences should be given those who only make a showing for the “roll,” and if the exits continue, those students should be brought before the absentee committee and made to explain their actions .
 Nikita Khrushchev bellowed to an Indian crowd in May of 1958 . “We will bury . you” he said to a crowd in India .
 Plans are underway for a direct communications system between the White House and the Kremlin . Plans are also being made for the Kremlin to communicate with the U.S.
 There is some speculation that Nikita is about to have his neck stretched by his Kremlin cohorts because of his passive policy . Nikita's passive policy is said to be the reason for his passive stance in Russia .
 Khrushchev is safe as long as he is willing to compromise . The Red Bosses realize a purge would insinuate a shaky government . This is hardly desirable in a dictatorship, says historian .
 This group on Presidium (the ruling body) wishes to do away with the party boss are holdovers from the Stalin era . The Presidium is the Presidium, the party's ruling body .
 They believe in a tougher line or more aggressive approach toward the United States and her allies . The U.S. and its allies say they want to see a tougher approach .
 It should be pointed out that even though this later offensive may take longer, it is advantageous to the communists because it is less dangerous . The communists are less dangerous than the Nazis, they say .
 This agile style has been indicated in the Russian Premier’s speeches, from rockets to rat traps of peaceful coexistence . The agile style of Putin's speeches is indicated in his speeches, including that of Vladimir Putin .
 To America 'peaceful coexistence' can only mean surrender on the installment plan . To America ‘peaceful . coexistence’ means surrender on installment plan. To America it means surrender, say the U.S.
 Mao Tse Tung of Red China (a Stalinist) would assume a greater role in communist circles . Mao would be Mao's successor to Mao's father, Mao's wife, and Mao's daughter . Mao's mother would be a Communist Party leader .
 There would be a closer link between the Soviet and Chinese parties and their varying versions of Marx .
 A greater emphasis would be placed on the Orient as an area for expansion, says President Obama . The president would also place a greater emphasis on the region of China as a destination for expansion .
 President Obama's tough line would be more important in the long run, would be the aftermath of this tough communist line . Even more important for the U.S. is the aftermath, he says .
 It would probably mean the West would return to NATO type military alliance as a defense . The West would probably return to a NATO-style military alliance, CNN says .
 The West is superior to the Red block miliatrily speaking, it can only mean the eventual return to the Khrushchev softer line . Since the West, especially in a common crisis, tightens its contacts and defenses, it is superior .
 James Robertson, then a sophomore at Hinds, was blinded in an automobile accident three years ago . Robertson continues to study after being blinded in a car accident . Robertson is a graduate at the Hinds school .
 He never regained any of his vision, but he has almost overcome his handicap by sheer determination . He has almost regained his vision by overcoming his disability by determination .
 This is the post Stalin and Khrushchev both held before assuming complete leadership of the Soviet Union . The post-Krushchev post was the post post-Stalin post .
 Polyansky, before assuming this position, was president of the Russian federated Soviet Republic . Polyansky was also president of Russia's Federation of Soviet Union .
 He has had executive experience and is reported to be very alert and somewhat popular among the average laymen . He is said to be popular among laymen.
 ‘experts’ pick Krichenko or Kozluv to succeed the aging Khrushchev, but these same experts never thought that the goblet shaped party crasher of Stalin’s entourage would crash the communist party either . This writer realizes that the �
 The future is the plaything of the present, and in dealing with the Soviet Union it is like playing with fire power . The Soviet Union is a powerful force in the world, says David Cameron . It is not the future of the future, says Cameron .
 He hasn't known enemies among the Red ruling clique . What’s more important, he hasn’t any known enemies .
 Oscar winners were in rare form last night . Surprising the 1 viewing audience as well as those who attended .
 Mr Sinatra is no comedian and the show lacked last year’sc. Needless to say, ‘Mr Sinatra’s no comedian.’
 As someone said, Sinatra has a private sense of humor and his jokes are private . Sinatra's joke is private, he said, but Sinatra is private .
 A little nervous at first, he soon relaxed and showed himself as the real pro he is . He soon relaxes and shows himself as a real pro, he said .
 Gregory Peck copped the most coveted award at the Golden Globes last night . Gregory Peck is a long respected Hollywood citizen . He was awarded the best actor of all time in Hollywood .
 Mr Peck won out over Jack Lemmon and the supposed winner, Peter O’Toole .
 Her accent would have won more fans than she already has . Too bad she couldn't have accepted for herself .
 Supporting actor and actress went to the old and the young . Ed Beagley and Patty Duke won the best supporting actress and actress .
 Mr Beagley said a hearty thanks to “agent” “Who had more faith in me than I did,” and Miss Duke only muttered “Thank you” through her tears .
 He started rehabilitation soon after his accident by seeking help from the State Rehabilitation Service for the Blind . He was started on “several crafts, writing, typing, cane travel, and even cooking,” he said .
 He returned to Hinds, graduated, entered Southern and received a B.S. in political science with a minor in psychology . He graduated from Hinds with a major in politics and psychology .
 The political science department chair says Jimmy is "well qualified to accept the responsibilities entailed In a fellowship"
 iA group of “readers” included women of B’Nai Brith, Junior Auxiliary members, and cooperative students . As far as studying is concerned, however, James needed some help . iA readers' suggestions included students and women of the B'
 He takes notes in class, and at test time has someone to write down his answers . At test time, he gives answers which he gives vocally .
 "Because of the support given by my family and so many friends, I can look forward to a useful career and a happy life," she says .
 X performed an autopsy on the Pit's body . X performed the autopsy . X thought the Pitians were Pitians .
 General Speaks On State Rivers FOR QUALITY WITHOUT QUESTION . Gen. Gen. HINDSONIAN: "I am proud of my achievements in the state of America"
 Army Engineer Division, Vicksburg, explains the importance of the Mississippi River . The Mississippi River is one of the most important rivers in America .
 The Lower Mississippi Valley Army Engineer Division discussed flood control and navigation improvements in the Lower Mississippi River . The river is one of the nation's largest navigations channels .
 The watershed program of the Mississippi's tributaries over 145,000 square miles in the South-Central United States . He also explained the watershed program .
 Flood control and navigation, worked through the congressionally established sevenman executive body of the MRC, averages $81 million; and watershed projects, averaged $54 million . Watersage projects, worked by the Corps of Engineers, are the most expensive .
 Work of the commission is carried out through the district engineers of three Corps Districts at Memphis, Vicksburg, and New Orleans .
 He earned his Master’s degree in civil engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.
 Patrick is the under the sun — especially sports, natch. Patrick is known for his colorful quips and quips .
 The Association handbook explains that new circulation records have been set, and new borrowers have appeared . New borrowers have also appeared .
 Appropriations have increased, and new library developments are underway . New library developments have also been announced .
 People are reading and using the accumulated facilities . But most of all they are people reading, using the facilities .
 Hinds librarians surveyed the number of people using the local library . During the first week of April— the peak of the term-paper season —Hinds librarian surveyed the .
 3,147 people came into the library in that time, with the majority being accommodated between 5:30 and 7:30m. during weekdays . The majority of people were accommodated in the library between 5 and 7am .
 In the last five years the use of Hinds’ library has doubled, head librarian Mrs. Mrs. Hinds says .
 The term paper rush comes just before national Library Week, she said .
 Max “Skipper’ Patrick returned to Raymond after retiring from twenty years as Regional Sports Editor for the Kansas City Associated Press . This week, more than 30 years later, he returned to the job .
 Patrick’s newspapering developed early, piddling around the Hinds County Gazette writing space copy for the late Tom Keith, Sr. Patrick's first assignment was to write for Tom Keith Sr.
 Patrick wrote most of the first three or four pages, which Keith Press published free of charge on the condition that he would sell subscriptions . Patrick wrote about the book, which was published by Keith Press .
 Sponsors of campus organizations began supplying news, so the paper became schoolsupported . Sponsors also supplied news to the paper .
 In 1942 he joined AP at Baton Rouge, launching an outstanding newspaper career . From 1939-41 he was Director of Public Information at Mississippi State, and in 1942 joined AP .
 Skipper met and was associated with every kind of sport. For 19 years he was regional director at Kansas City, Kansas City . Skipper was a regional director of Kansas City's sports .
 Thursday nights at Hinds now feature a new addition to the Westland Plaza square dance .
 Co-sponsors Oakes and Polly Rabalais have scheduled square dances in the girls’ gym each Thursday night at 6:00m. Girls’ physical education instructor has been in charge of the event .
 Since 1928 he’s missed only three weekends of football during season . BRANCH OFFICES at WESTLAND and MEADOWBROOK Now Showing ‘RED SHOES’ In Technicolor .
 Baseball Writers’ Most Valuable Player and Cy Young selection committee . Baseball Writer: "i remember one year we left off Ted Williams and picked Nellie Fox"
 Casey Stengel managed the Kansas City Blues, an American Association team . He managed the Blues from the 1940s to the 1960s .
 During his four years at Hinds, from 1928-32 when the college was both high school and junior college, Skipper was bell ringer . During that time, he was bell ringer for Hinds .
 I had more fun at HJC—even if the girls did walk one way and the boys another . The girls walked one way, the boys walked another, and the girls walked another .
 At present he is living with his wife, daughter and grandson at their home in Learned, Learned . At present, he is currently living in Learned .
 Coach Howard Sessums led the Raymond Rustlers to an upset victory over favored Armstrong last Saturday . The Rustlers defeated the Armstrong Rustlers by 19 points in the game .
 Ex-Hinds cagers Gary Carpenter, Harlan Stanley, Johnny Hines, and Johnny Franklin led the General Gas Hustlers . Ex-Indians cagers . Gary Carpenter . Harlan . Stanley . Hines . Johnny Franklin .
 Carpenter was named to the AllStar first team, Barnes and Hines to the seconod team . Carpenter and Barnes were named to first team .
 Percy Boell catapults over bar at IT 6” to rank second in the event . Hinds track jfeam chalked up their second win of the year . Jones Junior College hosted Peikinston and the Eagle unit last week at Ellisville .
 Hinds dominated their hosts by a mere V 2 point in the final event . The Hinds thinclad unit managed to win the match by a narrow 2 point .
 Hinds grabbeed first place slots and three seconds . Jones won all of the five field events the mile run . Hinds grabbed three first places and three second slots .
 Hinds Honey Linda Yelverton flashes a winsome smile as sunny as the days are of late . She is a former member of the Hinds honeymoon club . The club is celebrating its 25th anniversary .
 A Jackson freshman, Linda would be a welcome addition to anybody’s pretty picture of springtime . Linda is a junior at Jackson High .
 Three members of the Eagle unit could not enter action due to lack of competition . Due to lack competition three members were not allowed to take part in action .
 Coach Howard Sessums explained few such matchless meets have been scheduled . All should see action in later contests, coach said .
 Roxie Noblin Ann Stephenson wins 6-0, 6-1 . Maxine Sterling defeats Mildred Sterling in straight sets . Ann Stephenson doubles up 6-2, Mildred .
 This is the artist’s conception of the new $300,000 building being built on the Hinds campus . The artist's conception was planned for years . Also featured: "SUMMER AND SMOKE"
 Two patios will divide the wings of the structure, which will house a library, barbershop and student center for vocational department . The wings will be divided into two patios .
 A covered walkway will accompany each wing of the building . Though one roof covers the building, the building's roof will be covered .
 The award was given for “excellent” work during first semester this school year . The award is given for 'excellent' work in the first semester .
 Features rated a perfect score, with comments given on the variety and timeliness of news-features and straight features . Features rated perfect score .
 For accolades in printing, staffers share credit with publishers Keith Press in Raymond .
 Only one other college in the nation shared the honor with Hinds . Medalist is equivalent to All-American in the ACP contest .
 The contest is widely recognized as one of the most rigid newspaper rating services . It is also extensively known for its service to universities and senior colleges .
 Miss Hinds Junior College Contest begins May 14 . HiSteppers director: Participation has begun for the contest . Contest will be held in May .
 Workmen last week began construction on Hinds’ $300,000 vocational units . Units set for fall Occupancy . 12 coeds will be selected for the final contest .
 Hindsonian Staffers Aim High At Weekend College Press Meet . Hindsonian staffers hope to again capture the top newspaper award of Mississippi Junior College Press Association .
 The HINDSONIAN is again entering all divisions of the contest . Last year's winners swept first place trophies in all but two categories in all categories .
 Miss Marshall attended the National Association of Women Deans and Counselors April 3-8, and the American Guidance and Personnel Association April 8-11 . Miss Marshall collected ideas which will have a direct influence on Hinds students .
 Both meetings stressed the dormitory as a supplement to the classroom, she said .
 Other plans, some involving student responsibilities, will be presented to the administration .
 Both meetings emphasized educating the average student instead of focusing all attention on the exceptional .
 She indicated Hinds vocational department and technical division as examples of leadership in this new concept of education . She said Hinds was an example of leadership exemplifying the new concept .
 Friday afternoon will open the meetings and later in the session will conduct election of officers . Editor Joe White, MJCPA president, will lead the meetings .
 The Association includes all 14 junior colleges in Mississippi . The Association meets biannually .
 The contest and annual meeting are staged according to constitutional by-laws designed three years ago . The contest is staged in accordance with the constitution of the organization .
 Other features of the meeting will be the speakers, symposiums, and seminars . The meeting will also include speakers and symposons .
 The Hindsonian captured the best newspaper, news, feature, and cartoon awards at last year’s spring meeting .
 The group of 14 students will be accompanied by Kent Prince, sponsor of the paper, and Mrs. Mrs. Prince .
 Circle K annual district convention will be held this weekend in Shreveport, Louisiana . About 18 local members and the two sweethearts will attend the convention .
 The group will leave Hinds about 12:30m. According to club president Boyd McPhail, the club will arrive at Hinds .
 Club sponsor Jack Treloar will accompany members and sweethearts Hilda Bullock and Ann Stephenson . Several members will take cars, and sponsor Jack will accompany them .
 The convention, with “Education for Freedom” as theme, will be in Shreveport-Youree Hotel . The convention will be held at the hotel .
 Featured speaker for the occasion is Jim Matthews of North Carolina, International President of Circle K McPhail . The program will include a barbeque, meetings, and banquet .
 The purpose of the convention is for new members to gain greater knowledge of Circle K activities and administrational work . Financial worries usually focused on large construction projects, he said .
 This is the first time a major structure at Hinds will be built entirely by workers other than professional contractors . The first major structure will be constructed entirely by non-professionals .
 A separate library, barbershop, and student center for vocational students will occupy other portions of the building . The building will also have a student center, a library, and a bar .
 A grill-like dispenses will be included in the student center . Walter Gibbes, vocational coordinator, said “in all probabilities” a grill-style dispense will be in the center .
 He explained that the building’s srtucture will allow for additional wings and extensions in the future .
 Eventually the entire vocational school will consist of new buildings and machinery, he said . The school will be expanded into a state-run vocational school .
 One roof will cover the building, a covered walkway will divide each wing . The building will be covered by covered walkways . It will have a roof covering each side .
 As qualified Title VIII Division, electronics communications, electronics industrial, aircraft maintenance technology technology, and drafting technology will have government aid for onehalf machine cost and one-half instruction cost .
 Already the operational area for the building has been cleared and plotted . The operational area of the building will be cleared and plotting .
 Last week truckloads of cement from Jackson were poured into elongated moulds to form the foundation for construction . Truckloads from Jackson poured into moulds last week .
 Plans for the building were begun several years ago when a government program was initiated to help colleges build vocational units . The building will be the first vocational unit in the state .
 Hinds petitioned for aid and went to Washington to confer with officials, but help fell through . Hinds: "Help fell through. Help fell through" Hinds says he hopes to continue to work on the project .
 President McLendon explained that in retrospect it was good that the early program did not develop, because the buildings and facilities would now be obsolete . McLendon: In retrospect, it is good that it was not developed, because it would have been obsolete .
 Plans for the E-shaped unit were laid three years ago, McLendon says . Many authorities from industry and education were consulted, he says .
 In many respects this class seems to be quite representative of most graduating classes everywhere . The class of this year's graduating class is a typical of most graduates everywhere .
 The point to be reckoned here is there is an astounding difference between the percentage of boys that graduate and the percentage that girls that graduate . The point of contention is that there is a huge difference between boys and girls .
 It is the universal opinion that girls are slightly mentally superior to boys . These figures are not abnormal, for it is not abnormal .
 Men are destined from the time of birth to carry on the affairs of the world, says the author . Men will carry on with the world's affairs, says author .
 The reason for such a low percentage on the part of the boys cannot be pin-pointed, it is not clear . It is not known why the lack of success in the boys' games has been so low .
 Six weeks of school remain and students are beginning to feel the effects of a slack year . Students are feeling the effects .
 Reports indicate there is a general rush to college libraries at the end of each semester all over the nation . Reports indicate that students rush to libraries at end of the semester .
 Virginia Riggs commented last week on the fluctuation of library visits . Library visits have increased in recent years .
 Students flocking to library facilities only the week before National Library Week . Students flocked to libraries during the holiday week .
 Of course, that would not solve the problem of student procrastination . "I'm not going to go to school. I'm going to work. I want to work with my students," she says .
 Most people say nothing can't be done about it, and we're inclined to agree . Most people think nothing can be done with it, but we're not sure .
 The fault lies within each student, individually, and he cannot be made to do'what is objectionable', says the head of state .
 Possibly she is one of those who waits until the last min-i ute to get things done . Possibly she's one of the those who wait until the end of the miniute . She is not always getting things done.
 She did say she may spend most of the summer getting in her homework for this session . However, she did say that she may be spending the summer doing homework .
 America is at the crossroads of her civilization . W -CURRENT EVENTS “Signposts For The 60’s” -By RALPH .
 At the end of one road lies complete centralization in the hands of the national government . The government is centralizing its power in the country .
 Belva Watkins, Danny Evans, Viki Hazzlerigg, Klare Parker, Dawn McNeil, Jerry Cogell, Jerry Pogell and Fred Peyton are among the panelists .
 We take a sharp left at Harvard, Harvard, and there it is a vast wasteland of government controls, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 On our right, we see the bones of the Tenth Amendment and the skeleton of States Rights . We see the skeletons of the Tenth Amendment and States Rights on our right . On the left, the right is the right and the right, the states' right .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday .
 The legislative represents the will of the people, the executive represents the government, the judicial represents the law . What do we, our generation of life’s tourists and U.S. travelers, de-visitors, say?
 Most modern politicians merely milk our sacred cows; Kennedy leads them off to the slaughter . Kennedy leads the slaughter of the sacred cows, Kennedy says . Kennedy is not only a politician but a human rights activist .
 Services attended by 5,000 were held Monday at Portsmouth Navy Yard for the sailors and civilians who went down with the sub . The sub went down in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 At the same time these lost men were being honored, other men like them were trying to unravel the strange mystery surrounding their death . At the time, these men were also being honored .
 Only a few days ago the doomed men were alive and readying for their trip to the Atlantic in the recently “overhauled” Thresher . The doomed men are still alive and ready to make their final journey .
 The men carried out their duties as usual and, as the time approached to ""test,"" the accompanying ship Skylark moved in closer . The crew of the ship moved closer to each other in preparation for the test .
 As usual new submarines or overhauled ones are accompanied by a sister ship for their first dive . New submarines are usually accompanied by sister ships for the dive .
 This is precautionary action taken by the navy to insure the lives of the men and to observe the new sub in action . The sub is being used as a training exercise to ensure the men's safety .
 More important the precautionary ship keeps in contact in case of trouble . More important is that the crew keep in contact .
 We try to put into words what a little boy has already decided about his daddy, decided and accepted . We tried to put it in words: "We're not sure what it is like to have a baby with a daddy"
 The Washington rocking chair will be quite busy this August when the first lady gives birth to her third child .
 White House announcements regarding the approaching birth were released Monday . The baby is expected to be born in April .
 Grover Cleveland has a presidential wife had a baby while living in the White House . The president's wife had the baby while he was in the presidency .
 The Hindsonian is published weekly, except during holiday and examination periods, at Keith Press, Raymond, Miss., by journalism students at Hinds Junior College . Kennedy is reported to have conceited all official engagements . Kennedy was reported to be conceited .
 The first lady plans to spend much of the summer on Cape Cod . The new baby is expected to be born in Washington, D.C.
 Two other Kennedy brothers an going to be passing out cigars als< this summer .
 Since no controversial or comment-worthy subjects were raging this week which Hindsonian policy would permit publishing, the editorial staff turned to a relatively unknown subject the Metallics Metal Act . The act met with a wide range of reactions from many thinking college students .
 David Jones, Vicksburg sophomore, mubled, "I don't know enough about thfi subject to make a reliable answer"
 Mike Hendrix, Jackson freshman asserted, “Most of the metal in the United States is bought from other countries’s . The metal is most commonly imported in the U.S., Hendrix said .
 George Tannous, Vicksburg sophomore, mused, “Well, actually, I don t think it will stop the depression of the economy.” He said he doesn’t think it’s a good idea .
 Congress may do some foolish things, but they're yet to pass a Metallics Metal Act . Congress may be foolish things but they are yet to do so .
 Hinds students have already registered disap proval . Hinds has a history of disapal . The Hinds School of Technology students have been in touch with Hinds since 2003 .
 Northside Dormitory joined ranks of other feminine dorms today with the completion of a spacious sun deck . Psych... psychotic-neurotic Pavlov... bell... lunch whew...pause take a break... things go better with Coke .
 In the past occupants of the for-sophomores-only dorm have had to track across campus to either Main or Westside to partake of the sun . The dorm is a dorm for students only students .
 The campus maintenance crew recently completed a fourplex apartment building for faculty now being occupied . Campus maintenance crew is in charge of the project .
 Workmen Took time before beginning another faculty home project to supply a lacking Northside with a sun porch .
 The deck is 16 by 32 feet, and can accommodate approximately 25 girls . Located on the original section of the dorm, the deck can be seen by 25 girls at the time . The deck has a 16-by-32 feet deck .
 Steps from the old science building are being used to reach the first level . A small hand rail similar to the fire escape at Westside can support sun-bathers to the top level .
 Treloar explained that the deck has been in the planning for more than a year . A roof garden covering the entire original portion of the original portion has a great amount of weight .
 Fences around the sun porches on Main and Westside were added last week . Fences are not meant to protect girls from falls, but to protect them from falling .
 Completion of the sun decks is part of an $800 project which, when finished, will include a large enclosed patio in front of the campus infirmary . When finished, the patio will include an enclosed patio .
 This patio will extend from the end of Northside to the street corner . The patio will be supplied with chairs, benches, and tables, Treloar said .
 IRC Group Makes Plans For Varied Year-End Socials International Relations Club in a business meeting last Wednesday . President Ralph Hemphill appointed a committee of Jeff Boler, chairman, Jimmy Chandler, and Dawn McNeil .
 Displays will be open to the public Saturday morning during judging, Frank Stephenson, district chairman and Hinds physics instructor announced .
 Only fifth through twelfth graders who placed in their local Fair will enter here . Only fifth and twelfth grade students who placed at their local fair will enter .
 The 48 place-winners will progress to the state fair next weekend at Ole Miss . The state fair will be held in Mississippi next weekend .
 Over 20 judges from colleges and industries will make the selections, he said .
 They will judge on creative ability, scientific thought, applied principles and processes, technical skill, thoroughness, clarity, and dramatic value . Judges will also judge on creativity and scientific thought .
 Science Fair is sponsored annually by the Mississippi Academy of Science . The Mississippi Science Fair takes place in Mississippi .
 In lieu of the regular evening service, the concert will feature selections of musical periods from baroque to contemporary . The concert will be held at the end of the service .
 Plans call for several more concert trips and perhaps a spring concert at Hinds . Plans for more concerts are in place .
 Arrangements have been made to record sacred numbers, including selections sung at the State Festival and at the Mississippi Music Educators Association meeting .
 A small number of these albums will be available to the public for about $3 each, Reeves says .
 Cartoonist plus general artist plus shirt designer equals oceanologist . Edmond Alexander, Jackson freshman, is a general artist, general artist and shirt designer . He hopes to be an oceanologist at Jackson .
 Edmond had serious thoughts of majoring in art, but once in college turned to science . Edmond was majored in art at school in Clinton, Clinton .
 Though he has never worked professionally, he has been editor of the Clinton annual and on the art staff of annual and newspaper . He has never been a professional artist .
 Last week he drew the Hindsonian’s editorial cartoon and, if editors have anything to say, he will do many more before the school year ends .
 Cartoonist, caricaturist and shirt designer Edmond Alexander applies his simple magic marker with sometimes amazing and clever results . Alexander uses his magic marker to create his own cartoon style .
 Peggy Wilbanks and Sandra Parkison will present piano and voice recital Thursday, April 18, at 7:30m. in the Music Auditorium .
 Miss Parkison, a mezzo-sporano, will sing “Lasciatemi morire” Monteverde, “Quando sara quel di,” Tenaglia; “Sento nel core” Scarlatti;
 Howard Wilbanks of Carthage, is a sophomore music major studying piano with Mrs. Wilbanks . Mrs. Howard is a junior at Carthage High School .
 Miss Parkison is a freshman music education major with emphasis in voice . She is the daughter of Mr and Mrs. Parkison .
 The recital was re-scheduled for Thursday after postponement last week because of unecheduled holidays . Recital was rescheduled for last week after postponing last week .
 Chief instructor with Southern Bell Telephone Company speaks to Hinds Secretarial Procedures class . Spivey: Use the telephone effectively in business and social life in business, social life .
 In opening remarks, Miss Spivey emphasized the importance of the telephone as a medium of communication in business and social activities . She also emphasized the need to use the telephone to communicate with people in business .
 Students viewed a film contrasting the confusion created in an office from answering calls inefficiently and the smooth operation ^resulting when all personnel are trained in the telephone’s proper use . The film was presented to students at the University of Cambridge .
 Miss Spivey concluded the program with a recording depicting the “man-with-a-cigar-in-his-mouth voice” The high-pitched shrill voice, the mechanical voice and the affected voice are examples .
 The average time required to paint such a shirt is 15 minutes . The shirts are usually bulky sweatshirts .
 Beverly Tadlock, Pearl Sophomore, brought home 46th and 47th twirling trophies last Saturday . Tadlock won the Miss Twirlette of Mississippi for 1063 and the Hinds County Championship Twirling Contest .
 Beverly explained that her former instructor, Ella Mae Belcher, insisted that she enter the contest . Beverly explained how she entered the contest because she was a former instructor .
 Beverly instructs twirling and dancing for the Jackson City Recreational Department at Battlefield Club House, Level Woods Park, and JC Park . Beverly teaches twirling, dancing and twirling .
 Beverly Tadlock, Beverly became interested in twirling and bands early in her' life . She was chosen mascot of the Pearl Band during her first and second years of school . Tadlock is a member of the Tadlock family .
 Since attending Hinds she has been a feature twirler for the Eagle Marching Band . She is a member of the band at Hinds .
 Beverly Twirlette won the title in 1960 . She also won the honor in 1960. Saturday’s event marked her second time to be chosen Miss Twerlette .
 A large spotted instructive if they could evaluate dog was found and the only remaining problem was consent of campus officials to bring the dog on campus . Pore Ole Door Licked .
 The committee was sympathetic ^ and felt that to ""see Spot run"" was Jg indeed important . The committee felt that "spot run" was important .
 There would be a number of questions to be answered before permission could be granted . However, there would be many more questions before permission was granted .
 Committee members also questioned the good taste of unclad animals on a co-educational campus . Committee members wondered if indeed this isn’t an injustice to the dog .
 It was last Thursday, not a particularly fine Thursday, but patterned after all Thursdays before it—then fate snapped her powerful fingers . "It was not a very fine Thursday," she says .
 The music building door fell from its majestic perch, landing with a collapsible thud . With the mute snap, the door fell with a thud, making this Thursday a Thursday among Thursdays .
 Hitchcock would relish the mystery of it, for not only the birth of the door’s birth but its death was a mystery . The door's birth and its death were a mystery, for Hitchcock .
 Carpenters were ordered to supply the music building with a second story door that opened to the outside . They were probably long forgotten and nameless carpenters .
 The white four-paned glass door has stood plastered against the music building for years, seemingly afraid of falling . No matter what the reason, it has stood in the same place for years .
 Or it just might be that it contemplated suicide all these years and only Thursday took the final step . Or it may have contemplated suicide for years .
 The coed standing under the door when it fell doesn’t know because she never looked up . She’s used to falling doors . The door fell on the ground .
 Other witnesses, however, noticed the blank wall that stood back to back with the door . Other witnesses said it was a blank wall .
 More observant witnesses, however, noticed something else — something on the wall . The incident occurred in the early hours of Monday morning .
 For years they must have tediously built their little nest, anticipating just such a day as Thursday when they would feel fresh air fqr the first time . For years, the nest was filled with hope and anticipation for the first day .
 Dirtdauber conferences must have been held to plan the expedition that would build the nest so big and protrude it so far as to push the door forward and down .
 Only the nasty little I dirtdaubers know for sure . Perhaps it I wasn’t suicide after all after all . But I murder . . . I murder. Perhaps it was suicide after after all, perhaps it was .
 Games are scheduled for today and tomorrow at 3:30 on the southside field . The games are scheduled to be held at 3,30 on Saturday and Sunday .
 Athletics have always been considered a primarily male diversion, yet on H/nds campus the female sex is entering the sports scene via archery, tennis, and golf . S “ ba “ ing Practi “ the hea^S .
 In all the dormitories such terms as par — bogey — and putt are becoming common talk after study hours in the lady bull sessions . In the dorms such terms are common talk in the ladies' rooms .
 Each afternoon, girls in physical education classes spend an hour knocking the miniature balls across the lawn behind the gym .
 American scholastic round are items of interest to the lassies engaged in this series of classes . The lassies are engaged in a series of English classes .
 Tennis, also gaining as a campus sport, has grown to the extent of a team that represents the college against various schools in the area . Tennis has grown as a team to represent the college .
 Coached by Frank Stephenson, the unit recently won their first match of the session against Southwest .
 Patsy Mussleman, Elsa Brewer, Shirley Morris, Karen Perry, Roxie Noblin, Ann Stephenson, Sandra Weaver, and Barbara Clack are among others .
 Co-Lin totaled 32 3-4 points while Perkinston netted 31 . Perkinst totaled 31.3 points in the meet .
 Hinds beat their opponents 11 of 15 times in the first place slot . Hinds scored their fourth straight win of the season with the win .
 The Hinds track team tallied their third straight victory against Copiah Lincoln Junior College at Wes son last week .
 The Eagle cinder team held their hosts to only 47 in the one-sided action . Accumulating an impressive total of 87 points, the Eagle team held the hosts to just 47 .
 Of the 15 events Hinds copped 12 first place slots while Co-Lin grabbed only three . Hinds won 12 first-place slots in 15 events . The event was held in a joint event between Hinds and co-Lin .
 Winning for Hinds was the 440yard relay team of Jimmy and Jerry Clark, Johnny Hagan and Larry Jones . The relay team won the 440 yard relay .
 Jerry Clark won the broad jump, while Glen Yarbrough led the shot put action . Jerry Clark also won the men's shot put, with a win .
 Although my son is a college freshman, I am glad to say that In Wit Tlf ° dto chmb up on my lap and have a heartW i h ° n t , hmgs are troubling him .
 From the time he was a little tiny baby he always said he wanted to be a fireman . From the start of his life, he always wanted to become a firefighter, he said .
 'It is a full schedule for the young man, and that, in fact, we talked about when last he climbed upon my lap. It is exactly what we discussed about when he climbed on my lap,' he said .
 He complained that every bit of his time is taken up with his major requirements . He complained about his time being taken up by his major needs . He also complained that he has a lot of work to do with .
 They are each Top e bo.f h a PUre White filter and come in soft pa c k or Flip . Each filter comes with a soft, easy-to-make filter .
 We were going to take up a topic you are starLwifl . We were meant to talk about your busy academic life .
 Man is usually defined as a tool-making animal, but I nersonalty do not find this definition entirely satisfactory . Let us of man hhnilf"" 1 ^ P '° ° f a11 -anthropology, the study of the study .
 A fmf yPe ’ f ° r lnstan ce was made by an 86-year-old tiger . Still, when you come to a really complicated tool, you can be fairly sure it's made by a tiger .
 McLendon has called a faculty meeting for April 25 to explain the new requirements of accreditation for the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools . McLendon: The new requirements for accreditation will be explained .
 This new qualitative standard is exemplified in the new teaching requirements . The new requirements are exemplified by the new requirements for teaching in schools .
 20% of junior college teaching faculty members must possess the equivalent to three years of study beyond a bachelor’s degree in their particular field .
 An institution is to distribute those with more advanced work proportionately among the various departments . An institution was to distribute . more advanced . work proportionally . among the departments .
 Hinds will have no problem complying with new regulations, McLendon says . McLendon: Hinds has no problem with complying with the new regulations .
 The Hindsonjian is most outstanding junior college newspaper in Missisj sippi for the sixth year in a row . The honors sweep of MJCPA, meeting at Perkinston, marked the third major disTechnical Drafting Displays, Symposium Scheduled at Hinds
 The 1 Hindsonian also captured several other individual awards in this year’s MJCPA competition . The 1Hindsonian won several individual awards .
 At a total cost of approximately $120,000 the Data Processing course at Hinds will be expanded this summer into a full two year curriculum . The two-year curriculum will cost approximately $100,000 .
 One hundred copies of the 12-inch disc will be available through reserve sale, Reeves said .
 Sacred numbers and selections sung at State Festival and at the Mississippi Music Educators Association were recorded for the disc .
 The record is “a very good example of the degree of excellence that the choir has attained,” Reeves said .
 At the first of the year Reeves had noted that the potential of this year’s choir was greater than any choir he had directed . Reeves had said that this year's choir could be the greatest he directed .
 Sunday, April 28, will present another in a series of sacred concerts for area churches . The choir will perform a sacred concert for churches in the area .
 The group will perform in the Methodist church in Madison at 7:30m. March 2 . They will again present a varied program covering the definite periods of music .
 Curriculum Committee approves final approval of final approval before going into effect . The program will go into effect April 15 .
 Key punchers and other business equipment will run the figure up about $22,000 more . Key puncher and other equipment will cost the figure more than $20,000 .
 The curriculum includes such technical courses as basic computing machines and electro-mechanical, including others for a total of 18 hours first semester .
 Data processing and introduction to programming systems are two of the courses composing 17 hours for the second semester . Data processing, programming systems and programming systems will be required for the course .
 First semester of the sophomore year will offer the students 18 hours, including computer programming and statistics for Data Processing . Data Processing will offer computer programming, statistics and computer programming .
 The final semesters work totals 16 hours and includes computer programming II and data processing field project . The final 16 hours of work is 16 hours for the students .
 The program will consist of 69 semester hours divided into four semesters and spread over two years . The program is a two-year program that will take place in four quarters .
 This course is the first of its kind in the Mississippi Junior College circuit . It will serve the whole state . This course will be the first to serve the entire state .
 A Technical drafting display opens Monday afternoon in the academic building, marking the beginning of the first state wide tour of its kind . The first state-wide tour of the kind will begin Monday afternoon .
 The exhibit includes comprehensive studies of ten professional drafting fields and an array of modern drafting equipment . It includes architectural, structural, medical, and civil drafting fields .
 A symposium of professional draftsmen will close Tuesday evening . A special symposium will also close the session .
 Exhibition will continue all day Tuesday until symposium begins at 5:45m. in the main auditorium . Open in Room 14 Monday after 1m., the exhibition will continue Tuesday .
 Association hopes to attract more girls into drafting field . Association hopes, through the tour, to attract girls into the drafting field. Association hopes more girls will be drafted .
 Elected Treasurer tinction presented the Hindsonian this semester . The Hindsonian was presented by the Treasurer of the University of North Carolina .
 Others were the Medalist Award — best in class nationwide, shared by only one other paper in the country— from Columbia Scholastic Press Association .
 Hinds junior college newspaper in Mississippi wins gold medal for sixth year running . Hinds is home to the award-winning newspaper .
 Individual citations snared at MJCPA meet were for sports and student-drawn cartoons . Individual citations included sports and cartoons .
 Joe White, HINDSONIAN editor, received a $250 James Rutledge grant to Ole Miss .
 Bettye Simmons, associate editor, was awarded a $600 assistantship in the Ole Miss department of journalism . She was awarded the award in March .
 Linda Byrd, Hindsonian associate editor, and Dwayne Cox, business manager, were each awarded a $200 grant for the fall quarter at Southern . Linda Byrd was given the award for her work at the Southern Center .
 Danny Evans, Jackson freshman and Hindsonian Supplement editor, lost southern vice-presidency by one vote . Evans is a freshman at Jackson University . He is also a junior at Jackson High School .
 East Central Junior College’s Tom Tom placed second in general competition for overall excellence . Tom Tom was placed second overall in overall excellence competition . East Central junior college's Tom Tom came second overall .
 Citations in feature writing, editorials, and news stories are spread throughout the 14member association . Citations are spread across the country and around the world .
 Associate editors Simmons and Byrd accepted awards for cartoon editor Marcelle McLendon and sports editor Jim Bonney . The editors also accepted a sports editor's sports editor award .
 Judges for this year’s competition were Ray Furr, journalism instructor at Mississippi State College for Women . Mary Anne Myers* editor of the Spectator at MSCW . Gus Anderson, editor of Keesler News, was also a banquet speaker .
 The annual conference was attended by 14 Hinds students and Kent Prince, advisor to the newspaper . The conference was held by students from Hinds High School .
 ‘The time to read is now, not hereafter.’ The author of the book says that the time is now .
 Never put off till tomorrow the book you can turn in without a fine today . The book can be turned in without paying a fine without a charge .
 This is National Library Week, and in many libraries over the country, overdue books may be turned in without a fine . National library week is celebrated in libraries across the country .
 Students and teachers alike will flock through its doors in search of more knowledge . It will be open to students and teachers from across the globe .
 The library will serve students well—if the books are there . Whether this knowledge is for a term paper, for class discussion, for a report, or for personal curiosity, it will serve them well .
 We should realize that the books we have overdue are valuable tools for a researcher . We should also realize that we have a long list of books overdue are useful .
 If ever there were an appropriate time to release overdue books, it is now, it's now . The books are overdue and overdue, but not overdue .
 These men began drawing possibly for the purpose of preserving ideas and ideals . These men may have been drawn to preserve ideas, ideals .
 Through the centuries processes of the written word have evolved into a highly skilled journalism field, that of journalism .
 When the word journalism is mentioned today, one usually thinks of a newspaper . This is probably because newspapers are present everywhere, and newspapers are everywhere .
 On Hinds campus the student newspaper is a news media dedicated to serving, firstly, the students and, secondly, the institution . Hinds is the largest university newspaper in the world .
 When a story is written, the editors must consider all sides of a question with this in mind . This is especially true in the United States .
 Persons not connected with a journalistic staff can not feel the sense of responsibility that is naturally tagged with writing a story or stating an opinion . People not connected to a journalism staff can't feel the responsibility of writing or stating opinion .
 Our editorial page is dedicated to presenting views of students . Only such opinions are printed on this page .
 If students feel their newspaper is not carrying out its duty fully or in the best manner possible, they have a method of explaining their views in letters to the editor, rather than personal complaints to staff members or administrative personnel .
 "I ain’t never done nobody no harm. I’m sittin’ over here in Parchman Farm," he says . "I’s never done anybody no harm," he adds .
 Mose Allison may agree that "shootin' my wife" ain't too much, but Mississippi officials think differently . Allison may not agree that shooting his wife is too much .
 In fact, there is an institution up in the delta that houses just such opinionated people . The institution is located in the Delta .
 Sociology classes visited Parchman Prison to learn about the facilities for lawbreakers . Miss Susan Brown, the sponsor of the sociology classes, visited the prison .
 The most surprising thing was the students' disillusionment in prison housing . The students were disillusioned with prison housing, according to the study .
 “Black Annie’s still tops in discipline . Surprising also is the fact that ‘Annie’ is still top of discipline .
 Students were corrected when referring to her as a “whip” —she is supposedly only a ‘strap” j This then is supposed to straighten j out trouble makers and make them more responsible citizens .
 Only as large as the smallest bathroom, it is completely dark and has had as many as 20 guests at one time . The only bathroom in the house is dark and dark .
 The prison is seemingly well run and the prisoners’ natural needs are satisfied, says the author .
 Hinds students were treated to a performance by one of the Negro bands, conducted by a state choral employee . The performance was conducted by the state's choral employees .
 Tax cuts versus tax stability is the discussion topic presently most common on capital hill . When one of the Hinds delegation asked if the band could play “Hit the Road, Jack” ... a humorous Louis Armstrong type answered “I wish we could hit the road, Jack �
 Wilber Mills, chairman of the House Committee dealing with taxes, is expected to run the Kennedy tax reform bill through the mill . The Kennedy tax bill would be a major overhaul of the tax code .
 Congress is due to take some bite out of the government's bark for revenue . Regardless of the fate of the administration’s proposal, congress will take a bite out .
 Previous proposals have seeped through the halls of congress and crawled through cloakroom committees, only to be tabled . Previous proposals were passed through cloakrooms committees, but have been tabled.
 This time the initial bill comes from the White House, though, and has an air of urgency about it . The initial bill is from the House of Representatives, but it has an urgency .
 President Kennedy has long promised tax reform, but not necessarily in the Kennedy form . Tax reform is needed, and there is little doubt that it is needed . President Kennedy promised it in the 1960s, but it's not in the form of Kennedy .
 In 1952, the average American paid $65 a year out of his income to support the government . The average American would have to pay $65 per year to support government .
 In Mississippi the cost of government to the individual was $92 last year, or $21 below the national average . In Mississippi, the cost is $92 less than national average of $21 .
 To back up their point they rely on the theory of increasing cost of government . To support their point, the government says it is increasing the cost of the government .
 This theory is based on the fact that as our population increases it becomes more interrelated and dependent on the government . As our population grows, it will become more dependent on our government, the theory says .
 The tax rate per person has risen 43. percent over this same period, or almost three times the population rate of growth . While in the last 10 years our population has increased 15. percent, the tax rates per person have risen 43 . percent .
 Despite this rise in government income the national, state, and local debts are still rising . Most alarming of all is the fact that despite this rise of income, the national debt is still rising.
 The obvious conclusion is that we are spending money we do not have j for things we could get along withI out. We should not spend money on things we don't have .
 Walter Heller, chairman of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers, claims that a tax cut plus a big increase in the size of the deficit will spark an income upturn in the United States . Heller: A tax cut and a big hike in the deficit would spark an
 The scheme would not or could not lift the lid of inflation and destroy overseas confidence in the dollar, while at home could it not cause the businessman to lose confidence in economy and not expand .
 The only practical approach to the problem seems to be a spending cut by Washington as well as a tax cut . The only way to solve the problem is to cut spending and cut taxes .
 Heller argues that the economy needs government spending since it is one of America’s biggest customers . Heller argues government spending is needed to boost the economy . Heller: Government spending is necessary for America's economy .
 If this beso, it is high time for a reform in government spending as well as a good time for tax reform, says Simon Tisdall .
 Russell Herrington, baritone, and Donna Breitling, soprano, in voice recital Monday April 29 . Hinds department of music to present fifth in series of recitals .
 Staff photographer Danny Fazekas, staff photographer, has secretly taken a photograph, blown up its dimensions, and reproduced it for the paper .
 Students may obtain entry blanks from page three of this issue if they think they have correctly guessed the identity of the picture . Students can obtain blanks to fill in the blank blank space .
 These entry blanks must be filled out in front of a HINDSONIAN staff member in the student publications office before noon Thursday .
 This entry must be filled out according to school time and correct to the nearest minute . This entry is a written version of this article by CNN.com/Heroes .
 No paper staff member or instructors are eligible to enter the contest . The contest will only be limited to paper staff members .
 If no one guesses the correct entry for this week, the contest will be continued with a new picture, Fazkas said . Contest will be at 7:30m. in the music auditorium . If no-one guesses correct entry, a new photo will be added to the
 Herrington, a sophomore music education major, is music director for Richland Methodist Church of Plain, Plain .
 Herrington plans to attend Mississippi College next year . Herrington of Jackson, Mississippi, is a junior at Mississippi College .
 Glenda Milner, Jackson sophomore, doesn’t seem to mind wet weather at all . The Jackson sophomore doesn't seem to care about wet weather .
 Circle K wins two awards from the j and the club as a group won the fourth annual district convention in travel award . Circle K members placed third in oratorical contest, returned with two awards .
 Students who guess the contents of photograph may win two free 45p.m. records of their choice . Students can also win free records of choice of choice .
 On page 3 of this issue is an official entry blank . If fiHed in correctly and returned to a Hindsonian staffer before noon tomorrow, the blank will be an eligible entry .
 Eugenia Stogner, Tylertown freshman, elected president of Modern Language Club for 1963-64 . Dianne Abernathy, freshman from Vicksburg, has been chosen vice-president and program chairman .
 The club agreed to postponed elections of a secretary and a reporter . The club at that time agreed to postpone elections of the secretary .
 Program for meeting consited of a taste of France, Spain and Mexico . Program for the meeting was held in Mexico and France .
 Outgoing president Bettye Simmons appointed a committee to plan the annual spring outing . Outgoing Simmons appointed the committee .
 A report will be presented to members at the next scheduled meeting of the council .
 The group returned with new ideas and projects for the coming year, president Boyd McPhail said .
 McPhail. Easterwood, Steve Erwin, John Fitzgerald, Jack Herring, David Jenkins, Woody May, Billy Joe Montgomery, Jack McCaskill, Marcell McLendon, Mike Oliver, Fred Peyton, Clyde Pullen, Chris Sparkman, Vaughn Varnado,
 Hinds show band and an aggregation of Hi-Steppers will open the first annual Spring Festival of Talent April 26 in Jackson City .
 The Festival, sponsored by the Jackson Federation of Women's Clubs/ will featul| entertainers from over Mississiplu in a benefit performance for the Jackson Occupational Training Center for the Blind . The Festival will be held in Jackson, Mississippi .
 tentative plans call for the Hinds group to present their complete floor show including the ""mambo,” ""modern jazz,’ and ""grand exit” at which the group is particularly adept .
 As in previous performances this year, the fast paced numbers will feature colorful and assorted properties, Mrs. Mrs. Gwyneth .
 Bee said there will be new, flourescent costumes at the festival .
 Other talent scheduled to perform include Miss Mississippi, Miss Junior Mississippi, pianists, quartets, and contortionists . Other talent set to perform is Miss Junior Miss Mississippi and Miss Miss Miss Mississippi .
 Campus Invaded By High Schools For Track, Science Fair, Tests . Campus has been the animated scene of high school events including track meets, piano recitals, a science fair, and the fearsome American College Testing exams .
 Winners in District IV Science Fair were announced in another part of the Hinds building complex . Scores of seniors labored over the ACT queries which are required for entrance to the school .
 Joan Lynch and Rex Tatum will perform at 7; 30 in the auditorium of the music building . Joan Lynch will be joined by Tatum and Lynch in the audience at 7.30 .
 Performing in the general recital will be Sandra Parkison, Gary Kea, Carol Puckett, Peggy Wilbanks, Nancy Smith, Peggy Smith, Henri Lou Coleman, Peggy Smallwood, and Barbara Parkman .
 Miss Parkison will play Chopin’s “Nocturne in E Minor;” Kea, Rumanian Folk Dances by Bartok; Miss Puckett, “Intermezzo in A major,” by Brahms; Miss Wil
 Miss Parkman will sing Musett’s waltz from La Boheme by Puccini and “Deh nieni, non tar dar” from Le Nozze di Figaro by Mozart .
 In the past few weeks track season has initiated both the Capital Athletic Conference and the Magnolia Athletic Conference on Hinds popular “red dog’s track . Hinds track season started on August 1 .
 Coach Joe Renfroe has announced that even more high school meets are slated for the late spring season . Coach JoeRenfroe announced that more meets will be held in late spring .
 District IV high school piano contest held on April 1, 2015 .
 Sixty entrants were arranged in several categories, among them five solo, duo-piano, and duet contests . The contest was held in New York City .
 Entrants appeared from high schools in Jackson, Vicksburg, Yazoo City, and Clinton . Entrants include high schools from Jackson and Vicksburgh .
 Swarming in a range of transportation from horses to model-T’s, they lit erally took over, routing students and teachers alike from classroom and meeting hall . Students and teachers were routing from classroom to meeting hall, meeting hall.
 The 2000 boys starters are expected to graduate from high school this summer . They will be the first of the 2000 starters to graduate .
 A Hinds student takes advantage of free access to the nine-hole golf course which surrounds Raymond Lake . The course is located in Raymond Lake, near the town of Raymond Lake.
 Also available for student use is a spacious lodge complete with kitchen facilities . The lodge is also available for students to use .
 Taking a quick survey of Mississippi schools, one would find very few, indeed . Mississippi schools have a reputation for their lack of education .
 Raymond Lake was built in the late thirties by the WPA and used exclusively for fishing . Raymond Lake is located in Raymond Lake, a lake built by WPA .
 The present lodge was added some years later by the Jackson Optimist Club who used it until 1948 as a boys camp during the summer months . It was used as a summer camp by the Optimist club until 1948 .
 In the early fifties President George McLendon saw the possibility of creating a recreational area not only for the college, but for the Jackson area as well . The area was created in the early 1950s .
 Upon securing the property from the county, the college sponsored an extensive program of improvement . The college sponsored a program of improvements .
 Caretakers were hired to be on duty around the clock, and a caretaker’s cabin was built . Caretaker's cabin was also built in the 1930s .
 Since 1955 the boat docks, bath house, beach and picnic areas have been added to the site . The boat docks were added in 1955 .
 Plans are now completed to enlarge the course to 18 holes by mid-1964 . Jack Treloar, superintendent of the farm and physical plant, said plans are now complete .
 Charge for use of the course is only 50c for visitors and no charge for Hinds students presenting activity cards .
 Raymond Lake was the center of boating activities in the surrounding area . Before the opening of Lake Hico and other lake resorts, Raymond Lake had been a popular boating destination .
 Raymond Lake still has all it can safely handle despite its competition . Despite its competition, the lake still has a lot of water to spare .
 Lodge facilities were also revamped and now include a spacious recreation room with fireplace, screened in porch, and a kitchen equipped with a stove, refrigerator and limited supply of kitchen utensils . Lodge facilities include a dining room, outdoor dining area, screened-in porch and kitchen equipped .
 Organizations from Hinds have free access to the lodge . Any group can rent it for only $10.00 by making reservations with Mrs. Mrs. Hinds .
 College groups from Millsaps, Belhaven and Mississippi College frequently rent the building, Mrs. Mrs. Jones says .
 Hinds students again gain free admittance by presenting an activity card . Charge for swimming is 10c with Hinds again gaining free admission by presenting a card . Charges for swimming at Hinds are 10c .
 Case announced the guards this season will be Steve Erwin, Natchez sophomore; Ken Johnson, Clinton sophomore; and Robert Everett, Vicksburg freshman . Case announced this year's guards will be Ken Johnson and Robert . Everett is a freshman at Vicksurg .
 Spring Supplement Nears Completion . Spring Hindsonian Supplement is in its final stages this week, announced Dannie Evans .
 No definite date has been decided upon for publication of the book . It will be finished as soon as possible .
 This edition of the magazine will feature a color picture on the cover and an all new inside appearance, Evans stated . Evans: "This edition of this edition will be the first of its kind"
 It is hoped this edition will exceed the Christmas supplement, he added .
 Jackson day student team went down in defeat to Southside Monday in intramural play .
 Intramural softball teams play four games a week on the field behind Southside . Southside softball is a part of Southside's intramural program .
 Everyone is invited to attend the 3:45m. games every afternoon . Competition is close, stated Bill Oakes, recreation director, and everyone is invited .
 Hinds, Southwest Tennis Teams Rained out on Summit Court . Southwest and Hinds racquet teams were playing in a rain-soaked match .
 The deluge came as Hinds was evidently heading for victory Tuesday at Summit . Hinds won the first leg of the series at the summit .
 With only three courts, available, the teams could only play three matches at a time . The teams were only playing three matches a time at the time .
 Hinds won all three of the first matches and were ahead two out of three in the second round when the rain came . Hinds were ahead in the first round when rain came.
 Roxie Noblin and Ann Stephenson beat Maxine Sterling and Sue Dunn 6-2, 6-1 in girls' doubles . Girls' doubles team wins over Sue Dunn and Roxie . Girls Doubles team wins 6-0, 7-1 .
 Boys Doubles —Leslie Cohter and Walter Bishop behind Buddy Addison and James Dunn—6-2, 1-1 . Boys doubles team wins 6-2 and 6-3 .
 Thinclads Win 5th Straight Saturday Saturday in Four-Way Meet . Hinds’ thinclad unit won their fifth straight meet last Saturday .
 The Eagle aces held Northwest to 41 and East Mississippi to 35 . The Eagles scored 61 points .
 Hinds grabbed nine first place slots in the 15 event match to cop the honors . Hinds won nine first places in 15 event matches .
 In winning, several outstanding team members showed their colors in the meet . The team was victorious in the first round .
 Coaches Joe Renfroe and Ivan Rosamond supervised and aided in most of the construction of the track . The track was built in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Last Saturday he took the pleasure craft to Greenville and was running with the winners when a bad wave flipped the craft . The 13 foot pleasure craft was flipped by a wave .
 Next month a massive rally at Monroe, La., will see the 50 horsepower craft back in action . The 50 horsepower car is expected to be in action at the end of next month .
 Greenville has been my jinx, I guess, I flipped there last year and again this time . Greenville was my "jinx" I guess .
 District 6 track meet will be hosted on the Hinds track Friday, April 23 .
 Track teams from all A-AA and B-BB high schools will participate in activities . Track teams will take part in activities at the event .
 The event is the first step of elimination toward state high school championships for the state . The event was held at a high school in California .
 Only a year ago Hinds completed an $11,000 rebuilding job on the Eagle Stadium track . Hinds says heaps up praise for his efforts to rebuild the track .
 The track this year has received praise from coaches and pressmen around the area . Ranking as one of the finest in the state, the track has been praised for its performance .
 Much of this praise cart only be directed at the persons responsible for this massive change from the old dilapidated black cinder surface to the present moden^fred dog"" surfacing .
 In addition the broad jump and pole vault pits are completed for the first time this year . The pits are also being used for broad jump, pole vault and broad jump pits .
 Much of the labor was supplied by Hinds County Penal Farm inmates . Renfroe and Rosamond did a lot of the work themselves .
 Capital and Magnolia Athletic Conferences have used the track for their meets . In completing the track top competition has found its way to the new lightning fast arena .
 The annual district races are scheduled for this Friday, thanks to the planning of the athletic department . The district races will take place in the fall .
 Coaches from around the area have nothing but praise for the way the track has developed . It's a sure bet that in years to come the Hinds track will be much in demand as schools stage meets .
 Jerry Ainsworth readies boat in preparation for next month's big race in Monroe, La. Jerry Ainworth is one of the best-equipped boaters in the world . Jerry's boat is equipped with contact lenses and contact lenses .
 McLendon attended a called meeting of presidents of Mississippi Junior College Association Tuesday to discuss new standards of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools . McLendon was invited to the meeting .
 Meeting at the State Office Building, the group discussed the changing standards of accreditation . The group also considered legislation about state association standards . The meeting was held at the state office building .
 At that time legislation will be passed on conditions for eligibility of attendance in all Mississippi junior colleges . The legislation will also be passed .
 Frank Loflin is reported ‘improving’ at the Baptist Hospital following serious injuries sustained in a one-car accident at Manhatten and Benning Roads last Friday evening at 7:15 . Hinds student is reported 'improving' at the hospital .
 Police said Loflin, along with Patty Bruner, 2271 Hartfield, was thrown from a 1960 Triumph convertible . Police said they were thrown from the vehicle after driver Stuart D Abshire, 3414 North State, lost control of the vehicle .
 Presidents Council Will Present Proposal For Students’ Approval . Hinds proposed constitution and student association received administrative sanction . If passed by the Presidents Council tonight they will next week be submitted to the student body for final approval .
 Associated Student Body would go into full ooeration next fall . Conference representation and participation would be represented by students . Conference representative and participation is expected to start next year .
 A senate with almost 50 representatives from campus organizations, dormitories, and groups of day students would replace the present council . The senate would be made up of almost 50 students .
 Hinds only student government now consists of class officers and renresentatives of every campus organization, headed by president of the sophomore class . Hinds is the only school to have student government .
 Presidents Council constitution committee completed proposals two weeks ago and submitted them to administration . Committee was appointed in November by president George 1 Tannous .
 Proposals passed by the senate will be submitted to the ASB president for approval . The ASB senate will then submit the proposals to the president of the senate .
 Each commission will be headed by a student appointed by ASB president and approved by the senate . The ASB senate will also head a commission headed by an ASB student .
 The senate will act on all student proposals with each dorm, campus organization, and every 50 day students represented . Students will be represented by one senator .
 Lucien Hodges refused to suggest a date for Loflin's release, but saidy ""He will be all right. He will be alright"
 Family sources stated that Loflin is still in a coma, but has revived long enough to recognize those around him . Family sources said that L oflin is now in coma, still in coma . Family said that he has been revived by his family .
 The car skidded 94 feet to the side, hit a ditch, turned over, then traveled some 54 feet north . The car was driven by a woman who crashed into a ditch . The crash caused the car to skid 94 feet before hitting a ditch and turning over .
 Kathy Kilby, pianist, will be pre-1 following the recital . Music Masters Music Masters will perform .
 First president and vice president will be elected before end of this semester . They will be replacing the respective freshman and sophomore officers .
 Next year, the remaining class offices will be replaced by the new ASB heads . The remaining ASB offices will also be replaced .
 Judicial council of three shophomore girls and three sophomore boys — chosen by the student officers and executive committeewill review senate proposals and executive orders for constitutionality . Judicial council chosen by students chosen by student officers .
 The council may also submit recommendations to the executive committee . The council could also submit its own recommendations .
 May 5, at 3 p.m. in the main auditorium, sponsored by the music department . May 5 is at 3m.
 Hindsonian photo editor Daniel Fazekas carried out orders from superiors and got pictures of the annual campus bee swarming .
 Committee reports will later be compiled into a projective picture of Hinds . It will then be edited and printed . Hinds' portrait will be edited, printed and edited .
 Each member of the visiting committee and the SACS will receive a copy of the book . The book will be available to all visitors .
 For two years she has accompanied both individuals and groups in various campus performances . She has been accompanied by students on campus performances for two years .
 District talent winner of Mississippi Farm Bureau last year . Miss Kilby is a student of Mrs. Kilby .
 She will perform the Prelude and Fugue in B-flat minor by Bach; Sonata in E minor by Haydn; Gen eral Lavine, La Terrasse des Audeinces du Clair de Lune, and La Puerto del Vino, preludes by Deb
 The public is invited to attend the program and the reception at the ASB president and vice president, president and clerk of the senate .
 Members of the constitution committee were George Tannous, Billy Joe Montgomery, Bill Dunlap, Dottie Breakfield, Joe White, and Joe Hemphill .
 Sunday Recital Band, Hi-Stepp ers Entertain Agents Of Insurance Firm The Band and HiStepper floor show group will perform Thursday morning for the state convention of the Interstate Life and Accident Insurance Co. Mayo answered, “Hinds will look-1 Miss
 The two-day convention will be held on the roof of the Heidelberg Hotel . The convention will take place on the rooftop of the hotel .
 In the evolution of the animal kingdom, man is not the first to judge intellectually . The usual show will be presented .
 Man is the first animal to judge with a moral intellect . Man is, however, the first, and thus far, the only animal to do so . He is also the first to judge the moral nature of a person .
 This single factor above all others has made him superior to lower animals who act primarily by instinct . "This single factor," he said, "made him superior"
 President of the Mississippi Academy of Sciences says moral sciences are the most vital . He concludes moral science is the most important in the world .
 As a matter of fact, it is possible to have high morals without being Christian, says author . "I'm not Christian. I'm not a Christian. As a result, I'm a very proud Christian," he says .
 Our regard for sex, the rights and property of others, truth and honesty in all its forms — these are covered by the word moral . The moral value of moral morality is also covered by moral principles, the author says .
 The decline of the Roman Empire went along with the moral degeneration of its citizens . Roman Empire's decline was due to moral degenerating citizens, says historian .
 It is frightening that dishonesty is either above or just below the surface in so many human beings today, especially in the young . It's frightening that dishonestness is either just below or just under the surface .
 Of even more concern is the seeming half-acceptance of this in many quarters as apparently inevitable . Of course, there is also a 'half acceptance' that this is apparently inevitable, according to experts .
 They are defrauding insurance companies, embezzling funds, hiring “ghost writers,” cheating on exams . Yes, they are. Yes . They are, they're defrauds insurance companies . Yes .
 Hinds is no different than the rest of the world — everybody’s doing it here as well, he says . Hinds: "Everybody in the world is doing it as well. And everybody in the U.S. does it," he adds .
 The complex society we have today can exist only because enough people still live with high moral standards . But the complex society can exist today only because people live with moral standards, says CNN.com .
 "Just think, our banking system, our installment plan — both are based on the honor system," she says . "Just look at our honor system. Just think, Our banking system is based on this," she adds .
 The great wonder of man, as we said earlier, is supposed to be his supreme talent for putting himself under the disciplined control of his mind . We said that man's supreme talent is to be to be disciplined .
 The animal kingdom evolved part by part, not as an entirely new animal, evolutionists say . The animals evolved in part by parts, not entirely new ones, evolutionist says .
 School is ending, and time is here for job-seekers to begin work, finding jobs . S “They Have Their Day And Cease To Be” Positions Wanted: Positions wanted .
 Those who have had previous experience trying to locate jobs know that when they begin pounding the pavement all is not well with the world . Those with previous experience have had problems trying to find jobs .
 Many is the time when sought-for employers turn away applicants before they have gotten the words out of their mouths that they are seeking work . Employers are often turned away from applicants before the words come out of the mouths .
 An applicant is led to believe that there is hope for a job, and then waits for word from that employer, only to be disappointed by no correspondence . Perhaps even more discouraging is when an applicant is told there is no hope for the job, but is disappointed .
 More and more it becomes evident that the only way to find employment is through the grapevine of influence . The only way of finding employment is to use influence to influence influence, says CNN.com .
 Or know someone who knows someone that knows someone important in an important position? Or know a person who knows an important person? Call the National Suicide Prevention Hotline on 1-800-273-8255 .
 Each year more of these difficulties are found, and each year solutions are found for some of last year’s problems . Each year, each year, more and more problems have been found .
 If one keeps looking for a job long enough, he will soon run out of problems and have an occupation, he says . If you are looking for an occupation long enough you will soon have a job, he writes .
 Every politician has his day, every Democrat has his way -- or so it used to be in Mississippi . The state's Democratic leader has his own version of the Constitution . Mississippi is a state of history .
 Raymond Moley, nationally recognized journalist, stated in Jackson Saturday that the Governor’s race in Mississippi is the hottest political story in the country . Moley: "I'm glad to see that the governor's race is in the right direction"
 Rubel Phillips is coming out stronger than first expected . The reasoning behind this pivotal position is probably that Rubel . Phillips is probably the reason for the move .
 If he should win the governor's chair, this would indicate that Republican strength in the South is stronger than Republican voter appeal in the North . If he wins, it would show that Republican voters in the south are more likely to vote Republican .
 The South is Goldwater's, stomping grounds, and the North is Rockefeller's roost . A win in Mississippi would forecast greater days in Dixie for the Republicans, and for Democrats .
 With the South in his pocket at the time of the GOP convention a year from this summer, combined with Barry’s Boosters from the West, it could be Goldwater from the word go .
 Regionally, the South’s tax collections for 1963 were the largest in the nation . The South had the largest tax collections in the country .
 In the South $5. billions were collected by state governments, but in the Northeast it was $5 billion . In the North Central region, $4 billion was collected in the West and $5 billions in the South .
 The 1963 national average for per capita taxation ran over $112.5 per cent . The 1963 average national average was $112 per capita tax on the whole .
 Southern State governments have more revenue than their “rich’s” Northern and Western counterparts . Despite the fact that . Southern . State governments . have more . revenue than . their ‘rich” . counterparts .
 The South has 57. million people within its bounds, or more than any other section of the country . This means more representatives in the lower house of Congress from the South than other section .
 From Virginia through Texas and from the bottom of Missouri to the tip of Key West lies an area that should be the core of America . From Virginia to Texas, the area should be America's core, CNN.com reports .
 In the past, the South has contributed more in advancing the nation than any other section . The South has helped advance the nation more than other sections, including the South .
ciples of advancement seems to be the problem now. How best to preserve those principles? How best?
 Closer unity among the Southern states is the answer almost everyone agrees on . The Southern states are divided on the issue of unity .
 "Our state leaders have chosen the path of nonalignment with either of the two major parties," says D.C. Gov. Rick Perry . "We are not going to support either party," says Perry .
 "In the last presidential election we tried to make the South the national pivot by going unpledged," he says . "We're trying to make it the South a national pivot," he adds .
 In 1964, Barry Goldwater was a candidate for the presidency for the first time . In 1964 he ran for the second time in a single presidential nomination . Barry's campaign for the Democratic Party won't be held back .
 A man whose banner of conservatism all the South will unify under, and under which a large part of the rest of the nation will sheRer itself from self-suffocating socialism and a no-win foreign policy . A man .
 When one votes for governor this coming November, remember the vote is also whether the election one year later will be worth voting in . Remember the vote for governor in November will also determine if the election is worth voting .
 The first stated sin is the philoso-1 phy of Addicus Finch, head of the \ memorable Finch family . Addicus is the son of Addicicus Finch .
 The secj ond sin is the philosophy of an underpaid columnist whose words j appear here . It's the philosophy behind the idea that the secj sin sin is to be a sin .
 Gregory Peck won the best actor of the year award for his role in "The Darkly Dressed" He says he agrees with the academy's choice of Gregory Peck for best actor .
 Mr Peck has a unique way of playing the role of Addicus Finch with his face . Not only does he suit the part as perfectly as Clark Gable did Rhett, but he also plays it with his own face .
 Of course this doesn’t mean there was no screaming and there were no emotions . Of course there were screaming and emotions. Of course, there were also emotions.
 Mr Peck simply showed his feelings through his facial expressions and not his voice . He said he simply showed the feelings through facial expressions .
 Gregory Peck plays a little girl of indeterminate age, named Mary Badham, in the new film .
 In fact, as Scout Finch, she steals scene after scene from the professional Mr Peck .
 Harper Lee, the author, must have also had Mary in mind when she wrote the recollections of a child .
 Even the mature voice that commentates the movie’s story, sounds very much like the outspoken one of the youngest Fin Finch .
 Robert Mulligan, director, must be a genius to squeeze so much enthusiasm from the two child actors .
 The movie version is not as complete and detailed as Miss Lee’s original work . Naturally the movie version of the original work is less detailed .
 It must be understood, however, that the movie medium and the printed word are vastly different . The movie medium is vastly different, but it's important to understand the difference .
 If you go expecting a word by word account of the novel . . then don’t bother buying a ticket . Don't expect a word-by-word account of this novel . If you want to go looking for a word of words, don't bother buying ticket .
 Editor: "Becky Presley, Jim Toombs, Jim Bonney, Albert Dahduh, Joe White, Linda Boudreau, Linda Byrd, Becky Presley and Joe White are editors of this week's iReporters' weekly feature stories .
 Views expressed in this paper are not necessarily the views of the faculty and administration of Hinds Funior College . The views expressed here are those of the staff and faculty at the college .
 A motion was also passed by the group to delay election of other officials until next year . The group also passed a motion to delay the election of officials until 2015 .
 Two returning members will be selected by Miss Stogner next year to act as vicepresident and secretary at initiation of new members .
 Plans were discussed for a Phi Theta Kappa picnic at Raymond Lake-Lodge . At the same meeting plans were ; discussed for the picnic .
 Funds for the picneic will be provided through the club treasury, Miss Coleman reported .
 Staff plans a summer publication date for the Eagle yearbook . Yearbook editor Belva Watkins says it will be published in the summer .
 Miss Watkins: “No one likes to sacrifice quality for quantity.” Miss Watkins says no one wants to sacrifice quantity for quality .
 The staff plans an early August | edition of the yearbook, changing to a schedule which many senior colleges and universities throughout the United States are finding convenient . Staff plans to use the new schedule to make it easier .
 Hurley Comoany in Camden, Ar kansas will have a longer time work on the book and can take mo pains with it . Hurley comoany will have to have a long time work to complete the book .
 Annuals will be mailed to students who do not return this summer . Plans have been made to host an annual-signing party during mid-August for students who wish to return .
 Danny Fazekas, H ndsonian pho1 the winner each week to editor, announced a New rules direct students to use revamped schedule for the contest .
 Werlein's of this issue fill in their guess Music Company m Jackson will as to the correct identity and locagive away two 45 rpm records .
 The only formal program to be given locally by the choir this season, the concert should ""be the high point of campus musical activities this spring,"" Reeves said .
 Set for evening in the main auditorium, the program will include various selections . Program will be held at the main Auditorium .
 Walter Bishop, Jackson sophomore, entered the most correct description . In last week's contest about twenty persons correctly guessed the photo's identity, Fazekas said .
 Bishop’s entry was filed only one hour before deadline, paper staff members decided to revamp the contest rules .
 Miss Jackie Mayer, reigning Miss America, will be guest of honor . Mrs. Jackie Mayer will be feted by Mrs. Jackie Mayer .
 Two sets of secular songs will be presented by the girls ensemble . Bee will, in turn, be a guest guest at the show .
 Reservations placed immediately with Reeves will insure receipt of of Mrs. Reeves' bookings . Reservations made immediately will be made .
 Hinds tennis team suffered its first major setback of the season at hands of Jones Junior College . Hinds defeated the junior college at the hands of the school .
 Hinds lost five and won three of the eight matches allowed against fending state champion, Jo n e Hinds . Hinds also won one of the extra matches against the state champion . The state champion also won three extra matches and one extra .
 Remaining undefeated in the singles are Boyd McPhail and Walter Bishop . The pair are undefeated in their singles matches .
 Billy Joe Montgomery, Johnny Hines, and Roxie Noblin and Ann Stephenson are the co-stars of the series . The series is set to be broadcast on PBS stations throughout the world .
 Several team members were unable to participate because of lack of competition . Several of the team members had been unable to compete due to lack of competing .
 Frank Stephenson, physics instructor and girls' tennis coach, promises more competition in the meets ahead .
 Hinds again meets Jones Thursday, May 2, and meets Perkinston Junior College the following Tuesday . Hinds will meet Jones again next week, May 3, and May 4 .
 Hinds will host the Junior College State Tennis Tournament here May 11, beginning at 8:30 . Johnny Hines suspends in midair to check a passed ball in Thursday's meet with Jones .
 Hinds Eagle Trackmen run over opposition in six-way thinclad invitational . Hinds Eagles soared around their new “red dog’s track yesterday and captured top honors in a 6-way invitational.
 State Junior College meet to be staged at Hinds next month . Eagles walked away with a total of 63 points for first place honors .
 Jones Junior College tallied 41V2 for second place . Holmes J.C.C., gathered 35V2. Jones Jr. was second . Holmes Jr. C. was third .
 None of the times recorded were below the state junior college records, however, however . None of those times were below state records .
 Only one entry got his name in the first place column more than once during the affair . Jerry Clark grabbed wins in three individual events and ran with the three winning relay squads .
 He later copped a tie for the blue ribbon in the high jump with a leap of 5 feet 9 inches . It was the first time he had won a blue ribbon at the Olympics in a major event .
 Hinds Junior College track team scored an impressive victory in their sixth meet of the year at the Canton Junior College Invitational meet last week . Perkinston claimed 3 first place ribbons in the meet while Holmes gathered 2 and East Mississippi 1, Hinds Thinclads Capture Sixth
 Holmes was in second with 42, East Mississippi was in third with 41 . Mississippi Delta was fourth with 37, Mississippi Delta, and Co-Lin last with 31 . Holmes was second with 41; East Mississippi in third .
 The most impressive times in the running events were turned in by Hind's relay teams and Woody Martin's half mile effort . Woody Martin ran a half mile at the end of the event .
 The three relay teams consist of Johnny Hagan, Larry Jones, Jerry Clark, Jimmy Clark, and Darden Davis . The relay teams are Johnny, Larry, Jerry and Jimmy Clark . The three teams are competing in a relay competition .
 The times on the 440, 880, and mile relays were 44.6, 1:31.7, and 3.28. seconds consecutively . Relays were held at the same time for the 440 and 880 times .
 He turned in a time of 2:03.02. and has high hopes of lowering it to the one-fifties .
 Johnny Hagan, a Hinds freshman, won the low hurdles for the first time this year . Hagan won the event at the age of eight years .
 The pole vault ended in a duel between Jimmy Boatner of East Mississippi and Percy Boell of Hinds . The pole pole vault was a record-breaking pole vaulting event .
 Boatner wound up in second place in the pole vault, but got a first in the high jump . Boatner finished second in pole vault and first in high jump. Boatner won a first for high jump in his first event .
 George Benton and Glenn Yarbrough of Hinds were victorious . The weight men battled it out in the discus and shot put, but Benton won .
 Jimmy Boatner, Jerry Clark, Jerry Nix, Larry Nix and Billy Ellis are Mississippi natives . Billy Ellis, Billy Ellis and Jerry Boatner are Mississippi residents of the state .
 ZINC ETCHINGS COLOR PLATES, ARTISTS LITH0 NEGATIVES & PLATES P.0.0 . HALFTONES Zinc ETCHING COLORPLATES .
 The court house in Raymond, built entirely by slave labor in 1857-59, was built by slaves . The cover of this week's special edition of the Hindsonian features this week’s special edition edition .
 The building was also used as a hospital for Confederate soldiers during the Civil War .
 Raymond commemorates its Civil War battle with a special eight-page edition . The Hindsonian naturally fell into the frenzy of interest and decided to publish a special edition .
 Thanks go to citizens of Raymond, business establishments and college instructors for this edition .
 Raymond provides a natural setting for memorable commemorations . A town so full of pre-war relics as Raymond provides the perfect setting for commemorations.
 Each year townspeople gather to honor the soldiers who fought for individual rights and for their homeland . Townspeople gathered to honor those who fought individual rights .
 To those honored individuals we dedicate this issue of the Hindsonian along with our respect and gratitude .
 We are a UNITED States of America and now combine efforts with all areas of the country to make and keep this the best country possible . We are now combining efforts to keep this country possible.
 Extra numbers are being printed of this issue to be inserted in the Hinds County Gazette, Edwards Hummer and Utica Advertiser .
 Anyone who tries to answer this question in its stated form is a complete imbecile, and those that ask it are hopeless . Anyone who asks this question is hopeless, he says .
 Only depraved anima^i celebrate a date which brought death to thousands . Not only is the question poorly stated, but its word usage is deplorable, gg gg
 Southern people are depraved beings who cheer and laugh on a date when a hundred years ago, there was no cheering or laughing, only silent trickles of blood down silent faces . Is this what the southern people are?
 During the I Centennial of the Civil War, Southerners open antebellum homes, invite visitors to pilgrimages, wear hoop skirts and add extra syllables to their already elongated drawls . I hardly think the Southern people or the so-called Yankees think of themselves as
 There is something in war worth honoring, however, however ... ... ... the men and their causes . There is also something worth honoring .
 The men who fought the battles, the men who walked the miles, the . men who were hungry, and the men . who died. The men . died . The men were hungry .
 Some never went more than five ' _ j tniles from home and yet they j . . . Yet they fought at home . Some never traveled five miles from home .
 Their cause was not slavery as the world thinks, but these grey clad soldiers 1 real cause was ""state's rights."" -CURRENT EVENTS What Saith The Loser? -By
 The events causing its ut-1 16 and 17, something happened terance are taking shape . Then on the nights of April yet, but the events causing this week's events have been taking shape.
 Grant I that changed the course of the war has come down the Tennessee 1 Seven transports slipped under the Zhe Zhe .
 The South has lost at Shiloh, Chattanooga, Knoxville and Memphis . Dannie Evans, Virgil Leonard, Klare Parker, Dawn McNeil, Jerry Cogell, Fred Peyton River, and Fred Peyton .
 It might have been better for the South if Forrest had been at Vicksburg, instead of General Pemberton . Forrest was a political appointee more than a general . General Forrest was not a general, but a politician .
 The campaign against Vicksburg was an integral part of overall Northern strategy . The campaign was part of the Northern strategy in the 1930s .
 First, an ‘ironclad’ blockade of all Southern ports, to cut off aid from Europe . Second, a ‘Ironclad” blockade of Southern ports . Third, a blockade of southern ports to stop aid from the continent .
 Second, split the South in two parts, using the Mississippi River as the dividing line . Third, divide the South using the river as a dividing line. Second, use the Mississippi to separate the South .
 Situated high on the loamy bluffs, it is a natural fortress guarding its river passageway . Situated on the Loamy Bluffs, the fortress is a . natural fortress .
 Seemingly, nature had long before placed and planned the most decisive battle of the Civil War . The Battle of Gettysburg was one of the most famous battles of Civil War.
 Thousands of years before, she had caused wind storms that picked up dust from a cow turned over a lantern in, Chicago, turning that city into a Tennessee, West Virginia, and some blazing hell . Thousands of . years ago, she caused a storm that turned Chicago into Tennessee and West
 In the war between Northern sTates and Southern states, the issue acted as the cow and the blazing tongues of Congressmen played the part of the fiery long time burning lantern .
 This then is what we ""honor"— not ""celebrate" -- as we look at the rows of white crosses that house the unknown . This is not what we "honor," but what we celebrate .
 The men and their cause ... we are a part of those men and a big part of their cause . We are part of the men and the women's cause. We are proud to be part of that cause, and we are very proud of that .
 The South had dusted off the North before, but Grant, with his side-kick Sherman, were determined to put the ‘Union Label’ on this mound of dust . The South and the North were determined not to let the South reclaim the title .
 On his fourth visit, he came down through Arkansas and Louisiana, to a point South of Vicksburg, in the proximity of Port Gibson .
 Confederate batteries overlooking the river and on the 30th of April began ferrying troops into Mississippi at Bruinsburg . Confederate batteries .
 There were only four welcoming brigades to greet Grant as he slipped behind Pemberton’s left flank . Grant was only one of only four brigades for the visitors .
 Some historians say that Pemberton could have blocked Grant's advance by moving South to meet his advance before all the Union troops could cross the river . Some historians have suggested that he should have moved south to meet Grant's advancing .
 Grant and the boys were making tracks toward the Vicksburg-Jackson Railway, Pemberton’s lifeline . At the same time, Grant and his boys were moving toward the railway, which was the last line of the line .
 Grant perceived a large force gathering in Jackson, Jackson, when Johnston arrived . Grant perceived the arrival of Johnston in Jackson as a force .
 "He cut loose from his base and marched with his whole force, living off the land as they went, upon Jackson" "The whole force marched with him, and he marched with the whole force," he said .
 Whiskey-Whiskers struck Pemberton's field force at Champion’s Hill and drove it into the fortifications of Vicksburg in May .
 Johnston tried to regroup and collect a force large enough to break through and connect with Pemberton . Johnston was able to get a force enough to connect with the team . Johnston's force was large enough for him to get to the ground .
 Pemberton capitulated Vicksburg's vital position to the Yankees on July 4, 1863 .
 Sherman drove like a tank, and split the soft under-belly of the South . Later Grant was shifted north and paired off against General Lee Sherman . Sherman was a major factor in the Civil War .
 Sherman was heard to say, "War is Hell. If it is hell to the victor, it's anyone’s guess as to the condition ol the loser," Sherman said in a speech .
 The cannons roared, the rifles fired; 3,000 Union soldiers advanced on Raymond . Raymond was killed by the Union in the Battle of St. Louis .
 Within the town local citizens began spreading bales on the floors of the Episcopal Church and the Courthouse, preparing for the wounded and dying . Local citizens spread the bales of bales over the church's floors .
 One hundred years ago this week, Raymond was the site of a savage and bloody battle . The sleepy little town of Raymond, Raymond, was the scene of a bloody battle 100 years ago .
 On the days preceeding May 12, 1863, ordinary routine ceaosed; it was replaced by anxiety . "Only people who are facing impending death can know," the author says .
 Grant's inland march to Vicksburg was extremely imporant to the Union cause . The little town itself was unimportant—but it lay in the path of Grant's march .
 Grant took his Army of Republic down river to Bruinsburg, where they landed on May 1, 1863 . Grant landed in the town of Bruinsburg on May 31, 1863.
 Union army of about 20,000 men advanced up the Big Black, taking Port Gibson on May 2 . Port Gibson was captured by the Union army on May 1 . Union army took Port Gibson from Port Gibson .
 He immediately fell back and sent the 2nd Illinois Cavalry to the front . He immediately sent the troops to the battle .
 Both sides suffered casualties before the Confederates began to retreat . The Confederates were forced to retreat from the battlefield .
 On May 9, Grant made Rocky Springs Church his headquarters . General McPhearson and McClernand camped at Reganton .
 C 1 a rk Wright, USA, advanced toward Utica, skirmishing with a few Confederate Cavalrymen for an hour before taking the town . The town of Utica was taken by the U.S. Civil War soldiers .
 McPhearsin moved through Utica toward Raymond, camping at Week’s and Roaches’ Plantations . Osterhaus moved into Cayuga, thus splitting the Union forces in their advance . Neither side suffered casualties .
 Confederate forces had given ‘little resistance. During this time, the Confederate forces gave ‘ little resistance.’ Confederate forces were given little resistance .
 Scattered fragments of General Bowen’s army skirmished frequently with the Union but only in a hitand-run type warfare . General Bowen's army, along with Wirt Adam's Cavalry, skirmished with the U.S. during the war .
 Fourteen Mile Creek, on the old Dillon Plantation, was the scene of one such skirmish . Early on the morning of May 12, 14 Mile Creek was the site of one of the most recent skirmishes .
 The fighting occurred near the present Natchez Trace Overpass, eight miles out of Raymond, on the Old Port Gibson Road . The fighting was in the area eight miles from Raymond .
 The creek is shallow but flows through deep, steep banks in what was then a heavily wooded area . It flows through steep banks and deep banks .
 Wirt Adams’ Confederate Cavalry fell under heavy and unsuspected fire . The 2nd Illinois and the 4th Iowa Cavalry started across the bridge, but fell under fire from Adams' Cavalry .
 Heavy fighting ensued for over an hour, during which time Adams burned the bridge . Adams was killed by a bomb blast .
 The Southerners reported no losses, while the Union reported four wounded, four killed and 24 missing .
 Union army finally crossed Fourteen Mile Creek and met Confederate forces . The Union army advanced toward Raymond and met the Confederate forces in the battle .
 Gregg, two miles southwest of town at the forks of the j Utica and Old Port Gibson roads on May 12, 1863 . Gregg was killed by a firefight in the Battle of the Plains Plains .
 Pemberton ordered him to ad-1 vance toward Raymond . Gregg, with about 3,000 men, had been encamped at Clinton, when he arrived .
 Gregg established Bledsoe’s artillery, consisting of three large guns, at the forks of the road . He arrived in Raymond late late on May 11, and was rather surprised to find that the Union forces were so near, Gregg established the artillery .
 The 1st Tennessee and the 7th Texas with the 3rd Tennessee advanced as skirmishers in front of the battery . Directly behind him was the 1st . and the . 7th . Texas .
 Gregg placed the 10th, 30th, and 10th Tennessee divisions, with the 41st Tennessee in reserve . To the right Gregg placed . The 10th and 30th divisions were placed in reserve.
 Raymond’s memorial Confederate Cemetery today marks the spot where Yankee and Rebel forces clashed on May 12, one-hundred years ago . Raymond's memorial cemetery marks the site of the clash .
 Citizens of Raymond regularly pay tribute to the Confederate dead killed in the Battle of Raymond . Citizens of the Confederate town regularly travel to pay tribute .
 As the 2nd Indiana advanced through the woods between the roads, they were attacked by the 7th Texas, who were entrenched on the edge of the hill . The 2rd Indiana was killed in the battle .
 The 23rd fell back, and then were reinforced by McCook's 31st Illinois . McCook: "The 23rd and 31st fell back and then reinforced"
 The 24th Illinois, who were bringing up the rear, moved around to the right to attack the flank of the 3rd Tennessee and 7th Texas . The 24st Illinois were also moving around to attack to the left .
 On the left of the Old Port Gibson Road, the 20th Ohio charged across a field and attacked the 10th, 30th and 10th Tennessee divisions . The 20th and 30th Ohio divisions were engaged in the battle in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 The 8th Illinois helped push through center . They were backed up by the 8th Illinois .
 The 41st Tennessee rushed to aid the 3rd Tennessee, but after two and one-half hours fighting the Confederates began to fall back . After two and a half hours of fighting, Confederates fell back .
 The Texas 7th held their ground, but the 10th and 50th Tennessee retreated into the woods . The 10th, 50th and 10th Tennesseans retreated to the woods.
 30th Tennessee charged, ""yelling like savages,"" but failure of the other two divisions to attack ended in miserable failure . The 30th Tennessean, 30th and 30th were charged with "yelling like savages"
 The 7th Texas, practically deserted and out of ammunition, brought up the rear as the 31st Illinois assaulted them again and again . The 7st Texas was practically out-of-fire and out-gunned .
 Confederate troops retreated into Raymond, splitting up, some going towards Edwards, some toward Clinton, and others toward Crystal Springs . By 2 the Confederate troops had retreated . Some went to Crystal Springs, some to Edwards, others to Clinton .
 Gregg requested a short truce in order to bury the dead and care for the wounded, but this request was refused . Gregg requested that a truce be made, but was turned down .
 Bledsoe's Battery has long been silent, and the Army of Tennessee has become history . The Army has long remained silent .
 Confederate Cemetery marks the spot where the cannon once roared and men bled and died . Confederate Cemetery now marks the site of the Civil War's bloodiest battlefield .
 People of Raymond buried Confederate dead in the Battle of Raymond . Confederate dead were buried in Raymond, Raymond .
 The families of these soldiers simply waited, waited, and waited longer . Families of the fallen soldiers were left waiting for their loved ones .
 The second annual Awards Da y for Hinds students was held at the Hinds school .
 Officers of president and vicepresident of ASB will be filled Thursday, May 16, in a college election . ASB students will be able to elect the new president of the university .
 Both men and women will vote for president, but only women will be eligible to vote for vicepresident . The student will also be president of the Women's Student Association . Both women and men will be allowed to vote in the vicepresident election .
 If necessary, a second voting session will be held Friday, May 17, as final run-off . If necessary a second vote will also be held on May 17 . The final vote will take place on May 24 .
 Persons interested in becoming 'candidates for the two posts may obtain applications in the Student Publications Office . The positions will be filled by students at the University of Cambridge .
 The applications are to be completed and deposited in the mail slot of the post office no later than noon tomorrow .
 Presiding at the session will be sophomore class president George Tannous and vice president Ralph Hemphill . Nominating speeches are to be made by each candidate's campaign team .
 Jiml my Chandler was chairman of the | committee which coordinated the j typing , and distribution of j typing and distribution . Chandler was a member of the Committee of the Typing Board .
 Members of the assembling committee were Bill White, Leon Stewart, James Bond, Virgil Leonard, Mike Oliver Howard Quin, David Jenkins, and Jimmy Collins . Members of assembling committee include Bill White .
 Hinds Junior College has only academic recognition program for students . 12 students receive plaques for departmental honors .
 Six other awards for outstanding achievement were also presented . Several students were recognised for individual achievements .
 Kent Prince, public relations director, conducted the program . Department heads presented a plaque to the outstanding student in that department .
 Lynda Berry, Francis Brown, Rosalind Healy, English, Sammy Bridges, Engineering; Joy Ferguson, Home Economics. Joy Ferguson was awarded the Home Economics award .
 Frances Pickett Physical Education; Kathy Kilby, Music; Carol Kill-worth, Science; Ralph Hemphill, Social Science; Margaret Nunley, Speech; and Gwen Martin, Vocational . The students at the school were selected for the program .
 Phi Beta Lambda president G M McLendon presented an honorary key and lifetime membership to the club in recognition of his work in advacing business department standards .
 Recognition was given to students taking part in intramural sports by William Oakes, Hinds recreational director .
 Best Actor, Warren Nybo, Best Actress, Paula Hopson, Best Supporting Actor, Robert Everett; Best Supporting Actress, Carol Maxwell; and Best Back Stage Worker, Pat Donovan .
 Next year’s program will be in the hands of a faculty committee rather than the public relations department . The program will continue to be run by the faculty committee .
 A clinic for prospective sophomore cheerleaders was held Tuesday night in the girls’ gym . Cheerleaders Training For 7 64 in Weekly Clinic .
 The giris are being prepared for final try-outs by Barbara Clack, Pearl freshman, who has had experience in cheerleader clinics . Clack is a freshman at Pearl .
 Included in instruction are several cheers which the girls may enter in the contest . The girls may also enter cheers which they may enter .
 Tomorrow night, contestants will be viewed by a screening committee and will be voted on in next Wednesday’s assembly .
 Six of the contestants will be elected to represent next year’s sophomore class . Six of them will be chosen to represent the sophomore class of 2015-16 .
 A second election will be conducted next year to choose freshrpan cheerleaders . A second vote will be held next year .
 Last check-out day for library books I is May 20 . Library books I will be checked out at the end of the year .
 Peyton Lew is Peyton, the eldest son, received hisn^dical degree and returned to J^fHrnd a doctor . Tom Lew is Tom Lew, the son of Tom Lew . Peyton is Peyton's son .
 In 1834, the family of Fairquier County, Va., moved into Waverly, a history-fill-fill-, ed abode which still stands north a flu epidemic . And that's exactly how it was in 1834 when the John Bronaugh Peyton family moved into
 John Peyton was a civil engineer J approaching Civil War would have who had come to Mississippi to survey . Little did the family of Raymond on Clinton Road. j realize that four years later the John Peyton .
 In 1831 the couple beleased from a Vicksburg camp afgan construction of Waverly . He met and married Mary John Peyton, the last son, was reLewis and in 1831 they were beleased .
 Life at the Peyton Place was relatively calm, except for an occasional duel . Undernourished and ill-kept years of building. even his close friends did not rec . Life at Peyton Place .
 Only one event caused it was the choice of a new capital for Mississippi, then located in Washognie, Mississippi .
 General Ulysses S Grant and his subordinate officers made the present sun room temporary headquarters during Grant's inPage 5 y uctiuquarrers . Grant's sun room was used as a temporary headquarters .
 Judge Isaac Caldwell, a Clinton resident, was anxious to have it located there . Caldwell: "It's a good thing to have a judge in Clinton, Clinton, and a great thing to see"
 Jackson supporters won by one single single sources claim he was there on May date of the battle of Raymond . Others include May 13, May 13 or May 13 . Jackson supporters say he was at Raymond's battle .
 Caldwell challenged j Father Peyton to enter the army . Peyton selected rifles as corral to reclaim his animals, weapons . Caldwell promptly challenged him .
 Peyton family continued to occupy Waverflesh wound on Judge Caldwell's 1 ly until 1936 . Surviving the war, the only damage was a slight j family injury .
 In the summer of 1957 Erwin Peyton, great-great-grandson of John Peyton, began a complete renovation of the house . John Peyton died in 1946 at the age of 92 .
 He credits the project to his wife, the former Opal Brumfield of Bentonia . He credits his wife for the project .
 Peyton Peyton has studied, traced, and uncovered vivid details of Waverly’s past . Peyton has traced, traced and uncovered details of the Wavyly family .
 Renovation turned out to be almost rebuilding, the floor was out of level six inches . The floor in the building was out six inches. Renovation was almost rebuilding .
 The 14 feet wooden panel ceiling is being restored in the original manner . The 14 foot wooden panel ceilings are being restored to the original .
 The ten feet high windows still contain the original panes, some broken, scarred, or personally autographed by one of the Peyton children . Amazingly, the ten foot high windows are still contained in the Peyton family's home .
 Mississippi Intercollegiate Council T‘ this weekend at the biannual meet-lSTSofRavmoST T ine in HattiosWcr I „ t0Wn of Raymond conducts a City Of Raymond To Commemorate Hundredth Year Of Famous
 This delegation has been instructed to pay dues and assume obligations of membership . This delegation was instructed to . pay dues, assume obligations to membership .
 Beth Ponder, Carole Weathersby, and James Scoggins, students of Rex Tatum, will present a piano recital Thursday evening, May 9, at 7:30 .
 Miss Ponder will perform a Bach Prelude and Fugue in C minor, Schubert Sonata in A first movement, Faure's Fantasie and Chopin’s Prelude in G minor . She will also play a Bach Prel Prel Preliminary Fugue, and a
 When completed (possibly next year) Waverly will possess seven bedrooms, four baths, living room, dining room, kitchen, sun room, office, hall ways, side porch and sun porch . When completed next year, it will have seven bedrooms .
 The Peytons and their three children will have ample room to live in—and care for—and to care for . They will have plenty of space to live and care for their children .
 As a member of the school, the school will have voting power and authority to run candidates and discuss issues . The school will be a member, with voting power, authority to discuss issues and discuss .
 Organized in 1919, membership includes all senior colleges and four junior colleges in the state . The organization was formed in 1919 .
 Members of Hinds State Youth Council say value of membership lives in potential of state organization . The state organization is a growing state organization, says Ralph Hemphill .
 It was on May 12, 1863, that 73 Confederate soldiers were killed in the Battle of Raymond . The battle took place in the middle of the day .
 Ceremonies will include, in adedition to the memorial service at the Courthouse, a commemoration at the Confederate Cemetery, a tour of the Battlefield, and a Centennial Ball . Ceremony will include tours of the battlefield, a centennial ball and a memorial service .
 Master of ceremonies for the program will be James H Adams, mayor of Raymond, Raymond . The mayor will be the master of ceremonies .
 Featured speaker will be Herschel Gower, co-author of Pen and Sword, and Life and Journals of Randal McGavock, CSA, was killed in the Battle of Raymond . Gower is the co-founder of Pen & Sword and the son of Colonel McGav
 Also speaking will be Edwin Bearss, historian for the National Park Services in Vicksburg . Also speaking is Edwin bearss, who is a member of the National Parks Services .
 Raymond High School Band, directed sissippi Greys, will march to Confederate Cemetery and officiate while flowers are placed on each grave . Raymond high School Band will perform at the Confederate Cemetery in Confederate Cemetery .
 Raymond Memorial Observance will take place Sunday afternoon . The public will be able to view Waverly as a part of the memorial Observance . The memorial service will be held at Raymond's home in Newport, Connecticut .
 The Peytons hope to open the house for a fee during the pilgrimage season after its completion . The family hopes to open it up to pilgrims during pilgrimage season .
 Waverly—today serves as a reminder of a glorious past, of a rich-heritaged family . It was a beautiful archaic home. It is now a beautiful home.
 Shop TAYLOR’s DOWNTOWN RAYMOND entertainment, channel scholar-i by Thomas Christopher, will pro ships, and serve as a sounding, the musical tributes, board for college problems,” he said .
 Other members of Hinds delegation are George Tannous, president of the sophomore class and co-head of the group . Harlan Stanley, Billy Lee, and Johnny Franklin are also in the delegation .
 Officers for the next six months will be elected during the closing gneral session . The final session will be held on Monday night in London .
 Hinds plans to distribute copies of the newlyadopted Associated Student Body constitution . Hemphill plans to hold discussion sessions with the students .
 Hemphill said this weekend Hinds, a member with the constitution adopted, should create some furor . At the fall meeting, when Hinds was only an observer, much discussion time was centered on Hinds proposals . Hinds is a member of the Republican caucus . Hemph
 Members of the Sons of the South Artillery, Sons of Confederate Veterans Mississippi Grey unit, will also assist in the observance .
 A Centennial Ball will be held at the Raymond Lake Lodge on Saturday, May 11 from 8 to 12 m. Sponsored by the Raymond Civil War Centennial Committee and the Raymond Fencibles .
 Vicksburg Centennial Commission has sponsored similar observances in Raymond, Raymond . During the past years, with the cooperation of the Commission, the town of Raymond has sponsored such observances . The town has hosted similar events in the past .
 Hinds assembly speaker: “I’m Medford Evans, not Medford Evers,” laughed the assembly speaker . Citizen Council Speaker Lashes Forced Integration In Schools .
 Evans discussed the control of the nation by the colleges and universities . Evans: The attack on Mississippi's .institutions is a most destructive force . Evans said the attack on . Mississippi's institutions is a 'most destructive force'
 Evans: 'If they can smash Mississippi, the most adamant of the 50 states, the rest will also fall/' In an interview following the speech Evans stated that if token Hinds, the result would be approximately the same as at Ole Miss .
 Evans shunned any comment on the recent integration strife in Birmingham both in his speech and in the intervew following . Evans said he would not comment on recent unrest in Birmingham .
 Evans instead spoke on the possibility of Mississippi stopping the “one-world trend toward peace” by standing integration were ever forced onup for states’ rights .
 It's been seven years since Hinds copped the State Junior College track championship . The 1963 version of the Eagles will be favored to win when the annual affair gets underway .
 Eagles looking for twelfth win since 1940 and their fi^t since 1955 . Hosting the event on the new ""Red Dog"" track, the Eagles will be looking for their twelfth victory since 1940 .
 New records will be almost nonexistent in the meet despite the lightning fastness of the track because of low marks set in previous years . New records won't be set in this year's meet because of the speed of the meet .
 Benny Shows of Perkinston sped around the oval in 1:59. to write his name in the books . Benny Shows was the fastest man to complete the race in 1.59.
 Hinds has won the event 11 times and Sunflower JC three times since 1940 . Hinds have won the race 11 times, Sunflower has won three times and Hinds won 11 .
 Hinds won seven times in succession, 1946-52 for the longest winning streak on the books . Hinds' seven-game winning streak is the longest in the history of Hinds .
 Last year Perkinston won the affair and will return to the meet as the defending champs . Last year's event was held in the same place as last year .
 Intramurals are continuing to grow in interest as the season progresses . Jimmy, and Jerry Clark served as top' men in last week’s mile relay j track contest .
 Several teams are still tied for first place, and each game becomes more important . Several teams still tied with first place .
 Results of last week's play saw Eastside defeat the Staff 18-9, Wednesday . Eastside defeated the Staff in the last week’s play .
 Eastside scored 23 runs while Jackson Day Students pushed across 14 . Jackson Day students scored 14 runs .
 Everyone is invited to attend all games, urged Bill Oakes, the recreational director .
 Hinds suffered their second loss of the season against xMississippi Delta Saturday . Hinds Netters suffered their last match before the State Junior College Tennis tourney May 11 .
 Trojans scored a 3-1 win over the Eagle net unit and ended their season with a 5-0 record . The Trojan ended the season with an undefeated 5-1 record .
 The championship matches will be staged here Saturday starting at 8:30m. The championships will be held at 8.30m . The final match will take place at 8pm .
 Sandra Wier, a Jackson freshman, exempimes the feelings of the average Southern student during the hundredth anniversary of the Civil War . Sandra, a freshman at Jackson, talks about her feelings during the centennial anniversary .
 FLeetwood 5-4501 . The steady growth of our business in the Central Mississippi and Northeastern Louisiana area has made necessary this new and greatly expanded Sales and Customer Service Center .
 Baby Maroons Tie Eagles In Three-Way Track Meet . Mississippi State freshmen and Marion Institute invade Raymond track .
 State's Baby Maroons tied the Eagle team for first place with a score of 51 points each . The Eagle team also tied the Maroons with 51 points . The Maroons scored 51 points in total .
 Mississippi State enteredpmly a partial team failing to take part in some events . Mississippi State won't be able to participate in some of the events .
 Hinds field event ace George Benton throws the discus m the triangular meet staged here last ThurspeUtiorf Saturday . Hinds State Junior College comion; 2.2.3 .
 State (Tom Moss, Walter Becker, Jerry Blazer, Gary Perkins), Marion Time — 1:32.55.55 . Marion State won the gold medal in the 100-meter relay .
 Contestants are Jones, Perkinston, Southwest, Southwest and Delta, Northeast East Mississippi and Hinds junior colleges . Contestants will compete in a variety of categories .
 Johnny Hines and Billy Joe Montgomery serve as first team doubles and Walter Bishop and Douglas Sullivan as second team doubles . Walter Bishop, Douglas Sullivan and Billy Bishop also serve in doubles . Billy Joe and Billy Hines serve in first team singles .
 First singles player is Boyd Me Phail and second singles participant is Tommy Axtell . First singles event is Boyd me Phail .
 Third Photo Quiz Has Rules Change To Calm Students . New rules for the third in the series of photo contests sponsored by the Hindsonian .
 Provisions give day students a fairer chance, by eliminating the time element, Fazekas said . Provisions help day students get a fair chance by eliminating time element .
 The rules are as follows; Entries must be on the entry blank from the Hindsonian entry page . Entries are required to be entered into the entry space blank .
 The winner will be posted on the window of the Student Publication Office .
 Due to increased interest in the contest, it shall be continued for the remainder of the year . Due to the increased interest, the contest will be continued .
 Last week’s photo was the hole in a pencil sharpener where the pencil is injected . This week's photo is a look at a hole in the sharpener .
 Never has a novel so accurately begun and a character so exquisitely created* The novel is # of course, the American masterpiece, “Gone With the Wind""; the character, the egotistical Scarlett O'Hara; and the author, the ""character-
 Character laden Miss Mitchell was, not only with Scarlett but with the undeniable Rhett Butler, angelic Melanie, flower-like Ashly, all-knowing Mama, and all-powerful Mama .
 This spicy analysis of 19th Century characters helped to recently put the book into its 70th printing . The book helped sell more than six million copies in this country, plus 10 million In all nations .
 Many people enjoy Rhett's flippant manner and Miss O’Hara’s forked tongue in other languages . Although in the Civil War saga the host of characters speak English, no matter how drawlish .
 Pulitzer Prize winner enjoys such world-wide popularity it has been translated into 24 foreign languages . The award-winning novel is published in 24 languages .
 HoUyvrood turned out the finest piece of film ever to be edited . The film is based on the novel by Margaret Mitchell and is set in London .
 Clark Gable starred as Rhett and Vivian Leigh as Scarlett in the movie . The movie was produced by David O Selznick and directed by Victor Fleming .
 Seldom have actors so remembered for their respective roles as these two . Seldom will be remembered for roles as such as this pair .
 Joan Fontaine had been seriously suggested, as had Gary Cooper, as well as Gary Cooper . Claiming the leads was not easy, however, since Fontaine was seriously suggested . The film is set to be released in October .
 Clark Gable, long-time manabout-town, was given the tile of “King” after Gone With the Wind .
 How a producer could dream of anyone besides Mr Gable for the part is beyond me. How would a producer imagine anyone besides him for the role is beyond him?
 Olivia de Havilland gave depth and a gentle sweetness to Melanie . Hattie McDaniel gave Mama a sharp tongue . Leslie Howard reeked with the manners of a Southern gentleman named Ashly .
 The words of Margaret Mitchell, the eyes of Clark Gable, the Southern drawl of Miss Leigh, and the bloated figure of Hattie McDaniel —these made the movie great . The words and eyes of the stars of the movie made it great .
 Producers claim the movie has been showing somewhere, every day, since it opened . Producers say the movie is showing somewhere every day since opening .
 Adolph Hitler supposedly had a private print of the film which he played frequently . Winston Churchill sent congratulations to the film's makers .
 Now that the film is 24 years old, most of the cast and many production men are dead . Most of the film's cast is dead, including many of the production men .
 These are living j and playing at neighborhood ' theatres around the world .
 Clark Gable and Leslie Howard will live, and Vivian Leigh will remain forever young . As long as they do, they will be forever young, and as long as that they live, they do .
 William T Sherman’s army today houses Keith Press . The pressroom is now housed by Raymond Raymond, the son of William Sherman, who died in 1953 .
 The Hindsonian has been in operation since 1843 and has published the Hindsonian for 28 years . The press, which has been published since 1844, is in operation for more than 200 years .
 Legend tells that a Negro slave confided to a Yankee guard that there was a treasure hidden under the floor of the building . Legend says a slave told the guard that a treasure had been hidden beneath the floor floor .
 That night the guard shielded himself with a blanket in the back of the building where the supposed treasure was hidden and chopped a hole in the floor . That night he cut a hole into the floor and hid himself in the building .
 No treasure was found by the disappointed guard, but the floor j still bears the scars of the soldier’s chopping .
 The crude hole was never repaired, and it is now covered by one of the two large flat bed Lee Presses .
 The building in addition to being used as a hospital, once served as court house offices, a skating rink, and before Keith Press moved there in 1925, a garage . The building also served as a court house office, skating rink and a garage.
 Thomas Keith, Sr. began publishing the HINDS County GAZETTE in that year, buying the newspaper from Manship and M Ney Williams of Raymond . Thomas Keith Sr. purchased the newspaper in that same year .
 George W Harper, an outstanding Whig, is the oldest newspaper in Mississippi . Harper was a Whig . He was the editor of the WOODVILLE REPUBLICAN .
 Thomas and Billy Keith, present owners of the plant, stated that, to their knowledge, the Gazette has never missed an issue . The present owners said, to the knowledge of the Gazette, they have never missed a issue .
 Blanche Keith, wife of Billy Keith, was the “main working force” to keep the paper going . Billy Keith’s wife, Blanche, was his ‘main’ working force to keep it going, she says .
 Several monthly magazines and programs for various occasions have been issued from Keith Keith . Keith is best known for his work on television and radio .
 The plant is never out of operation, since it doubles on all machines . The plant, which usually employs eight persons, usually employs 8 persons, has doubled its capacity .
 In operation are 1 two Linotype machines, two large flat bed Lee presses, two smaller presses, and two folders . In operation there are 1 large flat-bed Lee presses and two small presses .
 Two tons of paper, fifty pounds of ink, and almost three tons of lead are required per month for the material coming from the Keith presses . The Keith presses are used to make paper and ink .
 Preliminary judging to select Miss Hinds contestants has almost reached completion despite a week’s postponement of the event to give the contestants time to perfect their talent . Preliminary judges to select contestants have already reached completion . Twelve Girls Vie For Campus Title Preliminary Judging to be held
 Twelve girls will soon be chosen on schedule to compete in the pageant May 21 . The pageant will be held on May 21 in New Jersey .
 HiStepper director and coordinator says three-minute talent acts are being used to narrow the field to pageant-size . Three-minute acts will be used in the competition to narrow down the field .
 Sharon Bearden, reigning Miss Hinds, was one of the ten finalists in the Miss Mississippi contest last year . Bearden is one of 10 finalists in Miss Mississippi's Miss Mississippi .
 Hinds contest is an official preliminary pageant following the rules of the Miss America Pageant . Contest is a preliminary pageant for the official Miss America pageant . Miss America will compete in a Miss America preliminary pageant .
 Contestants will enter swim-suit, evening gown, and talent competi* tion. Contestants must wear swim-suits and evening gowns .
 The winner of the contest will represent the college in the Mississippi Pageant at Vicksburg this summer . The contest begins at 7:30 in the main auditorium .
 Woody Assaf will introduce each of the fifteen contestants in three phases of competition . Assaf, a Jackson television personality, will serve as master of ceremonies .
 Contenders will meet with the five judges at an afternoon party sponsored by Pepsi . Pepsi is one of the national sponsors of the Miss America Pageant .
 Selection of the top five finalists and the winnner will climax the evening . Selection will be a selection of five finalists . The winner will be announced at the end of the night .
 The 1963 Miss Hinds will be crowned by Sharon Bearden . Bearden is the current Miss Miss Mississippi . She ranked among the top ten at Miss Mississippi Pageant last year .
 Contestants in the Miss Hinds Junior College Pageant gather around the piano to vocally relax during practice for their talent presentations . Vying for the crown this year this year SEEKING TITLE — Contestants .
 The contest will be held Tuesday night . Barbara Baile y> Jackson soph Bobbye Jean Kitchens, Hilda Bullock, Paula Jo Hopson, Carmen Cotton and Sandra Weir .
 Spring concert by Hinds choir has been canceled because of conflicts in schedules of various organizations . Hinds Choir Head Cancels Concert As Result of Tight Schedules .
 Reeves explained the move as not only a yield to conflicts, but also a . effort to give choir members more time for examination preparation . Reeves explained that the move was a result of a desire for more time to prepare .
 He explained that the choir has spent time alloted for concert rehearsals in preparation for the final appearance in the Sunday evening tour series . The choir has also spent time rehearsing for its final appearance .
 The last concert will be presented this Sunday at Crawford Street Methodist Church in Vicksburg, Mississippi .
 Several new works have been readied for Sunday's concert . In addition to numbers usually featured on the program, several new works are readied .
 Final Self Study Session Covers Questions Monday . One meeting of faculty and' a few instances, administration remains in the current college self-study program .
 McLendon all is on schedule and the finished reports will go on schedule, McLendon says . McLendon: "The finished reports are on schedule" McLendon reports are due to go to press on schedule .
 The meeting next Monday afternoon will be the fourth in the series . The meeting will leave time for all pertinent questions before the committee reports go to the final editing committee for polishing .
 All committees, both academic and physical, have had reporji approved by the general faculty . All committees have been re-evaluated by the General Faculty .
 Two ballots will be issued each voter Thursday in the first Associated Student Body elections . Dean of Instruction Dr, Janies Sparkman noted that some reports uncovered certain needs, but that corrections are already being made .
 Kathy Kilby, Brenda Mullins, Beth Ponder, and James Scoggins will audition on piano, and Peggy Smallwood, Barbara Baily, and Douglas Sullivan will sing . Peggy and Barbara Smallwood will sing on piano .
 ASB vice-president will head the Women’s Student Association . Leslie Reeves, and Rex Tatum. women will be given vice-presidents ballots .
 First primary is scheduled for Thursday, May 16, with polls open from 8:00 until 3:30 . First primary will be held on May 16 .
 If run-offs are needed, a second primary is slated for the following day . The primary is set to be held on Tuesday .
 All students who present their blue second semester ID card will be allowed to vote once . Students will be able to vote at least once if they present their ID card .
 Five boys and four girls campaigning for ASB president, four girls for vicepresident . Five boys are campaigning for AsB president . Four girls are also campaigning for vice president .
 Presidential candidates are Joe Campbell, Jack McCaskill, Douglas McCool, Billy Joe Montgomery, and Harlan Stanley . Joe Campbell is the Democratic presidential candidate for the first time since 1964 .
 Candidates for vice-president are Connie Roediger, Klare Parker, Vicki Hazzelrigg, and Carmen Cotton . Candidates also for second-term are Carmen Cotton, Connie Rediger and Klare .
 President McLendon said the administration is “highly pleased with the progress of the study and hopes to wrap it up Monday’s wrap up Monday .
 The committee reports will be published this summer in bulletin form . They will be examined by a committee from the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools .
 Paula Jo Hopson, Opelousas, La., sophomore, sophomore, dramatic reading; Bobbye Kitchens, Jackson freshman, dance; Jo Schaeffer, Jackson sophomore, song and dance; Gloria Shirley, Jackson freshmen, reading; Jan Simpson, freshman, comedy read ing
 Ann Stephenson, Raymond freshman, song and dance; Margaret Thomas, Jackson sophomore, dance; Sandra Weir, Jackson freshman, sing; and Linda Watson, Forest Hill freshmen, sing . Linda Watson and Ann Stephenson also perform at the awards show .
 Hi-Stepper director and coordinator of the contest, Anna Bee, recently talked with the present Miss America, Jacqueline Mayer, at a pageant in Houma, Louisiana .
 Helpful information was gained to make this pageant an even larger success than last year’s event .
 First prize is $100, with a chance to compete for the national best local pageant award . First prize will be $100 . The pageant will also compete for a national award for the best local beauty .
 Admission will be one dollar for adults and fifty cents for students presenting an activity card . Admission will also be a dollar for children presenting a card at the event . Admission is one dollar per person .
 Proceeds will offset expenses of sending the winner to the state pageant, paying entrance fees, buying trophies, awards and crowns presented at the local contest, printing of programs and tokens of appreciation to the judges .
 Federal Funds Awarded Hinds For Purchasing IBM Machines . Federal funds and a donation from International Business Machines will help purchase $120,000 equipment . IBM equipment needed for new twoyear course in data processing .
 Hinds payment will be $26,000, Dean of Instruction James Sparkman released . Hinds will be paid out to $25,000 .
 IBM instructor Harry Brister announced today that several machines—including a 16/20 computer —have already been designated for shipment to Hinds around June 15 .
 The data processing program is the only one of its kind in the state . It will begin in summer school this year .
 Hinds curriculum had to meet certain standards of the State Vocational Office . Hinds had to comply with the state's curriculum requirements to meet standards .
 IBM deducts 60 per cent of total cost for machines to be used for educational purposes . IBM deducted the cost of the machines for education purposes .
 Of the remaining 40 per cent Hinds pays 20 and the federal government 20 per cent . Hinds also pays the government $20 per cent of the profits .
 IBM training is done through companies or commercial firms which only have time to teach machine operation . Most IBM training was done by commercial firms or companies which only had time to train machine operation.
 The new two-year course will be equally divided between data processing and academic courses . The course will take place in a bid to boost data processing skills .
 In data processing students will actually go into nearby businesses and corporations, operating that company’s machinery . The more advanced students will be able to operate the machinery of those companies .
 Academic courses will include English, algebra, accounting, statistics, social science, and a course in industrial organizations . Academic courses include English and algebra and accounting .
 To accommodate the expanded course Hinds has ordered a highspeed IBM 16/2*0 computer, five key punch machines, and three verifiers . Hinds ordered the highspeed computer, a key punch machine, and five key punching machines .
 IBM computer, one of the most advanced IBM machines, will solve problems in milleseconds . The IBM computer is one of IBM's most advanced machines . IBM computer was created in the 1970s .
 Definite entrance standards will be set which will necessarily be stiffer than those for regular entrance in Hinds . Hinds will also have to be stricter than regular entrance standards .
 In this course the major emphasis will be placed on business applications rather than science or engineering applications .
 Mississippi Intercollegiate Council leaders could serve as favorable outside influence on Hinds' student leaders . Ralph Hemphill: "Pretty Sharp" was the way Hemphills described the council's leaders . Hinds student leaders will meet with Hinds students at Hinds College .
 The organization of college governments later also extended membership to Northeast Junior College and Wood Junior College . The organization was also extended to Northeast Jr. college governments .
 bi-annual meetings present leaders of state student governments opportunities to discuss problems and compare difficulties . The bi-yearly meetings give leaders of student governments a chance to discuss issues .
 Hemphill noted that the valut of the organization will be realized in the future when it has had time to grow some more . The organization will continue to grow in the coming years .
 Year’s End Social Set For Thursday in New Girls’ Gym Presidents Council Activity Committee . Thursday night, May 16 .
 The dance will take place from 6:30 until 9:30 in the girls gymnasium . Ralph Hemphill, head of the committee, said the dance would be held from 6 to 9:00am .
 Plans were not announced sooner, Hemphill said, because of indefinite information on exact date and time elements . Plans were announced sooner because of the lack of information on specific dates and times .
 A dissatisfied freshman voiced his felings on the upcoming Associated Student Body elections . With these words, one student voiced his feelings on the election .
 Sophomores and freshmen will vote Thurday on next year’s officers for the student body . Freshmen and sophomores will also vote on the officers .
 There must be a good, sensible reason for this privilege extended to sophomores, says Simon Cowan .
 There has to be a starting point for the change in procedure, and this is as good a time as any . There has been a lot of problems in the world of football, but this is a good time for a change .
 The same interview uncovered the bare facts of the real reason sophomores are voting . The interview also uncovered the truth about why sophomore students are voting.
 On the recent election for approval of the new constitution, freshmen were sparsely represented . Freshmen in the University of Columbia were also underrepresented .
 Only 66 freshmen voted on the important measure, out of a freshman class of 764 . Only 66 freshman members of the freshman class voted .
 We may assume that in the future sophomores will continue to show more responsibility than freshmen . We might assume that . In the future, sophomorees will continue .
 If you want to see something upsetting, look at the face of the fellow on your right . Lamentations will be shown on the BBC2 documentary, "Lamentations"
 Chances are that he’s one of the many students who are behind in their work, and having all kinds of trouble getting it done before final exams . Chances were that he was behind in his work, or having trouble finishing it before exams .
 There are less than two actual weeks of school to go, and over nine weeks of work to be done . There is much lamenting and sorrow, for either the work will be done and the student passed, or curtains .
 Never procrastinate, under any circumstances, especially from laziness . Never Procrastinate under any circumstance, especially in any circumstances .
 If this lesson is learned from such a situation, the situation might be forgiven and even praised . The situation may be forgiven, even praised.
 There is no excuse for idleness, and idleness causes one to get behind in his work . Idleness may even lead him to a life of dependence on others, rather than the necessary independence .
 College is the laundpdng pad for successful living in the modern world . College is a life-changing experience for students and students .
 tjpF student may never make it off the ground if his fuel line Becomes congested with debris such as laziness .
 E Zke Press Highlights Highlights of Hinds Hinds . Jim Toombs, Billy Lee and Jim Bonney are in charge of the sports team .
 The first scene of the new film is the opening scene . The film is set in New York City, New York, at 8 p.m. ET .
 The title would indicate an Oriental theme, naturally, and it does center around hundreds of women working rice crops in irrigated fields . After a few moments, realization comes .
 The rice-planting songs are so strange, they're Italian, too . That's what makes the rice planting songs so strange .
 Once the basic preliminaries were over, characters vividly portrayed the personages they were . Even to the point of overacting, characters portrayed the people they were, as well as overacting .
 The plot later revealed that she was his daughter from a previous common law marriage . She was later revealed to be his daughter . The plot was revealed that he had a previous marriage .
 The individual characters portrayed wonderful parts which could easily have been left out, leaving the movie with a basic 30 minute showtime . The movie is about 30 minutes long .
 Some of the actresses were evidently misplaced from a Naked City show . One worker had trouble with the illness of her child, whom she should have left at home .
 Their initial intention of ""making some money for my family which is so poor"" was disqualified when they went to town on weekends and blew their pay on gay times with gay blades .
 It seems that if these second rate movies are going to be turned out in droves and bad droves at that, the producers should at least try to co-ordinate the plot with the actions of the characters .
 An Italian cast in an Oriental background, singing Italian songs, ... it's too much for the average college student to comprehend . The show is set in New York, New York .
 I would be delighted to-own the sound track from this movie . Personally, I would like to own the soundtrack .
 A hauntingly beautiful theme song was played at appropriate places . The combined chorale of female voices was very well done .
 In fact, I think I would have enjoyed the movie far more with my eyes closed . I think it would have been far more enjoyable if I'd been able to watch with eyes closed.
 Haiti is a land where everything that is not forbidden is compulsory will best described Haiti today . Voodoo Leader rules Haiti by RALPH .
 Francois Duvalier, witch-doctor President, uses every trick there is to keep tight-fisted control over the island . Duvaliers was the French President of France in the 17th century . The island nation is now a French colony of Cuba .
 'He not only keeps his oppostion hopping, but keeps his friends hopping 'after his opposition' 'He keeps his opposition hopping,’ he says .
 Tousant LeOvervure, a Negro statesman, then set about unifying the island . The conquering of the other half of Santo Dominigo, the Dominican Republic .
 The U.S. Marines were stationed in Haiti at the turn of the century .
 With the end of WW II, and the birth of foreign aid, the U.S. took a renewed interest in the internal affairs of this tiny tornado of a nation .
 Castro and Communism to the Western Hemisphere, landing in Cuba only 50 short miles from Haiti . Haiti was only 50 miles from Cuba . Cuba is now 50 miles away from Haiti.
 Since Castro's arrival, strange things have been happening in the Caribbean . Since Castro arrived in Cuba, things have happened in the region .
 He was replaced by a more liberal and seemingly democratic regime under President Juan Bosch . Bosch was replaced with a more democratic regime .
 The plot of the people and the state of the economy has gone from bad to worse then . The plot is the plot of a plot to kill off the economy, the government says .
 Duvalier’s terror tactics to stay afloat has caused the U.S. to withdraw support and money from Haiti . This, combined with the United States withdrawing support from Haiti, has caused it to become a source of instability in Haiti .
 Duvalier regime finds itself between an invasion from the OAS investigation by the Organization of American States . The worst still to come, with the worst still yet to come .
 His troops have been stationed along the Haitian border for a week now . The Haitian border has been closed to Haitian refugees for a year .
 American semi-intervention is the only thing that has stopped them from crossing it thus far . The U.S. has not been able to cross the border with Russia .
 He has guaranteed not to molest foreigners or people seeking asylum in embassies in embassies . He has also guaranteed to not molest foreign people or those seeking asylum .
 Bosch wants Bosch to promise safe exits to those desiring to leave Haiti . Bosch says he wants safe exits promised to those wanting to leave the country .
 No matter what Duvalier does now, time is running out for him . Time is gradually running out .
 The only thing that keeps him in power today is his use of Voodoo on the ignorant natives, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If any dictator has used fear and terror as a weapon of the first resort, Duvalier is this man . The French dictator is known for his use of terror to terrorize his people .
 He will probably be removed before the year is out, by these same tactics in reverse . On the other side of the coin, he will probably also be removed from the job .
 Freshmen, sophomores, faculty and faculty weigh in on the decision . The decision has been made and sophomore will have an opportunity to vote .
 Jackson sophomore: "No, I don't think e should vote since it will not be our school next year" Easterwood, Jackson sophomore, voiced, “I don’t think e . should vote’s not to vote,” she said .
 Fred Peyton, Vicksburg sophomore, says the students are still interested in the future of the school . Fred Peyton: "Yes, because they are a little older, and are still . interested in future of school"
 Miss Susan Brown, social science instructor, mused, “No, because they had their chance last year and in all probability the freshmen are more aware of their candidate's qualifications .
 Patrick Patrick, also a social science instructor, commented, “I would say so, since so few freshmen voted last week.” Patrick said . Patrick also said that so many freshmen voted .
 A vice presidential nominee stressed, ""From the speeches sophomores can see which candidate is more qualified. A vice president nominee stressed. "Sophomore students will be able to see if the candidates are more qualified."
 Four candidates meet with Dean of Women Fay Marshall to discuss organization of the women’s governing body . Candidates expressed hopes for success of the new constitution, no matter who is elected .
 Carmen Cotten, Vicki Hazzlerigg, Klare Parker, and Connie Roediger, will be voted on by full-time women students during first ASB elections Thursday . Full-time female students will vote on the new ASB members on Thursday . The first AS
 Only women students are eligible for ASB vice-president because of the double nature of the office . According to the constitution, only women students can be eligible for the role .
 Only women students can vote for vicepresident . ASB veep also acts as president of women’s government .
 Politics ruffled campus conversations this week despite a lack of platform conflicts among candidates for first president of Associated Student Body . Candidates are vying for the position of first president at the University of Washington .
 In interviews with the Hindsonian before formal campaign speeches in assembly today, the five presidential candidates displayed simi lar attitudes toward the authority of ASB president .
 All agreed on the need for more social activities and increasing stu dent participation, which would result in a rise in campus spirit . All agreed that social activities needed to increase campus spirit and increase participation .
 Final decisions about voting are expected to come from speeches in Wednesday’s assembly . Final decisions will be made from speeches and from leadership ability, personality, and popularity .
 Candidates are Joe Campbell, Jack McCaskill, Douglas McCool, Billy Joe Montgomery, and Harlan Stanley . Joe Campbell is a Democrat who has run for office in the past .
 Campbell was a Boys Stater, Junior Rotarian, recipient of the DAR Good Citizenship and American Legion Leadership awards . He was a former president of his senior class . Campbell was also recipient of an American Legion leadership award and a Junior Rotary award .
 The President’s main job, this first year, is familiarizing students with the constitution and gathering student support for it . “The hope of a better tomorrow lies in the Constitution," says Vicksburg resident .
 McCaskill has a varied background in athletics, journalism, and class offices . She is a member of the U.S. Olympic Committee .
 He is a member of Hinds band, plays bass with the Jerry Lane Orchestra, and has played three years in the Jackson symphony . He has played bass bass for three years .
 Montgomery was President of the freshman class . Montgomery was chosen a favorite, served on Presidents Council, was a delegate to MIC, and was chairman of student assembly committee .
 He is a junior college tennis doubles champion . He is also a member of Circle K .
 Stanley served as a delegate to MIC, and has been elected BSU president for next year . Stanley is also a BSU delegate and has served as president of the BSU since 2010 .
 In high school he was a member of the Beta Club, Hi-Y, student council three years, and was elected Most Dignified and Most Likely to Succeed . He was also elected Most Likely To Succeed in high school and student council .
 Students expecting to transfer to another college at the end of this semester are requested to check with the Registrar’s office about transferring academic records .
 All college entrants from junior college must present complete transcript records, Registrar says . Registrar Miss Mildred Herrin stressed . All junior college entrants must present transcript records .
 Many students have already notified the office to send transcripts to senior colleges . A written applicaion must be made for transferring transcripts complete with this semester’s record .
 Four ASB vice-presidential candidates are consulting with Dean of Womer Fay Marshall . From the left they are Vicki Hazzlerigg, Carmen Cotton, Klare Parker, Connie Roediger, and Miss Marshall .
 Gill Family ends Season with Twelfth Hinds Grad . Parents Kenneth Gill and Kenneth Gill don't play baseball, but they have a perfect 1,000 batting average .
 The game originated in 1943, when Earl, oldest of the clan, earned his diploma from Hinds . Earl's oldest son, Earl, is the oldest son of the family . Earl is the son of two of the oldest sons, Earl and Earl, Earl .
 He was followed by four brothers, Guy, Fred, Grady and Kenneth . Seven sisters, Lucille, Ruth, Sarah, Helen, Helen and Dot, Jean and Carolyn graduated in 1961 .
 All twelve successfully paid their own expenses through school . Most of them worked in the cafeteria as does Kenneth. Kenneth .
 Kenneth hopes to enter the profession upon completing his studies at Southern, where he intends to go next year . Kenneth plans to study at Southern University in Atlanta, Georgia .
 The Gills are the salt of the earth and deserve all the credit in the world . Joby Harris, political science instructor who taught most of the twelve, said, ""The Gills" were the 'Salt of the Earth'
 Nine students will attend Ole Miss; six, Millsaps; four, MSCW; three, Belhaven; two, William Carey; and two plan to attend Delta State . Two students plan to go to Delta State; nine students will go to Ole Miss .
 One student plans to attend Peabody College, and one will attend Springhill . Another plans to go to Springhill College .
 There are several students who plan not to continue their education, but to instead work . Students say they want to stay focused on their studies and focus on their goals .
 Johns sophomore Kenneth Gill completes preparations for meal in Hinds cafeteria . Gill is a sophomore at the Hinds school .
 The party featured entertainment, a Who’s Who contest, and refreshments . The party was held in honor of the mayor .
 Best Looking, Bobbye Jean Kitchens, Merrilyn Mitchell and Margie Bingham named the cutest, friendliest and most Dignified . Gruesome Twosome, Gloria Bickham and Ann Bostick named the most gruesome twosome .
 Entertainment chairman Sandra Weir reported that Gloria Bickham, Donna Breightling, and Mary Ber ryhill sang for the girls .
 Jan Simp son did a monologue and the Twist, and Linda Miller did the Limbo . Linda Miller also did the limbo . Jan Simpp son did the monologue .
 Food chairman was Carolyn Christian; Entertainment, Sandra Weir; Who’s Who, Ann Williams; and Kay McBride and Vicki Hazzlerigg were in charge of decorations . Food chairman Carolyn Christian was Carolyn .
 Last week's picture showed the mandible, canine teeth, premolars, papillae, taste buds, and tongue of a four legged animal commonly known as a dog . Photo Contest Entry Blank Name is:_ My Guess .
 Miss Barbara Bailey, sophomore music major, was presented in a voice recital Tuesday evening in the Music Auditorium . Kay McBride was the Swingingest One, Jan Simpson; Jan Simpson was the Best Dancer, Sandra Weir; Sandra Weir was the Most Talented, Most Tal
 Miss Bailey studies voice with J L Reeves and is accompanied by Miss Brenda Mullins . Miss Mullins is also studying voice at the school .
 For her group of English lyrics Baily performed ""The Swan"" by Grieg; Loveliest of Trees"" by Duke; ""Velvet Shoes"" by Thompsin; ""My Love is a Fisherman"" by Stricklin and ""The Lilac Tree"" by G
 Eugenie Stogner, sophomore interior decoration major, smiles happily as she anticipates the end of the school year and the start of summer vacation . "Ioo& 9iom nfirft \ A IKi Page 5 r/oe
 Hinds took second in both boys and girls events in total number of points . Hinds also took second place in both girls and boys events. Hinds was second overall in the girls' events .
 Perkinston, Southwest, and Holmes each scored three points . Mississippi Delta scored two. Perkinst, Southwest and Holmes scored three.
 In girls division, Perkinston placed second again again . Northwest and Southwest tied for fourth with three each . In boys division, Northwest placed second .
 Billy Joe Montgomery and Johnny Hines of Hinds defeated Vernon Sauls and Billy Joe Schoenwitz of Perkinston to win the Number Two doubles doubles . Billy Joe Monterey and Johnny . Hines and Montgomery won the Number 2 doubles doubles match .
 The same Perk pair had edged them last week in the last of regular season play . The same team had edged each other last week .
 Shirley Morris of Hinds won the Number Two girls singles by defeating Barbara Glass of Jones . Roxie Noblin and Ann Stephenson won girls Number One doubles from Jones’ Margaret Buxton and Pat Moody . Shirley Morris won the girls Number 2 girls singles .
 Perkinston broke across just a foot ahead and was named winner . Hinds was spotted next just 0.2 seconds behind; Hinds and Jones (all gold) and Scooba (gold) were spotted next . Jones (gold), Scooba, Scooba and Scoobel
 Jones (Sonny Walters, Dayton Pridgen, Charile Robinson, Watts Davis) Jones (1-0), Jones (2-0) and Jones (3-2) win . Jones' first-half score was 2-0 .
 Perkinston (Phil Carriere, Bron Rasco, Teddy Roberts, Larry Plumlee) (4.5) (Perkinston) (Teddy Roberts) and Teddy Roberts (3.4) score . (Perkinsston) score: 4.5;
 Jones (Chariel Robinson, Walter Merrill, Dayton Pridgen, Watts Davis) (4) Jones (1-1) (2-1), Jones (3-2), Merrill (4-2) (3) Jones, Merrill (3), Merrill, Prid
 Hinds placed first in only four events . They racked up nine second place berths for 57V2 points . Hinds almost double their nearest opponent’s scoring .
 In addition they almost won individual scorer's trophy and barely missed cracking the oldest state record .
 Jerry Clark of Hinds was nosed out of the trophy of top individual by Allen Bruton of East Mississippi . Jerry Clark won the top individual award for his efforts .
 Had Martin been able to shave three-tenths of a second off his two-minute flat time, he would have broken the 25-year old state record, 1:59.7.7 .
 Holmes’ mile relay team of Alton Wright, Roger Bynum, Elton Wright and Johnny Vaughn bettered by only one-tenth of a second the record of 3:27 set by Hinds in 1961 .
 With today's installment I complete my ninth year of writing columns in your college newspaper for the makers of Marlboro Cigarettes .
 In view of the occasion, I hope I may be forgiven if I get a little misty. I hope it may be a little bit of a tearful moment .
 "I would not believe that so much time has gone by except that I have my wife nearby as a handy reference," he says .
 Most of my friends w T ho were married at the same time have wives who chase cars all day. Most of his friends w ho were . Most of their friends w. w. were married to the same . time .
 I attribute my good fortune to the fact that I have never struck my wife with my hand . I myself have never had this trouble and I attribute it to being struck by my wife .
 During this period I had the airmail edition of the Manchester Guardian flown in daily from England from England . During this time I had a weekly edition flown in from England.
 The airmail edition of the Guardian is printed on paper so light and flimsy that it makes little or no impression when one slaps one s wife .
 Mine, in fact, thought it was some kind of game, and tore several pairs of trousers . Mine, mine, thought that it was an act of madness .
 The makers of Marlboro Cigarettes are a fine group of men, as anyone who lias sampled their wares would suspect . I was saying what a pleasure it has been to write this column for the last nine years for the company .
 "I have never for an instant wavered in my belief that some day they will pay me for these last nine years," he says . "They are loyal, true, companionable, and constant," he adds .
 Working for the makers of Marlboro has not been the gr. ast of my pleasures over the last nine years . But working for the . makers of the . products has not always been the . pleasures of my life, I say . But it has been a pleasure of working for
 The chief satisfaction has been writing for you —the college population of America . The chief success of this article is writing for the college population .
 It is a rare and lucky columnist who can find an audience so full of intelligence and verve . It's a lucky columnist can find a audience of intelligence, verve, and he's lucky to have audience so enthusiastic .
 To those I extend my heartfelt wishes that you will find the world outside a happy valley. To those he extend his heartfelt wishes, he wishes they will find a world outside of a 'happy valley'
 To sophomores I extend my heartfelt wishes that you will become juniors, I extend a heartfelt wish that you become a junior . I extend your heartfelt wishes for you to become seniors .
 To freshmen I extend my heartfelt wishes that you will become sophomores. To freshmen, I extend a heartfelt wish that they will become Sophomores .
 "To those going on into graduate school I extend my heartfelt wishes that you will marry money," he says .
 I hope that success will attend your ventures. Whatever your status, whatever your plans, I hope it will be successful .
 WAA Top Girls Plan Journey to Gulf ) Coast . WAA top girls with highest point scores will vacation this weekend at Gulf Coast .
 The girls won their points by participation in various activities . The girls were able to earn points by participating in various athletic activities .
 Girls are awarded five to ten points for participation in the activities sponsored by the association . Girls are given five to 10 points for their part in the games .
 Tennis, archery, golf and softball are the main activities of the closing weeks of school . The card and checker tournaments have recently been replaced by tennis and archery tournaments .
 The freshman girls defeated the sophomore girls 11 to 9 in the first softball game Monday afternoon . The freshman won the game 11-9 . The sophomore girls also defeated the freshman girls .
 The second game will be played Wednesday afternoon at 3:30 north of the girls gym .
 From track meet to printed picture involved little more than four days . Color processing this week darrants some special mentioning since from track meets to printed pictures involved just four days.
 The pictures were air-mailed to Dallas by midafternoon Saturday . Spurred by photo editor Daniel Fazekas, the pictures were taken and airmailed .
 Dynacolor processed the slides, returned them by early Monday morning, and Hayes Graphic Arts processed separations Monday night . The slides were returned to the U.S. Monday morning .
 A rush at Mississippi Engraving detained the finished plates until late Wednesday afternoon . The plates will be unveiled at the end of the day .
 Keith Press ran the color on their hand-fed Lee flatbed . By noon Thursday the finished papers were being circulated on campus, a little behind schedule .
 Jerry Clark took first place in broad jump division of state junior college track meet held here last weekend .
 Jerry was ‘siightly second in the position of individual top scorer by only 11/4 points’ ‘Jerry’ is ‘slightly second’ in the . position of ‘individual top scorer’ by only . 11/2 points .
 Eastside dormitory dormitory leads the intramural softball standings . Eight teams head into their final week of play .
 Close behind in second place is Southside with the day students only one game behind . Southside is only one team behind in third place .
 Recreation director said final action will be completed next week and champions announced . Oakes, recreation director, said the champions will be announced next week .
 H V Watkins, prominent Jackson attorney, will deliver the 1963 commencement address . Dr. Dr. George M McLendon will also speak at the graduation ceremony .
 Kelly Unger, pastor of the First Presbyterian Church in Meridian, will deliver the baccalaureate sermon . Unger's sermon will be delivered at the ceremony .
 The baccalaureate sermon will be held Sunday, May 26, in the college auditorium at 11m. Sunday .
 Commencement exercises are scheduled for Friday, May 31, 10:30m., also in the college auditorium . Commencements will be held in the auditorium on May 31 .
 James Scoggins, organist, will play the processional and recessional for the baccalaureate sermon . Kathy Kilby and Brenda Mullins will also play for the commencement exercises . Kathy and Brenda Kilby will perform for the ceremony .
 Dr. W T Mangum, pastor, Raymond Methodist Church, will deliver the invocation and benediction Sunday . Dr. Dr. Mangum will also give the invocation . The event will be held at Raymond Methodist church in Raymond, Arkansas .
 Jerry Breazeale, pastor at Raymond Baptist Church, delivers the same at the Friday service . Jerry Breazedale, a pastor at the same church, delivered the same message .
 Beemon, sophomore class sponsor, advised graduates at today's practice during today's 2A period of the next rehearsal at 2 m. Beemon . Beemon also advised graduates during the 2A during the next rehearsals .
 The time was postponed in order for the graduating list to be as definite as possible . The time of the graduation list was postponed .
 President McLendon will award the diplomas at the commencement exercise . President will also award diplomas .
 Una Schaeffer Crowned Miss Hinds Junior College . Miss Una Jo Shaeffer smiles tearfully following her crowning as the new Miss Hind's .
 First alternate Hilda Bullock and second alternate Sandra Weir stand beside Hinds’ representative to the Miss Mississippi Pageant . Hinds representative to Miss Mississippi will represent the city in Miss Mississippi .
 Hinds Coed given Miss Pearl title for third year in a row . Hinds coed captured the title of “Miss Pearl” in the annual citywide contest .
 The winner will participate as an official entry in the Miss Mississippi Pageant . The winner is a Miss Mississippi .
 Nora Holder, freshman coed, was recently crowned in the annual pageant held in the Pearl High School Auditorium .
 Miss Holder is a member of the college choir and girls' ensemble . At Hinds Miss Holder also sings in the girls' choir and ensemble .
 While in high school she was cheerleader for two years and captain of the Pearlettes, precision marching group . She was also captain of a precision marching team .
 Miss Holder received her title from Dot Lyons, 1963 winner, who is now a sophomore at Hinds . Miss Holder was crowned Miss Holder at Miss Holder .
 Sophomore Beverly Tadlock preceded Miss Lyons as Pearl's representative to the Miss Mississippi Pageant .
 Proposed Student Center Receives Ideas Through Presidents Council . Presidents Council compiled a list of suggestions as to its composition . Proposed student center received suggestions from President Council .
 A committee of Ralph Hemphill and Harlan Stanley conferred with President McLendon Tuesday afternoon . The committee acquired an overall idea of the proposed building . The proposal was approved by McLendon .
 Hemphill-and Stanley presented their report to the Presidents Council . The Presidents Council asked for further suggestions .
 These suggestions will be formally submitted to the administration Thursday .
 Preliminary plans call for construction to begin during the next academic year, with completion soon afterwards . Preliminary construction is expected to begin in the fall .
 Miss Una Jo Schaeffer will represent Hinds at the 1963 Miss Mississippi Pageant . She is a 21-year-old co-ed whose ambition in life is to become a clothes buyer .
 Jo was crowned last evening in the college auditorium at the Miss Hinds Pageant . Jo crowned last night in the College auditorium .
 Hi-Steppers made their last performance of the year Friday night at the Indianola Country Club . First alternate was Hilda Bui .
 The group performed for the annual Ladies Night of the Indianola Kiwanis Club . The group performs for the Ladies Night .
 The group was invited to perform for the Kiwanis State Convention on the Gulf Coast in August .
 This week, at the request of several bowl officials, a color sound track movie will be made of the band and Hi-Steppers . The color track movie is scheduled to be released at the end of the week .
 Hi-Stepper will be produced to be shown at bowl committee meetings this summer . Alon Bee is the director of the movie .
 This year’s Hindsonian were Dannie | Toombs and Jim Toombs, both Jackson freshmen . Dannie . Evans and Jim . Toombs emphasized the tremenes .
 He is a graduate of P'rovine High School in Jackson . He served for two lock, 19-year-old sophomore, the daughter of Mr and Mrs. Mrs. J. and Mr. Smith . He also served as a high school principal .
 Second alternate was 19-year-old Sandra Weir, a freshman from Jackson . Weir is the daughter of Mr and Mrs. Weir .
 The new Miss Hinds charmed the audience with a rendition of ""Spanish Rose,"" sparked with an accompanying dance . The performance sparked with a dance .
 Brought to tears when announced inner, she cried, ""I just can't believe it. I just can," she said .
 Also named to the top five finalists were Barbara Bailey, Jackson sophomore and daughter of Mr and Mrs. Bailey . Barbara Bailey is a junior at Jackson High School .
 Ann Stephenson was chosen by fellow contestants as Miss Congeniality . She was the crowd’s favorite for the evening .
 She literally brought the house down with a roaring song and dance routine . She brought the crowd down with the performance .
 Jo was crowned by President George McLendon and Miss Sharon Bearden, out-going Miss Hinds j . Bearden earned a position in the top ten at last summer's Miss Mississippi Pageant . Jo is the first Miss Mississippi to be crowned Miss Mississippi .
 Ed Cox, of Vicksyears on the award-winning ""Provine Rambler,"" school newspaper . Ed Cox is the editor of the school newspaper, which is based in Vicksyearyearly .
 Public Relations Director Kent Prince expressed confidence that the 1964 Hindsonian would be larger, more attractive, and better planned than ever . Mr and Mrs. eant directors; Mr. Prince said the Hindsonian will be larger and more attractive .
 Wayne Terry Lamar (former Patricia Chadwick), of Jackson, served as Miss Jackson and 1st alternate Miss Mississippi . Lamar is the former Miss Jackson . Lamar was Miss Jackson, Miss Miss Miss Mississippi, and Miss Miss Louisiana . Lamar served as the first Miss Mississippi and the second Miss Mississippi
 Anna Bee, Hi-Stepper director, was coordinator of the pageant, assisted by Miss Annice Ray Jernigan . Anna Bee was also the pageant's director .
 Miss Pearl Buck Pruitt, manager of two Jackson threatres, will present a free Hirids Appreciation Showing tonight at the ’51 and Varia DriveIns . The show will be held at the '51 and 'Varia Driveins .
 Present showing at the '51 Theater is ""The Giant,"" starring Jimmy Dean, Rock Hudson and Elizabeth Taylor . Present showing is "The Giant" by Jimmy Dean . The Giant is "Jimmy Dean"
 Showing at the Varia Theatre is "Elvis at the Worlds Fair" starring Elvis Presley and Joannie O'Brien . Showing is Elvis at the World Fair .
 The theatres will probably sponsor another free appreciation night next year . According to Pruitt, the theatres are looking forward to a similar event .
 He served as assistant business manager this year for the newspaper . He also served as business manager for the spring magazine supplement .
 He is also a graduate of Provine High School and served two years on the Rambler staff . He is a former member of the staff at Ramblers .
 Evans and Toombs plan to direct a portion of their schooling to nalistic efforts . Both have extensive experience in the journalistic field, and plan to focus their education on the subject .
 Evans will serve as execunewspaper would not be changed, tive editor . Toombs assumed responsibilities of business but that a more varied style of manager . Evans will continue to serve as executive editor of the paper .
 The Hindsonian.com is a weekly feature on CNN iReport . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Visit CNN Living at 9 p.m. ET for details .
 As each staffer rises each morning his thoughts naturally shift toward the college newspaper . "As each staffer arises each morning he thinks about the newspaper," he says .
 "Perhaps we have not done exactly as everyone would have us do, but we have done our best," says President Obama . "I have done my best, but I have done the best," he says .
 Hinds possesses the best traits that he possesses is that of quality in personnel . Hinds has a reputation for being a quality player, says Hinds . He adds that he has a 'quality in personnel'
 Without qualified newspaper sponsors the Hindsonian would never have been as successful as it has been . The Hindsonian has been in touch with the world for more than 30 years .
 As we complete our last year at Hinds we have only single files of each issue of the Hindsonian to link our memories back to two years of work .
 Each back issue will remind us personally of events which impressed only us as a group . Each issue will also remind us of events that impressed us personally, such as the events in which we were impressed only by ourselves .
 Only direct newspaper workers can feel the sense of completeness when an issue is finished and being printed at the press . Only direct paper workers can .
 A small staff feels a unified pride in accomplishments, however small they may be . A small team feels proud of accomplishments, even though small they are .
 The Hindsonian is the most outstanding junior college newspaper in Mississippi and one of the top in the nation . We leave an open letter of appreciation to the many individuals, instructors, administrators and students who have helped us in making the Hindsonian .
 In questioning graduating sophomores we found that one answer reigns supreme -- people . We asked students to explain why they chose to do so .
 Frances Pickett, Utica, replied, #,/| l remember the friends I've made and working in the PE department . Frances pickett, U.S. resident, said, "l remember the time I spent working in PE department"
 "I feel especially close to some of the girls. Since I've been teaching some of them," she says . She says she feels especially close with the girls .
 Another phase in the lives of 1500 people has come to a close, and the curtains go up on another scene in the play of life . The end of the play-of-life comes to an end with the closure of the project .
 Some students will return to junior college to complete their two years of junior college education . Others will continue to attend junior college .
 "The departing ones find themselves going down different paths in the maze of life," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Some take the straight paths to success; others find themselves trapped in a one way avenue . Some people take the wrong path to success, but others take the right path .
 Still others, after much struggling, succeed in finding the goal they have sought . Still others succeed in trying to find the goal .
 Without these two rare qualities, a person might very easily find the going rough . Without these qualities, the person might easily find it rough .
 The actors must perform their roles to perfection, or be unsuccessful in their parts . The actor must perform his part to perfection or perform it to perfection .
 Dottie Breakfield, Yazoo City, slowly answered, ""I don’t think I’ll forget anything.” Breakfield said . "I’m not afraid to forget anything," she said .
 P'^ph Hemphill, Jackson, seriously considered, “It all boils down ■o the thing that makes Hinds great, the people who attend here," he said .
 Henry Lou Coleman: "I’ll remember most of the people with whom I have worked and studied, and what they have meant in my growth as an individual" Mendenhall says he will remember most with whom he has worked, studied .
 Doug Sullivan, Jackson, answered, "People and friends I've had the opportunity to meet and the experience I have gained" Doug Sullivan said, "I have gained the most experience I've ever had"
 Charles Dudley, Natchez, promptly said, “I’ll remember the silly room checks and lights-out we had. I'll never ^roet the band and Hi-Stepper trips"" Charles Dudley said, "I'll remember ... silly room check and lights
 Earsterwood, Jackson, summed up the average sophomore feeling, however, when, he answered, “I really don’t know.” “It’s the typical sophomore,” he said . “The average sophomore feels like, ‘
 Mississsippi’s dry politics moistened up a bit with the re-introduction of “legalized liquor” versus “moralized liquor .” into the gubernatorial race . “Legalized liquor vs. moralized liquor is a key issue in the
 Charles Sullivan, Clarksdale attorney, seems to be adding additional planks to his platform . Sullivan seems to base his whole 1959 campaign on legalizing liquor .
 First, enter the 1959 race late with a vote-taker platform and run a good race. Then, enter a late-running race with a good campaign platform. Then run for a good election. First, run for good things.
 This strategy seems unsound, because the state cannot be divided into logic-tight compartments, says David Cameron . This strategy is not sound, says Cameron, but it is a mistake, he says . Cameron: "This strategy seems to be unsound"
 Sullivan says Coleman seems to be his chief opponent . Coleman is Sullivan's opponent .
 Sullivan has constantly sought, with great vigor, to hang Coleman’s chances on the tree of the New Frontier . Sullivan has tried to keep Coleman's chances alive in the U.S.
 Coleman will stand on his previous record as Governor, and go forward from there . Coleman will continue to stand on previous record . Coleman: "I'm not going to let it slip up"
 Chances are, the voting public will witness one of the hardest fought political campaigns in this state's history as these two veterans close ranks and try to out-maneuver each other . Chances will be the first time two veterans have faced each other in a statewide race .
 If a house divides against itself (Sullivan and Coleman) it cannot stand up against Johnson’s third bid for this office . Johnson's third bid will be his third attempt to win the presidency .
 In 1960, who won the office of Lieutenant-Governor on the first ballot over numerous opponents—Paul Johnson . Paul Johnson won the election in 1960 .
 If Johnson can stay out of the fight, yet stay in the ring, the chances are he will be the one to square-off with the GOP candidate Rubel Phillips .
 Republicans would be in a much better position to capture the Governorship than if either of the other two were their opponents . Republicans are optimistic about their chances of winning the governorship in 2016 .
 In the past, nationally and locally, the Republicans have lacked a grass roots organization, and instead of relying on the great man theory to bring in the votes .
 Phillips has the advantage of possessing a semblance of a precinct level organization plus a good reserve of political sex appeal . Phillips has tht advantage .
 Sullivan will have opposition right in his own back yard, since Phillips has also come out for legalized liquor . It seems that Sullivan's opponent is also coming out for legal liquor .
 At present, Johnson and Coleman are sticking with the status quo on liquor laws .
 Neither he nor nor he feels he can afford to rock the boat if he wants to be pilot . Neither he or he feels comfortable in the cockpit .
 Harlan Stanley Elected Head Of ASB; Admits Close Finish Caused Worries . Harlan-State-Trotter hoofed into 1963 presidency .
 Hartman Harlan Stanley, Jr., was born in 1944 at Oakdale, La., from whom he moved to Oakgrove, La. to Leland, Miss., to Vidalia, La, to Vidal, La,. to Vidali, La . to Adel,
 Harlan's father, a district manager of General Gas, was transferred to Plain just prior to his son's senior year at Florence High School . Harlan is a senior at Plain, Plain .
 The active youth, nevertheless, had time to make the basketball and baseball teams . It was not the first time the active youth had made the basketball, baseball teams.
 In Who’s Who elections he was voted Most Likely to Succeed and Most Dignified . His good grades earned him membership in the Beta Club .
 "Good grades and its components have made him an outstanding place for him on the Hinds campus," he said . Good grades and the components of his good grades and his components made him a standout student, he added .
 Marking a 2.2. quality point average for first semester, he was initiated into Circle K and chosen presidentelect of the Baptist Student Union . Marking \a 2.0 quality point . point average, he is initiated into . Circle K .
 Harlan also champions the underdog, listing the Philadelphia Phillies as his favorite National League team . Harlan: "The Philadelphia Phillies are my favorite team"
 In an interview with the Hindsonian, Harlan explained his reason for seeking the presidency . Harlan: "I want to be the president of the world"
 Staff members Darling And Jordan Selected Co-Editors Of ’64 Eagle Yearbook . Eagle Editor Belva Watkins of the Eagle publication staff, announced this week that co-editors had been selected .
 Selected were Dottie Darling and Wendell Jordan, both present staff members . Selection was made by both present and future staff members.
 Miss Watkins stated, ""Both editors were chosen with rigid requirements in mind. Miss Watkins said: "Both editors chosen with . rigid requirements of mind"
 Helm was a member of the Helm newspaper staff for two years at Gulfport High School . She was a Gulfport resident and Gulfport native .
 This year she belonged to the Women’s Athletic Association and Wesley Foundation . She is a member of the Wesley Foundation and the Women's Athletic Association .
 Next year she will be program chairman for the Wesley group and cheerleader . She will also serve as program chairman and program chairman .
 Jordan, an Automotive Engineering major and Biloxi High School graduate, was also a member of Wesley Foundation this year . He will serve as club president for the 1963-64 school session . Jordan will also be president of the club .
 She added that unusual picture processing will be used in the magazine supplement .
 An entirely different cover design will be involved, in keeping with the secret theme of the yearbook, he added .
 Actual work on the student publication will begin the latter part of this summer .
 Already under consideration are outstanding students, including former opponents, for/positions in the ASB cabinet .
 Harlan quieted unrest that his dual positions of president of BSU and ASB might at some time have conflicting interests . Harlan quashed unrest that he might have conflicting interest in ASB presidency .
 With good men working behind pie in the cabinet and senate, it should work out well . With good people working behind pies, the Senate should work well .
 Harlan complimented outgoing officers of the Presidents Council with, “I’ll do good to stand any where near this year’s officers.” Harlan said he would “do good” to stand next to outgoing officers .
 From all indications, the Hinds student body will be supporting its new leader on the basketball court as well as in the Associated Student Body . The Hinds basketball team will be supported by the student body .
 Wendell Jordan and Dottie Darling are interrupted during work on the final stages of the Eagle yearbook . The yearbook yearbook will be released in November .
 They served as co-editors of the club section this year, and oddly enough are steady daters . The pair are a steady dater, and they have been a steady source of information .
 Presidents Council Holds Final Social To Climax Session . The Hindsonian erroniously listed Ralph Hemphill as chairman of the Presidents Council dance committee .
 The Thursday night social was held from 6:30 to 9:30 in the girls' physical education gymnasium .
 Ralph Hemphill, Jimmy Chandler and Joe White took charge of the ticket sales . Individual Circle K members ran the concession stands .
 Music was furnished by the Darden Davis Dance Band . Vocal selections were provided by Mary Berryhill, Wiley Magee, Woody Martin, and Steve Erwin .
 Harlan Stanley wins election for president of Associated Student Body government for next year . Stanley will be the first president of the newly-formed Associated Student body government . Stanley won the election for the presidency of the new student body .
 Stanley is also president of the Baptist Student Union and participates in many other campus activities . Stanley is a member of many campus activities and is president of several student organizations .
 Denton, freshman class sponsor, announced the ushers and program girls for the Baccalaureate Sermon, Sunday, and graduation exercise May 31 . Denton is also a sponsor for the graduation exercise .
 Head ushers will be freshman class president Billy Joe Montgomery and vice president Bill Dunlap . Head of ushers are freshman class President Billy Joe Monton and Vice President Billy Dunlap.
 Students may now begin preregistration for summer school sessions . Preregistration is now open for the summer school session .
 Hinds dormitories will open Sunday, June 9, at 2:00m. and regular class registration will begin at 8:00 a.m. The next morning, she said .
 Miss Herrin noted students would not be allowed to enter or change schedules afer June 12 .
 Second term will begin Monday, July 15, and the last entry or schedule change date will be July 17 . Second term begins Monday July 15 .
 Courses will not be taught where enrollment is not sufficient to justify their being taught . Courses scheduled to be taught will be not taught where the enrollment isn't enough to justify them being taught. Courses are scheduled to not only be taught .
 Additional classes will be organized where there is sufficient demand for them . Additional classes are planned where there are sufficient demand .
 All classes will meet five days a week—Monday through Friday . Students may earn 12 semester hours in the ten-week session or 6 semester hours for five weeks .
 Expenses for dormitory students from Hinds, Rankin, and Warren Counties total $120 for the summer . Day student fees for students from these counties totals $30.00 .
 Mississippi students whose parents live outside of Hinds or Rankin or Warren Counties will pay upon entrance a $15 out-of-county fee . Mississippi students must also pay $15 to attend the event .
 Students whose parents live outside the state of Mississippi will pay upon entrance a $50 out-of-state fee . Students who live in Mississippi will also pay a fee to attend school .
 A $10 graduation fee is required at the end of the summer for students who take diplomas . $10 is required for students to take a summer diploma .
 Students wishing dormitory accommodations should make the proper reservation . Miss Herrin noted that students should make a reservation .
 This can be done by writing for an Admission Blank or by calling in person . Admission Blank is an admission to the University of North Carolina .
 Schedules for summer school classes are available in the Registrar’s office . Dormitory reservations should be checked through the Dean of Men . Summer school classes will be available in summer .
 Hinds business office has announced that it will make room deposit refunds Tuesday afternoon and all day Wednesday and Thursday . The office will also make room deposits on Tuesday and Thursday afternoon .
 A check out slip signed by the Head Resident of the dormitory must be presented before the refund is made . A check-out slip must also be presented by the head resident of a dormitory .
 This is only for dormitory students who will not return to Hinds next year . Students will not be able to leave Hinds dormitory next year. This is not the first time Hinds students have left Hinds .
 JOHN’S GROCERY AND CAFE One mile from Raymond on Bolton Road Good Meals and Groceries .
 No dangling participles turn into a verb . Because of the scarcity of such an ag element, few verbs are born, and they are born .
 If people were classified in the same manner as sentences are diagramed, results would show that there are millions of common nouns and thousands of proper nouns .
 The same study will prove that verbs, people and words that move sentences and life are few and far between . The study was published in the U.S. last week .
 Miss Laura Bell Lindsey seldom remains seated or calm during English literature class lectures . Hinds, however, has a verb lurking in its midst, in the form SUki .
 Her classes are so ‘caught up’ with enthusiasm they speak their thoughts out loud . In fact, she said: ‘Caught up' with enthusiasm .
 Miss Lindey has her own masterful way of teaching, and students hardly know they’re being taught .
 Connecticut housewives swear Tide “brings fresh air in” but Miss Susan Brown, social studies instructor, cleanses air without soap — just a soapbox .
 The notorious Miss Brown found a deep comfort in the wooden structure . Expounding on everything from patriotism to ‘learning for the sake of learning,” she found a comfort in it .
 The once-tall statue of the educationalized femme fatale is now bent, unable to respond to the subconscious urgings that scream at her very being, making her taunt and anxious . In its place, the once-tweeted statue has been replaced by a bent statue
 For once one has the good fortune to own a soapbox -- a beautiful little soapbox with “magic gold footprints” — it is futile to think of existing without it . The words of a “troubled mind” are the words of the "trou
 Miss Brown is unable to answer simple survey questions without first finding an elevated spot on which to stand . The Hindsonian is especially sympathetic to the loss of such a valued instrument .
 Hinds Junior College faculty members have been added to the race of Hinds junior College faculty .
 If any of you out there can find it in your hearts to search for Miss Brown’s soapbox, she would be eternally grateful — as would Mr Reeves and the Hindsoman .
 Students of Miss Brown especially need to uncover the mystery of the missing soapbox, for as she said, her grouchiness will get worse .
 This display is a result of months of student effort and achievement . It is annually sponsored by Alpha Rho Tau, campus art club . This year's art display is sponsored by the club .
 Every style, technique, manner and size is represented, with scenes varying from churches to bar rooms, from Negroes in a cotton field, to Poncho Villa .
 Several students have imitated the styles and manners of the more renowned painters . Students have attempted to imitate the styles of some of the world's most famous painters.
 Visitors can expect to view impressionistic designs, designs dealing with prospective, palette knife experiments, “drip and splatter” attempts .
 Lynda Berry, a prolific young artist, was named most outstanding student from the department at Awards Day . Berry is a prolific artist who recently won the award for most outstanding artist .
 Miss Berry has made constributions to almost every style contained in the exhibit . She has also made contributions to almost all styles contained in this exhibit .
 The exhibit is open to all students, faculty and interested outside visitors . Katherine Denton, art instructor, emphasized that the exhibit is free to all .
 Parents and relatives will have an opportunity to view the products Sunday . The gallery will be open before and after graduation exercises .
 They do this of course behind her blonde back, though I doubt this comes as a surprise to her . The couple have been married for more than a decade .
 In conjugating the life of Bell Lindsey, facts are irrelevant, only the woman herself is of importance . Bell Lindsey's life is in the public eye, but she is in a state of state .
 At present, in the diagram of life, the verb is placed on the Hinds campus . At present is at present, at present is the verb that is placed in the picture .
 She is placed in the left wing of the top floor of the old library building whose windows face the highway and the road home .
 Tennyson, Pope, Byron and all the rest, live together in the mind of Miss Lindsey . They do not live in the deadness of a textbook, but Tennyson and Pope .
 Whether Miss Lindsey Lindsey is the fourth or fifth child is unimportant is not unimportant . Miss Lindsey is from a family of 11 children . She comes from an 11-person family .
 Bell used her relationship with her family to gain a foothold into the minds of others . Bell is one of 10 brothers and sisters in her family of 10 siblings .
 Small verbal woman is able to hold the attention of twenty-year-olds as easily as other teachers dismiss a noisy class . Having a unique trait, the small verbal woman has a unique .
 To the composite of twenty yeared people that make her classes, Miss Lindsey holds a different place to each of her students .
 Miss Lindsey likes opinionated people . She has been at Hinds for eight years . Miss Lindsey is known for her opinions .
 Students will probably in years to come leave Hinds and never remember what they did while they were here, who they knew, and why they knew them . Hinds students will probably never remember their time at Hinds .
 Students of the ‘verb,’ if they follow true to form, will be exceptions . Students of “verb’s” are exceptions .
 Over the past year, Miss Lindsey has received letters, phone calls and visits from previous students . Miss Lindsey says she's received letters and phone calls from former students .
 Miss Lindsey wrote Miss Lindsey while he was in flight training school during the second World War . One such student wrote her to him during the war .
 He was depressed because he didn’t know the meaning of the words used in flight training, and was sure he would never get his wings .
 If there were an Indefinite Tense, there would be no use in conjugating ‘the verb” further, for— there is nothing indefinite about Bell. Bell .
 Stuart Strenger Georgia State Stanley J Foust 1). of .Oklahoma Judson K Farnsworth Northeastern U Raymond T Joyce, Jr. of. Northeastern University Raymond T . Joyce Jr., Jr. Raymond J Joyce Jr. Stuart St. of Georgia State. Stuart Stre
 Hubert F Tett, Billy D Farris, Sam Houston State, William L Bradley, Charles Perry, Jr. and Charles Perry Jr. won the first lap .
 Providence College SECOND UP John M Mulcahy U of Connecticut Michael B Reed Ursinus College Baxter Myers, Jr. Baxter Myers Jr. Jr. was the second-ranked college in Connecticut .
 John N Bierer The Citadel William P Martz Kent State Lucy Lee Bassett Emory U SECOND LAP Richard L Smit U of Michigan R Montgomery, Jr. Emory University of Emory .
 Jose M Martinez Martinez Gonzaga U. Roger A Kueter Loras College Earl F Brown Colgate Cdt. Earl F . Brown . Roger A. Martinez Martinez Martinez .
 Lane Moak Pontiac 5 -JR HAND- OFF: George Puckett and Tommy Axtel practice a hand off for the intramural track meet here . Lane Moaks Pontiac is a junior high school intramorial track team .
 Intramural track meet will be held on Thursday afternoon at 3:45 on the “Red Dog’s track . Intramurial contest was initiated on track Bill .
 All boys are invited to participate in the events . There have been no preliminary try-outs fo rthe meet .
 Twelve members of the Women’s Athletic Association journeyed to the Gulf Coast last weekend on a year's-end pleasure outing . WA A Vacations On Gulf Coast .
 Leaving Hinds Friday afternoon the girls arrived at Gulfport in time to go swimming before retiring after the long ride .
 The weekend was spent near the beach and around the court's cemented pool . The weekend is spent in the area around the beach .
 Softball replaced swimming for several hours and was followed by lunch . Softball was followed up by lunch.
 Rain Saturday afternoon did not darken the spirits of the girls who played cards and checkers indoors . The girls played checkers, cards and cards indoors .
 The group was treated to a picnic at Dotty Darlings 1 boyfriend's house Saturday night . The group also enjoyed a night out at the boyfriend's girlfriend's house .
 After a picnic, the girls toured Gulfport and went to an amusement park at Biloxi . The girls went on a picnic in Gulfport .
 The freshmen girls won the second softball game last Wednesday afternoon by default . The freshmen won by default in the second game .
 Frances announced a meeting of the Women's Athletic Association for Wednesday afternoon in the girls’ gym to elect next year’s officers . The meeting will be held at the Girls’ Gym . Frances announced that the WAA will hold a meeting Wednesday afternoon .
 Hinds Junior College lettered 65 boys for their participation in the major sports of football, basketball, and track during the ’63 season . Hinds ends Sports Year, Letters Total Of 65 Men .
 Eagles turned in a fair record in football this year with four wins, five losses, and one tie . Eagles had a record of four wins and five losses this season .
 Hinds Eagles tied for fifth with Northwest . There were only eight slots for the 12 teams this year due to ties for second, third, and fifth .
 Hinds Eagles won their last three games after a slow start to the season . After getting off to a poor start, Hinds won their final three games in a row . Hinds have won their first two games of the season at Hinds .
 45 boys lettered in football and six Eagles copped Honorable Mentions in the All-Star vote . Passing played a major role in these victories . Coach Renfroe will probably rely on an aerial attack next year .
 Sophomores Rick Thrash, Bobby James, Mike Vincent, and George Benton received the honors . Freshmen Oscar Teasley and Mike Mahoney also received the honor .
 Coach Ricks' basketballers turned in a winning season this year with a record of 13 wins to 10 losses . Ricks won 13-10 in a season .
 The Eagles won their first two games and then lost five out of six on the road . The Eagles lost five of their first six games in the first six weeks .
 Hinds finished second in the South and went to the State Junior College tourney at Senatobia . Even though Hinds lost to Southwest they copped second place in the south .
 Sophomores Will Wade, Johnny Hines, and George Pucket also lettered . Will Wade was Will Wade .
 Hinds ended a truly victorius season this year by capturing the Mississippi Junior College Track crown here two weeks ago . Hinds' thinclad unit of Hinds won the state championship in the state .
 Jerry Clark barely missed the trophy for top individual scorer in the tourney . Clark lost by only 3/4 of a point to Clark . Clark was the only person to miss the trophy .
 Johnny Hagan, Jerry Clark, Jimmy Clark, Larry Jones, George Benton, Percy Boell, Woodie Martin, Darden Davis, Bill Dunlap, Dardan Davis, Dwayne Davis, George Boulden .
 Hinds did not give letters in tennis, but tournetters placed second in the state tourney held May 11 . Hinds won the state championship in tennis .
 Boyd McPhail, Billy Joe Montgomery, Johnny Hines, Shirley Morris, Roxie Noblin, Ann Stephenson, Barbara Clack, and Kerry Perry were the players . Boyd Mcphail was the star of the show .
 Tony’s main trick is jumping through a hoop of fire with a six foot clearance . Tony jumped through the hoop with a 6 foot clearance to jump through it .
 John has appeared with Tony on T.V. and in rodeos and horse shows throughout the state . John has been with Tony for more than a decade . He has appeared in rodeo shows, rodeos, horse shows and rodeos all over New Jersey .
 Tony does tricks with poles of fire and John does trick riding with him . Tony does other tricks with pole fire and does trick rides with John .
 Dixie Rubber Stamp Co. started raising the pole gradually to difQuality RUBBER STAMPS and PLASTIC SIGNS . After Tony became accustomed to the fire John raised the pole slowly to raise it .
 When the height of the pole reached four feet John decided to make a spectacular act with Tony . The stunt was a collaboration between John and Tony .
 As Tony accepted the fire on his sides the length of the sides was increased . Tony accepted fire on sides as long as he did the lengths of his sides . Tony took on the challenge with the help of his wife .
 John now uses an elipse six feet high and three feet wide supported on oil drums . John now has a six-foot elopse and three-foot wide elipsoe supported on drums .
 The performance will include Tony shaking hands with John, counting to two and telling his age . Tony will also play dead and stretching out, according to the singer .
 The act will close with Tony jumping poles of fire and finally jumping through the hoop . John will do trick riding and Tony will jump through a hoop .
 They will charter planes for all needs, rent planes to any licensed private pilot . They will also give qualified instruction to beginner flying students .
 This is the second of a series of Hindsonian supplements which will be issued at the end of each semester . Nygren Air Service Raymond Air Port will provide the supplements .
 Students at Hinds Junior College in Raymond, Miss., use Keith Press, Raymond, Mississippi, to help students .
 This magazine does not necessarily express the views of the faculty or administration of Hinds Junior College . The magazine is based in Raymond, Miss. Raymond, Mississippi .
 The natural beauty of springtime is consummated in this picturesque view of Raymond Lake . Raymond Lake is one of the most beautiful lakes in the world .
 Margie Lee, a Jackson freshman, is astonished herself at the wonders of Nature's paint brush .
 With spring as our theme, what could better illustrate the season's most common feature of natural beauty? Natural beauty .
 Darwin seemed to think the fairest “male” came from the great apes, but his theory didn’t include women . Darwin’s theory of a “fairest ‘male’ came from apes .
 The teased hair styles fit into the present metropolis as easilv as chickens into a back yard . High, wide, loose and bushy, the teased hair style fits into the modern metropolis .
 We strutted about the yard, displaying our elegant robes and ordering JoJo to pick more clover . Then we strutted around the yard and ordered JoJo, who was already flying .
 Sometimes, if you didn’t want to play king anymore, you would come to life and say, “You ain”t no Queen,” he said . “Sometimes you would say, "You ain't no Queen," he said. ‘You
 "I just mostly sat by the fireplace and hurled matches into the hot cinders," she says . But that usually evoked a sermon from her part, so I just mostly just hurled matches at the fireplace .
 JoJo was a dispatcher, you were a captain, and I was always the Jap that had to die in a painful, agonizing ashion . "JoJo" was the dispatcher and captain of the Japanese . JoJo and JoJo were a dispatcher and a captain .
 After I died, we always changed games, so I didn't mind playing . "I surely would have liked being a captain, or even a dispatcher," she says .
 "We just walked around, getting on each other’s nerves, and wishing the other one would go home," she says . "Sometimes we didn’t play at all," she adds .
 Every two hours we all trooped to the field, under that assumed commission, carrying water to JoJo’s mama . "JoJo's mama" is JoJo's mother, JoJo Jo's sister .
 "Aunt Lit always gave us candy. Actually he never asked us to go, but we did since Aunt Lit always gives us candy," she says .
 Aunt Lit was an old mulatto who was famous to us because of her “streak-of-lean-and-fat candy” as she called it . She was famous for her ‘streak of-lean’ candy’s “Streak
 Lit's collardardard is her standing menu . Lit: "Sometimes, if we happened to be in the field, we’d go sit on the turn-rows and watch Lit eat her collardards"
 I would stare as she ate, for I was certain that she ate differently from us . Invariably I would watch her eat and stare .
 She even took out her false teeth and washed them when she finished eating . Just like I’d seen my own grandmother do, she did .
 Being overly attentive to midwivery gossip, Lit, one day, forgot to replace her teeth . Lit is a writer who has been married for over 30 years .
 They were lying on a broad cotton leaf, grinning inanely when I found them, and imtin aeciaea to maKe act with Tony . The pair were lying in a vast cotton leaf when they were found .
 A short story by Way vie McGrew mediately I petitioned my mother to let me carry them back to her . He n a short story about a young boy with a young girl in a relationship with his mother .
 The petition was granted, so off I trotted with Lit’s great white teeth bound up in a handkerchief and pinned to my pocket .
 By the time I had gotten to her shack, I had eaten two bars of “streak-of-lean-and-fat candy,” it was well past time to go home .
 During the last candy bar, I had begun to dread the solitary hike home, and finally swallowing my pride, asked Lit to walk back with me . Lit walked back with him .
 Lit was a garrulous soul if nothing else; she kept up a constant prattle without any sort of connection or sense . Lit was always a constant prattle without any sense or connection or sense .
 I was hardly paying any attention to what she was saying until I realized that she was explaining how to kill someone . "I was hardly paying any attention," she said .
 She hadn't even finished the last phrase before I automatically began to walk faster . She hadn’t even started to walk before I started walking .
 "Visions of myself, throat cut and floating atop some slimy green slough were churning through my head," says author . Visions of me drowning in a slough churned through my mind, he says .
 At that time she caught the flesh at my throat and gave it a tug, accompanied by one of her terrible rasping growls . "At that time, she caught her flesh at her throat," she said . "She caught it up and it was a tug," she added
 "In my state of mind, hysteria, I delicately dabbed at my throat, beseeching God to prolong my life," she wrote .
 "God must have heard my prayers, for my throat was not one bloody mutilation as I had expected," she says . "And God must have been listening to my prayers," she writes .
 I even resolved that Lit was some sort of ole grouch that just wanted to scare me—so I wouldn’t want any more of her candy . I resolved to think Lit was just a grouch .
 "My courage was back again again, I would have slain Goliath, . . . had I not suddenly heard some loud baritone voice permeating the trees and very darkness. My courage was . back again, and had I . been able to slay Goliath? "I would
 Though it was dark, and I could not see, I perceived that already Lit was fumbling at the front of her dress for her razor . I also realized that the baritone voice was that of my grandfather, drunkenly singing some raucous barroom ditty .
 At that moment, I realized that I was born to be a Jap—just an ole cowardly Jap . "I realized that . At that . moment, he realized that he was born . to be Jap," he said .
 My mild hysteria was no longer mild; I was running, screeching, and quoting Bible scriptures all in one breath . "I was running and screeching," she said, "but my mild hysteria wasn't mild"
 Ole Lit must have thought I’d run out of gas . Don’t run out . Don't forget to keep up with your gas .
 Go by MITCHELLS TEXACO and gas up . Have them check the oil, tires, transmission, muffler, and trunk .
 Mitchells sells everything from seat covers to hamburgers . When you get a car wash they pay special attention to white walls and radiator cap .
 She had the most horrified expression — like any minute she would go shrieking off into the netherlands, beating her bony hips and bellowing santification . She had to be horrified expression .
 She stared at me for a while, the white of her eyes looking like two great pearl buttons just hanging in mid-air; then she was gone . She stared for a long time before she left .
 I didn’t know’ if she had just faded into the rest of the blackness or if . she had actually been taken off by the devil — my curiosity was too frightened to inquire . I didn't know' if she . just faded . into the . rest of
 Sometimes, when I was not in the mood to play war with you and JoJo, I would try to solve hit’s disappearance—but I never could . Sometimes, sometimes, when . I would . try to . solve hit's disappearance, but I . never could.
 You were just small dark shadows pursuing one another . effervescent clowns sprinted through clover . Funny clowns with ridiculously long arms and legs with ridiculously . long arms .
 At other times, Adventure, A view of unknown Minds and times— A student's scourge, A scholar’s love— Literature Is written now And famous later .
 Along one of Mississippi’s backroads lies a small community called Learned . The town of Learned is one of the Mississippi backroads .
 Learned almost equalled Jackson’s importance as a trading center . In its early history, Learned nearly equalled the importance of Jackson . Learned is now a national tourist destination .
 Learned resembles a still picture of a town taken from a western movie . Just before sundown, when the town is deserted, the town looks like a western film scene .
 At one end of Learned’s old main street stands a store preserved from the fate of the other decaying buildings of its age . The store is preserved in the same way as the other buildings of the age .
 The Gibbes Family is still doing business with the store . The store, which still does business, belongs to the Gibbes family .
 The building of a rectangular floor plan is constructed of edge-grained pine on the inside . The building is constructed from edge-Grained pine .
 High walls on the sides are lined with shelves, and a ladder is used to reach the top shelves . The high walls are lined up with shelves and high walls .
 Shelves extend from the back wall to an open space, centered by an old fashioned pot-bellied stove . Shelves are covered in shelves and open space .
 The Gibbes still sell kerosene, gas lanterns, long johns, blue jeans, and blue jeans . They still sell the goods .
 Old-fashioned scales, candy jars, and can-laden counters exhibit thriving business . Can-can counters, scales and candy jars are still popular in the U.S.
 The more conservative shoes are still available in Gibbes' establishment . High-topped shoes contrast to city-dweller's heels .
 Potbellied stove, which provides warmth in cold weather, typifies the antiquated store . Pot bellied stove provides warmth for cold weather .
 The most modern music lessons are available at SKEET’S GUITAR SHOP located in the Westland Circle Shopping Center .
 S BAND LUUlX hNSTRUMENT REPAIR SERVICE repairs all band instruments for Mr McWilliams at Mr Barnett’s shop in Raymond .
 For fast efficient service call or go by SKEET’S GUITAR SHOP in Jackson, Jackson . Go to the shop or go to the store to buy a guitar .
 Remember if it’s musical then Mr McWilliams has it or Mr Barnett can fix it . Remember if you’ve got it then Mr Barnett has it . If it's musical, Mr Barnett will fix it, remember if you have it .
 Skeet’s for the best in music. button and high-laced shoes, still being sold .
 For sale in the dry goods section are plastic collars worn during the early Twenties . For sale, the plastic collar collars can be found in the Dry Goods section .
 Not far from the collars are cotton stockings which ladies used to wear before the advent of nylons .
 Sales indicate that horse collars are more in demand than the Model T parts . Horse collars were also more popular than the parts of Model T . The horse collar is more popular among Model T collectors .
 Mr Walter Gibbes, a member of the Hinds faculty, and his brother now manage the store . Mr Gibbes is a former teacher at Hinds .
 The store was purchased by Mr Gibbes’ father just after its construction and has been in the family ever since . The store has been owned by the Gibbes family since its construction .
 They are now making plans to restore the building to its original state by displaying more antiques . They hope to display antiques in the building .
 Almost anything the customer wants to trade is accepted as payment for goods . Grain bins behind the store are reminders that in the early days, as well as today, the Gibbes accepted grain for payment of bills and then ground the grain themselves .
 It served as a storage place for ice and as a refrigerator for newly slaughtered pigs and cows . It was also used to store ice and refrigerate newly slaughtered animals .
 Mr Walter Gibbes estimates that the store includes more than 1000 articles . The store is believed to contain more than 1,000 articles .
 These articles are representative of the goods sold from the store’s early history to the present time . It is fairly safe to say that these articles are .
 SMITH-CORONA GALAXIE features modern design, fullsize office keyboard, mar-proof finish, and all-steel frame . 10 day touch typing course .
 Through the air floated the chilled tinkle of cymbals, as though light raindrops were striking the metal, then slipping off the edges . And through the air .
 Beacons of fine cedar glistened above her, and the mural-painted walls caught the translucent light and scattered beautiful pastels against the beveled glass lanterns .
 From the windows draped curtains of green velvet, which dropped to the floor, appeared to be dark pools of ink slowly moving with the wind . From the . windows draped . curtains of . green velvet . which dropped . to the . floor, appearing to . appear to be . dark pools
 Lengths of amber satin shrouded the floor, and in the folds of the slick amber lay mandarins . Still yet strangely vital, they seemed to sink further into the folds .
 The cymbols lost their light tinkling sound, and as they did, the muffled beat of a drum could be heard accenting their last fading quiver .
 The sounds of the cymbals being lost, the drums began a feverish throb, and the placid girl's placid head draped about her head a veil .
 Her body erect and her face immobile, she knelt on the floor, and pulling back an amber fold of satin, withdrew a small gold basket . The basket was retrieved from a small pile of amber satin .
 From the windows came the strained sound of a flute whistling a low, charming melody . The notes rising and falling as in a dirge, the notes rise and fall as in the notes . And from the windows, the sounds of the flute were heard .
 She slowly began to weave two and fro, with her hands folded . The most recent of a series of writing exercises by WAYVIE McGREW beneath her chin .
 The lining of the basket began to tremble, and slowly, cautiously, the head of a beautiful snake appeared . The head of the snake appeared slowly slowly and cautiously .
 Its eyes held the pastels, the greens, the ambers of the room all embraced in the enchanting, ominous music . It was the first time the music had been played in a theatre in London .
 Slowly it inched upward, erect and daring, until its eyes intercepted the vacant stare of the girl . Slowly it slowly inched upwards, erect, daring, to the girl's eyes .
 It began to move in the same willowy pattern . Then, as if intranced with her rhythmic sway, it began to dance again .
 Two and fro, again and again, they moved through the air, like two supple trees bent in the wind . Sometimes touching their heads to the satin floor, sometimes touching the head to the floor . They moved through air, sometimes in the air .
 The cymbals again grew faint, and the snake began to coil back into the basket . The snake's sleek skin glittering as it descended, its sleek skin glitters as it descends .
 The satin ceased to tremble, and pushing the basket under the amber and mandarins, the young girl flung the veil from her head and arose from the floor, vibrant and yielding . The drums now rumbled and, becoming more distinct, they sounded like great tom toms
 As the brutal drums reverberated, she began to duck her tiny neck and slinging her agile body about the room, her profile appeared to be a slender whip slashing .
 As she cut through the tense atmosphere, her lithe form began to spin . Faster and faster her body jerked, almost as if it were being pierced with sharp, tiny needles .
 She seemed only to be a vague whiff of smoke rising from the floor . Whirling, she seemed only there were only a vague smell of smoke .
 The tiny little form slithered to the floor, lying cold and motionless . And as the smoke began to drift away, the tiny little thing slithered .
 You get more for your money here finest the market offers Standard Photo (2ci Cameras fiAo ^ plies finishing 'Serving Mississippians over a third of a Century'"
 America's FAVORITE RESTAURANT and drive in complete TAKE OUT SERVICE SHONEY’S WESTLAND PLAZA SPRING SUPPLEMENT PAGE 17 .
 A large blue and white crosscountry bus is already slowly coming down the drive between the tennis courts and Northside dormitory . The bus will be on the way to the girls’s tennis courts .
 It pulls up next to a small, lonely tree; the door opens, and suddenly — mass confusion . The door opens and suddenly, mass confusion ensues . It is not the first time a car has been driven by a car .
 Some of the students leap from the bus and make a head-on dash toward the grill . Others slowly walk down the steps and drag their way towards the science building .
 Real nurses have dedicated their lives to helping others . Not the ones on television, but real honest-to-earth nurses . "Nurses" are dedicated to helping people .
 These are the ones who are destined to become poor, over-worked, under-paid, domantic figures enslaved in hospitals throughout the world . The ones destined to be poor and over-paid in hospitals .
 At the moment, they are “just fifty different women trying to maintain a C average,” as George Davis, one of their instructors, puts it .
 The other six hours are divided between four hours of hospital classes and two hours of practical work . The rest of the time is spent in hospital classes, practical work and hospital training .
 Four classes have been added to Hinds as a special treat for nurses only . Hinds has added four hours of hours for nurses to enjoy .
 The rest of their time on this campus is spent in the ordinary classes of English, psychology, and sociology . They also study psychology and psychology .
 In spit of all these complicated courses, their vigorous study, and hard-spemt hours, they are not half finished with their extensive training . The students will be able to take part in some of the world's most complicated courses .
 They have two more long industrious years of classroom and clinical work before they are ready to extend their helping hand to others . They have more long work to do before they're ready to help others .
 A ray of fun, laughter, and relaxation does shine into the hardworking lives of the hard-working families .
 At the Gilfoy School of Nursing in Jackson, students take part in activities such as basketball, bowling, and swimming .
 Besides all this, the school also looks out for their religious welfare .
 They attend church on Sunday and regular vesper services every Wednesday . The couple have been married for more than 20 years .
 No, the nurses are not leaving; in fact they will be here longer, and have more time for relaxation . The nurses will not be leaving the hospital, but will be staying longer .
 They came at 8:06 in the morning on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, and left at noon . They left at 12.30 a day .
 This arrangement was made so they could also attend classes at the hospital . This arrangement is made to allow them to attend classes in the hospital.
 It can easily be seen that this does not leave much time for their classes at the hospital .
 Hinds will no longer have any classes except those at Hinds . That's because they won't have classes at all except those in Hinds. That’s because they’re not allowed to go to school at all .
 Next year at 3:15 every week day between 50 and 60 girls will congregate by the solitary tree behind the grill . The large blue and white cross country bus will come and take them back to the hospital .
 "Want for better things pushes the weight of the work back a little farther," says the author .
 Thy mind Was cluttered, Twisted, tangled and torn And yet, Thee claimed clear-headedness. Thy mind was cluttered .