 The President’s News Conference of June 29, 1950 . Harry S Truman ""Checkers"" Speech in Los Angeles, CA September 23, 1952 Richard Nixon Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. Richard Nixon . Richard Nixon was President of the United States in 1952 .
 Harry S Truman spoke on the Marshall Plan, the Truman Doctrine and the North Atlantic Treaty . Henry A Wallace spoke on sources of Soviet conduct in 1947 and 1949 .
 July, 1947 Nathaniel Peffer Letter to Eleanor Roosevelt . March 16, 1948 Harry S Truman St. St. Harry S. Truman letter . July 17, 1948 .
 Truman visited Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. January 10, 1952 Harry S Truman The President's Duties . February 18, 1952 President Truman traveled to Youngstown, Ohio, for Youngstown .
 Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. June 12, 1952 . Federal Civil Defense Administration . Youngstown sheet & Tube Company. Youngstown .
 Felix Frankfurter Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. Co. March 08, 1948 Hugo L Black Dennis United States . June 04, 1951 Felix Frank Furfurter Beauharnais Illinois . April 28, 1952 Felix Frankfurter was born in New York City, New York
 June 20, 1980 Harry A Blackmun Roberts United States Jaycees . July 03, 1984 William J Brennan Jr. died in a car crash . June 03, 1983 William Brennan Jr died in an accident .
 Robin Morgan’s "For the Equal Rights Amendment” August 10, 1970 Shirley Chisholm The Need for the Amendment September, 1973 Ruth Bader Ginsburg Roe Wade 1973 Byron R White Anti-ERA Demonstration . Ronald Reagan A Christian Manifesto December 31, 1982
 Mr McCone has called on Mr Cline to give the most recent intelligence estimate conclusions of the United States Intelligence Board .
 Mr Cline did so on the basis of three papers which were distributed to the group . The group was given three papers by the group which had been distributed .
 Mr Katzenbach said he believed the President had ample constitutional and statutory authority to take any needed military measures .
 From the standpoint of international law, Mr Katzenbach thought United States action could be justified on the principle of self-defense, he says . He says U.S. action could have been justified in self-defence .
 "I did not think a declaration of war would improve our position, but indeed would impair it," he said . He added that he did not believe it would improve his position .
 I said that a defensive quarantine of Cuba would involve a use of force . This had to be considered in relation to the United Nations Charter, he said . I said .
 The Charter contained a general prohibition against the use of force except in certain limited kinds of situation . The Charter of Peace was also banned from using force in certain situations .
 The situation in Cuba did not constitute armed attack on any country, CNN says . One of these was “armed attack,” but the situation was not an armed attack, the report says .
 Collective action voted by the competent U.N. organ to deal with a situation under Chapter VII of the Charter . Another exception was collective action by a competent United Nations organ voting on a situation .
 It seemed quite problematical whether we could obtain a recommendation from the General Assembly . And it seemed quite . problematical if we could get it from General Assembly, it was difficult to get it .
 A case could be made under the Charter for the use of force if it were sanctioned by the American Republics acting under the Rio Treaty . The case could also be made if the U.S. acted under the treaty .
 The Organ of Consultation, pursuant to Articles 6 and 8 of that Treaty, could recommend measures, including the use of armed force, to meet a situation endangering the peace of America . It could also recommend measures to use armed force .
 Mr Martin would have something to say about that . As to the prospects for securing the necessary two-thirds vote in the Organ of Consultation .
 If the contention were advanced that a defensive quarantine voted under the Rio Treaty constituted ‘enforcement action” under Article 53 of the United Nations Charter, we would be able to make a reasonably good argument to the contrary, we say . We would like to argue that the quarantine vote voted
 "Our ability to persuade seven members of the Security Council to vote with us on this issue might be uncertain," he says .
 He thought the majority could be increased within 24 hours to 17 or perhaps even 18 or 19 . He said the majority of the population could now be increased to 17 .
 He was hopeful in regard to Ecuador and Chile, and believed there was a good chance of getting Mexico . He said he was hopeful of getting Ecuador, Chile and Chile .
 The Attorney General said the President would be placed in an impossible position if we went to the OAS and then failed to get the necessary votes, or if there were a delay .
 He asked if we could be perfectly sure of the outcome before seeking OAS concurrence . He said we could not be sure if we wanted to seek concurrence of OAS .
 Mr Martin said he hated to guarantee anything, but he had a lot of confidence about this . He said he was confident about the outcome of the case .
 A last-minute approach to heads of state, laying the situation on the line, would produce the votes, he says . You couldn’t go to the American Republics in advance without loss of security, he said .
 The Attorney General again expressed his great concern at the possibility of a slip .
 There followed a discussion covering the meeting held the night before with the President . The President and the Prime Minister discussed the meeting .
 One participant looked back on the meeting as having arrived at a tentative conclusion to institute a blockade, and thought the President had been satisfied at the consensus by then arrived at among his advisers .
 General Taylor quickly indicated that he had not concurred and that the Joint Chiefs had reserved their position . General Taylor said he did not concuriously concur with the decision .
 Bundy doubts whether strategy group was serving the President as well as it might, if it merely recommended a blockade . Bundy then said that he had reflected a good deal upon the situation in the course of a sleepless night .
 He said he had spoken with the President this morning, and he felt there was more work to be done . He said: 'He felt there were further work to do'
 This would be made more difficult by the prior publicity of a blockade and the U.N. pressures from the United Nations for a negotiated settlement . The blockade would make it more difficult to negotiate a settlement with the Palestinians .
 An air strike would be quick and would take out the bases in a clean surgical operation, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "An air strike is a quick, efficient way to take out bases"
 He favored decisive action with its advantages of surprises and confronting the world with a fait accompli . The president of the U.S. was assassinated in 1992 .
 Acheson said Khrushchev had presented the U.S. with a direct challenge . The United States was involved in a test of wills, and the sooner we got to a showdown the better, he said .
 He favored cleaning the missile bases out decisively with an air strike, he said . He favored a strike that would clean out missile bases with a strike .
 This wasn’t just another instance of Soviet missiles aimed at the U.S. It was also a Soviet missile strike . This wasn't just another attempt at the United States .
 "Here they were in the hands of a madman whose actions would be perfectly irresponsible," the author says . The usual restraints operating on the Soviets would not apply, he says .
 Mr Acheson agreed with Mr Katzenbach’s position that self-defense was an entirely sufficient justification . So far as questions of international law might be involved, he said .
 If there were to be imported a qualification or requirement of approval by the OAS, as apparently suggested by Mr Meeker, he could not go along with that . But he said he would not agree to accept that .
 General Taylor said that a decision now to impose a blockade was a decision to abandon the possibility of an air strike . General Taylor also said that the decision was to impose the blockade was to abandon an air attack .
 A strike would be feasible for only a few more days; after that, missiles would be operational . A strike could only be possible for a few days, after that the missiles are operational .
 If it were to take place Sunday morning, a decision would have to be made at once so that the necessary preparations could be ordered . The decision would be made once the decision is made .
 For a Monday morning strike, a decision would have to be reached tomorrow . A decision would need to be made on Monday .
 Secretary McNamara said he would give orders for the necessary military dispositions, so that if the decision were for a strike the Air Force would be ready . McNamara: "If the . decision were . for an attack, the . Air Force was ready to be ready"
 He did not, however, advocate an air strike, and favored the alternative of a blockade . He also favored an alternative of air strikes .
 Under Secretary Ball said that he was a waverer between the two courses of action . Ball said he was 'waverer between' and 'wavesrer'
 The Attorney General said with a grin that he too had had a talk with the President, indeed recently this morning .
 He thought it would be very, very difficult for the President if the decision were to be for an air strike, with all the memory of Pearl Harbor .
 Thousands of Cubans would be killed without warning, and a lot of Russians too . Thousands of Cuban refugees would have been killed in the attack . Thousands would have died without warning .
 He favored action to make known the seriousness of U.S. determination to get missiles out of Cuba . But he thought the action should allow the Soviets some room for maneuver to pull back from their over-extended position in Cuba .
 A blockade would not eliminate the bases, Bundy said . An air strike would. would. not eliminate bases, he said .
 Mr Martin replied that a good deal might be different after a strike, and Castro might be toppled in the aftermath . After a pause, he replied that, of course, Mr Martin said .
 Others have expressed the view that we might have to proceed with invasion following a strike . Others have said that we may have to continue with invasion after a strike.
 U.S. armed forces may seize base areas alone in order to eliminate missiles . Still another suggestion was that United States armed forces seize the base areas .
 Secretary McNamara thought this was a very unattractive kind of undertaking from the military point of view . Secretary of Defense thought McNamara's actions were 'unattractive' to the military .
 Secretary Rusk said he thought he thought this group could not make the decision as to what was to be done . That was for the President in consultation with his constitutional advisers, he said .
 The Secretary thought the group’s duty was to present to the President, for his consideration, fully staffed-out alternatives . The Secretary of State said the group's duty is to present .
 Two working groups should be formed, one to work up the blockade alternative and the other to use air strike . The blockade alternative should be worked up by the two working groups .
 Mr Johnson was to have with him Ambassador Thompson, Deputy Secretary Gilpatric, Mr Martin, Mr Nitze, and Mr Meeker . Ambassador Thompson was also in attendance .
 Mr McCone begged off on the ground that his position and duties on the U.S. Intelligence Board made it undesirable for him to participate in the working group .
 Mr Katzenbach was detailed to the Johnson group . He later visited the Bundy group to observe and possibly serve as a devil's advocate .
 Mr Sorensen said he thought he had absorbed enough to start on the draft of a speech for the President .
 There was some inconclusive discussion on the timing of such a speech, on the danger of leaks before then, and on the proper time for meeting with the President once more .
 Ambassador Thompson: "We should be able to present a strong legal case" Ambassador Thompson says the Soviets attached importance to questions of legality . Ambassador Thompson said the Soviets attach importance to matters of law .
 Attorney General said he thought there was ample legal basis for a blockade . The Attorney General, as he was about to leave the room, said he was concerned .
 Cabinet officers reconvened and were joined once more by cabinet officers who had been away in the earlier afternoon . They were joined again by ministers who had earlier been away from work .
 The Johnson group scenario, which was more nearly complete and was ready earlier, was discussed first . The Johnson Group scenario was also discussed .
 There was again a discussion of timing, now in relation to a Presidential radio address . The timing of the President's address was also discussed .
 Mr Martin thought Sunday might be too early, as it would be virtually impossible to get to all the Latin American heads of state on Sunday . Mr Martin said Sunday would be too soon .
 Ambassador Thompson made the point that 24 hours must be allowed to elapse between announcement of the blockade and enforcement, so as to give the Soviet Government time .
 Secretary McNamara voiced the opinion that the U.S. would have to pay a price to get the Soviet missiles out of Cuba . More than once during the afternoon, McNamara expressed the opinion .
 He thought we would at least have to give up our missile bases in Italy and Turkey and would probably have to pay more besides . He said we would probably pay more if we did not give up bases .
 At different times the possibility of nuclear conflict breaking out was referred to . The possibility of a nuclear war was also mentioned in the film .
 The point was made that, once the Cuban missile installations were complete and operational, a new strategic situation would exist . The United States would be more directly and immediately under the gun than ever before, the author says .
 A striking Soviet military push into the Western Hemisphere would have succeeded and become effective . The Soviet invasion of the U.S. in the 1960s would have been a success .
 The clock could not be turned back, and things would never be the same again . The clock had been turned back and the clock would not have been able to stop .
 Attorney General said it would be better for our children and grandchildren if we decided to face the Soviet threat, stand up to it, and eliminate it, now .
 The circumstances for doing so at some future time were bound to be more unfavorable, the risks would be greater, the chances of success less good . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the past .
 The implication of his statement was that he favored blockade rather than strike . The implication is that he favors blockade, not strike .
 An air strike could be made some time after the blockade was instituted in the event the blockade did not produce results as to the missile bases in Cuba . Secretary McNamara came to expressing the view that an air strike was possible .
 The Attorney General took particular note of this shift, and said it was now pretty clear what the decision should be . Other steps subsequently were not precluded and could be considered .
 After a few minutes, Secretary Rusk asked him if he had some views on the question of what to do . He replied, "Yes, yes, yes"
 He said that in view of the course the discussion was taking he didn’t think it was necessary to express them then . When queried as to them, he said that it was not necessary to do so .
 He went on to say he thought we must look beyond the immediate immediate action of blockade . He said we need to develop a plan for solution of the problem—elements for negotiation .
 One possibility would be demilitarization of Cuba under effective international supervision, perhaps accompanied by neutralization of the island under international guaranties . UN observers could monitor compliance .
 Once again there was discussion of when another meeting with the President should be held . Once again, there were discussions of when a meeting with President was held .
 It is generally agreed that the President should continue on his trip until Sunday morning .