 This site provides background on the crisis that brought the world to the brink of nuclear disaster in October 1962 . It also offers tools to understand how it can inform contemporary policy . Designed to help policymakers, students, and interested citizens draw lessons from these critical events .
 In 1960, at the age of 43, John F Kennedy became the youngest elected President in U.S. history . At the time of the Cold War, he was in a period of growing tensions in the United States and Soviet Union .
 Soon after taking office in 1961, he authorized the “Bay of Pigs’ invasion led by the CIA and exiles from Cuba . His government had been overthrown by communist rebels in 1959 .
 This failed to overthrow leader Fidel Castro, and was a major embarrassment to Kennedy . It was the first attempt to overthrow Castro, but failed to topple him .
 Tensions with the Soviet Union escalated during the 1961 Berlin Crisis . Tensions increased during the Berlin Crisis in 1961 .
 He resisted pressure to react quickly with a surprise air strike . He took time to deliberate in secret on the possible courses of action .
 On October 22, President Obama announced a naval blockade on further arms shipments to Cuba . The blockade was imposed on October 22 .
 President George W. Bush worked out an agreement with the Soviets . The deal involved a pledge not to invade Cuba if the Soviet Union withdrew its missiles, a threat to attack within 24 hours if the offer wasn't accepted .
 In 1961 tensions between the superpowers escalated over the Berlin Crisis . However, in 1961 tensions escalated over Berlin crisis .
 Khrushchev made the decision to place Soviet missiles in Cuba secretly in order to give a quick boost to Soviet missile power, and to strengthen the USSR’s bargaining position regarding the Berlin question . The decision was made in the spring of 1962 .
 Khrushchev initially maintained a hard line, expecting Kennedy to back down . After the missiles were discovered, the missile crisis was over . Kennedy was expected to have backed down, but the crisis escalated .
 Khrushchev reassessed the situation after the President stood firm . However, as the president stood firm, he reassessed the situation .
 He agreed to withdraw the Soviet missiles, in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The President’s secret assurance that the United States would withdraw its Jupiter missiles from Turkey was also a promise .
 The settlement was viewed by many as unfavorable to the USSR and hurt Khrushchev politically, contributing to his ouster from power in 1964 . As this American concession was not revealed publicly, the settlement was seen as unfavorable by many .
 The Cuban leader initially claimed this was not a communist revolution . Cuba formally aligned itself with the Soviet Union a year later .
 Relations with the United States deteriorated further in 1961 when the U.S. supported CIA-trained anti-Castro exiles in the Bay of Pigs invasion . Relations with Cuba deteriorated further when President Kennedy was assassinated in 1961 .
 In the summer of 1962 Castro accepted the Soviet offer to install missiles in Cuba as a deterrent to a U.S. invasion . In this context, the Cuban president accepted the offer . In 1962, the Soviet Union offered to install missile bases in Cuba, Cuba .
 Castro urged Khrushchev to defend Cuba and reject U.S. demands to withdraw missiles from Cuba . During the crisis Castro called for the Cuban government to withdraw the missiles .
 Castro urged Khrushchev to initiate a nuclear first strike . On October 27, believing a U.S. attack was imminent, Castro called for a strike .