 As a subscriber, you are shown 80% less display advertising when reading our content . We apologise for any use of this advertising . We are happy to let you know that we are happy for you .
 Those ads you do see are predominantly from local businesses promoting local services . Those ads do not include ads for local businesses .
 Adverts enable local businesses to get in front of their target audience . These adverts enable businesses to advertise to their local community . Adverts help local businesses get in the local community.
 Local businesses need as much support as possible during these challenging times . It is important that we continue to promote these adverts as our local businesses need .
 Nina Khrushcheva's great-grandfather was leader of the Soviet Union during the 1962 standoff . She said both Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to de-escalate as soon as there was a real threat of nuclear action .
 Sir Alex says aggressive rhetoric from Russia is in part an attempt to bully the West . But the situation should still be taken seriously, he says . He says Putin is trying to bully us with talk of his nuclear weapons .
 We want our comments to be a lively part of our community a place where readers can debate and engage with the most important local issues . Our rules: We want to keep the comments a valuable part of the community .
 The ability to comment on our stories is a privilege, not a right, however, and that privilege may be withdrawn if it is abused or misused . We are happy to let you comment, but it's not always a right to do so .
 If you have a complaint about the editorial content which relates to inaccuracy or intrusion, then contact the editor here .
 IPSO is happy to provide a customized response to a customer service request . IPSO has been in touch with some of the world's most important news organizations since 2001 .
 Newsquest Media Group Ltd, Loudwater Mill, Station Road, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, is a proud member of the community .