 Kennedy discussed in more detail about the blockade and air strike . Sunday, October 21, Kennedy discussed the blockade .
 The Soviet ships stop at the blockade and the military alert is raised to DEFCON 2 . Wednesday, October 24, is the first time the Soviet ships have stopped at a blockade .
 Americans discovered Cuba building secret missile bases off the coast of Florida . Americans discovered the bases off Florida coast . Cuba built the bases in secret, secret military bases in Cuba .
 If no one stopped them this could lead to a nuclear catastrophe, it could have caused a nuclear disaster .
 President Kennedy told Nikita S Khrushchev to remove all missile bases from Cuba . President Kennedy ordered the removal of the bases .
 Khrushchev ordered to the Soviet field commanders to launch missiles if the U.S. invaded . The Soviet leader ordered the launch if the United States invaded the country .
 He died November 22,1963 while riding in his motorcade a lone gunman shot him . He was shot in 1963 .
 He was born in Brookline, Massachusetts on May 29, 1963 . He died November 22, 1963 while riding in his motorcade a lone gunman shot him .
 He was born in 1894, the son of a miner . He was also born to be a miner.
 He was known for his temper tantrums . He was also known for being known for throwing tantrums at people .
 He also agrees that these planes can be observed and counted as they leave . He says the planes can also be seen and counted .
 All IL-28 bombers now in Cuba will be withdrawn within 30 days, says Khrushchev . I have this afternoon instructed the Secretary of Defense to lift our naval quarantine .
 I have this afternoon instructed the Secretary of Defense to lift our naval quarantine . Inasmuch as this goes a long way toward reducing the danger which faced this Hemisphere four weeks ago, I have ordered the lifting .
 U.S.A. sent nuclear weapons to Soviet Union in 1950s and '60s . USSR responded to the threat of a nuclear war with the Soviet Union . U.N. nuclear weapons were used in the Cold War . The Soviet Union responded strongly .