 DEFCON is “Defense Readiness Condition” and level 3 is the state of being more ready than required . Level 3 is a state that is ready to be ready to defend the nation .
 Kennedy and the rest of the U.S. defense saw this act as a threat . Kennedy and others saw it as a potential threat to the nation .
 Kennedy signed the proclamation for a naval blockade around Cuba to keep supplies from going in or leaving Cuba . October 23rd, Kennedy signed a proclamation for the naval blockade .
 The act was most likely going to cause some sparks to fly between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev, and Ambassador Dobrynin. President Kennedy was speaking with Ambassador Dobynin . President Kennedy and Nikita Nikitnikniknikniksi were at the center of the world's most famous meeting .
 Despite the fact that the missiles were being built and shipped in utter secret into Cuba, they were, in fact, just for protecting Cuba . The missiles had a very specific range to hit the US .
 Before Cuba was alligned with the Soviet Union they were with the United States after the Cold War . Cuba was with the U.S. before the Soviet-Cuba pact .
 The day after the proclamation of the Cuban Quarantine the Soviet Union ships heading for Cuba turned back except for one ship that tried to slip through . The Soviet Union ship was the last ship to make its way to Cuba .
 The United States military went to DEFCON 2, which is right below maximum readiness which is practically starting a war . The U.S. military is currently at DEFCon 2, a level of maximum readiness .
 Due to issues with interacting with Fidel Castro – who refused to have his territory inspected by the United States Military – and the stubbornness of both American and Russian parties there might have been an actual war on their hands .
 The Soviet Union agreed to withdraw from Cuba if the United States removed their set up missiles in turkey which were prepared to retaliate . The U.S. agreed to remove the missiles if the Soviet Union removed them from Cuba . The United States also agreed to pull missiles from Turkey .