 Many people believed Europe was finished after WW II: scarcity of food, runaway inflation, black markets . Western Europe's economic recovery was a major success in Europe .
 European federalists hoped Council would evolve into a true European parliament with sovereign rights, but this did not happen . Council was created in 1948, but has never been fully sovereign . Council is now the European Parliament of the European Union .
 EEC encouraged hopes of political and economic union frustrated in 1960s by resurgence of more traditional nationalism . European Economic Community encouraged hopes for political, economic union . EEC was created in 1967 after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Power struggle emerged after Stalin died in 1953; Khrushchev emerged a few years later . Stalin’s heirs realized reforms were needed needed . Stalin's heirs realized that reforms needed .
 Khrushchev took startling initiative against hard-liners by denouncing Stalin’s crimes in a closed session . The Soviet Union leader took a startling initiative in denouncing Stalin's crimes .
 Resources shifted from heavy industry and the military to consumer goods and agriculture . De-Stalinization resulted in communist reformers seeking greater liberty and national independence .
 Students and workers in Budapest installed a liberal Communist reformer as new chief in October 1956 . March 1956, riots resulted in release of more than 9000 political prisoners .
 Relations between USSR & U.S. improve with ascension to power of Nikita Khrushchev . Seeks ‘peaceful co-existence” with the West in order to focus on Soviet economy . Resulted in significant reduction in cold war tensions between 1955 & 1957 .
 Four times as many scientists in Europe and North America in 1975 as in 1945 . Massive growth of scientific community in Europe, North America . Massive Growth of Scientific Community .
 Khrushchev’s reforms in USSR brought modest liberalization and more consumer goods to eastern Europe . 1968, reform elements in Czechoslovak Communist party gained majority and voted out Stalinist leader .