 It merited little more than a passing mention in the mainstream media, despite the fact of having been the most dramatic and iconic moment in the Cold War . The conflict had stakes higher than any other in history and continues to haunt our current political landscape .
 I don't wish to write merely another historical retrospective on the event, but I do believe that the multifaceted and complex world of nuclear politics is still as relevant today as ever . It is vital for an understanding of the geopolitical reality with which we have to contend, as political activists
 Nuclear politics remains a defining part of the political landscape in the U.S. nuclear politics . Iran, Pakistan, North Korea, and Israel have all been in the spotlight in recent years .
 Nuclear war has exerted a strange fascination upon me since I was a 10-year-old in 1983, when I was barely old enough to begin to understand that the world I lived in, as a result of the Cold War that had just been reheated by President Reagan, was undergoing
 Reagan was calling the Soviet Union the “evil empire,” the Soviets shot down a Korean airliner carrying American passengers, and NATO engaged in a massive exercise to simulate a nuclear attack on the U.S.R. which very nearly triggered the real thing .
 The Day After, which aired in November, was televised in November . The British equivalent, Threads, aired the following year in Britain .
 I remember that I began checking books out from the public library on the subject of nuclear weapons and their effects, which were among the first adult books I ever read . I remember checking out books on the topic from the library on nuclear weapons .
 I kept checking out more and more books on the topic until my mother forced me to stop, concerned at the effect it was having on my youthful mentality .
 'I have never succeeded in exorcising the nuclear demon from my mind. Fortunately, I moved on to other interests, but I have moved on with other interests . Fortunately, he has never succeeded .
 Dreams of a world shattered in a nuclear war still continue to disturb my sleep . Dreams of the world shattered by a war still disturb me sleep on occasion .
 In some ways, the reality of nuclear weapons seems almost too fantastic thing to be real, sort of like when we first learn about dinosaurs as children . The reality of having nuclear weapons is almost too strange to be a reality .
 During the 1990s, however, with the end of the Cold War, I largely forgot about it, like most people, thinking that the danger had passed . I largely forget about it when I was in the 90s, but I thought it had passed, thinking it was over .
 Starting a few years ago, I decided to check in to see what was happening today . But starting in 2009, I began checking in on what's happening today. Today, I'm looking forward to the next few years .
 The nuclear menace has not really receded; really, it has just adapted and taken new forms . The nuclear threat has not receded, but has adapted and adapted to take new forms, experts say . The world's nuclear threat is not receding; it's just adapting and taking
 Counter-Currents readers need to take into account. And I think it is something that Counter-currents readers should take into consideration. And that's something they should consider .
 Rosenbaum is a secular, American Jew who has had a long career as a journalist and essayist . Rosenbaum, as one might guess from the name, is a Jew .
 Counter-Currents readers may recall his 1998 book Explaining Hitler, which was a varied, if unoriginal, effort to explain the ‘most evil man in history” by relying on psychological speculation and the like . Counter-currents readers might remember his 1998 attempt to explain
 Hitler imagined by people like him is a superhuman, almost supernatural figure, says Rosenbaum . Rosenbaum failed to find a satisfactory explanation, however .
 Rosenbaum's Jewish identity reveals a lot about Zionist and neoconservative attitudes towards nuclear politics . Rosenbaum’s book is a useful introductory survey, and also his Jewish identity, which he brings unapologetically .
 Counter-Currents offers an overview of the nuclear situation in the U.S. for reasons that I hope will become apparent . But more generally, I think it is important to provide a clear view of the situation .
 The conventional narrative is that the Soviets and their henchman, Castro, placed missiles in Cuba with the intention of blowing the U.S. to smithereens . The conventional story is that Soviets and Castro, eager to find a way to clobber the United States,
 The CIA uncovered the plot just in the nick of time, before the missiles were made operational . Kennedy told the commies to put a stop to their nonsense .
 Kennedy stood toe-to-toe with Khrushchev, threatening to attack Cuba in order to prevent the missiles from being activated, even if it meant all-out world war between the superpowers . Kennedy threatened to attack the Soviet Union's Cuba missile program in 1962 .
 Khrushchev frightened into submission by this demonstration of American determination, blinked, and he brought his ships scurrying home, presaging the total victory of democracy that took another 30 years to come to fruition .
 Only in recent years have declassified documents and revelations on both sides conveyed the real story . The reality was very different, and only recently have been declassified .
 The United States had already placed nuclear missiles in Italy and Turkey which were roughly the same distance from the Soviet Union as Cuba is from us . The Soviet leadership didn’t view their installation of missiles in Cuba as an aggressive act, but rather as a way of preserving the balance of
 Khrushchev was taken by surprise when the U.S. reacted strongly to the Americans' reaction . The Soviet leader was surprised when the Americans reacted strongly .
 The idea that Khrushchev ‘blinked’ was a fallacy concocted to placate the American public . Also, the idea that he “blunged” was concocted by the U.S. public . The idea was a mistake concocted for
 Kennedy conducted secret back-door negotiations with Khrushchev during the Crisis . Kennedy promised that America would never invade Cuba and that U.S. missiles in Italy and Turkey would be quietly removed in return for withdrawal from Cuba . Kennedy also promised to remove missiles from Turkey and Italy in return
 The one accurate part of the popular American wisdom about the Crisis is that it was the moment when the superpowers came closer to all-out nuclear war than at any other time during the Cold War . The American wisdom is that the two superpowers were closer to war than ever at any
 The CIA had been wrong that the Cuban missiles had not yet been activated when they were discovered . The missiles had been discovered in the Cuban missile strike .
 In fact, several hundred strategic and tactical weapons were already operational, and had been placed under Fidel Castro’s command . Several hundred weapons had already been put under Castro's command .
 Castro has made it clear that he would certainly have used them in the face of an American attack . In more recent years, Castro has said he would have used the weapons to defend himself .
 Tactical weapons were deployed to destroy the American base at Guantanamo Bay as well as any invasion force . Strategic warheads would have been fired upon the continental United States .
 At one point, a Russian submarine captain ordered his vessel to fire a nuclear torpedo at the American ships . He was only stopped from doing so by the convoy’s commanding officer .
 Control rooms of the early Atlas Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles required that both men in the two-man crew turn their launch keys simultaneously in order to fire the missiles under their command . Then, as now, the control rooms of early Atlas missiles required that .
 A crewman who goes nuts cannot launch without the consent of his colleague . The reason for this is so that a crewman can launch without his colleague's consent .
 What bothered these early missileers, as they are called, was that one of them might suddenly get cold feet if and when the order to launch was received, distressed at the idea of annihilating millions of Russians, east Europeans, or Chinese .
 In short, during those fateful autumn days, the world primed itself to bring about a man-made apocalypse of a sort that had precedent only in the darker passages of the Holy Scriptures . The world was primed itself for an apocalypse of the sort that only had precedent in the Bible .
 It is probably not accurate to say that World War III in October 1962 would have been the “end of the world,” but it certainly would be the end of the North American, European, Russian, and Chinese civilizations as we now know them .
 By the end of the 1960s, both sides had constructed thousands of land-, sea-, and air-based ICBMs that were, and are, maintained on constant alert . Ironically, although it is rarely framed this way in history texts, the whole thing ended up being much ado
 The need for maintaining missile bases in close proximity to the enemy’s territory became obsolete within a few years of the Crisis . Both sides were able to threaten the other with impunity . As a result of the crisis, the need for missile bases became obsolete .
 It was also far from the only time that the two powers came to the brink of war . The two countries came close to war in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Few historians would question that this was the moment when the Cold War came closer to going hot than at any other time . Nevertheless, few historians would say that this . was the . moment .
 In terms of providing an overview of the subject of nuclear politics and morality involving the traditional nuclear states, Rosenbaum’s book is a good introduction to the subject . Rosenbaum's book provides an overview .
 He doesn't present anything that can’t be studied in greater depth elsewhere, but he does it in an entertaining and easy-to-read way . He presents nothing that can't be studied more deeply .
 His style is more journalistic than scholarly , often presenting things in terms of personal anecdotes and with editorial asides .
 The world made it through four decades of Mutually Assured Destruction had as much to do with luck as with the prevalence of sanity among the various political leaderships . He discusses some of the important lessons to be learned from the Cold War .
 These chapters of the book serve to correct the impression in the popular consciousness that the end of the Cold War meant the nuclear threat . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a Pulitzer Prize-winning author .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union greatly reduced the risk of conflict in the 1980s, writes Andrew Hammond . But little has changed in the standoff since then, he says .
 The Russian Federation and the United States maintain arsenals of thousands of nuclear weapons . The weapons are kept on constant alert, ready to be launched at a moment's notice .
 There are far fewer of them today than there were 25 years ago . But each nation retains enough to completely devastate the other, if the situation arose .
 It is also a fact that both continue to actively prepare for the possibility of war against the other, such as air patrols which seek to detect holes in the other side's air defenses .
 Both Bush and Obama administrations worked to set up missile defense systems in vicinity of Russia . Few believe the systems are intended for defense against ‘rogue states’ such as Iran or North Korea .
 Retired Air Force Colonel Sam Gardiner discusses the Russian invasion of Georgia in August 2008 . CNN.com's John Sutter talks with retired Colonel Gardiner about the invasion .
 The White House mentioned that the Russians had moved some of their SS-26 Iskander missiles into the combat zone . Gardiner calls attention to the fact that, in a briefing to the press during the crisis, the White House said some of the missiles had been moved .
 The SS-26 is a short-range missile that can be armed with either conventional or nuclear warheads . The SS26 is capable of being armed with a nuclear or conventional weapon . The missile can be fitted to a range range of warheads .
 The Georgian forces were already heavily outclassed by the Russians . The Russian forces were not intended to be used on the Georgian forces, which were already outclassing .
 More likely, Gardiner says, they were meant to send a warning to the U.S. not to intervene . Gardiner: More than likely, it was meant to be a warning from the United States .
 The U.S. had no way of knowing if the missiles were nuclear-tipped or not, but this very uncertainty forced the Pentagon into a new strategic calculus .
 The presence of the missiles upped the stakes, and was likely intended as a deterrent . Gardiner was uncertain whether or not there were any actual U.S. plans to aid the Georgians .
 Russia announced that it would be positioning some of the SS-26s within range of Poland, where the Bush-era missile defense system was to be installed, within hours of President Obama’s inauguration .
 Whether this was done as a direct response to the Russian threats, we cannot know, but it seems a tantalizing possibility . Whether this is a response to threats from Russia, it seems to be a possibility .
 This may seem like mere saber-rattling at this point in history, but the fact that the last 20 years have been relatively peaceful between the two nations doesn't mean that they will always remain that way .
 If the “collapse” that is often predicted actually comes to pass, it is a certainty that the nations of the world will utilize every method at their disposal to attempt to dominate what remains of global resources, and reassert military power .
 Nuclear weapons are still a cheap and effective way – much more so than conventional weapons – of intimidating an adversary . Nuclear weapons still an effective way to intimidate an adversary, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 There is little doubt in my mind that, if a genuine global crisis occurs, nuclear weapons will return to an even more prominent role in diplomacy and war .
 This time, however, the fight won’t be over ideology, but will be over energy, food, water, and other resources – in other words, survival . The fight will not be over ideologies, but instead over energy and food, but over resources, it will be
 The desperation such a situation will engender will make the actual use of such weapons, rather than mere threats, a distinct possibility, a possibility . The desperation will make such a desperate situation a possibility, such as the use of weapons .
 This is not even to mention the ever-present specter of a war erupting through a mistake, an accident or even the malicious actions of a political leader or military officer who has lost his mind, as in the classic film Dr. Dr. Martin .
 Rosenbaum recounts a number of hair-raising accidental close-calls on both sides of the Iron Curtain . False indications of an attack in progress nearly led to an accidental counterstrike, he says .
 In each case, war was only averted as a result of an individual officer trumping the prescribed procedures in favor of his own judgment . War averted in each case was only because of the individual officer's actions .
 The notion that only the President has the power to use nuclear weapons is a fiction, Rosenbaum says . Some of the people who have served with nuclear weapons say it's a fiction to soothe public's fears .
 There are many politicians and analysts who have come to the conclusion that the best course of action would be to abolish nuclear weapons .
 These days, this is often referred to as ‘Global Zero,’ or the dream of the universal elimination of nuclear arms throughout all countries . The dream of eliminating nuclear arms from all countries is often known as “Global Zero”
 The problem is that no state will voluntarily give up all of its weapons, since it cannot rely on the fact that everyone else will follow suit . No state will give up weapons, but it can't rely on others to do so . The U.S. has a long history of
 The only way it could become even remotely practical would be if some international body were to arise, independent of any national loyalties, and imbued with enough political and military power to enforce its will over all nations, is to ensure that everyone was obeying the ban .
 Such an institution could only come into existence if all the nations of the world were to allow it to do so, voluntarily surrendering their sovereignty . Even more fantastically, such an institution would only be able to be created if all of the nations were to .
 A more realistic course of action would be for the nuclear powers of the world to take their weapons off of hair-trigger alert . The world's nuclear powers should be taken off hair trigger alert .
 The best way to do this would be to store nuclear warheads separately from their launchers . This would be the best way of storing nuclear warheads separate from launchers .
 In a crisis, they could be reattached and returned to their launching positions, but this process takes several hours . This process would be detected by any nation with satellite monitoring capability . The mission would take several hours to complete .
 The advantage to this is that it would give the governments involved time to negotiate with the opposing side before any weapons are actually used . The advantage would be that it gives the opposing sides more time to use weapons .
 This would only work if all nations which currently maintain nuclear forces on constant alert would implement this plan . Of course, this would only be possible if all nuclear forces were put on alert .
 Even this would not end the possibility of nuclear war, but it would at least remove the threat of accidental war . And, of course, even this wouldn't end the possible nuclear war .
 Strategic planners balk at such a notion, clinging to the idea that a “bolt from the blue” attack would wipe out their entire arsenal before any of it can get airborne . I agree with Rosenbaum that this is a sensible course, being less utopian in nature than the idea
 "Any significant stand-down from our current posture is unlikely to come about in the immediate future," says President Obama .
 Threads remains a harrowing viewing experience even today, and may be the greatest apocalypse film ever made . Threads is the most harrowing apocalypse film of all time .
 What you must remember is that the same Bolsheviks that controled Moscow were the same Leninists that controlled Washington .
 There was never going to be a nuclear conflict, that ruse like today’s modern so-called terrorist was designed to keep the public on both sides of the Atlantic scared of each other .
 The U.N. which is a police force of the Bolsheviks intervened only when it served the purpose of destroying the nation. The Bolsheviks only intervened when it was necessary to destroy the nation, says Lenin .
 The Belguim Congo fell or was forced into communist savage hands . Read the story of Katanga and what happened after it fell . Katanga is the birthplace of the Congo .
 Rhodesia was fighting comunist led and trained terrorist and the west England and America were boycotting it . Rhodesia fought against the West in Rhodesia and Rhodesia in the 1960s .
 South Afrika fought the communist in Angola led and trained by many Cuban communist with shipments of arms comminging in by freighters monthly and the west once again condemed S.A. and did nothing but help expand communism in Africa .
 Mandela in the west is hailed as the Hero of the people . Nelson Mandela is a comunist and a hero of the South African people . Read Nelson Mandela’s ‘How to be a good Comunist’
 French Algeria was hailed and promoted by the west, but fell into the comunist plot . Then you can go to French Algeria and see how that fall into comunism plot and how it was hailed .
 Communism is a tool of world jewry for complete control of the world . Communism was used to subvert the White Nations and the destruction of the U.N. was wrought on by communism . communism was used as a tool to control the world, according to the historian .
 "I was a kid in the ’80s, and the possibility of a nuclear war seemed very real to me. I was a child in the '80’s," he says .
 I find it hard to avoid the uneasy suspicion that in the lifetime of most people reading this, nuclear weapons will be used somewhere . This will shape the next thousand years .
 Even on a limited scale, nuclear war would cause enormous problems, particularly if the smoke from burning cities reduced growing seasons in the Northern Hemisphere .
 The refugee crisis alone would be out of Jean Raspail’s worst nightmare, he says . It would be a nightmare for the French president to see the refugee crisis .
 This is a great article about a topic that most people have forgotten about . This is one of the most important topics in the world .
 The world is safer when we think of a single nuclear war as the event that will end humanity and our natural world . Weirdly, however, it seems that the world is safe when it comes to thinking of a nuclear war .
 Where I think things get tricky is when there’s a possibility of “limited” nuclear use, as will most likely happen as nuclear devices proliferate to the third world . The nuclear devices will proliferate in the third-world and they are tempted to use them for
 Perhaps civilization will be destroyed not by a single cataclysmic nuclear war, but instead will be ground down by a series of smaller nuclear conflicts over a period of years or decades .
 If you have Paywall access, simply login first to see your comment auto-approved . This comment is the first to appear in this article .
 Your email is never published nor shared . Use this information to help people understand our community . Use the comments to help us understand our own problems .
 Interview with American Krogan on Call of Duty Counter-Currents Radio . Recent comments Lord Shang Abortion & White Nationalism, Again . Lord Shang abortion and white nationalism .
 The managerial system can go on for many more decades, perhaps even centuries . Lord Shang: Managers system can continue for decades or centuries .
 Muhammad Aryan Critique as Empire-Killer @Nick Jeelvy. That is an interesting assessment. That's a very interesting assessment of the Aryan Nation .
 Nick Jeelvy Critique Critique as Empire-Killer . We do not platform Jewish propagandists. We don't platform them. Nick Jealvy Critiques .
 Razvan Critique as Empire-Killer for the first time I couldn't read your article . Razvan criticique as empire-killer . For first time, I was unable to read the article .
 "I truly wish I were a Christian and life were more than just this 75 year veil of tears," she said . She said she wished she had been a Christian .
 Chad White Woman Tears: Once you go black, the father never comes back . As for white females, once you go . black, it's not easy to say .
 Chris Ice Cream Machines & Societal Disintegration . ya may not like what I say or do, but I will not risk mine ot my famlies life. ya may be like me but I won't risk my family's lives .
 Lord Shang An Extra 20 Million George Floyds Goad has outdone himself with the article . Lord Shang an extra 20 Million has been added to the list of the richest people in the world .
 Email or use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Follow us on Twitter @CNN_Newsquiz .