 Double, perhaps even quadruple that number of Soviet, Eastern European, and Chinese citizens perished . No one had any reliable data on how many Western Europeans, Africans, Asians, Australians, and others were killed .
 In 1957 Australian writer Neville Shute described its denouement in his eerily tranquil apocalyptic novel, On the Beach .
 Adapted for the screen by Stanley Kramer in 1959, On the Beach premiered simultaneously in major U.S. cities and Moscow . Adapted to the screen for the film, On The Beach premiered in 1959 .
 There were reports of viewers sobbing as Gregory Peck, Ava Gardner, Fred Astaire, and Anthony Perkins stoically prepared for the arrival of the deadly radioactive fallout from a nuclear war in the northern hemisphere .
 They were the last surviving humans, going quietly into the endless night . The last surviving human were going quietly to the end of the night .
 Pentagon opposed to any film that might undermine public enthusiasm for nuclear weapons . Pentagon refused to cooperate with CNN .
 While participants and historians of the crisis never tire of recalling its details and its dangers, the majority of the generation that lived through it, and subsequent generations, never became emotionally engaged with its potential consequences . The majority of those who lived through the crisis did not become emotionally engaged .
 It was neither Vietnam nor Watergate, nor was it Dallas on November 22, 1963 . Dallas was Dallas, Texas, on that day . Dallas, Dallas, 1963, was November 22 .
 It was just the most devastating event in world history . That somehow didn't happen. It was . The world's "most devastating event" never happened, says CNN.com .
 The terrifying realization in 1962 that nuclear armageddon was merely a stumble away profoundly influenced Cold War behavior for the next 27 years . The collapse of a wall in Berlin ushered in a second nuclear age .
 The public learned that nuclear war was an imminent possibility on Monday, October 22, 1962, at 7m. ET . Nuclear War Possible .
 Kennedy went on to explain that Soviet officials had repeatedly lied about the buildup . Kennedy explained that the Soviet government had been lying about the build-up .
 The United States is demanding that all the offensive missiles be removed from Cuba forthwith—or else . The U.S. is only the first step toward forcing the removal of the offending weapons, he said .
 The blockade of Cuba had been devised by a select group of advisers during the previous week in secret meetings that often lasted late into the night .
 National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy informed President Obama that a U-2 had photographed the ""unmistakable evidence" that he referred to in the first paragraph of his speech . The Executive Committee was assembled at the President's request .
 The final page of the Quarantine Proclamation or Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba is shown . Refer to Caption .
 The ExComm was initially composed of 16 members, the most influential being the President's brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy . The most influential member of the ExComm is Robert Kennedy's brother .
 Among the others were Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, President's speech writer Theodore Sorensen, and President's secretary of state George Ball .
 Maxwell Taylor, former Ambassador to the Soviet Union Llewellyn Thompson, and Bundy Bundy. Bundy. Maxwell Taylor . Bundy . Bundy. Thompson .
 All the Joint Chiefs attended one meeting, as did President Harry Truman's Secretary of State, Dean Acheson . Harry Truman also attended the meeting . All Joint Chiefs attend one meeting .
 McNamara's view that the Soviet missiles did ""not at all"" alter the ""strategic balance" was rejected out of hand . The option of accepting their deployment as a fait accompli was rejected .
 Even if they did not pose a serious military risk, their presence was deemed politically unacceptable . The U.S. government was concerned about their presence .
 Kennedy had ordered Secret Service to install recording systems in Oval Office and Cabinet Room . Secret Service installed recording systems to record most of the ExComm's meetings .
 Writing about the decision-making process from the perspective of ""a fly on the wall" was irresistible .
 It lay bare the dynamics between senior advisers and contradicted many of their recollections . It was the first time a senior adviser had been in charge of the White House .
 It exposed their confused views of Soviet objectives, revealed their analytical instincts, and exposed whether they had what can only be referred to as good sense . It exposed the confused views and revealed the analytical instincts .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff report raises troubling questions about the judgment of the Joint chiefs of Staff . And it raises deeply troubling questions over the judgment .
 The transcripts indicated that the committee members were divided, inconsistent, often confused, and appropriately frightened . The transcripts also indicated that members of the committee were divided and inconsistent .
 The seriousness of the encounter they were embarked upon, and their lack of confidence that any proposed strategy would accomplish their goal, led most of them to strike, as it were, like cornered animals . Most of the Joint Chiefs initially favor some form of military action .
 "The list of incorrect assumptions, false information, and bad judgments that ran through the committee's discussions is alarming. The list of false assumptions and false information is alarming," the committee says .
 State Department's leading Soviet experts argued for a military strike on the assumption that Khrushchev intended to use the missiles in Cuba to force the Western powers out of Berlin . State Department experts said Khrushche planned to use missiles to force West to leave Berlin .
 Former Secretary of State Acheson, perhaps the nation's most experienced Cold War diplomat, gave equally dangerous advice . The former secretary of state, who served in the U.S. during the Cold War, gave the advice .
 President Eisenhower said military force was the only way to deal with the Soviets . He urged an immediate surprise assault to destroy the missiles .
 When his recommendation was challenged, he declined to attend further meetings .
 The U.S. missed the deployment of the mediumand intermediate-range missiles until it was almost too late to respond . The Soviets had on hand 35 nuclear weapons that would have devastated any American landing force .
 The CIA's best estimate of the number of Soviet ground forces in Cuba was 10,000–12,000 . More than 40,000 battle ready Soviet combat troops were prepared to confront a U.S. assault .
 If the President had approved an attack on Cuba, Guantanamo Bay's reinforced garrison was primed to participate . Guantanamo Bay was primed for participation in the attack .
 The Soviets had moved a battlefield nuclear weapon into range of the base with the intention of destroying it before a single marine could pass through the gate . But the Soviets had planned to destroy the weapon before any marines could pass .
 While the ExComm Debated, Chaos Proved Troublesome . Other near disasters, oversights, and accidents added to the chaos within the crisis .
 Several anti-Castro groups, operating under a CIA program directed by Robert Kennedy, went about their sabotage activities because no one had thought to cancel their mission . The mission could have been mistaken for assault preparations .
 Authorities at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California were seemingly oblivious to the crisis . Authorities appeared to be oblivious to what was happening at the base .
 At the Pentagon, no one dealing with the crisis appeared to be aware of the scheduled test to assess whether the Soviets might misinterpret the launch as a hostile action . The Pentagon is unsure whether the test will be a hostile act .
 The commander of the Strategic Air Command, Gen. Gen. John H. Eisenhower, was the top Air Force commander in the U.S. Air Force .
 Gen. Gen. Eisenhower was trying to intimidate the Soviets, his behavior was confirmation of Gen. Dwight Eisenhower . Eisenhower's actions were confirmation of his intentions .
 Also on Saturday morning, October 27, a U-2 pilot was killed when his plane was shot down over Cuba by a Soviet surface-to-air missile . Also on that day, a Soviet missile was also shot down .
 All of the ExComm's members assumed that the order to fire had been issued by Moscow; in fact, the decision was unauthorized and had been taken by the local commander . The decision to fire was made by a local commander, not Moscow .
 A P2V Neptune United States Navy patrol plane flies over a Soviet freighter . Refer to Caption .
 Joint Chiefs pressure the President to bomb the offending SAM site, but he had the good sense and will to reject their requests . The response of the Joint Chiefs was to pressure him to bomb it, writes David Cameron .
 A U-2 flying on an air-sampling mission to the Arctic circle overflew Soviet territory when the pilot made a navigation error . The mission should have been scrubbed, but the mission was aborted .
 The Soviets could have interpreted that reconnaissance flight as anticipating an attack . The Soviets may have seen that flight as a signal for an attack.
 The most dangerous moment of the crisis occurred late on Saturday afternoon, and the United States did not learn about it until almost 40 years later . The U.S. learned about it nearly 40 years after .
 Four Soviet submarines were being tracked in the area of the blockade line, but no American knew that each had a 15-kiloton nuclear torpedo aboard that their captains were authorized to use . The U.S. didn't know that each of the four Soviet submarines had nuclear warheads .
 Savitskii, convinced that he was being attacked by the practice depth charges and grenades that U.S. anti-submarine warfare forces were dropping to force him to surface, loaded his nuclear torpedo and came within seconds of launching it at his antagonists . Savitskkii
 Had he fired that weapon, there was no doubt about the devastating consequences that would have followed . Had he shot that weapon? There is no doubt, there would have been devastating consequences .
 The fundamental flaw in the concept is that accurate information, the most important element in coping with any serious crisis, is invariably unavailable . accurate information is always unavailable, says the author of the book .
 The ExComm's discussions became the central focus of historians' efforts to understand the process that led to its peaceful resolution . Nevertheless, in the aftermath of the crisis, historians have focused on the ExComm .
 The members of the committee, as well as the President, promoted that idea . They touted its work as a classic example of the administration's ability to skillfully manage international challenges .
 A collection of early histories that relied on interviews with participants supported the view that the ExComm had been composed of ""wise men"" who had diligently worked through the most sensible policy options to reach the most appropriate decisions .
 In 1968, Robert Kennedy published a memoir of the crisis, Thirteen Days, that continues to reinforce that view . Robert Kennedy: "Thirteen Days" is a reminder of the tragedy .
 This attention to the words of ""the wise men"" led to many misconceptions, but initially, and in particular, to two historical distortions . The words of 'wise men' have led to a number of misconceptions about the Bible .
 The first was the incorrect impression that ExComm decisions had dictated the President's policies, the White House says . The first mistake was the impression ExComm made that the President had dictated his policies, he says .
 The second was to isolate the crisis from its broader historical Cold War milieu . The first was to try to isolate it from its Cold War-era milieu. The other was to separate it from the Cold War.
 War was prevented for two reasons, and the ExComm's members were responsible for neither . War prevented by two reasons . ExComm was responsible for both preventing war and preventing war .
 His objective was to protect Castro's government by deterring, not fighting, the U.S., he said . Castro was trying to deter the United States, not fight it .
 The second reason that war was avoided is that the President, not the members of the ExComm, insisted on providing Khrushchev with a politically acceptable exit from his failed gamble . The President refused to give the Excommons a political solution .
 The challenge was to find a resolution that gave the Soviet leader options other than capitulate or fight . The challenge is to find an alternative to capitulating or fighting .
 To do so, it was necessary for the President to empathize with his adversary . To see the crisis from Khrushchev's perspective, the President saw the crisis as a crisis . To do this, he was necessary to see his adversary's perspective .
 He was encouraged in this by two unsung, consistently level-headed advisers . He said: "He was encouraged to this by [his advisers] by ... the right people"
 Inclined toward military action early in the crisis, the President quickly grew increasingly wary of its unpredictable consequences . The President is wary of the unpredictable consequences of military action .
 He missed many of the meetings during the week before his speech . Forced to maintain his schedule, so as not to raise suspicions that something untoward was occurring .
 Within 48 hours of being briefed by Bundy, he told his brother to back away from the military option . But within 48 hours, he privately told him to back off from military option and bring in a blockade .
 Khrushchev's crude deception had, at least initially, trumped any inclination the President had to seek a diplomatic exit from the crisis . It is clear that Khrushvic's crude . deception had trumped . any inclination to seek diplomatic . exit from crisis .
 Under Secretary of State George Ball and Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson contributed to turning him against a military assault . But what restored his commitment to diplomacy is less clear, although circumstantial evidence suggests that the cogent arguments .
 Ball condemned the idea of igniting a war on their behalf . Expanding on McNamara's view that the missiles were not strategically significant, Ball said . Ball said the missiles are not strategically important .
 His alternative was to begin the process of eliminating the missiles with a blockade, he said . He said it would be the start of a process of elimination the missiles .
 President briefed him after lunch about the missiles and the conclusions of that morning's ExComm meeting . President was in Washington to attend a White House luncheon .
 Stevenson pointed out that while the United States had superior force in the Caribbean, any military action against Cuba could be countered by the Soviets in Berlin or Turkey . The process would most likely escalate rapidly out of control .
 Kennedy intensely disliked Stevenson, for both political and personal reasons . The problem is that this interpretation is that Kennedy disliked Stevenson . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Stevenson was a coward, not cut from the same heroic cloth as the Kennedy brothers . The Kennedy brothers suggested that Stevenson was not a hero, not a coward . Stevenson was the hero of the day .
 Stevenson had been heroic in dissent in the wake of the crisis . Stevenson had provided the clearest analysis of the dangers the crisis raised and the range of possible peaceful solutions .
 Stevenson's view made a lot more sense to Kennedy than the Joint Chiefs and the ExComm's majority . Like it or not, however, Kennedy hated it, but the Stevenson view made more sense .
 The psychology is complicated, but despite the President's personal dislike of Stevenson-the-man, Stevenson's intellect had spoken clearly, directly, and persuasively to Kennedy's intellect . The psychology of the psychology of this is complicated .
 Kennedy would cultivate and harvest as his own over the next 12 days . That "conversation" planted the seed for a diplomatic solution .
 It was a gamble based on 17 years of nuclear experiences going back to Hiroshima . But it's a gamble, based on the 17 years' experience .
 A review of his reasoning reveals the historical roots of his thinking and its crude mimicking of U.S. nuclear policies . A review reveals the history behind his reasoning .
 This included how each nation tested and deployed them, how they figured into diplomatic exchanges, and how strategists and generals promoted their use in war .
 Khrushchev bet that their secret deployment to Cuba would solve many of his problems . This state of affairs tempted him to bet that they would solve his problems, he says . This is the case for the first time since the war broke out .
 Kennedy called for the removal of the White House's use of the military equipment . Kennedy also called for their removal, even if they were unused, to destroy his presidency .
 Khrushchev responded to President Kennedy on October 24, stating that You are no longer appealing to reason, but wish to intimidate us . Refer to Caption .
 The plan was bizarre, vintage Khrushchev, a wild gamble that promised a huge payoff for both his domestic and foreign policies . The plan would be a huge gamble for the future of the Soviet Union .
 He had thought of it himself, and so pushed it through the presidium, manipulating the doubters with displays of reasonablableness and combative confidence .
 He began by enlisting the support of Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, his minister of defense . He also enlisted the support for the equally facile enthusiast, Marshal Malinov .
 Khrushchev had become consumed after the April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion with the need to protect Castro's communist government . The former Soviet leader was consumed by the need for protecting Castro's government .
 Thinking about Cuba in these terms had the effect of shifting it from the periphery to the center of Soviet priorities . In Khrushchev's mind, inextricably linking Soviet leadership of the Socialist world to the survival of Castro's government .
 Khrushchev alighted on the idea of emulating U.S. missile deployments to its NATO allies . That conundrum appeared to be insoluble until Khrushchev's decision to deploy missile systems .
 He assumed that while the United States could destroy most of his missiles before they could be launched, he also knew that the U.S. could never be certain that it could destroy them all . He assumed most of the missiles could be destroyed before launch .
 America's nuclear strategists had been promoting the idea of a second strike for Cuba for almost a decade . That, he reasoned, provided Cuba with a . second strike .
 Khrushchev impressed by the imbalance of fear between the U.S. and Soviet nuclear forces . The Soviet Union and the United States were at the top of the world's nuclear arsenals .
 The proximity to his country of United States nuclear forces in Europe heightened Soviet fears of a nuclear strike far beyond what Americans experienced . U.S. nuclear forces were in Europe . Soviet fears were heightened by the proximity to the United States to Europe .
 Khrushchev's assessment of U.S. caution in the face of a possible nuclear strike confirmed years later by McNamara . McNamara said that Kennedy chose the blockade option as a precaution against the possibility of even a lone nuclear warhead being fired from Cuba at an American city .
 Missiles that could devastate a few U.S. cities would be secretly shipped to Cuba . When they were ready to fire, he would announce their presence . He would then send them to Cuba, where they would fire .
 The mission to raise money for the first time in the U.S. has been a success story . The mission was originally intended to be a small group of volunteers .
 Simplicity gave ground, one decision at a time, to increasing complexity . Military planners added requirement upon requirement . Simplicity of the military grew in complexity, military planners said .
 The enterprise was designated Anadyr, the name of a well-known river in the frozen far northeast of Siberia . For purposes of deception, the enterprise was named Anadry, a well known river .
 The decision was made to ship 24 R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles each with a range of 1,100 miles . 16 R-14 intermediate-range missiles capable of traveling 2,500 miles .
 This array of nuclear firepower would provide almost total coverage of the U.S. U.N. nuclear arsenal would be almost total .
 Antiaircraft batteries were added to protect troops from air attacks . Of course, those troops also had to be protected, especially against an air attack, and so antiaircraft .
 IL-28 bombers, MIG-21 fighters, an array of battlefield nuclear weapons that included about 80 short-range FKR-1 nuclear-capable cruise missiles . Several dozen LUNA tactical nuclear weapons . submarines armed with nuclear torpedoes . Other significant weapons that followed included IL
 If deterrence didn't work, Khrushchev's Cuban brigades were prepared for nuclear war . If deterrence failed to work, the Cuban military was prepared to go on the attack .
 A Dangerous Confrontation on the High Seas was a deadly confrontation between three countries, their governments, and their leaders . The crisis that resulted from this deployment was the deployment of a deadly .
 By this time, Khrushchev, Kennedy, and Castro were aware of the danger of an incident escalating out of control . The military activities of each passing day exponentially increased the danger .
 Tensions had been heightened by the buildup of U.S. forces in the United States and Europe . Along with potential clashes on the quarantine line, tension had been increased by the well-publicized buildup of United States forces .
 The three contending leaders became acutely aware, and worried, that at any moment events could slip from their control . The three leaders were acutely aware of and worried that any moment could slip .
 Over the past week, Castro had become increasingly enraged, apparently beyond worry . Castro has been increasingly enraged over the situation .
 In response to Kennedy's speech, he ordered general mobilization and commanded his antiaircraft batteries to shoot down U.S. aircraft that overflew his island . Several low-flying Air Force reconnaissance jets had close calls .
 Certain that he could do little to prevent an assault, he became grimly fatalistic, determined to confront the inevitable head-on regardless of the consequences, he says .
 Embracing Armageddon as an act of retributive justice, he urged Khrushchev to prepare to strike first . Embraced Armageddon as a 'retributive' justice .
 Khrushchev: Castro's letter was a warning that the situation in Cuba was slipping out of control . Khrisschev's letter struck as yet another warning that situation was slipping . Castro: "It's a sign that the Cuban situation is not going to get better"
 He considered the blockade an illegal, outrageous act of war . Desperate to avoid Armageddon, he was determined not to remove his missiles without receiving a quid pro quo .
 "The folly of degenerate imperialism pushes mankind toward the abyss of a world nuclear-missile war,"" he had angrily written to Kennedy on October 24 .
 He appeared determined then to dare the Americans to sink a Soviet vessel .
 He was 9,000 miles from Havana but only 32 minutes from an intercontinental missile launched from the U.S. The Cuban president was in the midst of a missile strike from the United States .
 The more the two of us pull, the tighter that knot will be tied, the more we pull . Mr President, we and you ought not now pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knot of war, Mr President says .
 At times he was not sure if he was being too cautious, too aggressive, too flexible, too rigid, or simply too worried . At times, he was unsure if he had been too cautious .
 He was infuriated with his military chiefs for their cavalier attitude toward war . He had lost patience with his advisers, who continued to offer contradictory recommendations .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were enemies, ideological and military adversaries . They blundered into a dangerous confrontation that neither wanted nor anticipated . Kennedy and his Soviet-Khrhrchev adversaries were enemies .
 Each was aware that an accident, or even a misinterpretation, could set off a nuclear conflagration .
 Nothing they could achieve was worth the consequences of a nuclear war . Yet the circumstances of their political and international obligations, as well as their personal interests, compelled them to press .
 By this night, the pair had nudged each other so close to the edge of the nuclear precipice that terror had entered their calculations . Yet, by this night it had been so close that terror was entered into their calculations.
 The first was to combine an earlier pledge that the United States would not attack Cuba with a secret U.S. commitment, delivered that night by Robert Kennedy to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, to remove Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 Kennedy would accept the offer, allowing him to avoid his commitment to the Joint Chiefs to begin military actions . Kennedy would instead opt out of the offer and instead take the lead .
 Khrushchev had looked deeper into the abyss on Saturday night, and fearful that the ally he was seeking to protect was on the verge of starting a war . He precipitously ended the crisis on Sunday with a surprise announcement over Radio Moscow .
 Five decades of research also reveals why, absent revision, history petrifies into myth . Five decades worth of research has been published on the subject of a new book .
 The crisis was the transformative event in U.S.-Soviet and .U.S. Cold War relations between the two countries . It was the first time the crisis occurred in the Cold War era .
 U.S.-Soviet nuclear relations reset the rules of the nuclear relationship . Castro's survival ensured his survival, but it also reset the unstated rules of nuclear relations .
 Nuclear deterrence no longer viewed as a stable condition that allowed governments to brandish nuclear weapons for diplomatic advantage . Nuclear deterrence could no longer be viewed as stable condition, says the author of the book .
 The crisis had exposed deterrence's fragilities, requiring it to be managed openly as a delicately balanced process . Crisis had exposed the fragility of deterrence, requiring that it be managed as a delicate process .
 The crisis fits all of those definitions, but as the historical lens is widened, more complexity, more politics, more miscalculations, more unintended consequences, and more understanding enter the narrative . The crisis will continue to grow as the lens of history is widened .
 Expanding the boundaries of the 13 days to Castro's revolution and the failed Bay of Pigs invasion explains the circumstances that made room for the crisis but does not deal with its root cause . Expanded the boundaries to the Castro revolution does not solve the problem .
 The root cause was the central role that nuclear weapons had come to play in the U.S. relationship with Russia, author says .
 Disregarding how those weapons were seen and valued by Soviet and U.S. leaders during the 17 years that preceded the crisis is analogous to explaining the cause of the American Civil War by focusing solely on Abraham Lincoln's election in 1860 while ignoring the history of slavery .
 The Soviets called it the Caribbean Crisis, the Cubans labeled it the October Crisis . The Soviets and Cubans called the crisis the Caribbean crisis . The Cubans also labeled it October Crisis.
 It was also a Berlin Crisis, NATO Crisis, a Sino-Soviet Crisis, and a Chinese Crisis . The Organization of American States and the United Nations played major roles in the crisis .
 Kennedy replied to Khrushchev that he consiedered the premier s Radio Moscow message an important contribution to peace . Kennedy immediately replied that the message was a contribution to the peace .
 The literal fright that the crisis engendered put an end to serious considerations of limited nuclear war . "The literal fright" of the crisis put the end of serious consideration of limited nuke war .
 A limited nuclear exchange would be more analogous to stumbling on a slippery slope than climbing the rungs of an escalation ladder . Most nuclear strategists have faced the possibility of such an outcome, most say .
 Khrushchev's efforts to eliminate West Berlin as a viable western enclave were made clear . That recognition also brought an end to efforts to kill West Berlin . It had been made clear that such an effort could too easily slide out of control .
 The crisis exposed the multiple poles of the so-called bi-polar international system . The crisis also exposed the . multiple poles . of the bi-Polar international . system .
 The United Nations played a far more important role in leading to its resolution than either the U.S. or Soviet governments were willing to acknowledge . The U.N. played a role in the resolution of the Cold War, the author says .
 By providing a world stage, it transformed the crisis into a public international Cold War drama, it increased pressure for a peaceful resolution . By providing the crisis a global stage, the crisis transformed into a Cold War Drama .
 The crisis even contributed to Sino-Soviet hostility on the one hand, and on the other, to a readjustment of the ties between the U.S. and its European allies . The crisis also contributed to China-Russia hostility, and to the United States-Russia relations
 The energetic effort to gain the OAS's approval for the blockade gave the nations of Central and South America a sense that they were being taken seriously, perhaps for the first time . The OAS approved the blockade .
 The United States pleaded for the support of its southern neighbors . It was a unique moment because, in effect, the U.S. pleaded for support of southern neighbors.
 JFK administration sought OAS' support for evidence of Soviet duplicity . U-2 photographs show the importance of the nonmilitary dimension of the Cold War .
 It exposed the limits of what great powers could do alone and demonstrated the influence that small states could exert . Small states can exert influence, whether clients or enemies, in the world .
 Cuba was a major player in every aspect of the crisis, but no U.S. policy maker was willing to consider that Khrushchev was paying very close attention to what Castro was saying and doing .
 It can even be argued that technology took the lead in both creating and resolving the crisis . Technology can be used to help solve the crisis, says CNN.com .
 "It made things possible, and because they were possible, they were attempted," says author . "Because of that, they are attempted," she says .
 Proclamation or Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba is signed . Cuba is banned from sending offensive weapons to the island .
 A P2V Neptune patrol plane flies over a Soviet freighter . The Neptune is a U.S. Navy patrol plane .
 Khrushchev responded to President Kennedy on October 24, stating that You are no longer appealing to reason, but wish to intimidate us . President Kennedy responded by saying that you are 'wishing to intimidate' Soviet Premier responded to the President's comments .
 Kennedy immediately replied to Khrushchev that he consiedered the premier s Radio Moscow message an important contribution to peace . Kennedy replied that the message was a contribution to the peace .
 The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer won the 2006 Pulitzer Prize for Biography . Oppenheim won the Pulitzer Prize in 2006 .
 The John F Kennedy Presidential Library is the central depository for researching the American story . The library is located in New York City, New Jersey .
 Documents that alter what is generally believed continue to be extracted from government files around the world . But documents that alter the generally believed are extracted from the world's government files .
 Since the end of the Cold War, many Soviet sources describing Khrushchev's decision to ship missiles to Cuba have become available . Details of Operation Anadyr, and the negotiations that concluded the crisis, have also been revealed .
 Even Cuban sources, the most difficult to obtain, have enriched our understanding of the role that Castro played in Cuba, says author . "Even Cuban sources" have enriched the understanding of Castro's role, he says .
 Some of the best Soviet and Cuban information emerged from the remarkable October 1992 Havana Conference . The conference brought together U.S., Russian and Cuban senior veterans of the crisis for a detailed discussion .
 Japan, China, Hungary, France, Israel, Holland, Yugoslavia, Switzerland, and elsewhere .