 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, or photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior written permission .
 DK INDIA Design Manager Managing Editor Arunesh Talapatra Rohan Sinha Senior Designers Senior Editor Sudakshina Basu, Balwant Singh Soma B Chowdhury Designers Editor Anjana Nair .
 Philip Parker Historian and writer . Jane McIntosh THE CLASSICAL AGE . The Empire Stops Here and DK Eyewitness Companion to World History .
 Thomas Cussans is an author and contributor to the New York Times . He has written numerous books, including Timelines of World History and History . He is also a contributor to [he Times newspaper]
 Sally Regan is award-winning documentary maker whose films include Shell Shock and Bomber Command for the UK's Channel 4 . Regan has written several books for DK including History, World War II, and Science .
 The Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum is one of the world's most popular museums . The museum is located in Washington, DC .
 Its mission is to educate and inspire visitors by preserving and displaying aeronautical and space flight artifacts . The museum is located in New York City, New York .
 July 1, 1916, when my grandfather, serving as an artilleryman, lost several of his closest friends on the first day of the Somme offensive . My grandfather was serving in the First World War in Germany .
 History was cast as a grand chronicle of events and actions, the work of often larger-than-life protagonists, and was intended to enthrall and capture the imagination in the same way as a great novel . From the earliest times, history was cast .
 Most often the events were battles, treaties, and political struggles, a narrative that excluded the lives of the great majority of men, women, and children . The events were often political struggles and often the lives were lost .
 Historians focus on cultural, social, and economic continuities, looking for their evidence in everyday objects, trading records, accounts of childhood and old age . Historians focused on cultural and social continuities .
 The result was certainly a richer and more diverse account of human experience, but one that often left little sense of change over time . The result of the book was certainly richer than ever imagined, but also often less clear of change .
 As the present book shows, history constructed on a timeline does not have to be a narrow account of war and conquest, treaties and treason . The present book will be published in September 2015 .
 The Inca citadel of Machu Picchu was probably constructed in the 15th century . It was probably abandoned in the 16th century, and abandoned in 16th. exploration, and commerce .
 This is an exhilarating and comprehensive account of human creativity as much as its destructiveness, of discovery and understanding as well as natural disasters and human folly . This is the exhilarating account of creativity and destruction as well .
 Key events in history from the first beginnings of agriculture to the most recent astrophysical discoveries are laid out along what is probably the most comprehensive timeline ever assembled . Spectacularly illustrated and succinctly explained .
 History Year by Year makes to an understanding of global history . No less exciting for me in helping to compose this book and to choose from all facets of human history to build up the timeline .
 Throughout the book, events, discoveries, and achievements occurring in Europe and North America are set against the equally momentous and significant events in the Mideast and East Asia, India, Africa, or South America and the Pacific Rim .
 This is a history that stimulates awareness of a wider world by placing events from across that world side by side . Progress and discovery, feats of social organization, and challenges to the political status quo are no monopoly of the Western world, but as likely to originate in India or Egypt as in
 The design of this book offers a unique opportunity to appreciate a global history of mankind in all its facets . We hope that you enjoy reading History Year by Year and using it as a reference .
 Over seven million years later, we appeared and developed the skills—including sophisticated toolmaking and agriculture—that allowed us to colonize the world . —4.5 million years ago .
 While all of these species seem to have walked on two legs like us, it is not certain whether any were actual ancestors of humans .
 It is difficult to tell from isolated and often poorly preserved fossils which species they should be assigned to, or how these are related to one another . Because species are constantly evolving, individuals of those species can vary .
 PARANTHROPINES’ WAY OF LIFE was unsuccessful and they became extinct after about 1.8MyA . OLDOWAN TOOL 2-1.8A U.S.
 These early Homo species were not very different from australopithecines . They were probably not very similar to australopsines, according to scientists .
 H ergaster was tall and slender, and may have been the first hominin without much body hair . He was tall, slender and slender .
 Their brains were larger than those of their ancestors, and they lost the last of their adaptations to tree-climbing to become fully adapted to walking and running .
 Many animal species use natural objects as tools, but the manufacture of stone tools is unique to hominins . Hominins manufacture stone tools are unique to their use .
 These are known as Oldowan’s tools, after Olduvai Gorge, where they were first found . The tools were found in the area where they are found .
 Another close relative of Homo ergaster, Homo erectus, lived in China and Indonesia perhaps not long afterward . Homo erects lived perhaps not as long afterward as Homo ergasters .
 Some of the skulls from Dmanisi and from Liang Bua in Flores, Indonesia, resemble those of Homo habilis and Homo rudolfensis . Some archaeologists believe that earlier groups of hominins may also have left Africa .
 Living farther north would have required a different way of life . Zhoukoudian 1.6-1.6: 'Narmada' is one of the world's most famous animals .
 MYA ~Hexian _ "" 7 e® Nanjing Lantian @Yunxian 1.5-1 MYA ’ Trinil Sangiran, 8 Mojokerto Ngandong KEY and Eurasia .
 ACHEULEAN HANDAXES made by Homo ergaster and H erectus were produced across most of Africa . To make these tools, knappers had to think several steps ahead to select a suitable stone .
 Handaxes were used for a wide range of activities, including butchery, but also important for personal or group identity . Handaxs were used to demonstrate their makers’ strength and skill, demonstrating their strength .
 Homo antecessor : had appeared as far west as : northern Spain and Italy by 1.5 years . Homo Erectus continued ' to thrive in Asia, but had appeared west as far as northern Spain, Italy and Italy .
 Marks on their bones at the site of Atapuerca in Spain suggest they practiced cannibalism . Marks on the bones of their remains suggest they may have eaten them .
 Humans have a disproportionately large brain for a primate of their size . Archaeologists disagree about how and why this expansion happened .
 Switching to fatty and calorific foods such as bone marrow and meat may have ‘powered’ brain growth . Also demanded more complex tools and effective hunting and foraging skills, researchers say .
 Social skills were also a part of this process, as increasing group cooperation and pair-bonding were necessary to sustain the longer periods of childhood that infants needed for their larger brains .
 They were also highly skilled at making stone tools and heavy thrusting spears with which they tackled large animal prey, such as horses and bison .
 Despite burying their dead, Neanderthals do not seem to have created more than the most limited art or used any symbols, as all modern humans do .
 Whether or not they spoke in a similar way to modern humans is also difficult to establish . Whether they spoke or spoke like modern humans? Is also hard to establish.
 First traces of modern humans beyond Africa come from fossils in Israel and possibly from stone tools found in Arabia . The first traces of human life beyond Africa are found in Israel, Arabia and Israel .
 Homo sapiens colonization of the globe involved many stops, starts, and sometimes retreats, as well as waves of different groups of people in some areas .
 Archaeological evidence suggests that people may also have taken a ‘southern route’ across Arabia into southern Asia . Archaeology evidence suggests people may have traveled across Arabia to southern Asia in ancient times .
 Most scholars favor later dates for the discovery of the site . However, these finds remain controversial, and most scholars favor earlier dates .
 Genetically, the North American colonists are likely to have originated in East Asia . The colonists likely originated in Asia .
 Beringia is now beneath the Bering Straits between Siberia and Alaska, but exposed by low sea levels at the height of the last Ice Age . They probably traveled across the plain of 'Beringia'
 The spread of languages can often be tracked to reflect the globe to be colonized, via the Philippines, by movement of people . The islands of Oceania were some of the last parts of the . spread of . the languages .
 The shows the spread of Austronesian more remote northern and eastern Islands of Micronesia speakers across Oceania . The Austronesians are speakers of the Micronesian language .
 An alternative “multiregional” theory suggests that Homo sapiens evolved simultaneously in many different parts of the world, from ancestors who had left Africa much earlier .
 Most cave ars are > from a similar period, though some were created by the earliest Homo sapiens to arrive in western Europe, around 32,000 years ago . Some are thought to have been created by Homo sapien to arrive 32,500 years ago, but some are from
 DNA analysis of living humans suggests that the common ancestor of all living humans (known as Mitochondrial Eve) lived in Africa around 200,000 ya .
 Skull from 160,000 years old is almost modern in shape; this has been identified as a subspecies of modern humans . Homo sapiens idaltu is Homo Sapiens idalu, a sub species of modern human that has been called Homo sapien idalut .
 Humans moved north into Western Asia some time before 100,000 yA . They do not seem to have stayed there for long .
 It is debated whether uniquely human behaviors such as language and the ability to use symbols evolved before or after modern human anatomy .
 Neanderthals and other hominins prepared a stone core before striking off a sharp flake to use . In Europe this technology is known as the “Mousterian” 2 time and, in such harsh conditions, complex modern language and symbolism .
 In Europe, modern humans appeared in Turkey from 40,000yYA, and in western Europe shortly afterward . In Turkey, they appeared in the region 40,200 years ago . In western Europe, they first appeared in eastern Europe shortly after .
 Homo erectus survived in China until at least 40,000 years ago . These dates suggest that the earliest modern humans in Asia may have encountered groups of Homo erectuans in China .
 Flores date to less than 38,000 years ago, and seem to represent . specialized, extremely small : forms of Homo erectus, or perhaps even the descendants ' of earlier hominins .
 They had lower, more sloping foreheads and a double arch of bone over their eyes that created heavy brow ridges . Their skulls were anatomically modern, but they had lower foreheads . They also had double arches of bone .
 How and why Neanderthals died out is one of the most intensely debated topics in archaeology . Neanderthalans are thought to have died out of Neanderthalism .
 DNA evidence suggests that there may have been some exchange of mating partners between the groups . There is little evidence of violent interactions between the species, according to the study .
 Early humans may have outcompeteted their relatives for food and raw materials in the rapidly changing environmental conditions . Early humans were likely to outcompete their relatives in food and materials .
 Slight increase in competition could have been significant . Environments at the time were highly unstable, so even a slight increase could have significant .
 Modern humans and Neanderthals coexisted for several thousand : years . Modern human sites : Neanderthal and human ranges : Modern humans, Neanderthal sites: Neanderthal, human ranges .
 Large areas of grassland with few trees offered good hunting for groups of humans able to survive the cold . Farther south, grassland areas with little trees were also good hunting sites .
 The “GRAVETTian” culture is known for its elaborate sites, which often have complex structures and burials, and large amounts of shell jewelry .
 Some of the earliest known clay objects, including some of the famous ‘Venus’ figurines, have been found at Gravettian sites . The clay objects were found in the region of Gravettia .
 These may have been fertility or religious charms, or part of a system of exchange between social networks across the region as the Ice Age intensified . The charms were believed to have been part of an exchange of fertility and religious charms .
 The Magdalenian (18,00012,000 YA) is famous for its beautiful art objects, engravings, and cave paintings . It is the largest cave in the world and is located in the region .
 Globally, many groups probably died out, but some held on in | more sheltered regions . Globally many groups likely died out .
 To survive the harsh conditions, much time and effort was invested in hunting . To survive, much effort was spent on hunting .
 Little evidence survives beyond finely worked bone needles . People probably developed sophisticated clothing to keep warm .
 In Europe, bone and antler points, needles, and ‘Magdalenian’ technologies that most depict animals that were represent a magical means of show information about the best ways to hunt different species .
 Paintings of imaginary half-human, half-animal creatures and the inaccessibility of some cave art suggest that painting may have perhaps been practiced by shamans or during initiation or religious ceremonies .
 Developments around 3300 CE included the construction of stone circles, such as Castlerigg in northern England .
 In the Americas promoting the spread of forests and grasslands and providing new opportunities for hunter-gatherer communities . However, in the Americas .
 Coastal areas decline in the availability of wild drowned by rising sea levels were cereals . Cereals drowned by sea levels are cereals, say experts .
 This prompted some rich sources of aquatic foods, as West Asian villagers turned to were lakes and rivers . This prompted them to turn to these sources of food, such as fish .
 Early farming villages in West Asia grew to a considerable size . Many early farming villages were known as 'farmers'
 Native (naturally occurring pure) pure copper and gold were being : shaped into small objects by cold : hammering before 8000 BCE in : West Asia .
 They removed the flesh, reassembled and reinforced the skeleton . They stuffed the skin with plant material, coated it in clay, and painted it with black manganese or red ocher .
 In addition to being functional aids to survival and subsistence, the objects made by prehistoric peoples would also have been important in their social lives .
 Different groups develop their own ways of manufacturing and decorating objects . Distinctive designs may become badges of identity or status symbols .
 Prehistory is traditionally divided into the Stone, Bronze, and Iron ages . Wood, hide, and plant fibers were also used in early technologies . Prehistory was traditionally divided between the Stone and Bronze ages .
 Antler leather or sinew binding flint head set into wooden long, thin sleeve blade | Y; je reproduced wooden handle 2.6-1.6 .
 Early modern humans produced uniform, simple, sharp-edged flakes of narrow blades that would have been fitted stone, made by striking a stone to wooden and antler handles or held in the cobble with a hard “hammerstone.” hand .
 Antler harpoon head attached to a long handle for spearing fish . Hand-axes were skillfully made and used for a range of activities, including woodworking and butchery .
 Hunters were able to throw features “ spears farther and with greater force” They enabled hunters to throw spears farther, greater force . They were later used to hunt for food and drink .
 Neolithic flint blade Lespugue Venus set in reproduction 24,000-22,000BCcE ¢ FRANCE handle . Venus figurine is one of many ‘Venus’ figurines from the Pyrenees .
 In very dry climates, bodies can become mummified . Mummified head 7000-3000BCcE e PERU .
 Loom weights sickles like these sickles held vertical threads taut; bone superseded in most places by the stamp decorative designs . They were used to weave invention of the combine harvester on to skin or cloth .
 This period saw the emergence of complex civilizations . Early CIVILIZATIONS 3000-700sce was the period of early civilization .
 An early earth enclosure and a circle of wooden posts were later replaced by the outer circle of stones seen here . The outer circle was later replaced with the outer stone stones .
 The world’s first civilizations arose, first in Western Asia, North Africa and South Asia .
 By 3000 bce, the world’s first urban culture had begun to develop in southern Mesopotamia, in what is now Iraq . The first city culture was developed in Mesopotamian culture .
 By 3500 Bce, farming communities were growing into towns and then cities such as Ur, Uruk, and Eridu . The city of Ur was first known as a city of the same name .
 Around 3200 sce, Sumerian smiths began manufacturing bronze . Around 2300 BCE ' smiths started making bronze . Sumerians began making bronze around 3200 BC .
 Nile formed a narrow strip of : cultivatable land, floodplain, as the : is credited with founding : the Egyptian capital at Memphis and Egypt's first dynasty . Nile formed part of the Nile formation in Egypt and formed the Nile River .
 The Early Dynastic Period was already characterized by many of the celebrated aspects of Egyptian culture: hieroglyphic writing, hieroglymics, and a belief in the afterlife . It was also characterized by the belief in an afterlife .
 Egyptian kings—later known as : pharaohs—ruled with the help of : governors (nomarchs), and a : huge staff of lesser officials including priests, tax collectors, : and scribes .
 Bronze Age in Europe seems to have developed separately from around 2500 Bce, using ore sources from the Carpathian Mountains in Central Europe . Bronze Age developed in the Bronze Age, using . ore sources .
 This era also saw the beginnings of the Minoan civilization on the Greek island of Crete around 20008BCE . The Minoan culture was also known for its trading links to the nearby Cyclades Islands .
 Southern Mesopotamia was a patchwork of over 40 city-states . Ur, Uruk, Nippur, and Kish were the most important cities .
 Trade flourished using a network of rivers and canals . Trade links extended to Anatolia (modern-day Turkey], Iran, and Afghanistan, with grain, minerals, lumber, tools, tools and vessels traded .
 In Ur, Ur, Uruk, and other centers, people lived in clustered mud-brick houses . People lived in Ur, . and others centers, such as Ur, and others .
 A mound—provided the focus for religious ceremonies, and grain panels—one depicting war, the other was kept in storerooms within the ' temple precincts .
 From around 2500sce, some citizens of Ur were ' buried in tombs along with ' treasures such as the Standard , of Ur . From around 2000sce. some citizens were 'buried in . tombs .
 Southern Mesopotamia became densely populated, putting pressure on natural Cuneiform tablet . Over time, the inventory of signs regularly used in cuneiform script was greatly reduced .
 Early Dynastic times, kings had : been buried beneath rectangular rectangular : mud-brick platforms called : mastabas .
 The region's prosperity was based on farming, mining, crafts, and trade . The region was known for its mining, farming and crafts .
 Mohenjo-daro and Harappa were well-planned cities laid out on agrid system . Harappa was a well planned city laid out in the ancient region of India .
 The ruined citadel of Mohenjo-daro was made up of various buildings . The residential areas were seemingly divided by industry, one-piece cart wheel wheel .
 It was built on a platform to guard against flooding of the Indus River . The platform was built in order to protect against flooding . It is one of the world's oldest bridges .
 Excavations suggest that the Indus . civilization covered an area far larger than Mesopotamia and Egypt combined . such as pottery, bead-making, and metalworking .
 Indus cities and towns had the 'most advanced plumbing system 2 in the ancient world, with enclosed wells and covered drains . Indus cities and towns had enclosed wells, covered drains and enclosed wells .
 A clay model of a bullock cart found at Mohenjodaro dates back to 2500-1900 BCE . Merchants supplied craft products from the valleys to Agrarian lives . Agrarians lived in the valleys of the Indus Valley .
 Indus ' script of hundreds of signs ' appeared on seals and pottery . By around 2500BCE, the Indus script was used in ancient texts .
 King Sargon from the northern region of Akkad defeated Lugalzagesi of Umma to become the ruler of Sumer . A new power emerged in MESOPAMIA 23348CE, a new power .
 Sargon carved out the world’s first , empire—the Akkadian Empire— stretching from the eastern Mediterranean to the Gulf . Through subsequent campaigns to the Levant, Syria, and Anatolia, S. S. carved out a world's first . empire .
 Sargon's exploits were recorded in several documents, such as the Sumerian King List . Sargon’s exploits are recorded in a number of documents such as a Sumeric King List. Sargon is believed to have been the most powerful man in the world .
 His name means ‘legitimate king’ which led some scholars to believe that he took power through force . Some scholars say that he may have taken power by force .
 Sargon spoke Akkadian, a Semitic language that replaced Sumerian as the official language of the empire . Sargon was the first person to speak of the Semitic Semite language .
 Akkadian rule was enforced through regional governors who collected tributes and taxes . Regional governors in Akkadians ruled out of control of the region .
 The of defensible borders, and it came under regular attacks from neighboring hill tribes, were attacked by neighboring tribes .
 Sargon’s Silbury Hill in Wiltshire is one of the tallest man-made chalk mounds in Europe . It is the largest chalk mound in the world and is located in the middle of the year .
 Bronze provided a hard metal for forging armor, weapons, and tools such as this hand ax . Bronze was used to forge armor and weapons such as the hand ax and hand axes .
 To the south of the first cataract on the Nile, the kingdom ' of Nubia also grew more . Empire’s weakness lay in its weakness around the city of Kerma at the ' third cataracts .
 Relief sculptures in Egyptian tombs represented everyday life and religious rituals . Sculptures were found in the tombs of the ancient Egyptians .
 Carved from the Sixth dynasty shows boys with sticks, on the left, and youths wrestling on the right . Carved by the Sixth Dynasty shows boys playing with sticks and wrestling .
 Sumerian states such as Kish, Ur, and Lagash took the opportunity to reassert their independence . Sumerians such as Ur, Lagash, Kish and Kish were able to take advantage of the situation .
 For the next 80 years, the city-states vied for control in Mesopotamia . City-states fought for control of Mesopotamian land for 80 years .
 The armies of Ur overran eastern Mesopotamia and Elam, and regained much of Sargon’s empire . Ur’ armies were able to reclaim much of the empire from Sargon . Ur was one of the most powerful men in Mesopotami .
 Ur-Nammu founded the Third dynasty of Ur, which witnessed a revival of Sumerian power, as well as an artistic and cultural renaissance . Ur-nammu was the first Sumeric king to hold the throne .
 Sumerian scholars devised a method of counting, based on units of 60 . Sumerians used a system of counting based on the size of 60 units . The method was devised by Sumeric scholars .
 Ur-Nammu commissioned the first ziggurat in Ur—an imposing stepped platform topped with a temple . Ur-nammu also commissioned the . first zipliplipladot in Ur .
 The ziggurats later became a characteristic of ancient western Asian architecture . Zigguratas were a feature of ancient Western Asian architecture.
 In 2181 BCE, Egypt's Old Kingdom collapsed following a series of natural disasters, including famine . Egypt's old Kingdom collapsed after natural disasters such as famine and famine .
 Herakleopolis in central Egypt vied for control with Thebes : in the south . Thebes was in the center of the Egyptian city .
 In China, the Neolithic Longshan culture (see 3200 BCE) was found to confirm the existence of a centralized state in China at this time . This elegant pottery tripod pitcher has tapering legs and swirling patterns .
 Europe's first civilization was emerging on the Mediterranean island of Crete, Crete . Crete lay at the heart of Mediterranean trade routes .
 Pictures painted on walls of caves up to 25,000 years ago are considered a precursor to writing . They recorded information that could then be understood by others . HesiSbetas, a — hieratic script reads .
 The first true written script was developed by the Sumerians of Mesopotamia . Cuneiform is the first written language of the Mesopotamians .
 Writing with a reed stylus creates a wedge-shaped impression on tablets of wet clay, which then dry hard . Writing on tablets creates wedge-like impression, which is then hard .
 Through the Roman Empire, this alphabet spreads across Europe and used for personal as well as official correspondence . The alphabet was used to write personal and official letters throughout Europe .
 This script begins as a form of picture writing, and includes signs for words and also sounds . This script includes words and sounds . It is written in the form of a picture writing .
 Phoenician alphabet spreads to the Greeks through trade, who add vowels . Phoenicians alphabet was added to the Greek alphabet by the Greeks, who added vowels to it .
 Chinese script involves 50,000 characters that stand for words . Parchment becomes a popular medium for writing around the 6th century BCE, taking over from papyrus, a paper made from reeds .
 The development of writing was an amazing breakthrough, as it allowed people to communicate over distance and record information for posterity . Writing was the creation of the first written language .
 Some scholars think prehistoric cave paintings featuring images and symbols constitute a form of writing . Some of the cave paintings are thought to be prehistoric drawings .
 Writing was used to keep economic records or keep track of time . A number of different ancient cultures had developed writing, usually to keep records .
 As writing developed, it was commonly used to reinforce the authority of rulers . It was used by rulers to reinforce authority .
 The Arabic alphabet is used to write down the Qur’an, the holy book of Islam . Many early texts, including monumental ones in stone, glorify the deeds of kings and attribute them to divine approval .
 Its use spreads with the Islamic faith to become one of the world’s most widely used scripts .
 In early medieval times, the use of writing spreads through the copying of Christian texts . Medieval Qur’an texts spread through copying .
 Illuminated manuscripts are highly decorative, with ornate capital letters and marginal illustrations . The codex, or manuscript in book form, gradually supersedes the roll of parchment . 4th century
 Use of codices spreads with the Christian religion . Originally developed by the Romans, codices were used by Romans and Romans .
 In logographic scripts, each sign stands for a whole word . Chinese writing is an example, although it also uses syllabic signs . Logographic scripts are logographic .
 A smaller but still large number of signs are needed—700 in Babylonian cuneiform . A third of the signs are still needed in the ancient Babylonian language .
 For years, the spread of writing was limited by the labor involved in hand-copying texts, but this changed with the Invention of printing . The Invention of Printing was the invention of printing.
 In the late 20th century, writing became electronic with the invention of word processors . In the 1980s, word processors made it easier to write .
 In the 1990s, the spread of information was again revolutionized by the arrival of the Internet . Nowadays, ancient texts can be viewed digitally .
 The Codex Sinaiticus was handwritten in Greek over 1,600 years ago . A digitized page of the book has been digitized by students .
 The invention of printing using movable type makes writing far more accessible . Inventors of printing used to make writing easier to write .
 Some scholars do not consider pictograms to be true” writing, since the symbols do not convey the sounds of words in any language . Some scholars say pictograms are not considered true’s writing .
 Pictures from Pompeii dating to 79cCE and a modern sign from modern times convey the same warning . For example, the pictures above are from a house in Roman Pompeii and a sign in modern times .
 The symbol can be read in any language—for instance, as canis, chien, Hund, or dog . The symbol is the symbol of a dog .
 The words convey the same idea but reproduce the sounds of different languages . Latin, French, German, and English are different sounds of each other .
 Pictograms have limited use but remain widespread, appearing, for example, on street signs, maps, and clothes labels . In the 1990s, the first text messages are sent via mobile phones .
 In 2009, more than 1. trillion text messages are Sent. in Waterman fountain pen . In the mid-1960s, the first electronic messages are sent from one computer to another .
 Emails become popular with the spread of personal computers in the 1980s . Egyptian hieroglyphics involved the use of pictorial signs . Emails were popular with personal computers .
 It is thought that Crete’s prosperity was based on the export of pottery, gold, and bronze, as well as grain, wine, and oll, to Egypt, Cyprus, and Palestine . Crete is thought to have exported pottery and bronze to Egypt and
 Minoans established colonies in many parts of the Aegean, including the islands of Kythera, Thera, Melos, and Rhodes, and at Miletos, on the Turkish mainland .
 Egypt's eras of strong, centralized : rule only began with the reign of Amenemhetl, from about : 1985Bce, during the Middle : Kingdom . Egypt's reigns began in 1985, when the country was ruled by an Egyptian king .
 Minoan rituals included a bull-leaping ceremony, in which athletes grasped the bull's horns and vaulted over its back . Charging bull Minoan ritual was among the rituals of the Minoan .
 It is inlaid with turquoise mosaic, believed to represent a dragons scales . The mosaic is believed to have been created by a dragon .
 According to legend, China's first dynasty was the Xia, but current archaeological evidence points to Shang as the first dynasty . The Shang dynasty is believed to have been Shang or Shang .
 Babylon in the southeast—which 2 were to dominate Mesopotamia : for the next 1,500 years . Babylon in southeast . Babylon was the center of Mesopotamian culture for the first time .
 In 1813BCE, it was taken over by the Amorite king ShamshiAdad, who carved out a kingdom in Mesopotamia .
 Sumerian hero from the Old Babylonian the Epic of Gilgamesh, previously passed down in the oral tradition . Sumeric epic was previously passed out in oral tradition and passed down orally .
 During his reign, Assyria declined, allowing the state of Babylon to come to the fore . Assyria was ruled by Assyria until the end of his reign .
 During the reign of ShamshiAdad, Babylon was probably a vassal state of Assyria, but as Assyria declined, King Hammurabi a wider kingdom . Babylon was likely to have been a larger kingdom .
 Between 1763-1762BCE, he defeated Elam to the east and Larsa, which controlled Sumer, to the south . He defeated Larsa and Elam, and then Larsa .
 In 1757-1755BCE, King Hammurabi conquered much of northern Mesopotamia and took the city of Eshnunna after diverting its water supply . King Hammabi conquered the city and took it over .
 Hammurabi introduced the Babylonian law code in the region under his control of Babylonian rule . Hammabi's law code was introduced in Babylonian state of Babylon . He introduced the law code to the region .
 The Law Code of Hammurabi is famous for punitive Laws that meted out punishments in the same . Set in stone Hammurabis code was inscribed on stone pillars called stele .
 Urban society was consolidated in Western Asia in the 2nd millennium, and powerful states vied for control of lands . In contrast, in South Asia, towns disappeared .
 The exceptional agricultural productivity of the Nile, Euphrates, Indus and Yellow [see 31] river valleys undoubtedly played a part in the emergence of civilizations in these regions .
 International trade was also important in the development of the first New World civilizations . So did international trade, which helped develop the New World .
 High-level diplomacy was essential to the smooth operation of international trading networks and to success in inter-state power struggles . Diplomats were essential to success of international trade networks and success in power struggles.
 Royal letters found in the Egyptian capital Akhetaten provide a fascinating picture of relations between the rival great states of the eastern Mediterranean .
 In the Americas, large ceremonial complexes with residential suburbs provided the focus for the communities of the wider region . The region was strongly connected by shared religion and trade, strongly connected .
 Settlements clung to the Nile delta and riverbanks, beyond which lay arid desert . Settlements remained in the area until the end of the Nile .
 The great mineral resources of the flanking desert regions and Nubia, which included gold, were any exe)micJahan ecelaamcelemelelanl-s-S-10 .
 Rulers exercised centralized control and commanded impressive resources, as shown by the pyramids at Giza . The Old Kingdom 2686-2181 BCE was centered around Cyprus .
 NUBIA WAWAT £ “i, \b 4 oe, ay. Oe LR yy — a a a ut SE: “7” WPPER capital pe EGYPT 2055-1985 BCE and 1650-1550 BCE
 Decorated tombs record prosperous life under the stable 12th dynasty, but the state disintegrated under later rulers .
 Cyprus x ee — ys oe “Viterranean 9&4 Per-Ramesse (Qantir] Akhetaten (Amarna) “Tg % Yeo Waset i sc. ““.” – Cyprus . Cyprus x
 At the same time, other powers were on the rise, such as the Hurrians of Mitanni in Syria, and the Hittites of Anatolia in Turkey .
 By 1650BCE, the Hittites had built an extensive kingdom in central Anatolia, with its capital at Hattusas . The Hittite kingdom was founded in 1650 BCE, and its capital was Hattuas .
 Iron was used to create superior weapons . Later, as technology developed, iron was used in the creation of better weapons .
 The Hittite Empire was known for its bronze craftsmanship . Hittites were known for their bronze workmanship .
 During this time, Egyptian rulers assumed Egyptian religion was very > complex . During this period, Egypt rulers assumed that religion was complex .
 Mycenaeans are believed to be the home of the mythical king Agamemnon from Homer's Iliad . They are named after the fortresspalace .
 A succession of warrior kings campaigned to expand Egypt's boundaries once more . The Egyptian empire was ruled by a succession of warriors .
 Tuthmosis | drove the Nubians back in the south and recaptured Sinai and parts of Syria and Palestine . The Nubian people were driven from the south to the south of Egypt .
 This detail from the pharaoh’s throne shows him being anointed by his wife Ankhesenamun .
 The pharaohs had migrated from the Balkans or Anatolia on” Sea of . Egypt’s pharaoh . They had migrated THRACE _ areligious reformer, became | pharaoh’
 After the collapse capital between Thebes and ' Howard Islands' British archaeologist Howard Islands . Howard Islands Gulf Of Cop .
 Carter found Tutankhamun’s P iheMicenteane okorerceverl| yeenaa ag ee 0 a meaning ‘horizon of Aten” . tomb virtually intact . Carter named it Akhetaten, Carter found it . He named
 Minoan trade networks and established settlements inherited Minoan arts and crafts . They adapted the Linear A script to write an early form of Greek known as the Linear B script . After 1400BCE, they also took li Lai ""Fee unpopular"
 Shang capitals were surrounded Séa or Crete Thera Rhodes . Shang capitals may have been surrounded by walls . Mycenaean site was a site of a Mycenean site .
 Shang rulers’ practice of consulting their ancestors on : important decisions . Shang rulers consult their ancestors before making important decisions on important matters .
 In this relief carving (modern el-Amarna), he influential priestly elite. In this carving, he is seen as a member of a priestly . elite .
 Tutankhamun Is believed to have died under mysterious circumstances at 18, and was hastily buried in a minor tomb . He is thought to have been hastily buried .
 New evidence suggests he died of blood poisoning after breaking his leg in a chariot crash while out hunting in the desert . It was thought for years that blow to the head was thought to have been fatal .
 The ve Chania aekene Tutankhamun ascended the golden statues, and musical Anatolian mainland at the age of nine . The other rooms contained jewelry, furniture, and furniture, on Rhodes, Kos and the island of Greece .
 The facade of the temple of Ramesses II at Abu Simbel features four colossal seated statues of the pharaoh, but the statue second from left has crumbled . The four statues were placed on the temple's facade .
 The eastern Mediterranean and Western Asia were a mosaic of empires, which comprised Egypt, Babylonia, Elam, Assyria, and the Hittites in Anatolia . Egypt was one of the most important cities in the history of the world .
 Each kingdom strove to gain ascendancy over its neighbors through conquest or diplomacy . Borders fluctuated as each kingdom tried to gain power through conquest .
 In war and peace, vital trade routes, through which tin and copper for bronze reached the region, remained intact . Trade routes remained intact, with tin and bronze being exchanged for bronze .
 Ramesses sought to extend Egyptian influence to Western Asia . Through a combination of war, diplomacy, and strategic marriage, Ramesses succeeded in extending Egyptian influence .
 Ramesses claimed : victory at Qadesh, the ' battle is believed to 2 have been inconclusive, and the Hittites held on to the region . Ramesses negotiated a pioneering peace treaty with the new Hittite king .
 Ramesses kept up a friendly correspondence ' with the Hittite ruler, which was recorded on clay tablets in 2 Akkadian cuneiform script . Ramesses: 'I kept up friendly correspondence with the ruler of the city'
 In 1259BCE, after two Hittite princesses In marriage Ramesses also embarked 2 on an extensive program of » monument-building .
 He founded ' anew capital at Per-Ramesses in ' Lower Egypt, although Thebes in Upper Egypt remained an ' important center'
 Shalmaneser: Ninurta I, continued to gain territory, expanding the kingdom's borders west to conquer eastern . Mitanni and briefly, from 12251216BCE, southeast to Babylonia. Mitanni .
 The boulders used to make these walls, now in ruins, at Mycenae on the Greek mainland were so huge, later civilizations believed they were built by giants .
 Many of the powers that had dominated Western Asia for centuries went into decline, and some disappeared altogether . Some of the world's most powerful powers disappeared altogether between 1250 and 1050 BCE .
 The eastern Mediterranean entered a time of turmoil, and many coastal cities were laid waste by unknown invaders . Written records of the period give few clues as to the identity of the invaders .
 By 1180BCE, Hittite possessions in the Levant were lost and the empire fragmented . The empire was fragmented and Hittites lost control of the Levant in 1180 BCE .
 Danube region in 1300BCcE, and spread to Italy and central and ' eastern Europe in the following : centuries . known collectively as the Sea Peoples . Known collectively as 'Sea Peoples'
 Warlike peoples came from many different areas, including Sicily, Sardinia, Greece, Libya, and Anatolia . These warlike peoples were warlike people of many different countries .
 Movements through eastern Mediterranean inc.00-1100BCcE led to attacks on Cyprus, Egypt, Anatolia, and Canaan and Syria in the Levant .
 By 11008cE, most of the Mycenaean palaces had been sacked and abandoned . Most of the palaces were in ruins and abandoned by the end of the 11th century .
 An inscription by Ramesses II, referring to the Sea Peoples Krishna Yajur Veda lron, rapidly replaced bronze in tools and weapons, signaling the end of the Bronze Age . The Sea Peoples were the first Sea Peoples .
 Olmecs built ceremonial centers, including San Lorenzo, and built temples and houses on earthen mounds . They also carved huge stone heads clad in helmets, and carved large stone heads .
 Monumental carvings from temples at Cerro Sechin on the Peruvian coast show warriors, torture victims, and human sacrifices . Carvings show warriors and torture victims .
 The close of the 2nd MILLENNIUM saw major changes in the power politics of West Asia . The 2nd century of the Middle East saw major power shifts .
 Historians believe that the power of the pharaohs had been eroded by a priestly elite who had gained control of many areas . Historians say that the priests had taken over many areas of the Egyptian empire .
 By 1000BCE, all of the territories won by New Kingdom pharaohs had been lost . All of the territory won by the New Kingdom was lost by the end of the reign .
 In Mesopotamia, there were frequent wars between the Babylonians, Assyrians, and Elamites . The region was also subjected to devastating raids by Aramaean nomads from the west .
 A Semiticspeaking people, who called themselves Canaanites, had inhabited the Levant for centuries . They lived in city-states that controlled the surrounding territory . The Canaanites were known as Canaanites .
 They were Skilled seafarers and played a major role in international trade . They were skilled seafarers .
 They traded cedarwood from Lebanon, glassand Ivory-ware, metal ores, and, most important, purple dye made from murex shellfish .
 Zhou territory was divided into fiefs held by trusted noblemen, in return for military allegiance . Zhou territory in China was divided between fiefts and fiefdoms in exchange for military loyalty .
 Many aspects of Chinese tradition already present in the Shang period continued in the Zhou, including ancestor worship and use of oracle bones for divination .
 In Japan, the Jomon culture, named after the cord patterns [jomon] that decorate its pottery, continued .
 The Jomon people were still hunter-gatherers, albeit prosperous and sedentary . They were still hunters-gatheringrs, but still sedentary and prosperous . Jomon was the first people to live in Japan .
 In this example of late-Jomon : pottery, the bowl and stand bear : the distinctive rope patterns that . give the Jomon period its name . sacred writings .
 Sanskrit is an IndoEuropean language related to lranian and almost all European languages . It is also the ancestor of modern languages such as Hindi and Urdu .
 Vedas were transmitted orally during the first era, the Zhou capital : : : During the first . era . The Vedas are largely in Sanskrit .
 A carved figure representing a high priest of Amun holds a stele, or carved slab . Neck is circled by a collar Perpauty's collar .
 Artifacts manufactured over some 2,000 years bear witness to the skills of Egyptian craft workers . Artifacts made over 2,500 years have been found in Egypt .
 They also reflect Egypt’s wealth and its trade network, through which ebony, lapis lazuli, and turquoise were imported . Egypt's wealth and trade network was also a major trade network .
 Many of the objects shown here were used in daily life by well-to-do Egyptians . Many of these objects were found in the Egyptian Museum .
 They reflect belief in the afterlife and the practice of burying possessions that it was believed would be used by the dead person's spirit . The practice was believed to be believed to have been used by a spirit in the future . It is believed that the possessions of a deceased person can be used
 Statuettes of servant-figures called shabtis a ge were commonly placed in tombs . Shabtis is a name of a servant-figure-figure .
 The Egyptians believed they would come alive to serve the dead person's spirit in the life to come . The Egyptians ee | coma believed that they would serve the spirit of a dead person .
 Funerary mask 1500BcE would have been placed over the head of amummy . This mask would have had to be placed in place of a mummy .
 The Egyptians mummified bodies because the deceased spirit could not survive HI ; a unless there was a body for it to return to .
 Perpauty and his wife were offered gifts by their offerings son and three daughters . This side of the photo shows the couple being offered gifts from their sons and daughters .
 Duck-shaped flask is carved in the shape of a duck, which appears to be trussed and plucked . The flask is thought to have been carved in 1700BcE .
 Mummiform shabti 1300BCcE figure was carved from wood . It probably held cosmetic paste, such as eye-paint, which was likely removed using a stopper/applicator .
 From the 8th century BcE onward, also dogs were mummified in honor of the jackal-headed god Anubis, who presided over funerals and embalmings .
 Once the basic shapes for these studs and earring were made, strands of glass in a contrasting color were wound around them . The pieces of glass were wound together in contrasting colors .
 Egyptian craftsmen had access to many semiprecious stones and precious metals . Necklaces 1550-1069 BcE were necklaces .
 This double-sided comb has a row of longer and shorter teeth . It was found in 300BCcE and is thought to date back to 300 BC .
 The spoon for cosmetic paste was carved from schist in the shape of an ibex, with its head bent over its back, so that its straight horns touch the bowl . It symbolizes grace and mastery over the natural world .
 This originally held a polished charm placed on mummies bronze mirror disk . It was placed on a bronze mirror disc placed in a mummies mummies . This was originally used as a charm to keep a mummy mummy's eyes open .
 The handle to protect the dead person's is carved in the shape of a spirit in the afterlife . The handle is carved to protect a person's body .
 The papyrus column topped with symbolized regeneration symbolized the god Bes—a popular deity . Papyrus column also symbolizes regeneration .
 Frogs were a symbol of life kneeling male god clasping and fertility . Frog amulets 2200BcE 1360BCE were found in 2200BCE . Frogs symbolized life and fertility in ancient times .
 It was worn as jewelry in the tomb of King Tutankhamun. in ancient Egypt. It was found in the Egyptian tomb of the same name .
 In the 10th century BCE, the major powers of Western Asia continued to decline in Western Asia . The Period of Decline in the region continued .
 There, they came into conflict with the local Philistines and Canaanites . The Canaanites were also involved in conflict with Philistine forces .
 Around 1000BCE King David united the Israelite tribes and established his capital at Jerusalem . King David established his Jerusalem capital at the end of his first reign .
 David's son Solomon (r.5-928 BCE] increased Israelite territory and built a magnificent palace and temple In the capital, but on his death the kingdom split in two . On his death, Solomon's son David's kingdom split into two .
 Israel and, later, Judah became , part of the Assyrian Empire . Eventually Israel and Judah became . Later, Israel became . part of . the Assyria Empire . Israel and later Judah became part of Israel .
 This black limestone obelisk commemorates his deeds and those of his commander-in-chief, DayyanAssur . It is the only monument in the world to commemorate the fallen prince .
 It details the enforced tributes paid by the people he conquered . It details, in cuneiform, the tributes he received from his people .
 La Venta to the northeast became the main Olmec center . After San Lorenzo was destroyed inc.O0BCE, La Vent was the main center of the Olomec .
 This larger settlement was dominated by a 111ft high pyramid, the forerunner of Mayan temples . The Mayan settlement is dominated by an 11ft high high pyramid . This is the largest Mayan temple in the world .
 Their influence spread across Mesoamerica, impacting on other cultures that were starting to emerge at this time . The Zapotecs and the Maya were also influencing the culture . Their influence was also starting to spread across the region .
 In eastern North America, the Adena culture was developing in the Ohio Valley . In eastern N. America, it was also developing in Ohio Valley.
 It was characterized by ritual earthworks and burial mounds containing objects of fine craftsmanship . The burial site is located in modern times of the 20th century .
 The Chavin culture had appeared in the Peruvian Andes by 1200BcE and spread to the coast . Far to the south, the Chavin cultures had also appeared in Peru .
 Iron Age brooch i was discovered in a grave at Hallstatt : in Austria . It was found in the Bronze Age era .
 ASSYRIA conquered rival states in Western Asia and reduced them to provinces . Assylyia continued its policy of autonomy through the 8th century BCE .
 Assyrian success was based on a disciplined, technically advanced army and an efficient bureaucracy . The Assyrian state of the Assyrian Empire was founded in the early 2000s .
 Conquered peoples had to pay costly tributes, and revolts were ruthlessly crushed . In the past, people were forced to pay a huge tribute to conquerors .
 Tiglath-Pileser III (r.4727 BCE] recouped Assyria’s losses . The Assyrian state was weakened following a period of weak rule in the 8th century .
 Iron tools increased ' efficiency in agriculture and food ' production . Iron tools have been used to increase efficiency of agriculture and . food production. Iron tools were used to make agriculture more efficient .
 Amenirdis |, sister of Shabaka [r.6702 BCE], is shown holding a flail, a traditional symbol of Egyptian rule . Not long after, Homer's epic poems the /liad and the Odyssey were probably written down .
 In the 8th century BCE, central Italy was a mosaic of small states ruled by the dominant Etruscans . Italic tribes such as the Latins, Umbrians, and Sabines were also ruled by Etrusans and Latins .
 Classical developments in science, art, and politics still felt to this day . The impact of Classical developments still felt in science and art .
 The 44 TAHAROA THE GODLESS HAD FALLEN TO THE SHEN in 771BCE, and the Western Zhou capital was transferred east to Chengzhou . In China, the city of LUOYANG it took a concert campaign to defeat the ShEN .
 From around 7OOBCE the Zhou were ruled by puppet-emperors, while real power lay with the ba (“senior one”) among nearby states .
 After Huan Gong's death, the competition for power between his five sons weakened Qi, and Jin Wen Gong [r.5643 BCE], the ruler of Jin, rose to become ba. He rose to be ba. Gong's successor .
 In the Near East, the Assyrians continued their expansion, confronting Egypt . Egypt, whose intermittent support for rebels drove the invaders out, drove them out .
 Their language remains undeciphered, but lavish tombs indicate a rich material culture . The language of the tomb is undecipherable, but the tombs are believed to be a sign of wealth .
 Vassal king of Sais, Psammetichus, revolted against his Assyrian masters, driving them out and founding the 26th Dynasty . This was not the last rebellion against the Assyrians .
 In Greece, the rise to preeminence of a number of city states, notably Athens, Sparta, and Corinth, began . Athens and Sparta were the first city states to become pre-eminence .
 Ashurbanipal initially shared rule over Assyria with his brother, Shamash-shuma-ukin . He ruled Assyria for more than a century .
 His latter years saw none of the military successes of his early reign . His last military successes were in the early years of his reign .
 At his death, a dispute between his two sons further weakened the Assyrian Empire . The Assyrian empire was weakened by the death of his sons .
 ' events of the Japanese Yayoi ' period after 100Bce, when tribal . chieftains began to consolidate : their territories . Honshu eastward to establish ' his kingdom near Nara are legendary, but may echo real ' events .
 Assyrian Empire : From its core around Assur and Nineveh, the Assyrian empire grew to : encompass Babylonia, Media, Elam, Syria, and Egypt . ' led the war against neighboring Alba Longa, which ultimately led . to that city’s
 Ancus Marcius expanded Roman territory toward the coast, and founded Rome's : great port of Ostia at the mouth of the Tiber . Marcius . founded Rome’s greatest port, Ostia .
 Tarquinius Priscus was the fifth king of Rome and one : of the city’s greatest kings .
 Priscus won a series of victories over the Sabines, the Latins, and the Etruscans, who all competed with Rome for . dominance over central Italy .
 The ASSyrians finally conquered the city in 69158CE . The city was partially destroyed .
 It took four years of war to suppress the Babylonians and their Elamite allies . The fighting drained Assyria’s ability to hold on to its empire .
 By 630BCE, Assyria had lost Egypt and Palestine, and in 626BcE, the Babylonians regained their independence .
 Around 615BCE the Scythians switched sides and played a key role in Assyria’s destruction . The alliance with Assyria survived into the reign of his son Madyes .
 The flowing lines and realistic depiction of the stags muscled flanks are typical of the art of the Scythians . To the south of Egypt the state ' of Napata became a power of the first order .
 THeEet Cave paintings in Dunhuang, China, illustrate a variety of Buddhist parables . The cave paintings were found in the cave of TheEet, China .
 The first king of the neo-Babylonian dynasty, Nabopolassar, embellished the city of Babylon, was the first king to destroy the city . Nabopolasar is the first to destroy Babylon .
 The last neo-Babylonian king, Nabonidus, moved his royal court to the Arabian oasis of Tema, but discontent rose among the Babylonians during his reign . The last Babylonian king moved his court to Tema .
 Media was under pressure from the Babylonians to the south and the new power of Persia . But by the 550sBcE, Media was in danger of losing control of the world .
 Nebuchadnezzar took » Jerusalem and deposed King : Jehoiakim . Babylonian expansion to the west. Babylonian conquest of Jerusalem .
 In 947BC, Cyrus defeated the Lydian army and annexed western Asia Minor . King Croesus defeated Lydians on the Halys River and annexed Asia Minor in 947 BC .
 Solon was a Greek statesman and lawgiver and reformer . This image shows him teaching . Solon is shown in the image above .
 Darius's reforms began to undermine the power of the aristocracy in Athens . His reforms were not well established. re The Behistun inscription of Darius was not well-established .
 Cambyses defeated the Egyptian army at Pelusium in 525BCE and then captured the royal capital at Memphis . Cambysyses captured the Egyptian city of Memphis in 525 BCE .
 Wealthy class fought as cavalry, 'the higher classes as heavy infantry, and the poor as light auxiliary troops' Wealthy fought as heavy cavalry and the higher classes were heavy infantry . The poor were 'light auxiliary troops', the poor were light auxiliary forces .
 He was the ruler of the kingdom of Pars when he led a revolt against his Median overlord Astyages . He led the revolt against the overlord when he was ruler .
 Persian influence continued with conquest of Lydia . He then continued to expand Persian influence with the conquest of the Lydia .
 Cyrus adapted local ideas about kingship to cast himself as an ideal ruler in the cities he conquered . Cyrus adapted to local ideas of kingship in order to be a ruler in his conquered cities .
 While the Greeks created magnificent monumental art, smaller items such as jewelry, musical instruments, weaponry, and Ay ey nal vases show the Greek love of intricate forms and decorative adornment throughout all periods of their history .
 Greek art underwent a series of phases that were reflected in all aspects “yf of artistic production, but particularly on vases.”
 This one is decorated using the black-figure technique, which predates the red-figure method . This is the first time the technique has been used in a large-scale painting .
 He dedicated the discus to the gods Castor and Pollux after he won a sporting contest using it .
 This blackfigure vase shows the goddess Athena beating a giant to his knees . It is believed to be the work of the goddess of Athena .
 This south-lItalian vase has its base decorated with a pattern of white chevrons .
 Thermopylae became a byword for heroic defiance against overwhelming odds . Thermopyae was the birthplace of the Battle of Thermagnay .
 In 490sce, Darius! : to Sparta for aid, the only help and protector of Gautama Buddha of Persia decided to take revenge they received came from Plataea, (c. 3-c.3) In 5th century, Darius asked Sparta to
 Persian winged-lion rhyton split Rome irreparably, so the patricians ceded some political power . The patrician was forced to give up some of Rome's power .
 The fall of Miletus to the recruit allies for a planned ' Persians that year and the death of Aristagoras undermined lonian unity . The revolt fell apart after a great naval ' defeat at the Battle of Lade in | 494ece .
 Athens and Sparta patched together a league of southern ' states . Greek states chose to submit, : but Sparta and Athens and Athens agreed to join forces . The league was formed in the 4th century .
 Themistocles says the Athenian fleet inflicted a ' serious defeat on Xerxes’s naval ' force at Salamis .
 Themistocles persuaded the Athenians to use the wealth of a silver mine discovered at Laurium in 483/2Bce to double their fleet . The mine was discovered in the city of Laurium .
 After the naval victory at Salamis, he became the object of increasing jealousy from political rivals . However, after the victory, he was the subject of increased jealousy .
 Persians possessed : vastly superior numbers, the . Greek forces were motivated : to win crucial land and sea engagements . Persians were motivated by their superior numbers and superior numbers .
 Persian wars followed in June 4798BceE, : on land at Plataea in Boeotia and : at sea at Mycale off the lonian ' coast . The Grecoae : Persian wars .
 An attempt by the island of Naxos to leave the Delian League around the same time led to an Athenian expeditionary force that powerfully suppressed the breakaway movement . An Athenian force suppressed the movement .
 Pericles tried but failed to prosecute Cimon in 4638cE, on a charge of having neglected a chance to conquer Macedonia . Pericles, the Athenian statesman responsible for making Athens the political and cultural focus of Greece .
 Pericles’ vision and ideas of expansion for Athens were already evident . From this maneuver, Pericles' vision was already evident, according to his writings .
 When the leading figure among the democrats, Ephialtes, was assassinated in 461, he was assassinated . He was the leader of the democratic movement in the 461th century .
 Persians had tried to bribe the Spartans into diversionary attacks on Athens, initially to little effect . Periodically, the Persians tried to bribed the Spartans to attack Athens .
 In 464BceE, a revolt of the Messenian Helots in the western Peloponnese further distracted the Spartans from any attempt to stem the rising power of the Delian League . The Messenia Helots' revolt distracted the Spartan from trying to stem
 All members of the Delian League had to deposit funds at treasuries on : Delos, but the contribution of Athens was the most important . By 462.sce their last stronghold at Ithome had been reduced .
 In the late 5th century, the Mexican city of Monte Alban began to build its public buildings . The ancestors of its later magnificent pyramids are shown here .
 In the Roman Republic, the two social classes -- the patricians and the plebeians -- were still divided . The two social groups were divided in the Roman republic .
 In Oaxaca on Mexico's Pacific Coast, a new center arose shortly before 450sBce at Monte Alban . The center is located on the Pacific coast of Oaxacaca .
 The Athenian Empire had the naval advantage as it included most of the island and coastal states around the northern and eastern shores of the Aegean Sea . The Greek Empire had a naval advantage .
 Thucydides, ancient Greek historian, relates a speech by Pericles to the led an alliance of independent states from the Peloponnese and and had the strongest army . Pericles was the leader of an alliance with independent states .
 Despite the Thirty Years Peace of 446sce, tensions remained high between Athens and Sparta . Sparta and Athens were at the center of the Thirty years of the peace .
 Sparta found itself embroiled in a quarrel with Persia over whether the lonian Greek cities should regain their autonomy . The Shishunaga dynasty lasted after the death of Ajatashatru .
 Sporadic fighting and abortive peace talks diverted Sparta from weakening position in mainland Greece . Through the 390s BCcE, Sparta was weakened to a weakening position .
 The “King’s Peace’, a definitive treaty with Persia in 3868ce, deprived the lonians of autonomy but allowed the Spartans to quash any threats to its supremacy . The treaty was made in a final treaty between the Spartans and Persia . The �
 Xenophon, the Greeks marched to the Black Sea coast and safety near Trapezus (Trabzon in modern-day Turkey) The feat their commander immortalized ' in his book Anabasis. Xenophon .
 In Italy, the Romans widened ' their territory and annexed the city of Veil in 396BcE . The submission represented the end of any Etruscan threat .
 The ancient Greeks adopt the Idea and spread it around the Mediterranean . Ancient Greeks adopt it and spread the idea around the world .
 Around 7000Bce, naturally occurring metals, notably copper, began to be used for small items such as pins in western Iran and eastern Anatolia . They still permeate every aspect around the world .
 The introduction of smelting in a crucible around 38008ce led to large-scale use of metals . Heating copper to make it more malleable was probably discovered by accidentally dropping the metal in fire .
 Bronze was the principal metal for tools and weapons until the invention of ironworking around 12508ce . Made by smelting tin and copper together in a crucible, bronze is stronger and more easily worked than either of its constituents .
 Since their earliest known use in the 8th millenniumBCE, metals have played a crucial role in the production of a vast range of objects, and even today, with the availability of sophisticated polymers and composites . together in a furnace .
 This method of production continued until the introduction of blast furnaces in Europe in the 15th century . Blast furnaces were introduced in the 1500s and replaced the method .
 The Invention of the Bessemer converter In 1856 permitted the large-scale production of steel, a strong, high-quality, iron-carbon alloy . The invention allowed the production of a strong and high quality alloy of iron and carbon .
 Later in the Industrial Revolution, further advances made it possible to produce other metals, such as aluminum, magnesium, and titanium, whose light weight and strength played a vital role in the development of the aviation and space industries .
 15th century weapons from cast metal . Cast iron is developed. Cast iron developed .
 Because it is strong and can be used to make shapes such as tubes, it finds an immediate use in making artillery . Because it can be strong, it is also found to be used in artillery .
 English inventor Peter Durand patents the tin can for preserving food . The tin can was invented in 1810 . Inventors patented the can to preserve food .
 His patent was for a can made of iron and coated with tin to inhibit rusting of the iron . His invention was for an iron and tin can made from iron .
 Many metals occur naturally in alloyed form, but synthetic alloys were not produced until around 3000 BcE, when copper was melted with tin to produce bronze . Synthetic alloys began to be made in around 3000 BCE .
 The technique spread, reaching Mesopotamia soon after 3000BcE and Egypt by 2000 BCE or possibly earlier . Because of its high strength-to-weight ratio, titanium starts to be used extensively in military aircraft .
 Lockheed Blackbird 1910 aluminum foil was the first aluminum foil to be produced . Lockheed Blackbirds were the first aircraft made of aluminum foil .
 It was made possible by the invention in 1886 of a method of massproducing the metal by passing an electric current through molten ore . The crocodile-headed Sobek was the first person to mass produce the metal .
 Nectanebo Il (r.0-343 BCE] succeeded Nectenebo Il, and continued to meddle in the Persian civil wars . Nectnebo Il continued to interfere with the civil wars of the Persian kingdom .
 Artaxerxes Ill of Persia marched 11,000 SPARTANS to the Battle of Leuctra . The Thebans exploited the tendency of the Spartans to shift right by concentrating their attack on the left, enabling them to defeat an enemy with larger numbers .
 Sacred Band supplemented the ' mercenaries' who largely fought Greek city-states wars by this period . Sacred Band .
 The Thebans did not participate in a general peace in Greece in 371BCE . The ATHENIans brokered a peace with the Ancient Greeks in 371 BCE .
 Theban success was hampered by the temporary deposition of Epaminondas, who was tried for allegedly sparing the city of Sparta in exchange for a bribe . As a result, Messenia was finally detached from Spartan control .
 Once Epaminondas was back in control, the Thebans won Persian backing for their anti-Spartan alliance in 367BCE . A further invasion of the Peloponnese in 366BCE gained recruits for Theban coalition .
 Philip Ill began to transform the position of what had been regarded by other Greeks as a very minor kingdom . Philip Ill became the most powerful king in Greece .
 He became involved in the Third Sacred War (356-346 BCE), fought over perceived violations by Sparta and Phocis of the sacred oracle at Delphi . Used this to cement his position as an important player in the power politics of central Greece and the Peloponnes
 Philip strengthened his position in Thessaly in the 340s . Became involved in petty disputes between the city-states, as rival factions turned either to him or to Athens for support .
 Philip defeated the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus Mausolus at Chaeronea in Boeotia . Two years later, Philip defeated a Persian satrap (governor) of a region of southwestern Turkey .
 Philip II reformed the Macedonian army and forced the Greek states to joina League of Corinth under Macedonian control . Philip I reformed the army and made the League of Coronation of Corinth part of the League .
 Alexander the Great made brilliant use of his cavalry to win a stunning victory over Darius Ill . Alexander was heavily outnumbered at Issus, but made a stunning use of the cavalry to defeat Darius .
 Alexander reacted swiftly; the Thebans were defeated and their city razed . Alexander reacted quickly; the city was razed and destroyed . Alexander was able to take control of the city .
 Alexander traveled to Anatolia in 334BceE, where a Macedonian army was already established . Perhaps 43,000 infantry and 6,000 cavalry were part of the army . Alexander's army was established in Anatolia .
 Alexander’s cavalry smashed the lines of the satrap Arsites at the Granicus River in northwest Turkey . Although this figure was dwarfed by the forces of the local Persian satraps .
 In Sogdiana, north of the Oxus River, the local nobles betrayed Bessus and handed him over to Alexander . The local warlord Spitamenes led the local warlords to hand him over . Alexander was the first king to be captured .
 Alexander penetrated the farthest corners of the Persian empire . His army reached central Persia . Alexander the Great’s conquests were the most successful of his conquests .
 Alexander the Great had not provided for an orderly succession after his death in 323BCE . His most experienced generals were also dead, except for Antipater, who had been left as regent in Macedonia .
 Alexander's wife Roxane was pregnant, and he who was, unfortunately, mentally unstable, was also mentally unstable . Alexander was the father of the couple's first child, Roxane .
 "In reality, this military clique carved up the empire between themselves and four other generals," says CNN.com's John Defterios . "I'm not going to be surprised," he says .
 Perdiccas emerged as the main power In the center; Antipater and Craterus took Europe . Antigonus Monopthalmus was given Phrygia; Ptolemy got Egypt . Seleucus and Cassander were promoted to senior military commands
 He then retired to become a Jain monk, ultimately starving himself to death . He then became a Buddhist monk .
 A third war broke out between the Romans and Samnites in 298BCE . The war was apparently provoked by Samnite harassment of their neighbors, the Lucanians .
 He arrived with an army more than 25,000 strong, including war elephants . He arrived at the start of the year with a large force of war elephants and elephants .
 Around eight years later, he launched a campaign against Kalinga (modern Orissa), which was so bloody that around 100,000 people are said to have died . Around 100,00 people died in the bloody campaign, which was said to be bloody .
 The equally vast Roman army—at 45,000, the largest they had ever fielded—was threatened with defeat until the Roman consul Publius Decius Mus (d.36) intervened . The Roman army was the largest ever fielded in the world .
 He dedicated himself and the enemy army as Sacrificial victims to the gods of the underworld and led a suicidal charge that shattered the Samnite line . He led the army as a suicide attack on himself and his army .
 Roman territory now stretches across the Italian peninsula to the Adriatic Sea . Roman territory was now stretched across Italy's Italian peninsula . Roman rule stretched across the entire Italian peninsula until the Adratic Sea.
 He set up a series of edicts carved in rock throughout the empire . Many of them on pillars topped with a lion . Promoting his adherence to dharma .
 The Third Buddhist Council met at Pataliputra around 250BCE . Ashoka sought to export his ideas abroad, exchanging diplomatic missions with foreign rulers .
 In their homes, Romans had shrines to household gods and the spirits of their ancestors . Romans had a shrine to their ancestors in their homes . He was the master of all China .
 The same year he proclaimed himself the “First Emperor” as Qin Shi Huangdi, and the first ruler of the new Qin dynasty . He proclaimed himself as the "First Emperor" in the same year .
 Civil war broke out between the king’s widow Berenice and his ex-wife Laodice . The king died in childbirth .
 Carthaginians had possessed ' colonies since the 8th century BCE, : was at the root of the First Punic : War , a conflict ' between Rome and the North : African power of Carthage . Carthagans had possessed colonies since 8th Century BCE .
 The Romans’ fortunes changed after they built their first-ever fleet . However, after they had built their fleet, their fortunes changed .
 This defeat caused Hamilcar Barca, the ' Carthaginian general, to sue for peace . This defeat was caused by the defeat of the Carthaginians .
 The dispossessed aristocrats and nobles of Qin’s former enemies were moved to the capital Xianyang to keep them under close control . Qin's former enemies of Qin were kept under control in the capital .
 Li Ssu commissioned a single script and a standardized system of weights and measures for China . Li Slu commissioned a standard script and standardized weights and measure system .
 In 213BCE, he ordered the “burning of the books,” by which the writings of philosophers opposed to the Qin state were burned . In 212BCE he had many intellectuals who opposed him brutally killed .
 Shi Huangdi, China’s first emperor, oversaw the burning of books and the execution of scholars . Painting shows him overseeing the burning and execution of books, scholars .
 Despite their victory in the First Punic War, the Romans’ position in northern Italy was still weak . The Romans were still weak in the area .
 In 225BCE, the Celtic Insubres and Boii tribes tried to drive them out of the city . The tribes were driven out by the Insubreres and the Boii .
 The king of the Boii was killed in single combat against a Roman consul . Their capital Mediolanum was captured by the Romans .
 The Romans established colonies in the Celtic territories in 218BCE, including at Piacenza . The Romans set up colonies in Piacenz in 218 BCE .
 He offered his service to a succession of Rome's enemies before poisoning himself in Bithynia . He then offered his . service to Rome's . enemies before offering his service .
 A number of new kingdoms broke away from the center, while the anti-Qin forces found a talented military leader in Xiang Yu . Xiang Yu is the leader of Xiang Yu, the son of the Qin .
 By 206BCE, the Qin Empire was fragmented and Xiang Yu and Liu Bang were at war with one another . Xiang Yu was one of the two Qin leaders at the time of the war .
 Romans embarked on a policy of picking off the allies of Carthage . Hannibal making little headway in southern Italy, the Romans began picking off his allies .
 In 211BCE, the Romans allied with the Aetolians, who fought the Macedonians on land while the Romans launched naval attacks . The Romans fought on land and sea, and allied with them in the battle . The Roman empire was defeated by the Macedonian army in
 Cornelius Scipio (c.6-183 BcE] to Spain, where he captured the : Carthaginian capital of Carthage : Nova Nova Nova . He captured the city of Carthagana, and brought it to Spain .
 Hannibal's brother Hasdrubal was defeated and ' killed at the Metaurus River in northern Italy, denying Hannibal crucial reinforcements . Hannibal was defeated in 207BcE . Hannibal's sister Hannibal was killed in the battle .
 It was stamped with the Greek letters for ‘ATHE’ to identify the city of its origin . The city of the origin was also stamped with Greek letters to identify its origins .
 In China, common tools are cast in metal, punched with holes (for stringing several together] and used as money . The tools are used to make money .
 The state of Lydia produces the first true coins, made of electrum (an alloy of gold) and stamped with the standard gold coin, iW Knife an image of a lion or stag . Emperor Augustus reforms the Roman coinage system .
 Money was created to fulfill this role, and it evolved from cattle to precious metals . It evolved from precious metals to coins and coins and bank notes . Money evolved into bank notes and coins .
 Today, money is exchanged more abstractly, through credit cards or electronic transfers . Money is exchanged via credit cards, electronic transfers or credit cards .
 The earliest forms of money—used in ritual code mentions loans paid in silver . The earliest form of money was used in ritual codes .
 For thousands of years, system had been adopted, with coins of gold, precious metals were used, often in the forms of silver, and bronze [of least value] circulating across bars and ingots . Gold, silver, bronze and bronze were used in the form of silver .
 All had the head of the ruler stamped on them, for propaganda as well as fiscal use . They were used for propaganda and for fiscal purposes .
 ‘real’ value of Pic allen) ee iG eis ie eae eae YEAR notes and coins became nominal, relying instead on in any other city where the bank had a branch . Subsequently, the “real” value of the ‘
 The debasement of Roman coins a sense of trust that they could be exchanged for Great Italian banking houses, such as the Medici . Due to inflation, excessive expenditure, and weak control goods .
 The growth of credit cards from 1950 took were rich enough to fund the military campaigns ee ate ea ee . This a stage further, as the purchaser passed on of European kings through their loans .
 The Jin dynasty Song standard in the its first bank notes, operate as electronic issues the first true bank dynasty Spanish and Austrian Joachimsthal backed by the bank’s cash (without deferred notes around 1189. note Habsburg empires. thaler own gold reserves.
 First one dollar bill SS Ss Gaozu was one of the few Chinese rulers to come from a peasant background . SS Gaoz was the first Chinese ruler to have his own name on a first dollar bill .
 Hui Ti was just 15 years old when Hui died in 195BCE . Hui was the first Chinese leader to become a leader .
 Indo-Greek dynasty emerged in India, and became powerful : under Menander I (c.5130 BcE), an important patron of : Buddhism . Menander was a patron of . Buddhism .
 Paullus defeated Perseus at the Battle of Pydna in 168BCE . The Third Century War ended in 168 BCE, with Paullu defeating Perseus .
 Macedonia was broken up into four republics to prevent it recovering its strength . A purge of anti-Roman elements swept through the Greek cities, and the country was broken into four states .
 By 148BCE, the Macedonians had been defeated and the Romans turned their attention to the Achaeans . The Romans were victorious in the battle of the Achaians .
 The Roman consul L Mummius quickly routed the Archaeans and took Corinth, which he razed to the ground . Lummius was consul of the Roman Empire .
 Initial Roman s 0 . to as high as 600,000 people—and Campaigning achieved little Romans Macedonians except the alienation of their . COMBATANTS Yayoi vase ae Ul Battle of Pydna .
 Philip V of Macedon'’s army was completely destroyed at the Battle of Pydna . Philip V's army was destroyed by the battle . The battle took place in the middle of the year of the Second World War .
 N < ENS <0 » a Se ° Ms e A oS er e Oe 6b 6b ‘ < NYY fe) : After the end of the Second Punic: : War, in 202BcE, the Romans had allowed their ally King Mass
 Carthaginian government sent a military force to relieve a town that had been besieged by Massinissa, : and the Romans reacted by declaring war . Carthaginians embassy in 162BCE ' even resulted in Carthage being Carthagian government . sent a : military force . to
 The consuls came to be supported by other magistrates (praetors and quaestors), and tribunes of the plebs who had a special role in protecting the rights of the lower orders . Over time the consuls were supported by magistrates, including tribunes
 Later elections for the consulate became bitterly contested as the office provided great potential for enrichment and personal and family glory . The office was bitterly contested in the 1980s .
 After Augustus became emperor in 27 BCE the office of consul lost any real power . The office was increasingly awarded to imperial favourites, such as imperial favourites .
 Zhang Qian was held captive by the Hsiung-nu for some years during his journey before he was able to make an escape . Zhang Qian made his escape after he was captured by his captors in China .
 Under emperor Wu (141-87 BCE) the Chinese launched several offensives against the Hsiung-nu, particularly in 121BCE and 119BCE, after which the frontier was quiet for almost 20 years .
 Numantia, the main center of the ' revolt, finally fell to the Romans ' after a bitter siege . The revolt was centered in the city .
 The last Carthaginian defenders died in an inferno in the city’s main temple . Carthaginians died in the main temple of Carthaginia .
 After Maues died, the Saka kingdom collapsed, but it was revived under his son Azes . Azes was the son of Maues, who conquered much of northwest India .
 It comes from Amravati in Andra Pradesh, southeast India, one of the capitals of the Satavahanas . It is one of India's most important cities, and is located in southeast India .
 During the reign of John Hyrcanus (r.4-104 BCE) it recovered much of the ground that had been lost . However, during the reigns of Hyrcranus, it recovered some of the lost ground . It is thought to have been the largest
 Alexander Jannaeus [r.3-76 BCE] enlarged the kingdom until it occupied most of modern Israel and the West Bank . The kingdom was occupied by Jannaeus, who ruled most of the region of Israel .
 After defeats by the Nabataean king Aretas III in 84BCE and internal strife following Alexander's death, the Hasmoneans were increasingly vulnerable to Roman interference .
 The Romans ordered the kingdom be divided between Micipsa’s nephew © Jugurtha and his sons . The Romans . ordered the . kingdom to be divided .
 Jugurtha and Adherbal renewed his attack on his cousin : and the Romans became involved . The Romans were involved .
 Gaius Marius opened the army to those who fell below the normal property qualification . The army was opened to those with lower property qualifications . Marius Marius changed this by opening it to the army .
 The eagle became the universal legionary standard for the first time . The legions themselves were reformed as a heavy infantry force .
 From this point onward Roman light infantry and cavalry were organized into ‘auxiliary’ units, which were recruited from noncitizens . The auxiliary units reached 80,000, and the majority of Roman soldiers were non-citizens .
 The Danzante carvings at Monte : Alban, Mexico, were once thought : to be of dancers, but they are now : believed to represent the mutilated bodies of enemies captured in war .
 Alban’s control began to reach beyond the immediate vicinity of : the Valley of Oaxaca, and many ' large stone platforms and public monuments' were built in the city . Alban's control of the city began to . reach beyond . the immediate . vicinity of . the Valley
 Marius became Rome's dominant politician, but the brutal behavior of his ally Saturninus, tribune of the plebs, provoked the Senate . After his victory at VERCELLAE, Marius was Rome's leading politician .
 As Marius’s power waned, discontent rose among Italians without Roman citizenship . Marius was the Roman leader of the Roman Empire .
 A protéé of Marius, Lucius Sulla, took a key role in suppressing the revolt . The revolt was largely over by 88BCE, albeit with some concessions offered by Rome to rebels .
 Spartacus Crassus crucified slaves along the Appian Way, which led to Rome, as a warning to any others who might plan a similar insurrection . That same year, while waiting to sail with his army to Greece to counter the threat posed by the king of Pontus,
 Marians, packed the Senate with his supporters, and curtailed the : powers of the tribunes. Marians . Marians were packed with supporters, . packed the . Senate with supporters . Marianians .
 AY rP Fr it ' A isearieeiesiont of na Roman ramparts at Alesia, where Caesar forced Vercingetorix to surrender to surrender'
 Mound City, Ohio contains a cluster of more than 20 Hopewell earthwork burial mounds . Mounds are located in Hopewells, Ohio, and are believed to date back to 17th century .
 When war broke out with Mithridates of Pontus again, the Romans forced him to retreat to Armenia, which was ruled by his son-in-law Tigranes .
 By DOBCE, Caesar had subdued most ' of Gaul and had acquired a vast replace him . Caesar had subdued most of Gaul .
 The Huo family, which had dominated the government for decades, was removed from power . Its leading members were executed and leading members of the family were killed .
 Caesar responded by crossing over to Britain in 55 BCE with two legions . Caesar responded to the situation by crossing into Britain . Caesar crossed over to the UK in 55 CE .
 Clay pipes, often in the shape of birds, are one of the most characteristic products of the Hopewell culture .
 Caesar's second expedition to : Britain, another revolt in Gaul, this 2 time led by the Senones, wiped out much of the Roman force there . After putting down the revolt, Caesar's attentions were diverted to Rome, where political violence had resulted in the murder of his former
 Vercingetorix also defeated Caesar 2 himself at Gergovia, but was then trapped at Alesia in September : 52Bce . Vercingeorix was also trapped at the end of September .
 The Senate ordered Caesar to disband his army or be declared an enemy of the state . Caesar's army was ordered to be disbanded by the Senate . Caesar died in the Battle of the Roman Empire .
 Caesar annexed the kingdom of sons Gnaeus and Sextus . King Juba of Mauretania, who forced the Pompeians : there to surrender, escaped .
 Kharavela expanded Kalinga far to the north and east, ' conquering the Sunga capital of ' Pataliputra in Magadha . The Sunga city was the capital of the Patalimiputra, the capital in the region .
 Jainism, Kharavela established , trading contacts as far afield as Southeast Asia . Jainistism established . trading contacts . as far as Southeast . Asia .
 Mark Antony and Octavian were seen as the heirs of Julius Caesar . Many viewed Antony as the rightful heir to Caesar . The Roman city was ruled by the Roman Roman Empire .
 Octavian marched to raise the siege of Mutina (Modena, Italy], where Mark Antony was besieging Decimus Brutus, one of Caesar's assassins . The two almost came to blows early in 43BCE, when Octavarian marched to raised the siege .
 Octavian realized he was being sidelined and formed a three-way alliance with Mark Antony and Marcus Lepidus . The Senate voted to transfer Decimus Brutus's legions to Decius Brutus .
 The Triumvirate conducted a war against Cassius and Marcus Brutus, two more of Caesar's assassins, who had seized much of the territory in the east . The war was fought against the two assassins, Cassius, and Brutus and Cassius .
 Antony stayed in the east until 4OBCE, when he returned to Italy to try to undermine the 7, growing power of Octavian . Antony remained in the eastern part of the Roman Empire until 4 OBCE .
 Octavian's fleet outnumbered that of Mark Antony and Cleopatra, with smaller more manoeuvrable ships and fresher, better trained crews . The Senate declared Antony a public enemy .
 Octavian did not take on the title of dictator, as Julius Caesar had . Octavicius did not become dictator, but did become a dictator .
 He instead ruled informally as the princeps, the first man of the state . He ruled the country as the first king of the kingdom .
 Having acquired control of Antony's legions, he now had an army of about 500,000 men . Antony now had control of the legions, having acquired control over the Roman army .
 He disbanded more than half of his 28 legions (about 150,000 soldiers) He retained 28 legions, settling the remainder in colonies in Italy and abroad .
 In 27BCE, Octavian gave up all his powers, ostensibly restoring the Republic . In 27 BCE, he gave up his powers to restore the republic .
 The Senate responded by granting him personal control of Egypt, Gaul, Germany, Spain, Syria, and Syria .
 Augustus is seen as the first Roman emperor . Augustus ruled Rome in Rome in the early years of the Roman Empire . He ruled Rome from the beginning of the reign .
 North Africa was a center of strong resistance to both Julius Caesar and Augustus, who settled many army veterans there . North Africa had been a center for resistance to Julius Caesar .
 Juba, whose wife was the daughter of Mark Antony and Cleopatra, proved a reliable Roman ally . Juba was Roman king of the Roman Empire . His wife was a Roman ally of the late Roman king .
 Herod I was allowed to retain his position by Octavian, : even though he had supported Mark Antony . In western Asia, the ruler of : Galilee, Herod I, had supported Antony, but was not deposed .
 La Maison Carré, in Nimes, southern France, is one of the finest surviving Roman temples . It is located in the southern French city of Nimes .
 Augustus Caesar adopted Gaius and Lucius Caesar after his own appointed heir died in 25BCE . He adopted Agrippa’s children, renaming them Gaiuus and . Lucius Caesar . Augustus was born Augustus Augustus Augustus, who died in August
 The end of the Republic and the reign of Augustus saw a golden age in Latin literature . Latin literature was a golden era in the Roman Empire .
 The orator Cicero and the historian Sallust marked the height of late Republican literature . Cicero was the orator and historian of the Roman Empire .
 After Augustus's rise to power, the poets Virgil and Horace flourished under the patronage of Maecenas . Virgil was a close confidant of Augustus .
 Some semi-independent kingdoms that the early Han had suppressed began to reappear . The early Han dynasty had been suppressed by the Han dynasty . The Han dynasty lost control of some of the world's largest cities .
 Yuandi and his successors Chengdi and Aidi created numerous marquisates, many of which were granted to the sons of the new kings, weakening the state's central control . Yuandi also created numerous Marquisates which weakened the state .
 The Romans became entangled in campaigns in the Italian Peninsula and beyond . Gradually, the Romans became enthused to Italy .
 By the 1st century CE, the Roman Empire had become the largest Europe had ever seen . The Roman Empire was the largest in Europe's history . The Empire was one of the largest ever seen in the world .
 The early growth of Roman territories was slow, with wars their military successes to bolster their position in Rome . against neighbors often threatened the survival of Rome itself . The Roman capital was Rome's first Roman city .
 The quest for security along the existing frontiers then North Africa itself resulted in the region being pushed even farther forward . North Africa was pushed even further forward in the quest to secure itself .
 Victory in the First new territories in northwestern Europe Dacia, and made small advances Punic War (264-241 BCE) into western Asia . But the Romans still faced began to contract after 250CE resistance to their rule in northern Italy .
 He strengthened his influence by marrying his daughter to the young emperor . He married his daughter in order to strengthen his influence .
 On Ping Di's death, many of the . nobility rejected Wang Mang’s choice of successor and rose up in revolt . Many of the THE NUMBER OF DIFFERENT ISSUED BY WANG MANG nobility rejected . Wang Mang's choice of . successor and successor
 Wang Mang easily put them down, and in 9 he took the title of first Xin emperor . Wang Mang was easily put down and became the ruler of China in 9 .
 Chang'an fell, Gengshi became : the first emperor of the restored : Han dynasty . Gengshi became the first Emperor of the . Han dynasty.
 Tiberius concentrated on strengthening the existing empire rather than extending Roman territory through foreign conquests .
 He alienated many of China’s nobility and bureaucrats by moving the capital from Luoyang back to Chang’an . He alienated the Red Eyebrows and angered many of the . nobility and . bureaucrats by making the capital move back to . Chang'an .
 Much of China had already slipped from Gengshi's grasp by 25, when Chang’an was sacked by the Red Eyebrows .
 Guang Wudi is regarded as the first Eastern Han emperor . Guang was deposed and replaced by Guang . Guang is considered to have been the first Chinese emperor .
 The new ruler had first to face a civil war . By 27, he had defeated the Red Eyebrows, but it took him until 36 to overcome the last of the warlords who opposed him .
 In 37, he abolished all except three of the kingdoms that had sprung up MONGOLIA Sea . China in 206BcE Territory added by Former Han Dynasty .
 Ornamental brick from China’s Eastern Han period shows 14 a procession that includes horse-drawn carriages .
 Jesus, a carpenter from Nazareth, began his ministry in his early 30s . Jesus was born in Jerusalem and died in the city of Gthorim .
 He taught in the Jewish tradition, calling for the reform of the Temple and for the love of one’s neighbour to take precedence over the strict observance of religious law .
 Jesus gathered a group of twelve disciples around him, but was targeted by Jewish conservatives afraid of his growing influence . Jesus gathered 12 disciples, including 12 men and 12 women .
 QP 9 SOM Wr _ xe 2.0mm SO Ce Oe Otek ee ee DA OP A pH pH Q92' WP ad a® oe BANS eh 0 oo <O oe NY wo wo eo O Soe. QP
 Few details of Kujula’s reign are known, but he minted coins in imitation of both Greek and Roman models . Bactria and northwestern India remained a cultural crossroads .
 In 43, the new emperor, Claudius sent a force of four legions led by Aulus Plautius, governor of Pannonia, to conquer Britain .
 The Romans landed unopposed at Richborough, pushed on to London, and then captured Christian catacomb, Rome . At first, Roman Christians did not have their own cemeteries .
 In 47, the Romans paused briefly: in their conquest of Britain, having | ' reached a line roughly between ' the Humber River in the east and ' the Severn River in . the west . In 47 , the Romans reached a . line roughly . between 'the Humber
 Ostorius Scapula invaded Wales, where Caractacus was continuing the resistance . The Roman Roman general invaded Wales . Caractsacus was killed in the battle .
 Caractacus over to the Romans, ' and Roman Britain remained ' relatively trouble free during the ' following decade .
 Paul wrote a series of epistles to various fledgling Christian groups . A charismatic preacher, Paul was a charismatic preacher .
 The young emperor's reign began well when he promised the senate he would avoid making any arbitrary measures . He promised to avoid making arbitrary measures, the senate .
 First sign of Nero's tyranny surfaced in 59, when he had his mother Agrippina murdered . However, the first sign of his tyranny was the murder of his mother .
 In 62, a new praetorian prefect (commander of the imperial bodyguard) took office . Tigellinus took office in 62 . In 62 he became the praetorians prefect .
 Tigellinus pandered to the less desirable side of Nero's personality, whose rule became increasingly despotic . The emperor's rule was becoming more despotic and more repressive .
 Nero is said to have taken terrible retribution on Rome's small Christian population . Nero took revenge for a fire that destroyed much of Rome in 64 . Rome's Christian population proved convenient scapegoats for Nero's actions .
 Nero alienated senators by seizing their land to build himself a new palace . Later, during the reconstruction of Rome, he alienated senators . Nero was known for seizing the land of the senators to build his palace .
 He also ordered additional taxes in Palestine, which sparked a Jewish revolt in 66.6 . The Jewish revolt was sparked by the order .
 When the king of the Iceni died, he left his lands to his queen, Boudicca . He left his land to his wife, who died in childbirth . The Iceni were the most powerful tribe in the world .
 Camulodunum had ' been sacked by the Iceni. Britain, was away on campaign in Wales, and by the time he : returned, had been sacked . Britain .
 It is said the Iceni lost 80,000 warriors and Boudicca herself was captured, though she died, possibly poisoned, soon after .
 Tiridates was allowed to keep the throne, as long as he travelled to Rome to seek Nero's approval, which he eventually did in 66 . He eventually did not want the throne back, but was allowed back to keep it .
 Nero’s position as emperor became increasingly precarious when Calpurnius Piso led a conspiracy in 64, which prompted Nero to order further governor of Gallia Lugdunensis . Shortly after the —_. many senators, many senators .
 In early 68, a revolt broke out, led by Gaius Julius Vindex, a legion based in Spain proclaimed the governor, Sulpicius Galba, as emperor . The revolt led to the death of the governor of the Roman Empire .
 In April 69, the armies of ' Otho and Vitellius clashed at Bedriacum near Cremona in ' northern Italy, and the Vitelli's army won .
 By the mid-70s, the rest of Vespasian’'s reign was largely peaceful . The rest of his reign was peaceful .
 He restored the empire's finances, imposing levies on a number of provinces, including Egypt . With a reputation for frugality, he restored the Empire's finances . Egypt was one of Egypt's most important provinces .
 In Britain, the Romancontrolled area continued to ' expand, with governor Petillius ' Cerialis occupying the northern English kingdom of ' Brigantia .
 By 86, Domitian had . defeated the Dacians, under their new king, Decebalus . By 86 he had defeated them, under the new king of the Roman Empire .
 Domitian had never commanded armies and was unprepared for the exercise of supreme power . He was unprepared to command the supreme power of the Roman Empire . The Roman Empire was founded in Rome in the early 1900s .
 He had some success in his early campaigns, but he over-extended himself against the Dacians, and in putting down a legionary revolt led by Saturninus, the governor of Germania Superior .
 Domitian was forced to pay off the Dacians with an annual subsidy . This distraction allowed Decebalus to renew his war against Rome . The Dacian King of the Romanians renewed his war with Rome and Domitians .
 The conspiracy of Saturninus led Domitian to become paranoid and he had many senators executed for treason . The conspiracy led him to be paranoid, and he became paranoid .
 In September 96, he was murdered in a palace conspiracy and the Senate chose the aged M Cocceius Nerva to replace him . He was assassinated in September 96 .
 The Senate then voted to destroy all statues of Domitian and recall those he had exiled . The Senate also voted to recall those who had been exiled from the Roman empire .
 In 97 Nerva faced a mutiny of the praetorian guard, who demanded the punishment of Domitian’s murderers . However, in 97 the guard mutiny was a success .
 To rectify this he adopted M Ulpius Traianus , the governor of Upper Germany, a man with a strong military backing . He adopted him as a governor of Germany .
 Ban Chao ' became protector-general of the Western Regions in 92, and 2 reestablished control over the key oases along the Silk Route . Ban Chao re-established control of key ' oases .
 Trajan’s Column, in Rome, gives a visual account against Decebalus in the Dacian Wars . Trajan's Column gives an account of Trajan in Rome's battle for the throne .
 EMPEROR TRAJAN was the first emperor to come from a Roman province rather than Italy . His family settled in Spain and he became the first Roman emperor to have come from Spain .
 From a base at Viminacium , he pushed into central Dacia, and fought a major engagement at Tapae . Both sides suffered serious losses in the battle .
 When Trajan’s legions neared the Dacian royal capital at Sarmizegetusa Regia, Decebalus sued for peace . He agreed to give up his army's weapons and siege equipment, and to demolish his remaining forts . Trajan's
 Trajan acquired a large amount of treasure in Dacia allowing him to build impressive monuments to commemorate his Dacian victory . Trajan built impressive monuments in the area to commemorate the victory .
 Gulf near modern Basra, Iraq, is said to have remarked that, had he been younger, he ' might have pressed on to India'
 In 109, Trajan appointed Pliny the Younger ' (61-c.2) as his personal representative to govern Bithynia: Pontus on the Black Sea coast of Anatolia . Pliny was appointed by Trajan in 109 to govern the region .
 Pontus for at least two years, ' trying to sort out the finances of the main cities, which had fallen : into confusion . Pontus has been in charge of the Pontus finances for two years . The main cities had fallen into confusion.
 The central wall occupies a high position that vastly enhances its defensive value . It is said to be the most important part of the castle in the world .
 Hadrian visited Britain in 122, where there had been frontier troubles . In 122, Hadrian returned to the country .
 He ordered the building of a huge barrier from the Solway Firth in the west to the Tyne River in the east . The barrier was built between Solway and Tyne rivers in the 1920s .
 It took governor Aulus Platorius Nepos two years to complete Hadrian’s Wall (part in stone, and part in turf) The wall ran 76 Roman miles (113km), and was equipped with a series of forts and milecastles .
 Hadrian's Wall acted as the northern frontier line of Roman Britain for the next 40 years . The wall was built in the Roman city of Hadrian in Roman Britain .
 Emperor was mocked by some for his grecophile tendencies . He was the first emperor to sport a beard, a Greek fashion .
 The city was planned on a grid, with two huge pyramids -- of the Moon and the Sun -- at either end of the main street . Two pyramids were planned for the city's main street, with a main street of two pyramids .
 Antoninus survived Hadrian by 23 years, and became Roman emperor in 138 . Hadrian had adopted Antoninus | Pius as his son and successor, a stop-gap until Marcus Aurelius was old enough to rule . Antoninus was Antoninus’s relative, Marcus
 MARCUS AURELIUS SUCCEEDED to the Roman Throne jointly with Lucius Verus in 161 . MARCusius Aurelius was the first Roman Emperor to be elected in Rome .
 Marcus was the more capable of the two, but it was Lucius who was sent, In 162, to rescue the situation in the east after the governor of Cappadocia was defeated and killed by the Persians following a disastrous invasion of Armenia .
 Langobardi and Obii tribes crossed the Danube to attack the Roman province of Pannonia . The Obii and Langobardi tribes attacked the Roman city of Pannia .
 Pannonia later in the year to ' launch a massive offensive : across the Danube' The Danube is expected to be used as a 'massive offensive'
 The eunuch faction at ' court had become increasingly powerful and had even engineered the murder of the emperor Shaodi : in 125 . Marcus . Marcus, the war dragged on for ' another 10 years . In China, the eunuchs faction at the ' court became increasingly . powerful
 From their bases in the Peruvian valleys of Moche, Chicama, and Viru, these people spread to dominate almost the whole northern coastline . From their base in Moche to Chicama to the northern coast of Peru, they dominated almost all of the coastline .
 They were skilled workers In gold and their pottery has an extraordinarily realistic quality . The pottery was made by skilled workers in gold and pottery is extraordinarily realistic .
 Roman Empire was in crisis in 170 . The Marcomanni and Quadi had occupied parts of northern Italy, and an invasion by the lazyges and Costobocci had overun large parts of the Balkans .
 Romans trapped the Marcomanni as they returned across the Danube and killed many of them . The Romans trapped them and killed them in the area . Romans trapped many of the marcomanni during their journey .
 The Quadi sued for peace later in 171, but the Marcommani remained recalcitrant, forcing a new offensive in 172 . The Marcommeni were forced to sue for peace in 172, but refused to accept peace .
 In May that year, rumors that Marcus Aurelius Moche stirrup jar was rumored to have been found . This jar has a typical Moche “stirrup” attached to the back of it .
 There were suggestions that Faustina encouraged Avidius as she feared for her husband's health and worried her own son Commodus was unfit to rule . There were also suggestions that Marcus's wife Faustina feared for his health .
 Marcus Aurelius returned to the Danube in 177 . He was freed from the distraction of Avidius’s revolt .
 The Roman way of life came in the form of a leaf . The Roman empire spread a vast wealth of wealth across the world .
 Roman surveyors laid out new cities, local elites took up Roman practices, and the masses attended gladiatorial spectacles . The Roman city was laid out by the Roman Empire .
 Roman fashions in clothing and accessories also spread across the world . Roman clothing spread from the Roman era to the Roman empire .
 Many of the territories that the Romans conquered initially resisted initially resisted . However, the populations of these provinces, particularly the former ruling classes, gradually adopted many Roman customs .
 Influential men became Roman citizens, towns were given new public buildings such as baths and courthouses . Roman legionary garrisons were established in strategic places, and new trade routes brought luxury goods from Rome .
 The most important Roman baths were adorned with lavish mosaics, such as those of Oceanus, the ocean god, from Sabratha in Libya .
 Bronze weighted plumb line was attached to a groma used by the Romans to survey straight lines . Dividers allowed engineers to copy scale plans or models at twice or half their size . Bronze weight cart carrying worshipers carried worshipers .
 At the baths, a Roman's skin goods such as oil and wine was oiled and then scraped to in amphoras, a type of large, large, remove sweat and dirt . The Romans transported liquid such as wine and oil to the baths .
 The Roman military sword, or gladius, had a short blade—ideal for attacks at close range . The gladius had a i short blade .
 Each Roman legionary carried two of these pila . The javelin’s iron head was designed to break off on shank throwing impact to prevent an opponent throwing it back .
 Coins bearing the head of the current emperor acted as powerful propaganda tools across the empire . Imperial coins were used as propaganda tools to show even the masses an image of their ruler .
 Noncitizens who served 25 years in the Roman army were awarded citizenship and given bronze diplomas to record the grant .
 Roman legionaries normally relied on their swords, but auxiliary light infantry used other weapons to devastating effect, such as sling pellets . Sling pellets would have offered little protection to Roman gladiators .
 This sort of helmet was armed gladiator—carried lightweight, worn by a Thracian, a type of gladiator round shields such as this one for whose equipment was modeled on defense, and a scimitar, with a short . curved blade, to attack .
 Emperor Commodus shoots an arrow to subdue a leopard . In this engraving by Giovanni Stradano, he is seen shooting an arrow at the leopard.
 Another uprising fueled by the Five Pecks of Rice sect then succeeded in taking over Sichuan in the southwest .
 Although the Yellow Turbans had been largely crushed by early 185, the control of the Han emperor was ever weakening . The Han emperor's control over the Han empire was ever waning .
 After Lingdi died in 189, he was replaced by his younger half-brother Xiandi . Xiandi never exercised real power but was never in power .
 Control of the empire fell to Han general Cao Cao, who contended for 30 years with a series of rival warlords, notably Liu Bei and Sun Quan .
 Aureliuss son, was the first Roman emperor to succeed his . father for 90 years, but he proved : to be a disastrous choice . Commodus became . increasingly despotic after an assassination attempt on him .
 Papirius Dionysius, engineered a shortage that led to Cleander's downfall . Papirious Dionysian, engineered the ' shortage' of supplies . Cleander was the first Roman leader to be assassinated .
 Rival claimants to the throne engaged in an auction outside the praetorian camp to decide who would be emperor . This was followed by rival claimants engaging in a battle to decide if they would be Emperor .
 A prophecy had predicted that she would wed an emperor, and so it turned out . She married an emperor . She was the first woman to marry a monarch .
 She failed to mediate between her sons Caracalla and Geta after their father's death and to prevent Geta’s murder . Forceful and intelligent, she failed to Mediate between their sons after father's murder and prevent their murder .
 Kushan rule finally collapsed under Vasudeva when Persian invaders | swept through northwestern India . Persian invaders invaded the region .
 Kushan kings continued to rule a much-reduced realm for a further century . However, their influence was purely local and their heyday was at an end . The Kushan kingdom was ruled by the Kushan people of the region .
 The empire was granted citizenship to 2 almost all free males in the ' empire'
 For some 2 unknown reason, he became » enraged and ordered the massacre of the citizens of ' Alexandria' Alexandria . For some reasons, he was enraged . He became enraged and became enraged .
 His praetorian prefect Opellius | Macrinus came to suspect that : Caracalla wanted him dead, so he persuaded a disaffected soldier to murder the emperor .
 Elagabalus and Alexianus fell out in 222, when the army backed the army . When the two fell out, the army supported Alexianuus and Elagababalus was murdered .
 Diplomas were issued to auxiliary soldiers in the Roman army, granting them citizenship . In 207, N\ > tact the kingdom had been Bronze diploma diploma .
 Arch of Caracalla was topped by a figure of the emperor riding ina : Chariot . Originally the arch was topped with the figure of an Emperor riding in a chariot.
 Ardashir was the first ruler of the Sasanian dynasty . He was then declared king of the first Sasanian kingdom . Ardashar was declared king . He ruled the kingdom .
 Within two years Cao Pi, Liu Bei, ' and Sun Quan would each declare ' himself emperor . Cao Pi forced Xiandi to abdicate . Liu Bei would declare himself emperor.
 Maximinus Thrax spent most of his reign raising funds to reward his troops for their support . The uprising’s ringleader was an officer from a humble background, but he spent most his reign in raising funds for his troops .
 Wei kingdom faced the greatest challenges among the three : kingdoms . It would eventually conquer the Wu and the Shu Han . Wei kingdom would eventually defeat the Wu .
 Balbinus and Pupienus were killed soon after, leaving Gordian II to rule alone . Gordianian II ruled alone in the Roman Roman Empire .
 Compounding the Roman Empire's difficulties was the appearance of barbarian confederacies among the Germanic peoples of the Rhine and Danube frontiers . The Roman Empire faced a series of problems in the early Roman times .
 In 244, he won a decisive battle against Gordian Ill at Misiche near Ctesiphon . The battle took place in Misiche, near the city of Misiche . In 244 he won the battle in a decisive victory .
 Philip made peace with Shapur but had to pay a large ransom to escape Sasanian territory . Philip paid a large sum to escape the Sasanian kingdom . Philip died in the hands of Shapur's forces .
 In this relief, Shapur triumphs over the Roman emperors Gordian III and Valerian . The Romans were left .
 Yamato kingdom emerged on the plain of Nara [in : central Japan] around 250. In Japan, the Yamato kingdom .
 Palmyra grew rich on tariffs paid by merchants who plied the desert route that passed through the city .
 Valerian’s son Gallienus was struggling to contain an invasion of Italy by the Germanic luthungi . The Rhine frontier was being breached by Alemmanic raiders .
 The Governor of Germania Inferior, Marcus Postumus, revolted and killed Gallienus’s son Saloninus . He began the Gallic Empire in control of Gaul, Germany, Britain, Spain, and Spain .
 In 274, Tetricus was captured near Chalons, and the Gallic Empire was reabsorbed . In 274 he was captured and the Empire was absorbed by the Roman Empire .
 Many peasants fled to landowners for protection, resulting in the rise of private armies . However, the wars of the Three Kingdoms period had impoverished the state and as the tax burden rose, many peasants fled .
 In 285, he defeated Carinus (the then emperor of the Western Empire) and started a radical reorganization of the empire, reforming the army, and subdividing provinces . In 285 he defeated the then emperor Carinus .
 Constantius Chlorus [r.3-306] to assist Diocletian in the Western Empire and Galerius (r. 3-311) to be Maximian’s junior in the East . Constantius Constantius Chlorus Ch
 Constantine is said to have seen a Christian monogram in a dream predicting his victory . Constantine is believed to have been able to defeat the Roman Roman Empire . The monogram is a Christian symbol .
 SINCE PERSECUTIONS IN the 250S AND 260S, the Christian community had experienced some 40 years of tranquillity in the Roman Empire . The Roman Empire had experienced a 40-year-calamity period .
 Devout Christians could not accede to these demands, and many of them were martyred . Many of the demands were made by Christians, many of whom were killed .
 Maxentius'’s forces outnumbered : those of Constantine, but his : army became trapped between : Constantine's men and the river . Constantine's forces became trapped by the river in the battle .
 CHANDRAGUPTA I ASCEND TO THE THRONE of a small kingdom in the western Ganges Plain in 320. He was the son of a king who ruled a kingdom in 320 .
 Emperor Constantine found Christians were far from united in doctrine or organization . Emperor Constantine (r.0-337] 2 found that Christians themselves : were far . from united . The Emperor of the Roman Catholic Church was found to be a follower of Christ .
 SAMUDRAGUPTA ([r.575) SUCCEEDED HIS FATHER Chandragupta as ruler of the Gupta domains in northern India . The number of coins he issued by Samudragupta in 335 is the highest ever issued by the Gupta .
 An inscription he set up in Prayaga Survives, recounting a series of campaigns he fought in Uttar Pradesh and Mathura . Both were annexed to the Gupta kingdom .
 He also made conquests down the east coast of India, as far as Madras, and subdued West Bengal . He also subdued parts of Rajasthan and the Punjab .
 Various regions acknowledged his suzerainty, making him the most powerful Indian ruler since the Mauryas . Various other regions acknowledged him as ruler .
 Constantine died in 337, having accepted Christian baptism only on his deathbed . Constantine accepted Christianity only on the deathbed of his son .
 Constantine Il held Spain, Gaul, and Britain; Constans ruled Italy, and Constantius Il (r.7-61) governed the Eastern Empire . Their reigns began with a massacre at Constantinople in which almost all of their father’s . other male relatives were killed in
 Gaul proved surprisingly effective at combating Frankish raiders . Gaul as Caesar, where he fought off raiders, proved surprisingly . effective . Gaul .
 The Kingdom of AKSUM became one of the earliest states to embrace Christianity outside the Roman Empire . The King of the Kingdom of Aksum was the first state to accept Christianity outside Roman Empire.
 The Mayans developed a hieroglyphic form of writing that survives on many of the stelae (carved stone slabs) they set up to commemorate important events . In Tikal the first such dated monument is from 292 years old .
 Tikal was by far the largest and most powerful of the Classic Maya cities . The first named king of Tikal Is Siyaj Chan K’awiil | , and by the reign of Chak Tok Ich’aak (r.078) Tikal .
 RY ° 2 Po ar es oe on . ee ie Foyer or oS SO 2 < aS ox 9 os Q r 9 3 i, J ei in. — ea hats yee <A ‘Here Emperor Julian is seen in religious debate.
 He attempted to sow discord among Christians by decreeing the return of those who had been exiled for religious reasons . He also attempted to return those who were exiled for religion reasons .
 In China, the EASTERN JIN DYNASTY brought comparative stability to the south of the country . The region has been known for its instability in recent years .
 Many of the emperors were short-lived, but the period saw a cultural flowering . The bureaucracy in Nanjing functioned efficiently and the period of Nanjing was a culture flowering .
 Artists such as Gu Kaizhi painted masterpieces such as the Admonitions of the Instructress to the Palace Ladies, as well as producing works on the theory of painting .
 Eastern Jin emperors alternated between a defensive stance towards the Sixteen Kingdoms and aggressive campaigns, notably under Mudi who retook Sichuan and Luoyang . Northern China, on the other hand, was highly unstable, divided .
 Julian unexpectedly became emperor in 363, he tried to restore paganism in the empire . He banned Christians from teaching literature . Julian banned Christian literature from being taught .
 He became known by Christian writers as ‘the Apostate’ for his perceived betrayal of Christianity . He was also known as “the Apostle’s” for perceived betraying Christianity .
 An officer of the imperial bodyguard, Valentinian , was then raised to the throne . He selected his brother Valens to be his co-ruler . Valens was the first Roman emperor to be a king .
 Valentinian spent much of his reign along the Rhine dealing with Frankish and Alemannic invaders . Valentinian was one of the most powerful men of the Roman Empire .
 Valens was forced to spend most of the early 370s in Syria to contain the Persian threat . Growing trouble with barbarians along the Danube later forced him to turn to the Balkans .
 Goths feared being squeezed between Huns and the imperial frontier . The Huns, a new nomadic group from Central Asia, were at their rear . The Goths believed the Huns would be squeezed between them and the frontier .
 Emperor Valens did not wait for reinforcements before marching out to meet the Gothic army . The Gothic army was defeated by Valens in the Battle of Genesus .
 On August 9, 378, near Adrianople, the Romans met the Goths, under Fritigern . The Romans and Goths met in the Battle of the Danes .
 Valens attacked but his army was surrounded by the returning barbarian horsemen . The Gothic cavalry was forced to retreat from the battle .
 Valens was killed and the Eastern army destroyed, leaving the Balkans open to the Goths . The Eastern army was destroyed and the Balkans was left open to Goths in the Balkans . Valens died and the eastern army destroyed .
 Gratian reacted by turning to Theodosius, a Spanish military officer, who he appointed as his imperial colleague . Theodusius appointed as the imperial colleague of the Roman emperor .
 Theodosius patiently negotiated, bought off some groups, and struck militarily where he could . For the next three years he patiently negotiated and struck where possible .
 He also made an astute marriage alliance that extended ' his realm to the southwest . He also extended his kingdom's borders .
 Iron pillar at Qutb complex on the outskirts of Delhi is said to have been erected on the orders of : Chandragupta II. a St. a. a . St. an iron pillar .
 Jerome completed the Vulgate, \, the first definitive translation of the Bible into Latin, 405 . Jerome was the first to translate the Bible in Latin . Jerome's work was translated into Latin in 405 .
 His arrival, which may represent a military conquest, led to the death of Tikal’s ruler Chak Tok Ich’aak and the destruction of most of the public monuments . His arrival in Tikal may have been a military invasion .
 Siyaj Kak installed a new dynasty on the throne of Tikal, possibly drawn from the ruling house of Teotihuacan, with Yax Nuun Ayiin as the first ruler . The new dynasty may have been the first of its kind .
 In 382, Gratian ordered the removal of the Altar of Victory from the Senate House in Rome . He continued to act against pagans in Rome after the Battle of Adrianople .
 Magnus Maximus led an army north to face an invasion of Gaul by the Alemanni in 383 . He was then faced with a revolt in Britain, where the legions declared their commander Maximus emperor . In 383, he was faced with an uprising in Britain where he was declared emperor
 Theodosius was fearful of trouble with Persia or a revolt in the Balkans if he moved west . Maximus was his colleague, and was feared for his life in the west .
 Maximus invaded Italy in 387. He had influence over Theodosius . Maximus' influence over the Roman emperor freed Theododosian to react when Maximus arrived . Maxius' influence on Theodusius freed him to react to Maximus invasion of Italy .
 August 388, he marched swiftly : into northern Italy, capturing | Maximus near Aquileia and : having him executed . Maximus was captured and executed by the Roman Roman emperor .
 Theodosius’s side at the Battle of : the Frigidus River felt they had not been sufficiently rewarded for their losses . They felt they were not sufficiently rewarded after the battle and felt they should have been rewarded .
 Goths escaped and marauded throughout Greece in 396 . Despite an attempt by Stilicho » , the half-Vandal ' commander of the Western Roman army, to suppress them, they escaped and escaped . The Goths marred and marred throughout Greece .
 Stilicho ' moved against Alaric again in 397, ' but once more failed to defeat ' him' Stilic ' moved again, but failed to win again . The two men fought in 391 .
 Roman government to magister ' militum (a middle-ranking official, emperor, emperor) Magisterius is a senior general in the Roman government .
 The Christian Eugenius revoked all of Theodosius'’s anti-pagan laws . To gain support in the Senate, where paganism was still strong, he revoked all the laws .
 He was defeated by Theodosian army at the Frigidus River near Aquileia in 394 .
 Theodosius did not enjoy his rule as sole emperor long, dying in January 395 .
 1CE criss-crossed the whole of the classical world . Socotra <é Emporen World trade go elnele Trade routes1CE .
 Bactrian camels were used in Central Asia, while horses, bullocks, and yaks were used elsewhere . The means of transport used depended on location, with camels, yaks, camels and bullocks being used .
 Maritime trade was also extensive—there was an active trading network around the Indian Ocean . There was also an extensive maritime trade network .
 The establishment of Chinese control in Central Asia from the late 3rd century BCE opened up a series of routes through Persia to the Mediterranean . The Silk Route became collectively known as the Silk Route . The routes were known as "the Silk Route"
 Han emperors In continuous and costly defense of their new territories . However, it also involved the Han . emperors . In continuous . defense of new territories.
 J. Procopius, Byzantine scholar, from History of the Wars, III iv 1, 500—550 ee fo. He was a Byzantine scholar of the Byzantine period .
 Flat headdresses may represent the group that founded the city . Flat headdress may denote high status .
 Within a decade the Western Roman Empire had suffered a series of disasters . Western Europe seemed to have been secure in 400 years .
 Vandals, joined by two other barbarian groups, the Alans and Sueves, crossed the frozen Rhine near Mainz, and forced their way southwest until they reached the Pyrenees . The Vandals crossed the Rhine on the last day of 406 .
 The armies of Britain had raised up a series of usurpers as emperor from 406 . Meanwhile, the armies of the armies raised up the usurpers from 406.
 The Asing Vandals and Sueves were in possession of northwestern Spain . But some of them settled in southern Spain . The Sueves and Alans were left in northwestern Spain, but some settled in northern Spain .
 Wallia rewarded with official possession of much of southwestern Spain . Wallia was rewarded with a posthumous gift of the Spanish capital .
 A colorful Buddhist mural from the Yungang ca under the Northern Wei 450 . The mural is part of a colorful Buddhist Buddhist mural .
 THE EASTERN JIN DYNASTY in China had ended in 420, with Gongi's abdication . Gongi was the leader of the Eastern Jin DyNASTY . The Eastern Jins had been known for its use of 420 .
 Song Wudi (r.0-22], a former fisherman, had risen to become a general and founded the Liu Song dynasty . His successor, Song Wudan, was a general, and founded Liu Song | dynasty .
 Song Wudi had strengthened the central bureaucracy but the growing power of the Buddhist and Daoist monasteries weakened the economic basis of the state . The growing power and wealth of the monks weakened the state's economy .
 The Northern Wei ruled over northern China, until its split into two in the early 6th century . The split was caused by a revolt against the imposition of Chinese dress and language on the Wei nomads .
 Visigoths under Theodoric : : : occupied sections of ' the Mediterranean shore of Gaul, : before they were pushed back ' southwest in 430 in 430 .
 Valentinian III in the Western Roman Empire did not provide any stability as he ascended to the throne as a child and never asserted himself until Northern Wei horse . The art of the Northern Wei evoked their nomadic origins, as in this beautiful terra-cotta horse .
 He used these contacts to gain influence and rose to further prominence in the late 420s . He rose to fame in the early 420s.
 The deaths of patricians Felix and Boniface [in 433] left him with unrivaled dominance .
 Saxon and Jutish raiders began 2 to occupy parts of the former Roman province . Saxon, and . Jutis raiders also occupied parts of Roman province in the Roman era .
 Complex irrigation systems began to appear, and rulers built ever larger burial mounds, such as the 1,600 ft(486 m-] long Nintoku mound .
 Ojin founded a new line of kings, who exercised firmer control over Japan's main islands from a royal center in the Kawachi-Ilzumi area . Ojin was the first Japanese king to rule over the islands .
 He was captured and only released after leaving his son as a hostage . He was . | captured, and released after . leaving his . son as hostage .
 Ricimer replaced him with ' Libius Severus (r.1-65], who he later had poisoned . Ricimer was replaced with 'Libius Sexthenius (r. 1-65), who he then poisoned . He then replaced him as a Roman general .
 Clovis’s baptism made him an easier diplomatic partner for the eastern Roman Empire than his Arian neighbors . The baptism of the Roman god made him easier diplomatic partners for the Roman Empire .
 IN 456, THE VISIGOTHS, encouraged by the western Roman emperor Avitus, had invaded the Iberian Peninsula . The Visigothes had been encouraged by Avitus .
 Visigothic king Theoderic Il defeated the Suevic ruler Rechiarius, who was threatening the Roman province of Tarraconensis, and the remaining Sueves retreated . The remaining Suevic rulers were defeated by the Visigoths king .
 Theoderic took most of Spain for himself, but left the Romans parts of the east coast . He took the Romans' eastern coast of Spain, leaving most of the country behind him .
 This policy was reversed by his successor Euric , who overran the remaining Roman territories in the late 470s . Euric was killed by Euric in the 4th and 5th century . The Roman state was overrun by the Roman army in the 470s. Euric overran
 Visigothic kingdom encompassed almost all of Spain, as well as Aquitaine and Provence in southern Gaul . By the time of Alaric Il the Visigothsic kingdom was over-extended .
 Euric conquered almost all . remaining Roman territory in the © south by 475 by 475 . Euric . conquered almost . all remaining Roman . territory in Gaul . by 475.
 Olybrius and Glycerius ' (r.3-74) on the throne in quick succession, but, despairing of the ' empire's frailty, he then left for : Burgundy . He left for Burgundy in despair .
 Orestes’s deputy, Odoacer, revolted and deposed : Romulus in September 476 . Interests of the Germanic : barbarians in the army were being ignored, barbarians . ignored .
 In 507, he defeated the Visigoths at the Battle of Vouillée and drove them out of most of southwestern Gaul . He defeated them in 507 and drove most of Gaul .
 Clovis converted to ‘THEODORIC THE GREAT’ Son of Thiudmir, a king of the Ostrogoths, spent 11 years as a Roman hostage to guarantee the good behavior of his father . Theodoric spent the 11 years in Rome as a
 He returned home to become king of the Ostrogoths in 471 . For the next 17 years he allied with and attacked Roman territories in the Balkans .
 Anglo-Saxon art in the : 5th century valued abstract geometric patterns, as seen on this brooch . Zeno in Britain faced the challenge expulsion of Roman officials .
 S-~—\) < ha) cer . ° oY Ne “Oe % pee <Shechai Qe x o> be \@ K» ra QO oe 2 © ey Oo . S O ae s) ® ‘s) ‘
 He amassed a vast financial surplus, which his successors spent on expanding the Eastern Roman Empire . His successors spent the rest of the Roman Empire on expanding their empire .
 Persians insisted on Byzantine financial subsidies to pay for the defense of strategic passes in the Caucasus against barbarian incursions . More serious were problems on the eastern frontier, where the Persians insist on financial subsidies .
 In 502, the Persian ruler Kavadh began a war over the issue . The slow Byzantine reaction allowed him to capture Amida as well as several towns .
 Byzantine forces retook Amida in 505, and Kavadh agreed a truce, which lasted until 527 . The truce lasted until the end of 527, when Amida was retaken .
 Anastasius gained popularity by abolishing the chrysargyron tax for traders and craftsmen . The king abolished the tax for craftsmen and traders .
 Prosperity continued and over his reign his treasury amassed a surplus of 320,000 pounds of gold .
 Monophysite, which led to serious rioting in 512, and the revolt of an : army officer, Vitalian, in Thrace in 513, led to a revolt .
 Chalcedonian Christianity developed good relations with the Ostrogoths of Italy and the Vandals of North Africa . The Vandals were also known as Vandals . Chalcedorian Christianity was a form of Christianity . It was the first form of Christian Christianity .
 Clovis’s kingdom was divided among his four sons—Theuderic, : Childebert, Chlodomir, and : Chlothar . The king was divided between his three sons and his four daughters .
 The Byzantine Emperor's reign began with important reforms . He was the first king of the world .
 In 528, he commissioned a new law code to replace the confusion he had inherited . The law code was designed to replace confusion he inherited .
 The rapid conquest of the Vandal kingdom encouraged Justinian to ’ intervene in Italy . Justinian's intervention in Italy came after the conquest of Italy .
 He took Naples after a three-week siege, causing the Ostrogothic king, Vitigis, to retreat northward . He took the city after three weeks of siege .
 Persia entered a new period of : and their followers to serve by greatness under Khusrau . ' paying salaries. ' ' ' paid salaries'
 He attacked | movement—had caused serious again, in 544, but again, but a siege of 'social tensions' He attacked .
 Further outbreaks of plague occurred in the 6th and 7th centuries, sapping the vitality of the Byzantine Empire . The Byzantine Empire was devastated by the plague .
 In Italy, the Ostrogoths made rapid advances after the departure of Belisarius . The Ostrogoth had a history of rapid advances in Italy .
 Belisarius was recalled to retrieve the situation in 544, but Justinian starved him of resources and Rome fell in 546 . Justinian was also starved of resources .
 Although the Byzantines retook Rome in 547, it fell once more to Totila in 550 . Totila was the first city to fall under the Byzantine rule of Rome .
 Justinian sent two huge armies under Artabanes and Narses to finish off the Goths . Justinian then sent two armies to finish them off . The Goths were eventually defeated by Justinian's armies .
 Narses defeated Totila at the Battle of Busta Gallorum in the Apennines in 592 . Artabanes entered Ravenna in June 592, and entered the city of Ravenna .
 There was still some Ostrogoth resistance, but the war in Italy was effectively over . The high level of workmanship in the of Italy was the high quality workmanship .
 Merovingian ruler of Francia ruled the area around Soissons until his death in 561 . By 558, Chlothar I had absorbed the Rheims kingdom and the region around Paris after their rulers .
 Francia was once again divided, with Charibert | receiving Paris, Guntram getting Orleans, Sigibert Rheims, and Chilperic Soissons . The French capital of Paris was then given Paris . The city was then divided .
 The Ajanta caves, a Buddhist holy site in Maharashtra, India, experienced a second major phase of use during the 6th century . The caves were used during the 2nd century .
 Next emperor, Sushun (r.6-93], had a Soga mother, reinforcing the family’s dominance . The next emperor, the next emperor had a mother of Soga .
 Wendi was now the country’s sole ruler and the first emperor of the Sui dynasty . After three centuries of division, China was finally united . Wendi now ruled the country .
 Wendi disarmed private armies and established agricultural colonies along China's frontiers to strengthen central control of remote areas . Wendi established agricultural colony in China's west to strengthen control in remote areas of China .
 He implemented a major land reform that increased the number of households liable to the land tax from 4 million in 589 to almost 9 million in 606 . The land tax has been increased to nearly 9 million households .
 Maurice succeeded Tiberius II (r.8-82) as the Byzantine emperor in 582 . In 582, Maurice succeeded him as the Emperor of the Roman Empire .
 He maintained good relations with Merovingians In Francia and Visigothic rulers of Spain . A man of great ability and energy, he was involved in resistance to Lombards in Italy .
 In 584, Maurice renewed the war with Persia, appointing Philippicus to oversee it . Philippicus was appointed to oversee the war against Persia .
 When the Avars moved into the region inc. inc. the Slavs were pushed farther south . The Slavs moved farther south when the Avararans were pushed further south .
 Gregorylsenta ' mission to Britain ' to revive : Christianity, ' following invasions by pagan : Anglo-Saxons in the : 5th and early : 6th centuries . Gregory's mission was to revive Christianity, following the invasion of Britain by the pagan Anglo Saxons .
 Augustine established a church in Canterbury . Bertha, the wife of the Kentish king Aethelberht, was already Christian . Augustine was able to establish a church .
 A coin depicting the Eastern Roman emperor Heraclius. an unusual traveling companion. Meanwhile, in the New World, great civilizations .
 Phocas became emperor but Chosroes Il of Sasanian Persia took advantage of the eastern empire's weakness, while the Avars invaded from the north . The Avaras invaded from north, and the Sasanian empire was weakened .
 Harsha acceded to the thrones of Thanesar and Kannauj, establishing the last native Indian empire of ancient times . In 606, in northern India, in . 606 , in northern . India, established in 606 .
 By 618, Constantinople was besieged by the Avars, and their Slavic subjects . The Avars were the first Slavic city to be conquered by the city .
 In 620, Heraclius bought off the Avars in order to focus on repelling the Persians . The Avarans were the first to be conquered by the Roman Empire . In 620 she bought off her husband to focus her efforts on defeating them .
 His Edict of Paris, issued in 614, introduced reforms to the Merovingian church and state . The Edict was issued by the King of Merovingians in 615 .
 Muhammad fled to Medina with his family and followers in 622 . Hostility from the Meccan authorities forced Muhammad to flee to Medina . Muhammad was forced to flee with his followers .
 Taizong, consolidated Tang power by suppressing rebellions ' across the empire . He suppressed rebellions throughout the empire by suppressing them .
 Taizong forced his father to step : down and inaugurated a golden : age of trade, prosperity, and cultural exchange . The Chinese state of China is one of the world's most prosperous countries .
 Muhammad ibn Abdallah worked as a merchant and shepherd before growing discontented and retiring to a Life of contemplation . He was born in Mecca and died in Mecca .
 In 610, he received the first of a series of divine revelations—these became the Qu'ran . In 610 he received first of series of revelations, these became the holy text .
 Muslim community united by Islam transcended traditional rivalries . The young Muslim community was ready for expansion .
 The first caliph, Abu Bakr, suppressed an Arabian rebellion, reestablished Islamic dominion over Arabia, and began the conquest of Syria . Abu Bakr was the founder of the Islamic state of Arabia .
 By 637, Umar controlled Jerusalem and Damascus, and, in the same year, Arab forces conquered Persia (modern Iran and Iraq), occupying the Sasanian capital at Ctesiphon . Umar held Jerusalem and held the city of Damascus .
 Xuanzang left the Tang capital, Chang an, in around 630 . He crossed Central Asia and reached India in 645 .
 Buddhism became increasingly influential in Tang China; the ' Buddhist monk Xuanzang ' journeyed far and wide in search ' of wisdom .
 Conversion of the population to Islam proceeded slowly but steadily over the following centuries . Conversion of Muslim population was slow but steady but gradual .
 Arabs met with similar success in Egypt where the Byzantines offered only token resistance . The Arabs met similar success with the success of their Arab conquests .
 The fall of Alexandria came in 642, the same year that the Muslims founded the military settlement of Fustat, which later became Cairo . The fall came in the year 642 .
 Christian king Oswald of : Northumbria, hitherto one of the ' most powerful kingdoms, was slain by the pagan king Penda of ' Mercia . Penda was a pagan king of 'Mercia .
 One of the last burials of this type in England, the artifacts comprise a fusion of Christian and non-Christian elements .
 Sunnis and Shiites were divided over how succession to the caliphate should be decided . Succession was either by selection or by hereditary descent .
 As Muhammad's cousin and son-in-law, Ali enjoyed unique status in the Islamic world . Ali faced challenges as next in line by descent, but he faced many challenges .
 In 657, the Umayyad emir of Syria, Mu’awiya, asserted his claim on the caliphate . Ali was also challenged by the Kharijis, a sect that objected to the application of the hereditary principle . Ali also was challenged by a sect of
 In 661, Ali was murdered by a Khariji, opening the way for Mu’awiya to declare himself caliph, instituting the Arab Umayyad dynasty . Ali was killed in 661 . Mu'awiya declared himself Caliph, establishing the Arab
 Ali's supporters formed a party of their own, which evolved into a distinctive branch of Islam, the Shiites, in opposition to the Sunni . The Shiites are a distinct branch of Sunni Islam . Ali was the first Sunni Muslim leader to be elected to power .
 Arab expansion continued throughout : the latter half of the 7th century . The rapid Arab expansion of the Arab world continued throughout .
 Korea brought to an end the long Three Kingdoms period, with the help of Tang China . Korea ended the long three-century rule with Tang China's help .
 This gray stoneware incense burner dates from the Silla kingdom . Silla was on the verge of becoming the dominant power during the late Three Kingdoms period .
 INIS Mask was : bringing six centuries of growth gel elilitoaitt : and dominance to an end . INIS mask was . bringing . six centuries-of-a-decade-long growth gel gel gel eliolioliaitt : . end .
 In 705, with the help of Bulgar allies, the deposed emperor Justinian Il returned from exile and regained the Byzantine throne . He exacted brutal revenge on those who had mutilated him .
 Zoroastrian refugees fleeing Islamic conquest of Persia established communities in India and became known as the Parsees . By 705, refugees fleeing the Islamic conquest in India established communities . They were known as Zoroastrians .
 Persian Zoroastrian emigration continued during the following centuries . Zoroastrians continued to emigrate during the years of Persian Zoroasts .
 The Benedictine Priory was built in the 12th century . Lindisfarne Priory replaced an earlier church founded by St. Edward VII . The Priory is a Benedictine monastery .
 Islamic armies now established tn North Africa, just a short distance away across the Straits of Gibraltar . In '710, the British city of Gibraltar had descended into civil war with Islamic armies .
 Muslim army under general Tariq ibn Ziyad landed at Gibraltar in 711 . In 711, a Muslim army invaded Gibraltar . The Muslim army landed in Gibraltar .
 Tariq defeated the Visigothic king, Roderick, at the Battle of Guadalete . By the end of the year most of the Iberian peninsula was under Islamic control .
 Only the northwest, known as Asturias, managed to get to 12th century, which chronicles the history of the Byzantine Empire . The northwest of Asturia is known as "Asturias"
 Tang dynasty scroll shows Xuanzong watching his concubine Yang Guifei mount a horse . The scroll was written in Tang dynasty China in the late Tang dynasty .
 Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople, captured Christ's image in Constantinople . The image of Christ was held by the Patriarch of the Byzantine Empire in the 1920s .
 The success of the Hohokam, an ancient people of the Sonoran desert, lay in a watering system that allowed a range of crops to be grown, despite the arid environment .
 The Hohokam lived here for more than a millennium; they were known as “canal builders” because of their sophisticated irrigation technology . They were also known as "Canal builders"
 Casa Grande was at the center of a trade network that stretched from the Pacific coast to Tucson and to the Gulf of Mexico . Casa . Grande was a center of trade network .
 The earliest structures at Casa Grande were probably pit houses . The ‘great house’ that gives the site its name came much later . Casa .
 In 725, the Khazars established their capital at Atil, on the Volga delta at the northwestern corner of the Caspian Sea . The Khazar, a Turkic people of Central Asian origin, were the first Khazar .
 From here they controlled trade routes to all corners of Asia and built an empire that would control a huge swathe of Eastern Europe and Western Asia for centuries .
 In 726, the emperor Leo Ill instituted a policy of iconoclasm [smashing images deemed sacrilegious] in response to the idea that God was punishing Christian Byzantines by their loss of land to the Arabs and Slavs .
 Maya city-states overtaxed the surrounding ecology and exceeded their ability : to cope with drought . Othe Frankish kingdoms to : present a unified defense . Maya cities-states over-exercised their natural resources .
 ISLAMIC FORCES had made regular raids across the Pyrenees, striking deep into modern-day France before retreating to al-Andalus . Tiwanaku was the center of a civilization that thrived in modern-modern France .
 In 721, an incursion into Aquitaine had been checked by Duke Eudo at the Battle of Toulouse . In 722, the dukedom was nominally nominally in vassalage to the Frankish kingdom . The incursion was checked at the
 Eudo was unable to halt a fresh invasion of Islamic forces under Abd al-Rahman I, emir of al-Andalus . But in 731, Eudo failed to halt the fresh invasion under the emir's reign .
 Eudo was forced to appeal to Charles Martel, the Frankish mayor of the palace, for help . After defeat at the Battle of Arles, Eudo appealed to the mayor for help in the aftermath of the battle .
 Martel raised an army and met Islamic forces on the banks of the Loire, between Tours and Poitiers, in 732 . Martel met the Islamic forces with his army .
 Mayans would have sought help from god of rain and : thunder, Chaak, for their crops .
 In 747, revolt broke out in Persian Khorasan, stronghold of the Abbasid clan . The Abbasid traced their descent back to Muhammad through his uncle, al-Abbas .
 Abu al-Abbas al-Saffah was proclaimed caliph at Kufa in 749 . The following year he defeated Marwan Il, the last Umayyad caliph, at the Battle of the Zab .
 Marwan fled to Egypt but his head was sent back to Damascus . Al-Saffah instigated a general massacre of the Umayyad clan to remove potential opposition . Marwan was killed in the massacre of his family .
 Pepin II deposed the last Merovingian king, Childeric Ill. The Carolingian king was deposed by Childeric . Pepin III died in 758 .
 Pepin was soon able to return the papal favor with the help of the pope . With the pope's support Pepin became king, he was soon crowned .
 Lombard king Aistulf set his eyes on Rome after conquering Ravenna, the last Byzantine territory in Italy . He then set his sights on Rome . The Lombard ruled Rome from the 6th century .
 Pepin Ill was the first Carolingian King of the Franks . Also known as Pepin the Short, he was also known as the Short Pepin . He was also the first king of the Frankland .
 RY ca < Roland bids farewell to Charlemagne, ) in this medieval illustration on vellum .
 The new city was carefully laid out on a circular plan and was connected ' to the Tigris and Euphrates rivers by canals . The city was laid out around a circular circle .
 His intent was to extend Frankish hegemony, foster a close relationship with the papacy, and reform the Church to ensure divine support for the Frankish Kingdom . He also wanted to foster a strong relationship between the Pope and the Church .
 The following year he launched a series of bloody campaigns with the aim of bringing the peoples east of the Rhine back under Frankish rule . They had been subject to the authority of the preceding Merovingian Dynasty .
 Charlemagne was determined to convert the various Saxon tribes to Christianity and thus bring them under the hegemony of the Frankish state . At this time the variousSaxon tribes were still pagans, and Charlemagna was determined .
 In the late 770s, he attempted to project his power into Spain by taking advantage of infighting among the Muslim rulers . He attempted to take advantage of Muslim infighting to gain power in Spain . He died in 7th century .
 In 785, Offa of Mercia started constructing the monumental earthwork known as Offa's Dyke . The earthwork was built on the border between Wales and Mercia . Offa is the effective overlord of Britain and the effective head of state of state .
 Originally 89ft wide and 2é6ft high, the purpose of the dyke is unknown, and it probably fell into disuse soon after its completion . The dyke was originally 89 ft wide and 89ft high . It is thought to have fallen into disused soon after being
 The “Vikings’ (possibly from the Old Norse language) originated in Scandanavia . The ‘Vikins’ originated in Scandinavia . They may have been from the same place as the Vikings .
 In Tang China, the influence of Buddhism continued to grow, signaled by monuments such as the Leshan Buddha . A giant statue of the seated Buddha was carved into a bluff next to the confluence of several major rivers .
 Irene was a co-ruler of the Byzantine Empire in 792 . Four years later she had him blinded and declared herself empress . Irene invited his mother Irene to become co-leader in 791 .
 Viking brooch was not only beautiful : but also practical, used to fasten : cloaks or other clothing . Viking Brooch was a symbol of loss of authority in Africa west of Egypt .
 Tang China's influence in Central Asia was indicative of its weakness in the region . Its influence In Central Asia is indicative of Tang's weakness in region .
 The Gurjara-Prathihara dynasty had united the region and held back the advance of Islam . Nagabhata II, around 801, conquered Kanauj in modern-day India . The dynasty continued to grow in strength in northern India .
 The Temple of Borobudur is a Buddhist monument in central Java, Southeast Asia . It was completed in the early 9th century . The temple is located in Java .
 The colossal structure contains over 2 million stone blocks and is covered in almost 21,500 sq ft of carvings . Is the largest Buddhist monument in the world, containing over 2million stone blocks . Is covered in over 21,000 sq ft and covered in more than 2 million car
 Its construction was an epic achievement, and a testament to the power of the Srivijayan Empire . The Empire had grown rich from extensive maritime trade of the region .
 For much of this era, Srivijayan influence extended over the Southeast Asian mainland, including the Mekong basin kingdom formerly known to the Chinese as Funan . The Srivian kingdom was formerly known as Funans .
 CONFLICT continued through the early part of the 9th century . Byzantinas and Bulgars were at the center of the conflict between them .
 Nicephorus was killed and Krum had his foe's skull lined with silver for use as a drinking cup . Krum's skull was lined in silver and he used it to drink in a drinking glass .
 Krum attempted to besiege the Byzantine capital Constantinople, but was unable to breach the walls and so retreated, devastating Thrace instead . Two years later Krum tried to attack the capital of Constantinople but failed to reach it .
 Islamic scientists made great advances In fields such as alchemy (, medicine, toxicology, metallurgy, mathematics, and astronomy . Alchemy, medicine and toxicology among them .
 Civil strife in Carolingian | Empire resulted from ' tension between Louis the Pious and his sons over their inheritances . Civil strife resulted from tension between the two sons over inheritance .
 Louis was deposed, and although Lothair’s misrule saw his father restored by the autumn, his authority was compromised . The scene was set for worse ' conflict to come .
 Moravia began around 830, with the establishment of the Principality of Moimir, to the west of the White Carpathians . Moimir was one of two Slavic polities to establish themselves in the power vacuum left by the collapse of the Avars in 805
 O 9 <) oe St een es Ww’ oar OY Kr we OO Pg oe Nove AN » xs COCR \ aman Ne OP . Ww the Aghlabid invasion of the island .
 Palermo fell after a year-long siege in 831, when it finally fell in Sicily . The city was plagued by outbreaks of plague and disease .
 The city then became the capital of Islamic Sicily, although total conquest of the island did not happen until 902 . Total conquest of Sicily took place in 902, but total conquest did not take place until 903 .
 After the death of Louis the Pious in 840, his three surviving sons embroiled themselves in further conflict over land . The three sons of the late king embroiled themselves with land disputes .
 Charles the Bald and Louis the German swore oaths to impose a settlement on Lothair in 842 . The Frankish Empire was divided into regions by Louis and Charles the German . The settlement saw the Frankish empire divided between regions .
 The coffee bush is native to the mountains of Ethiopia and Yemen, where it was first recorded in use in the mid-15th century . In around 848, the Burmese ' city-state of Pagan was founded .
 A combination of drought, famine, disease, and social upheaval were probably responsible, as overpopulated cities and their overstretched resources reached a tipping point . Drought, famine and disease are probably responsible .
 Crossbow, or arbalest, required little training or strength to operate . Although slower to reload than a longbow, the crossbow was the most versatile weapon in the world .
 The Caspian Sea is still known in the region as the Khazar Sea for the empire that ruled the area between it and the Black Sea from the 8th to 10th centuries .
 A contributing cause to the empire's decline may have been a rise of 23ft in the sea level .
 Vikings settled in Iceland by 874, settling in 874 . The landscape of Iceland offered scant welcome, yet the Vikings settled here . Vikings are now living in Iceland .
 ALFRED THE GREAT OF ENGLAND acceded to the throne of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Wessex in 871 . The educated man had spent time in Rome with the Pope, and spent time with the pope .
 Alfred helped defeat the Danish Vikings at the Battle of Ashdown in 870 . During the reign of his elder brother Aethelred, Danish Vikings had invaded Wessex, but Alfred had helped defeat them .
 Cyril and Methodius were sent to convert Slavs in Moravia by Byzantine emperor, Michael Ill in around 862 . Originally named Constantine, Cyril was originally named Constantine . He and his brother Methodius converted Slavs to Christianity .
 Cyril devised a new ‘Glagolitic’ script to translate the Bible into Slavic . This later became Cyrillic script . Cyril wrote a new version of the Bible to translate it .
 Alfred was given shelter by a peasant woman who, unaware of his identity, left him to watch some cakes that were cooking on the fire . According to the popular legend, Alfred was here given shelter .
 Alfred let the cakes burn. Preoccupied with the problems of his kingdom, Alfred let them burn .
 A statue of King Alfred was erected at his capital, Winchester, in 1901 . His sword doubles as a crucifix, : emblematic of his militant faith .
 This wax tablet contains psalms of : David, written in the early 11th : century . Early Cyrillic script i.
 Politician, on King Alfred, 1956-58 ' throne pillars overboard and ' following their drift' King Alfred's throne pillars were 'throne pillars overboard'
 The city would become the capital of Kievan Rus, a loose federation of territories, until 1169 . The city became the capital in 1169, and would become part of the loose federation .
 The Danelaw, the part of England in which Viking law was upheld, was formalized by the Treaty of Alfred and Guthrum in 886, following renewed attacks by Guthrum . The Treaty was followed by the treaty of Alfred, Guthrum and Alfred .
 Alfred would keep the south, including London, while the area to the north of a line between the Thames and Lea rivers went to the Danish . The Danish, who would live under their own laws, would live in their own country . Alfred kept the south of the line, including
 Charles the Fat was the last Carolingian king to rule both the primary Frankish territories, West and East Francia (modern-day France and Germany) He was deposed in 887 . He ruled both of the primary Francia and West Francia, modern-modern France
 Charles, already king of the East Franks since 879, had been elected king of West Franks In 884 . Charles had been already King of East Franks in 879 .
 Viking invaders conquered territories along Russia's waterways, establishing a hybrid culture that mixed Slavonic and Viking styles . Slavonic-Viking Jewelry was created by the Vikings in the early 1400s .
 This provoked the new khan, Symeon, to mobilize the Pechenegs, a tribe that had recently arrived on the Dnieper, to invade Magyar lands . However, this merely provoked the khan's death of the new king . The Pec
 The Magyars were forced to migrate west, settling in present-day Hungary . They launched extensive raids on Frankish territories for years to come .
 Valley of Mexico, founding a ' capital at Tula 900, and forging : a militaristic empire that inspired their descendants, the Aztecs . The Aztec Empire of Mexico was founded by the Tula .
 This stone relief is from the Chinese Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period .
 Breakdown of central authority in the period led to economic contraction . Breakdown led to an economic crisis in the 1930s .
 Zhuwen (c.2-912] was a warlord who had originally been part of the Huang Zhao uprising and then instrumental in the rebel defeat . Zhuwen was originally part of a revolt against Huang Zhao, but was instrumental in its defeat .
 Dynasty was short-lived (907923), with a succession of groups seizing control of the Huang He region and founding dynasties of : their own, but proving unable to : hold on to power . Dynasty . Dynasty was a succession . of groups ' seizing control' of
 Cluny became the center of a monastic empire of great power, governing around 10,000 monks . The town was the birthplace of a medieval monastic dynasty of monks .
 Frankish emperor unwilling or unable to help, the East Franks : elected regional ‘dukes’ to defend against incursions . The East Franks elected regional 'dukes' to protect their territory .
 ABD AL-RAHMAN III BECAME the NEW UMAYYAD RULER of the Cordoba emirate on the death of his grandfather, Abdallah, in 912 . He became the new ruler of Cordoba after his grandfather died .
 His territories had been reduced by rebellions and he quickly set about regaining much of his lost kingdom . His territories were reduced by rebellion and he set about to regaining them again .
 Charles spent much of his reign 2 engaged in civil war with Odo and his descendants . Charles spent his reign at the center of the civil war . Odo's descendants are descendants of Charles .
 Frankish kingdom, Louis the 2 Child, died in 911, after which Conrad, duke of Franconia, was elected as king . Conrad was elected king of the Frankic kingdom in 911 .
 On his death he '’ nominated his strongest rival, ' Henry, as successor . The center of the oldest parliament. ro ao\ ry .
 Abd al-Rahman III declared himself the true caliph in 929, thus amending his kingdom from emirate to caliphate . The proclamation was prompted by the birth of the Islamic state of Hijab .
 Cordoba became the largest and most developed city in Western Europe during the 10th century . Cordoba was the largest city in the world, with Cordoba being the most developed in Europe .
 Icelanders started meeting to decide on justice and legislation at an outdoor assembly on the plains of Thingvellir in 930 . In 930, Icelanders began meeting to discuss justice at outdoor assembly .
 All free men who had not been outlawed could attend the Althing, making it the oldest representative assembly in the world . The Althing was founded in the 13th century .
 Pueblo peoples of Chaco Canyon, North America, were thriving during what archaeologists call the Pueblos Il phase . During this phase, archaeologists say, the people were thriving . Archaeologists say the people lived during this phase .
 Al-Rahman also waged a successful war against the Christian kingdoms of Leon and Navarre on his northern borders, forcing them to acknowledge his overlordship .
 Wang Kon had acceded to power in the Three Kingdoms state of Koguryo In 918, renaming it and leading it in successful military ventures against the Kingdom of Paekche, who were conquered in 934, and the Silla . Wang Kon also led it in
 T’aejo consolidated power by incorporating Silla nobility into his new ruling bureaucracy . During his reign, T'aejo incorporated the Silla aristocracy into his ruling bureaucracy.
 Aethelstan (c.3-939) crushed an alliance of forces in 937, cementing his control of Britain and his kingship of a the now unified Anglo-Saxon realm of England . The battle was one of the bloodiest battles ever fought on British
 In 946, the Persian Shi'ite ' Buwayhids took Baghdad and ' forced the caliph to recognize » Ahmad ibn-Buwayh as supreme commander . Ahmad ibn'-Buwayah was supreme commander in 946 . He is believed to have led the Shi'
 49 xX Onn xy se Nh AO 2 oe & er o er o \ YW at 2 2 haar lai 7nd slaargcnemnncaarers <° So, £27.50. X \ rr""
 The Vikings worshipped Frey, the Norse god of fertility . Thor was the Norse gods of thunder . Frey was also worshipped as a fertility god .
 Silver figure of horseman from Sweden probably represents a warrior on horseback . Silver figure is a stylized metal figure from Sweden . It is believed to represent a Swedish warrior on a horseback warrior .
 Between the 8th and 11th centuries, the Viking world spanned Europe, from Pontic Steppes in the south and east to the shores of North America in the west and north .
 The unifying motifs of Viking art and crafts were elaborate ornamentation, interlacing patterns, and stylized animals . This realm was tied together by a culture of arts and crafts tied together .
 The material culture of the Vikings was mostly utilitarian yet finely crafted . Vikings were mostly utilitarian but finely crafted. Vikings were known for their fine workmanship .
 Common ceremonial, baldric (slinglike shoulder strap) and military objects were ornamented heavily . Common, ceremonial, Baldric (Slinglike) shoulder strap was worn by soldiers .
 Techniques such as etching, engraving, and inlaying and the use of metal beading helped to create patterns of interweaving tendrils, gripping beasts,” and stylized limbs .
 Wooden shield Shields were made from spruce, fir, pine, pine or linden wood with iron handles behind an iron boss . Shields made of spruce or fir, or pine, with iron handle handles behind a boss .
 This Danish ax has a metal blade and a wooden hatft . Vikings were fine horsemen, but they preferred to travel by ship .
 This sword could be easily drawn out from its sheath and wielded with one hand . ornate etching lion figure indicates wind direction . Metal plate was fixed to a Viking's leather belt so that it could be buckled .
 Weather vanes were originally mounted on the prows of ships and later on the tops of churches . Gilded weather vane was first mounted on ships' prows .
 This gilded weather vane was found in Sweden . Weather vane is a Swedish gilded hat .
 Vikings used looted coins, hack silver, and barter in place of their own money . Originally, the Vikings used looting coins and hack silver to pay for their trade .
 Found in Sweden, these brass-coated iron weights were used to measure quantities of goods . Viking warriors believed they would use drinking horns like this in Valhalla, the heaven for warriors, If they died in battle .
 Elements of Viking culture were from a ship burial in Oseberg, derived from and prefigured in Norway . This drinking vessel was used In feasting. carved from an animal horn beech panel with tin and iron studs . Sledge Ship's prow ornament .
 Tiwanaku has a population of up to 60,000 people, with up to 1. million in the wider region, according to some estimates . Sophisticated agricultural and irrigation techniques had allowed Tiwanak to support a population .
 A prolonged drought is believed to have been responsible for the decline of the city . Archaeological evidence suggests that the main city was abandoned as a result .
 Zhao ' Kuangyin was a : general under the Late Zhou, the | last of the Five Dynasties . He founded the 2 dynasty in Kaifeng .
 Emperor Otto I, “the Great” defeated the Magyars at the Battle of Lechfeld in 955 . The battle was the first of its kind in Germany since 955.
 Viking seafarers had penetrated to every corner of Europe and beyond, reaching as far as Greenland in the north . By the late 10th century, Viking sea routes had reached all corners of the world .
 In 961, Otto made an expedition to Italy in response to a plea for protection from Pope John XIl . Otto assumed the Italian crown in Pavia . Otto made the expedition in 961 .
 The following year he went to Rome to receive the imperial crown and assert his authority over the fractious papacy . The next year he was able to claim the crown of Rome and assert authority .
 In 965, the King of Denmark converted to Christianity, and the religion spread rapidly through the Nordic region . Harald Bluetooth converted Denmark to Christianity in 965 and spread the religion .
 Viking raiding parties maintained an aggressive posture without sacrificing mobility . By keeping part of the crew at the oars, Viking raiders maintained a posture without sacrifice mobility .
 John TZIMISCES, nephew of Nicephorus Il, won a string of victories during his short reign . John Tzimisces was the nephew of the king of the Romans .
 Tzimisces crushed a Campaign by the Kievan Rus leader, Sviatoslav, and conquered Bulgaria as far as the Danube . He fought off a revolt by general Bardas Phocas in 971, and fought a revolt against Bardas .
 In 972, he campaigned in the East, taking Edessa, Damascus, and Beirut, reaching the gates of Jerusalem in 976 . In 976, he reached Jerusalem, taking over the city of Jerusalem .
 In 980, the Vikings started raiding England again, though they suffered a reverse In Ireland, where Malachy Il forced Viking Dublin to pay tribute . The Vikings raided England again in 980, but suffered a defeat in Ireland .
 Venice’s modern splendor is the result of control of the lucrative trade routes between Europe, the Byzantine Empire, and the East in the 10th century . Venice was the center of the trade routes to the East and Europe .
 In 981, the ISLAMIC FORCES of CORDOBA defeated the Christian kingdom of Leon in Spain, under the leadership of Al-Mansur . The ISlamaic forcorsas defeated the Christians in Spain .
 17th century oil painting depicts’ : : Al Mansur, or Almanzor to his : Christian subordinates . Oil painting depicts the Al-Mansur to his subordinates .
 The Toltecs ruled a state centered on Tula in modern-day Mexico . They were notable for their aggressive militarism, paving the way for militaristic states such as the Aztec .
 Toltec art and architecture, characterized by monumental masonry and giant statues, was greatly influential in the region . Toltec masonry was a major influence in Toltec culture .
 In 991, a force of anGLO-SAXON WARRIors made a stand against a much larger army of Vikings at the Battle of Maldon . The battle took place in East Anglia, England, in the early 991 .
 Aethelred II, “the Unready” was forced to pay a tribute known as the Danegeld, to buy off further incursions .
 Byzantine emperor Basil II launched the first of a long series of campaigns against his greatest enemy, the Bulgarian czar Samuel, in 996 . Basil II's first campaign was against Samuel, who was the Bulgarian king of the year .
 Basil had won major victories in Syria the year before . But it took him nearly 20 years to finally defeat the Bulgarians .
 From around 1000, the inhabitants of Easter Island, or Rapa Nui, began carving monumental statues known as moal . The island is in the Pacific Ocean .
 Pueblo Bonito in Chaco is one of the oldest ruins in the region of the world . Around 1000, the Chaco culture centered on Chaco Canyon reached its climax .
 The Anasazi used sophisticated dryland agriculture and hydrology to thrive in the arid environment . They controlled trade routes that extended as far as the Pacific coast of present-day California and the Valley of Mexico .
 Pueblo Bonito, one of 13 such buildings in Chaco Canyon, is one of the 13 Great Houses in the canyon . They achieved impressive feats of architecture, most notably the construction of Great Houses .
 It was probably functioned as a ceremonial center, storage depot, and elite residence . It was likely to function as an elite residence and storage depot . It is believed to have been used as an important ceremonial center .
 Well-maintained roads connected Chaco Canyon to thousands of smaller Anasazi settlements across the region . Well--maintainable roads—some with stone curbs—connected Chaco canyon to smaller settlements across region .
 Meadows, in northern : Newfoundland, attest to Viking ' presence in North America . Meadows are in northern Newfoundland, Newfoundland .
 According to one account, he was returning from a visit to Norway in 1002, where he had been converted to Christianity . He was blown off course, landing at the place he called Vinland because of the grapes growing there .
 MURASAKI SHIKIBU wrote Genji Monogatari in installments between 1011 and 1021 . He wrote the novel in installments .
 The novel is regarded as the first Japanese novel, and possibly the first psychological novel in world literature . It is regarded by some as the most famous psychological novel .
 Brian Boru, High King of Ireland and self-styled Emperor of the Gael, defeated a coalition of Dublin Vikings and Celtic Leinstermen in 1014 .
 Brian Boru was killed in the battle and his dream of a united Irish kingdom fell apart . Although the Norse kingdom was crushed and Viking incursions into Ireland halted, the union fell apart thereafter .
 Bulgaroktonos put out the eyes of 15,000 captured warriors before sending them home . Earning the name 'Bulgoktonios', he sent them home and put them out of the eyes .
 The Brihadishvara temple was built by the Cholas in their capital Tanjore . It is one of the most famous temples in India .
 In 1025, the king of Srivijaya launched an audacious naval expedition against the maritime empire of Sumatra in Sumatra, also sacking the Pegu kingdom in Burma . The expedition was launched in 1025 .
 Rajendra inherited a strong kingdom from his father, Rajaraja, who had conquered Sri Lanka and instituted a program of Hindu temple building centered on the Chola capital of Tanjore .
 Under Rajendra, the Cholas expanded their kingdom to include Bengal, and shattered the power of Srivijaya . The Cholas secured control of the lucrative IndianChinese trade routes .
 Cnut was the son of Sven Forkbeard, king of Denmark and Norway, who had invaded England and driven the AngloSaxon king, Aethelred Il, into exile in Normandy in 1013 . Cnut (also known as Canute) was also known as Cnut
 Cnut was accepted as overlord of all England in 1016, and went on to expand his empire . After staging his own invasion In 1015, Cnut staged his own successful invasion of England .
 By 1030, it included Norway, Denmark, and the Faroe, Shetland, and Orkney islands . It included Denmark, Norway, and Denmark .
 The Cholas were staunch Hindus and enthusiastic temple builders . They were staunch Hindu and enthusiastic builders .
 Shiva, one of the major Hindu deities, is depicted here as a young and handsome man . Shiva is depicted as a handsome young man in the image .
 In 1037, Cnut managed conciliation between his . Danish and Anglo-Saxon subjects . Cnut in 1037 .
 Oghuz Turks were originally nomads from Central Asia who converted to Islam and moved to Transoxiana, where they served as mercenaries in the region, before turning their attentions to Khurasan . Dandangan, winning control of eastern Persia, was the first step on the
 In 1031, 40 lesser dynasties were founded on the shattered remnants of the Cordoba caliphate, in Spain . The 40 lesser dynasty were founded in 1031 .
 These short-lived dynasties took control of different provinces of Cordoba after the strife that brought down the Umayyads following the execution of Abd al-Rahman Sanchol, son of al-Mansur, in 1009 .
 He was the last capable leader of the caliphate, but his attempt to move out from behind the throne led to his downfall . His attempt to take over the throne and take the crown led to him being toppled .
 Cordoba descended into civil war for 22 years . Subsequently, the Berber faction nominated their own candidate for caliph . Subsequent to the death of the caliph, Cordoba went to civil war .
 In 1031, the death of Hisham Ill, the last Umayyad caliph, who had already lost control of several provinces, led to the Seljuks . The death of the last caliph in 1031 led to a series of battles against the Byzantine Empire
 Ferdinand was the first ruler of : Castile to call himself king . Ferdinand was a ruler of Castile . He was also the first king of the Spanish kingdom . Ferdinand died in 1883 .
 Ferdinand inherited Castile, and in 1037 he killed his brother-in: law, the king of Léon, and made himself emperor there in 1039 . In 1039, Ferdinand made himself king of Castile .
 Bantu became the dominant language family in sub-Saharan Africa . Whether this indicates conquest, colonization, or simply cultural influence is less clear .
 The Bantu expansion started in the Late Stone Age, accelerating as the Bantuspeakers acquired iron technology and cattle-husbandry skills . The expansion began in the late Stone Age .
 By the mid-11th century, Bantu tribes had become sophisticated pastoralists, able to sustain high population densities and complex social and economic networks .
 Bantu speakers dominated Central and southern Africa . This in turn led to the emergence of chiefdoms, and chiefdoms . Chiefdoms were formed in the early 1900s .
 At Nee Cameroon, Bantu-speaking people spread east and south, through the tropical 1000 alanarl forest . Eventually spreading to all parts of central and southern Africa .
 In 1056, the Almoravids well established by the mid-11th began the Islamic conquest of century . The Almoravidids were well established in 1056 . The Islamic conquest began by 1056.
 Ife is most famous for its artistic achievements, most notably terracotta and bronze heads . It is the birthplace of Ife, Ife .
 Ife bronze head represents an artistic tradition stretching back to the 11th century that was at least as sophisticated as any in contemporary Europe . West Africa, where a number of Ife bronzes are found, is also known for its artistic tradition .
 In 1066, William Duke of Normandy defeated Harold Godwinson [c.22-66], the last Anglo-Saxon king of England . William Duke was the last English king .
 Edward the Confessor spent his youth in exile at the Norman court while Cnut ruled England . England had fallen into the Norman orbit earlier, with Edward being exiled in exile .
 William claimed that Edward promised him the English crown, but when Edward died, in 1066, Harold was elected king . William claimed he had promised him that he had been promised the crown by Edward . Harold was later elected king of England .
 William marched north to defeat a Norse invasion, before dashing south to Hastings to face William, where he was killed and his army shattered . William's army shattered after he defeated the Norse invasion of England .
 William the Conqueror quickly took southeast England, then the southwest, and suppressed a great uprising in the north in 1069 . William the conqueror took the south of England and the southwest of England .
 Henry IV requested mediation from Matilda of Tuscany and Hugh of Cluny . The 12thcentury manuscript illumination shows Henry IV requesting mediation from the two monarch .
 Emperor Henry III ruled in 1046 that it was the emperor's right to appoint the pope . Emperors had derived great income and power through their power . Henry III had gone further still still, insisting it was his right to appointment pope .
 Pope Gregory VII represented the opposite view; he held that only popes had the right to invest clerics . Gregory VII was Pope Gregory VIII of the Roman Catholic Church .
 Gregory issued a decree forbidding lay investiture in 1075, at the Lent synod . Gregory issued the decree at that time . Gregory's decree was made at the same time as the 1075 Lent Synod . The decree was issued by Gregory Gregory at the end of the Lent
 Henry IV (10501106) was fighting to reduce the power of German prelates . The emperor, Henry IV, defied the decree . Henry IV was trying to reduce power of the German prelates by reducing their power .
 Seljuks established the Sultanate : of Rum there, while other conquests brought them Syria : and Jerusalem . Other conquests also brought them the city of Rum .
 Under the leadership of Hassan-i Sabbah, this group recognized the claims of an infant called Nizar, and were therefore known as Nizari Ismailis . The group was led by Hassan-I Sabbah and recognized the infant's claims .
 Hassan led the Nizaris to his homeland in Persia where they captured a fortress known as Alamut in the mountainous region of Kazvin . The group later became known as the Assassins, a name derived from the word "hashashins"
 Defeating Alfonso at Zallaka 2 in 1086, they annexed most of Spain . They annexed most  Islamic Spain in 1087 .
 This mechanical astronomical clock was 30ft high, and was water-driven with an armillary sphere, which showed the position of celestial objects . The clock was water driven with a sphere, showing position of the celestial objects in the sky .
 Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar, known by the Moors as El Cid, captured Valencia in 1094 . He established himself as ruler of Valencia in eastern Spain . The Castilian had served both Christian and Islamic Masters .
 Pope Urban, a French Cluniac, preached to an assembly of mainly Frankish clerics and nobles about Muslim ‘defilement’ of the Holy Land . He urged his audience to take up arms in a holy war against Muslims .
 Urban had been entreated by the Byzantines for help against the Seljuks . Saw a way to channel the energies of European nobility away from infighting and toward a Christian expansion that would benefit the papacy .
 Other nations were either in conflict with the papacy or indifferent, so the First Crusade was largely French affair . The Crusades were largely a French affair, with many of the nations involved .
 Saracens are the generic term used by Europeans to refer to their Muslim disarray in the Muslim world, three: groups of Crusaders under Godfrey: foes . Saracen is the name of a group of three groups under the Crusaders, three under the name Godfrey
 Islamic forces at the Siege of Antioch outnumbered Crusaders considerably . Islamic forces outnumbered the Crusaders . Crusaders were outnumbered considerably .
 OMAR KHAYYAM was an astronomer and mathematician in the service of the Seljuk sultans . He composed a series of four-line poems, or “roba’iyat,” which became famous thanks to the translation made by Edward Fitzgerald in
 Khayyam was invited to Isfahan in 1073 to set up an observatory and lead a team of top scholars . At Samarkand he was able to pursue his mathematical studies thanks to patronage from a local jurist .
 In this period he made many mathematical and astronomical breakthroughs, including an accurate measurement of the length of the year to 12 decimal places .
 Much of the current reputation of the work derives from the very free translation by Edward Fitzgerald . Edward Fitzgerald translated the work in a free translation .
 Drought and drought, followed by personal ambition, led to catastrophic flooding, led of potentates . But a prolonged zeal, civic pride, and drought followed by the personal ambition led to the disaster .
 Gothic styles were given from the convulsions of the expression in the great 11th century . Each new capital at region developed a new capital around the region developed its Tucume .
 New temples were own, distinctive idiom. built and the capital flourished In Novgorod, for until its conquest by the instance, the Cathedral Chimu was . by which of St. St. Peter the Apostle was founded .
 Nicholas (started time there were 26 mounds in 1113] was given and accompanying enclosures. domed cupolas . domed cupsolas were given to St. Nicholas and accompanying enclosure enclosures .
 Henry IV's failure to reconcile with the papacy had as the most significant regional helped bring about his downfall; power . Henry IV failed to achieve the title of the Roman Catholic Church in Rome .
 A kingdom of the Shona concerned that the ongoing peoples that emerged around 900, dispute was undermining royal Mwene Mutapa was initially based authority, his own family had on cattle herding, but from around conspired against him .
 The new king of Jerusalem, Baldwin II, assigned them quarters in part of the Temple Mount compound, next to the site where the Temple of Solomon had once stood . Baldwin II (cousin of Baldwin II) was Baldwin II's successor as count of Edessa .
 Soldiers of Christ and of the Temple of Solomon—also known as the Knights Templar— were the Knights Knights Templar . The Knights Templar were Knights of Christ, Knights of the Knights of Solomon . They were also known as soldiers of Christ .
 Welf and Hohenstaufen dynasties, wou IN 1121, MOHAMMAD IB-TUMART, a BERBER LEADER from the Atlas Mountains, was hailed as the al-Mahdi (the Muslim messiah) and led
 A synod at the German town of Worms, in 1122, presided by a papal legate drew up a concordat ending the Investiture | Controversy . In 1122 a synod presided by the papal Legate drew-up a Concordat
 A compromise was agreed along the lines already adopted between Henry | of England and Anselm . Under that the emperor would be involved in investiture but not control it .
 Scholasticism was an approach to learning that used a method of formal discussion and debating . Scholasticsism was used to teach students how to learn and debate . It was used as a way of learning to learn .
 A mosaic shows Roger I being symbolically crowned by Christ in a mosaic . Roger I was the son of Roger I .
 The Jurchen dynasty established by Aguda [see 1115] in Manchuria turned on their erstwhile Chinese allies, overrunning northern China and seizing the Northern Song capital at Kaifeng in 1126 .
 Jin took control of northern China and moved the capital to Beijing . The Jin took over northern China from Beijing and moved capital to the capital .
 Song prince, Gaozong, escaped to the south and established the Southern Song dynasty in Hangzhou in 1127 . However, a Song prince escaped and established his own dynasty in the south .
 During this papal schism, Roger Il, count of Sicily, recognized Anacletus as pope . His reward was the throne of Sicily . Roger Il was the son of the count of the king .
 The Qingbai glaze on this ewer is characteristic of Song dynasty porcelain from southeastern China . The Song dynasty survived the Jin invasion of China .
 Alban’s Chronicle shows Matilda P ePONek le 1F0EE PANLE CO Ee FORE celle nit rom . Celle nitrom nit rom cellet nitrucule . A4 ar of England holding a charter .
 Henry had made his nobles swear allegiance to his daughter, the Empress Matilda . She had spent little time in England and her second husband, Geoffrey of Anjou, was unpopular . His only male heir died in 1120 while crossing the English Channel .
 On his uncle's death he immediately went to London, secured the support of most of the nobles and the Church, and had himself proclaimed king . On the death of his uncle, he went on to London and secured support from the church and nobles .
 In 1133, Lothair Il went to Italy to intervene in the papal schism, installing Innocent Il . Innocent Il was installed in 1133 . Innocent I was installed as Pope Innocent Il, who died in 1131 .
 The Pope confirmed the Matildine inheritance (the vast estates of Matilda of Tuscany, which she had willed first to the papacy and then to the emperor, sparking a dispute that would become tied up with the Guelph versus Ghibelline contest . L
 Lothair pacified his rivals Conrad of Hohenstaufen and his brother Frederick of Swabia . He apparently secured the German crown for his son-in-law Henry the Proud, of the House of Welf .
 Conrad set about reversing the grants of Lothair, taking Saxony away from the Welfs, which promptly sparked renewed civil war . Conrad took Saxony back to Saxony, taking it away from Saxony . Conrad's victory in Saxony in the 13th century sparked renewed
 Matilda entered England in 1139 to reclaim her crown from the usurper Stephen of Blois . In 1139 she entered England to reclaim the crown from Stephen .
 John of Seville translated the Epitome of the Whole of Astrology . Adelard of Bath translated an Arabic version of Euclid’s Elements of Geometry, one of the founding texts of mathematics .
 Pot helm helmet was typical of those worn by Crusader knights . Henry engaged in a vigorous renewal of German expansion to the east, where his Pot Helm helmet was .
 The pot helm helmet completely covered the head except for two small eye slits . Made of steel, the helmet was made of steel and covered the entire head .
 Campaigns against the heathen » Slavs were given the status : of Crusades. » |n 1144, the atabeg of Mosul, Imad el-Din Zengi » , founder of the Zengid dynasty, took advantage of feuding between the
 Imad el-Din besieged Edessa until it fell to him . She did not have the authority to settle a dispute between Antioch and Edessa .
 Crusaders who helped AfonsoHenriques, Count of Portugal, take Lisbon from the Moors in 1147 .
 Conrad and Louis took different routes to the Holy Land . Their armies met equally disastrous fates as they struggled through Anatolia . Conrad's armies died in battle with Louis' armies .
 25,000 20,000 15,000 Crusaders . 10,000 5,000 French French French and German Crusaders. 10,00 French French Crusaders and 5,500 German Crusades .
 The Koutoubia reflects the mercantile success of Almohad Marrakech, where book, cloth, and other sougs flourished . It was the only Muslim state friendly to the Crusader kingdoms .
 Crusade marked the beginning of the decline of the Frankish : Crusader kingdoms . Crusades marked the end of the medieval period .
 Islamic arts and crafts were shaped by religious restrictions, cultural heritage acquired through conquest, and the elaboration of unique features, notably the use of Arabic script .
 Through its rapid conquest of a huge empire, the Islamic caliphate was exposed to a diverse mix of cultural styles and heritages . Islamic art foliage inscription reflects these while maintaining a high degree of homogeneity due to the high level of uniformity .
 Islamic physicians made huge ae and engraved with verses from advances in medicine and surgery, bs the Qu’ran . This jade necklace is made from 10TH CENTURY © ORIGIN UNKNOWN .
 The lace of highlighted detail lends kings—lions and cheetahs symbolized power. adept at combining baser metals like a meditative quality to the design of the design. The design was designed to reflect the power of kings .
 The head tilts to allow insertion of charcoal. brass with silver and gold inlay. brass . brass .
 Calligraphy scissors 1700-99 e IRAN were used for shaping pens and brushes . These scissors were used to shape pens and brush .
 Hexagonal case for carrying pens bares geometric shapes, a typical feature of Islamic design . Hexagonal cases are made of geometric shapes .
 Divan of the Persian poet Hafez from 19th-century India has typical Kashmiri painted lacquer covers . Divan was painted by Kashmiri Kashmiri in Kashmiri style in Kashmir .
 It has been estimated that it took 15 million baskets of earth to make it . It is estimated to have taken 15 million bales of earth .
 Cahokia is the fastest-ever city in the world to be built in Cahokia . Cahokia was the first city to have been built in 1881 . It was the second city of the same name, Cahokia, in 1883 .
 Until around 1050, Mississippians lived in small villages and had never built on anything approaching this scale . Until around 10, they lived in a small village and never built anything like this .
 Its cultural and economic influence spread across the Midwest, from the present Canadian border to the Gulf Coast . Its cultural influence spread from its origins to the modern Midwest .
 Mississippians, Cahokia would : decline rapidly, within around 2 a century, with a return to low| density farming communities . Cahokia was a low-lying farming community . Mississippian population would have declined rapidly within 2 centuries .
 Frederick Frederick was determined to make Germany the dominant state in Europe . Frederick was also determined to reassert authority over all the imperial lands in Italy .
 Emperor wanted to restore the imperial crown to Roman-era glory, and began to style his realm the Holy Roman Empire . Known as the Roman Roman Empire, he wanted to return to Roman glory .
 Bologna claims to be the oldest university in the Western world . The university dates back to 1088 .
 Early universities tended to specialize in one field of study, such as law . Bologna was dedicated to law .
 In 1159, Alexander III (c.00-81) was chosen as pope, although his election was opposed by the emperor . Frederick I Frederick had once again invaded Italy, this time intent on assuming his full imperial inheritance . Alexander III was elected pope in 1159 .
 At the Diet of Roncaglia, in 1158, he went too far . With the aid of the League of Pavia (Bresci, Parma, and others), he had subdued Milan and its associated cities .
 Frederick insisted ancient law gave him the right to appoint an imperial podesta (local governor) to rule each city . Frederick insisted that ancient law gives him the power to appoint a local governor .
 Milan was pushed into revolt, and other cities joined them in forming a Lombard League under the auspices of the papacy . Milan was forced into revolt and joined other cities in the Lombard league under papal rule .
 Alexander III would earn the title ‘the Great” for leading this anti-imperial rebellion . Alexander III was the first king of the Roman Empire to lead a revolt against Rome .
 The 12th-century Chinese statue depicts the Buddhist deity Guanyin, who protects those in danger . The Bodhisattva is perhaps the most popular figure in China .
 IN 1161, THE SOUTHERN SONG REPULSED AN INCURSION by the northern Jin . The northern Jin secured their kingdom from invasion . In 1161 the song was used to repel an invasion of China .
 A peace treaty of 1165 recognized an uneasy truce between the two powers . The peace treaty was signed in 1165 .
 Becket became one of the most popular English saints . He was Canonized in 1173 .
 Henry’s famous outburst (see above) prompted the action of the knights . He swore that he had not ordered the crime, and was absolved of responsibility by Pope Alexander in 1172 .
 Votive tablet from the trading empire of Srivijaya is engraved with Buddhist figures .
 Muhammad of Ghur, traveling by elephant, leads his army in the Islamic conquest of India . The ruling Sailendras of India were ardent Buddhists . Muhammad was the son of the Hindu king of the Samaya .
 Ala-ud-Din Husayn conquered much of Ghaznavid Afghanistan and founded a new state based at Ghur in western Afghanistan in 1151 .
 In 1173, Ghiyas-ud-Din became emir, making his brother Mu izz-du-din, better known as Muhammad of Ghur, co-emir . Muhammad was later known as the founder of the Ghur kingdom .
 Muhammad launched the Islamic invasion of northern India in 1175 . Together the brothers brought most of Afghanistan under their control . Muhammad and Muhammad were able to take control of most of the country .
 Spanish rabbi Benjamin of Tudela was the first recorded European to have approached the borders of China . In an epic journey he made from 1159 to 1173, he made a journey to the Chinese border .
 Benjamin of Tudela recounts many exotic legends, including Noah’s Ark resting on Mount Ararat . His account, The Travels of Benjamin of . Tudela, is published in The Travels . of Benjamin .
 In the medieval period, the city of Pisa, in Tuscany, became the center of a thriving city-state . Pisa was the birthplace of the first city-states in the Italian city .
 Its cathedral was constructed In the 11th century, but in 1173 work began on a separate bell tower . The cathedral was built in the 12th century . Its cathedral is located in central London .
 Even during construction the foundations sank and the tower began to slant . The foundations sank during construction of the tower .
 The battle marked one of the earliest occasions In the medieval era when cavalry were defeated by infantry . The battle was one the earliest occasion in medieval history when cavalry was defeated by the infantry .
 Knights on horseback generally belonged to the feudal aristocracy, while footmen with pikes represented freemen of the rising bourgeoisie . This had class implications as knights on horse back belonged to a feudal aristocracy .
 In 1176, the army of the Byzantine emperor Manuel Commenus was destroyed by the Turks of the Sultanate of Rum at the Battle of Myriocephalum . never again able to send land forces to help the Crusaders .
 Charcoal was still the main source of power for iron forges, but deforestation caused wood shortages . Deforestation was the main reason for wood shortages in the iron industry .
 Demand for coal increased and scavenging for sea coal was increasingly supplemented by mining . As a consequence of the increase in demand for coal, mining was increasingly needed .
 Europe was deaf to entreaties for Crusader reinforcements, and the Christian Byzantines were preoccupied with other matters, such as war with Norman Sicily . The Christian Byzantine Empire was preoccupied by other matters .
 Saladin mobilized his army, : intent on punishing Reynald, but ' his progress was checked by : Frankish fortresses and another ' prolonged famine' Saladin's progress checked by Frankish forges and a famine .
 The Battle of Dannoura of 1185 marked the climax of the Gempei | Wars . The Peace of Constance was ratified by the Peace of the Constance in 1185 . The peace was ratified as a result of the battle of the Italian .
 Yoritomo, the founder of the shogunate, destroyed the Taira in : Saladin, sultan of Egypt and Syria . Saladin escapes from battle on acamelin .
 On July 4, 1187, the forces of Saladin were defeated by the army of the Crusades . Saladin's forces defeated the army in the battle .
 The Crusader forces were led by the new king of Jerusalem, Guy of Lusignan . Guy had seized power on the death of the infant Baldwin V in 1186 .
 Saladin’s troops outnumbered the Crusaders by 30,000 to 20,000, yet his success was owed to his tactics and the Christians’ desperate thirst . Reynald of Chatillon raided a caravan of pilgrims and provoked Saladin into a final campaign to sweep the Holy
 King Guy led a combined force of Crusader knights, Templars, Hospitallers, and English a waterless plateau in the blazing heat to take up a position on the Horns of Hattin .
 Between them and Lake Tiberias, the main source of fresh water for the thirst-crazed knights, lay the well-rested and provisioned army of Saladin .
 Tyre, 2 Antioch, Tripoli, and a few castles ' were all that remained of the Crusader kingdoms . Tyre was Tyre and 2 Antioch . Tripoli was Tripoli, Tripoli and Tyre .
 The fall of Jerusalem in '1187 prompted Pope ' Gregory VIII to preach a new ' Crusade' European assistance for years and the fall of . Jerusalem in 1187 finally prompted Pope to preach new ' crusade'
 Richard the Lionheart won most of his battles, but was unable to achieve his sworn aim of ‘liberating’ Jerusalem . The Third Crusade was hampered by infighting among the European factions of the Crusaders .
 Richard stopped to conquer Byzantine Cyprus in 1191, 1191 . The Crusade had already gotten off to a bad start [see 1186-90]
 He sold the island to the Templars, who would later pass it on to the diminished Crusader kingdoms . The island became one of the main supports for continuing Christian presence in the Holy Land .
 Richard joined Philip Il of France in the siege of Acre . Guy had laid siege to the city on his release from captivity . But Saladin had encircled his forces .
 Acre was taken by the Crusaders in July and much of the population i was massacred . Acre took over from the Roman Catholic community .
 Philip II * returned to France, but Richard | had sworn to liberate Jerusalem . He marched along the coast, retaking towns and defeating Saladin at Arsuf in September . Philip II returned to the throne .
 In 1192, the Ghurids of Persia defeated a Hindu rebellion at the Battle of Taraori near Thanesar in India . The battle took place in the region of India and was fought in 1192 .
 POPE INNOCENT III wanted to reunite the Greek and Latin churches to fulfill his vision of a single Christian dominion under the papacy .
 In 1201, envoys met Enrico Dandolo, Doge of Venice, to arrange passage to Egypt for the Fourth Crusade . The Fourth Crusade was held in Egypt in 1201 .
 Under the Peace of Venice, the Venetians agreed to transport 33,500 men and 4,500 horses for a fee of 85,000 marks . Under the peace of Venice , they agreed to pay 33,000 to transport the men and horses fora . The payment of 85
 They would supply 50 war 7 galleys in return for half of the Crusaders’ conquests . In addition, they would supply half the Crusader’s conquests. In addition to supplying 50 war ships, 50 ships would be exchanged for 50 more .
 When the Crusaders gathered in Venice in 1202, it transpired that there were too few of them, and they could not pay the agreed bill . The Crusaders gather in Venice, Italy, to meet with the locals .
 Zara, Dalmatia, is a rich source of wood for Venetian galleys . Venice agreed to help Venice by taking Zara from Zara . Instead, they agreed to take Zara for wood .
 Constantinople was taken for the ' first time in its history, and was ' brutally sacked' The city was taken by the Byzantine Empire for the first time .
 Empire of the East was proclaimed under a new emperor, 2 Baldwin of Flanders, while Venice ' was awarded nearly half the city, : numerous Mediterranean islands, : and other territories . Venice was awarded half of the city and numerous territories .
 Fourth Crusade marked the end of the Byzantine Empire as a true power, : which discredited the Crusading movement and helped the Turks . Mongolian and Turkic nomads of the steppes were fearsome but 2 disunited .
 Genghis Khan, was a minor 2 leader who became a nokhor ' to Toghril, Khan of ' the Kereits, the dominant tribe in Central Mongolia . He became a Khan of the Mongolian state of Mongolia .
 Bronze statue of Jayavarman VII, in Mahayana : Buddhist style, portrays a serene : and contemplative king . In 1203 he clashed with Toghril himself .
 Peterhouse College, Cambridge, was founded 75 years after the university was founded . Peterhouse is the oldest college in the world to study Hinduism .
 By 1206, TEMUJIN HAD UNITED ALL the TRIBES of MONGOLIA into the Khamag Mongol Ulus, “the All Mongol State,” reorganizing tribal society into an army grouped ona decimal system .
 Their teachings challenged the worldliness of the established church . Their anticlericalism attracted nobles keen to appropriate church lands . The Cathars were under the protection of Raymond of Toulouse, who ruled much of southern France .
 The Sea Temujin would go on to unite the Mongol . addition, and tribes and conquer a huge empire .
 PETER II of ARAGON and ALFONSO VIII of CASTILE defeated the Almohads [see 1146-50] at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212 . The battle was fought in the Spanish city of Tolosa .
 Alfonso had earlier been crushingly defeated by the Almohads tn 1195 . He had fought off invasions by the other Christian Spanish kingdoms and rebuilt his army . Alfonso was defeated in 1195 but fought off invasion by other Spanish kingdoms .
 After this decisive victory, the Spain, Spain, leaving only local Muslim the Christian advance . Only local Muslim Muslims survived .
 King John's barons were forced to concentrate on England, where they had cause for discontent . King John’s barons forced to focus on England .
 The king was briefly excommunicated by the pope after a dispute with the pope . The king had been briefly exiled from the Roman Catholic Church .
 John was forced to sign the Articles : of the Barons, known in history as : : The Great Charter or Magna Carta . Although this mainly concerned the ' rights of barons, its statement that the king was not above the law was a milestone for human rights .
 Of the 63 clauses contained in the original Magna Carta, only three : survive as laws today . Only three of the original 63 clauses survived as laws .
 ANGKOR THOM JAYAVARMAN VII DIED in around 1220, having seen his greatest creation take shape .
 In modern-day Cambodia, he created a new city, Angkor Thom, centered on the great temple of Bayon . The city was centered on a great temple, the Bayon, which he built on the site of the great Bayon.
 The temple comprises towers decorated with huge sculpted faces . The identities of these faces are disputed, although they may include Jayavarman himself .
 Genghis Khan's empire (see 1201-05) now bordered the Khwarazm Empire of Persia of Persia . Having conquered most of Central Asia and northern China, Genghi's empire bordered most of the region .
 After archers had decimated the enemy, fighters with hand weapons would close in . Archers would use hand weapons to decimate the enemy . The archers would then use their hand weapons for hand weapons .
 In 1203, he had gone to Rome to ask permission to do missionary work with the Tartars . Instead he was sent to France to preach to the Cathars of Languedoc instead . He was sent back to France instead .
 Like Francis of Assisi, he had created a new kind of monastic order . The Dominicans adapted to the new urban culture . However, the Dominicans had to adapt to the urban lifestyle .
 The Dominicans and Franciscans were mendicant friars, mainly recruited from the middle classes . They lived off charity rather than farming, and devoted to preaching in towns and cities .
 The Fifth Crusade was the fruit of Pope Innocent’s determination to reboot the Crusading movement . A largely ineffective affair, it was largely ineffective . Pope Innocent was determined to reinvigorate the Crusades .
 Crusaders failed to account for the Nile floods, which foiled their advance on Cairo . The Crusaders took that but then lost Damietta, and failed to explain the floods .
 They rejected a treaty offered by the sultan that would have given them Jerusalem, and left Egypt in 1221 having accomplished nothing . They high-handedly rejected the treaty . They left Egypt after 1221 .
 The RENEWAL of the AlbigenSIan Crusades was in spite of Pope declaring an ‘official’ end to the Crusade at the Fourth Lateran Council of 1215 .
 In reality, the battle for the south of France descended into vicious guerrilla warfare . In reality it was a bloody struggle for freedom of expression .
 The Cathar castle of Peyrepertuse in the Pyrenees was located in a strategic defensive position on the French-Spanish border . Cathar stronghold was located on a strategic position on France's border .
 14th-century image shows Pope Gregory IX receiving a list of heretics . The image was taken in the 14th century at the time of Gregory IX's visit to Rome .
 In 1231, POPE GREGORY IX established the Papal Inquisition, a campaign by the church against heresy . The papal Inquisition was established in 1231 by Pope Gregory IX .
 Mongolian expansion continued, although Genghis Khan had died In 1227 while suppressing a rebellion in Xia Xia in China in China . Mongolian Khan died in 1227 .
 He was succeeded by his second son, Ogodei (c.86-1241], who was still more ambitious . He succeeded him in the death of his first son . He died in 1241 .
 Ogodei sent armies to the east and west, leading the final assault on the Chinese Jin Empire (see 112630) The Jin Empire was conquered by 1234, and the Chinese empire was conquered .
 Southern Song had aided the Mongol advance, but when they tried to seize Kaifeng in northern China in 1235, the Mongols turned on them . The Southern Song helped the Mongol defeat the Southern Song .
 In 1235, Sundiata, king of the Keita, a Mande people from sub-Saharan Mali, defeated the Susu king Sumnaguru at the Battle of Kirina . The battle took place in 1235 .
 Se meee 5, Phen —* a Steppe Steppe landscape; little changed since the days of the Mongol Empire . Se mee 5 is Phen, Phen, a steppe steppe region of the steppeland .
 ON HIS DEATH, GENGHIS KHAN had informally divided his empire among four of his sons .
 Batu Khan established the Kipchak Khanate, also known as the Golden Horde Khanate . Given authority over the west, Batu was given authority to the west by Batu .
 In the winter of 1237, when the frozen rivers allowed his cavalry to cross, Batu invaded Russia . Batu's army crossed frozen rivers in winter 1237 .
 Over the next four years, his armies conquered Russian principalities and blazed a trail of destruction deep into Central Europe . Over the years, he conquered Russia and conquered the rest of Europe .
 Under the overlordship of Ogodei , the expanding reach of the Mongol Empire had important implications for pan-Eurasian trade . Under the . overlordships of the . Mongol Empire, the expanding . reach of . the Mongol . Empire had significant implications for . pan-
 The Pax Mongolica or “Mongol Peace” achieved in the lands under Mongolian control made the perilous passage across Central Asia and the silk road increasingly viable, enabling the first direct contact between Europeans and the Chinese since Roman times in around 1240 .
 The Teutonic Knights were formed in 1198 by German merchants serving at the Hospital of St. Louis . By 1236, the Knights had been at least one of the world's most famous Knights Knights Knights .
 Mary of the Teutons in Jerusalem completed the subjugation of the Pomeranians, a pagan tribe In Prussia . The Pomerans were a pagan pagan tribe in Prussia. Mary of St. Mary in Jerusalem .
 NO) NY Ki OE @ xy. AS @ Or KN Cease ev wy * oF 3 vye we Eee oe Se ge eo no” NO) NO)
 Miniature from Annalistic Code of the 16th century depicts the “Battle of the Ice,” fought on the frozen waters of Lake Peipus, Novgorod .
 In 1241, the German trading towns of LUBECK and HAMBURG formed an alliance to protect the Baltic trade routes . The alliance was formed to protect trade routes in the Baltic .
 Lubeck quickly became the center of expanding German trade in the Baltic region . The area extended along the Russian rivers as far as Novgorod, and linked to England and Flanders .
 The notion of the Reconquista—the Christian reconquest of Islamic Spain— as a single, continuous project, is a myth, first created by clerical propagandists in the 14th century . In 1242, the efforts of the Teutonic Knights were made by the
 Hamburg was a founder of the Hanseatic League, which had its roots in an alliance of 1241 with Lubeck. to extend their Livonian territories eastward and launch the conversion of the ' Russians from the Greek to the Roman church .
 Lake Peipus thereafter served as : the eastern limit of Livonia . Alexander Nevski, : prince of Novgorod, checked the knights’ progress and . checked their progress and : Lake Peipsus thereafter . served as . the east limit of . Livonia.
 The Mongols had reached the gates of Vienna when, in 1242, the ' news reached them that Ogodei, : the Great Khan, had died .
 In 1244, Ayyub’s forces overran | Jerusalem and expelled the : Christians . In 1242, the Egyptian sultan was engaged in a contest with the 2 Syrian branch of the Ayyubaids at Damascus, which had allied itself with the ' Christian Crusader
 Ferdinand Ill, King of Castile and Lon, accepts the surrender of the city of Seville from the Moors in 1248 . In this 16th-century painting, he is shown accepting the surrender .
 In 1247, FERDINAND III of CASTILE and LEON laid It fell to him in 1248, and with it with it the last Moorish kingdom in Spain—with the exception of Granada .
 Louis IX of France was much respected throughout Europe and had a reputation for justice . Louis IX was much admired throughout Europe .
 Under his reign, royal control of the Mediterranean was extended to the Mediterranean . Languedoc and Provence would become part of French Capetian territories . The previously autonomous realms of Languedo and Provece would be part of the Capetians .
 Theobald of Navarre had ' launched a crusade in 1239, but siege to Seville failed . Louis’ crusade of 1248 is accounted the : Seventh, the last Crusade of this “a ' magnitude ever undertaken. ™ — established the Nasrid dynasty in
 In 1250 his army was destroyed ' by the Egyptians at Fariskur and : he was taken captive . Damietta without opposition, but 'in 1250 he was destroyed by the Egyptian . Egyptian forces destroyed his army in 1250 .
 Constant tribe, made most Aztec gold jewelry . mask was a votive offering. warfare was a way Of Life. Constant tribe .
 The artifacts they created dazzled the medieval European invaders and still fascinate today . The artifacts were created by the medieval Europeans in medieval times .
 Long-bladed, razor-sharp obsidian knives such as this one were used by warriors and in the gory human Sacrifices practiced by the Aztecs . Obsidian knife AZTEC .
 Americans used obsidian [volcanic glass] to form cutting edges . The conquistadors had a devastating effect on these Bernetions .
 The maquahuitl was a wooden club fringed with obsidian blades . The artifacts that survive are a testament to their rich heritage in Aztec culture .
 Much of Incan culture came from client states, such as the Moche, while the Aztecs and Mayans derived theirs from older cultures . The Olmecs, the Aztec, and the Mayans also derived their cultures from older ones . Much of the Incan
 Sun stone AZTEC is largest Aztec sculpture ever found . Sun stone or calendar stone is the largest calendar stone ever found in the world .
 By the mid-13th century, the Aztecs were established in the Valley of Mexico . They are now known as the MEXICA TRIBE .
 Aztec legend suggests that they migrated from ancestral homeland of Aztlan in the early 12th century . Legend suggests that the Aztec people migrated from their ancestral homeland in the 12th Century .
 The Tepanecs were one of the tribal confederations competing for dominance in the wake of the Toltec collapse in the early 12th century . Settling at Chapultepec, near Lake Texcoco, Mexico, in around 1250, they were soon expelled
 The Mongols had conquered most of the Russian principalities . The Golden Horde Khanate had claimed authority over Russia . But surprisingly little changed for the Russians .
 In return for tribute and military service, the Russian princes were left in power . The Russian Church was not interfered with. In return, the princes were .
 Alexander Nevski became the Grand Duke of Vladimir after his brother was driven out by the Mongols . He led the Russians to victory against the Teutonic Knights in 1242, leading them to victory . He was the son of the prince of Novgorod, who had led the
 Mongke and his brothers Kublai and Hulagu renewed the Mongol expansion . Mongke was the first Mongol leader to lead the Mongol Empire .
 HULAGU KHAN continued his campaign against the SELJUKS and other Islamic powers .
 In 1256, he crushed the Order of the Assassins, taking their stronghold at Alamut in Persia . He crushed them in 1256 .
 Mongol invaders massacred hundreds of thousands of Muslims during their campaigns . In 1258, he sacked Baghdad and executed the Abbasid Caliph—the figurehead of Islam—in one of countless atrocities .
 In 1259, Hulagu penetrated deep into Syria, but as with Batu’s campaign in Europe 18 years earlier , his progress was halted by news of the death of the Great Khan . He withdrew his armies while he returned to help select a new leader .
 Mamluk general al-Zahir Baybars marched north and struck at Mongol garrisons in Syria . Taking advantage of Hulagu’s withdrawal, Baybars attacked the Mongol forces . Baybars struck at the Mongol troops in Syria in the early 1400s .
 At the Battle of .. i Ayn Jalut in Palestine, A General Baybars P defeated the . 99 Mongols and 7 expelled them from Palestine and Syria . he murdered the sultan and took his place. At the . Battle of . Ayn . Jalut, Ayn
 Genghis Khan's grandson Kublai succeeded his brother Mongke as Great Khan in 1260 . He spent eight years campaigning in southern China before succeeding Mongke .
 Mamluks gave refuge to a fugitive ' Abbasid prince, setting him ' up in Cairo as the new caliph . Recognized as guardians of the ' Islamic faith, the Mamluk were and international links . formally made sultans of Egypt, Syria, and the Levant
 He oversaw the final expulsion of the Almohads from Spain in 1257 . He oversaw 'the final expulsion . of the . Almohad .
 Thomas Aquina became one of | the most important philosophers — in the history of Western thought . He was one of the most influential thinkers in Western thought.
 Aquinas's period of greatest productivity occurred between 1258 and 1273, when he penned his two bestknown works . The Summa contra Gentiles and Summa Theologiae were his best known works .
 He had already secured an alliance with the Bulgarians, and was now poised to achieve his dream of re-taking Constantinople from the Latin Empire . The Byzantine Greek Empire was reconstituted during the fourth crusade .
 In July 1261, a Byzantine army took advantage of the absence of the Venetian fleet to cross the Bosporus strait and take Constantinople . The Byzantine army crossed the strait to take Constantinople, taking the city .
 Paleologus would campaign tirelessly to restore lost Byzantine lands . Paleologos would campaign for the return of lost Byzantine land .
 Lewes summoned the ' first European parliament that included elected representatives . Lewes in 1265 summoned the first European Parliament that included members of the House of Lords in 1266 . Lewe summoned the parliament in the year of 1265 .
 After paper-making technology was introduced to Italy, the cost of vegetable-based paper fell to 1/6 of animal-based parchment .
 Yekuno Amlak claimed to have restored the legitimate line of the ancient Christian kings of Aksum . The Solomonid dynasty was founded in 1270 by Yekun Amlaks .
 Amlak claimed descent from the biblical Solomon, via the possibly Ethiopian Queen of Sheba, via an Ethiopian queen . Amlaks claimed descent of Solomon via a possibly Ethiopian queen of sheba .
 The town of Fabriano lies close to the Adriatic port of Ancona, which was notable in the 13th century for trade with the Muslim world .
 This is probably how paper manufacture became established there in the 1270s . Paper manufacture was probably how it was established there .
 Use of animal gelatin in place of more degradable vegetable gel made Fabriano paper more durable . Town became principal paper manufacturing site in Europe .
 In 1270, Louis IX of France made another attempt at crusading, but on the request of Charles of Anjou, the Eighth Crusade was diverted to Tunis . Disease killed Louis and his army .
 Marco Polo traveled through Anatolia, Iran, and Afghanistan to reach China . Marco Polo was a member of the Chagatal Empire . He traveled through the Middle East and Asia .
 Marco Polo arrived at Kublai Khan's court in 1275, 1275 . The Great Khan employed Marco Polo in various capacities .
 In 1292, he escorted a Mongol princess to Persia, returning to Italy three years later . He also wrote a travel memoir while a prisoner of the Genoese .
 Polo’s memoir, The Travels, is known by Italians as ll Milione, because of the belief that it contains a million lies . It is a fascinating portrait of the Mongolian Empire at its height . Polo's memoir is known as The Travels .
 The Pax Mongolica allowed freedom of movement through lands under the authority of Il-khanate . A virgin with a pot of gold on her head could pass unmolested from Constantinople (modern-day Istanbul) to Beijing .
 King KULASEKHara I expanded the empire of the Pandyas to its greatest extent . King Kulasekhara I was one of the most successful kings of India .
 Under Sundara [r.51-68] the Pandya empire had expanded dramatically and reduced some neighboring states to vassalage . Sundara had expanded her empire dramatically under Sundara .
 Master craftsmen were believed to channel the voices of the spirits and ancestors . Craftsmen carved posts and lintels adorning structures around the marae (sacred space) Guglielmo Berardi da Narbona was killed at Campaldino .
 In 1280s, the Ottomans were based in northwestern Anatolia . They were known as the "Osman" and the "Ottomans" known as their chieftain . Osman was elected to lead the people of the region in 1212 .
 Byzantine Empire was successively reduced and broken up by Seljuk and Latin encroachment . Meanwhile, the Byzantine Empire had been successively broken up .
 Osman was able to lead his tribe ina the last Chola king, Rajendra Ill, | of colonization climaxed with the | 150,000 men in two huge and waka territorial expansion, rapidly and annexed his territories . Osman led his tribe to a huge territorial expansion
 Cities, had developed into largely autonomous republic or communes . S e accumulate and pass on mana . cities . cities, had . developed into a largely autonomous . republic .
 It was typically easier for the German emperors to grant cities powers of self-government than try to control them directly . The emperors typically granted cities powers to self-governorate .
 This Guelph-Ghibelline conflict had gripped the Italian city-states, providing a vehicle for the expression of local class tensions as well as national and international politics . This conflict was a vehicle to express local and international class tensions .
 When one faction gained the upper hand in a city, the other was typically expelled . The two factions were typically expelled from the city .
 Guelph partisans exiled from Arezzo encouraged them to take up arms against the rival city . In the 1280s, the Guelsphs had the upper hand in the city of Arezzo . The Guelshph partisans were encouraged to fight against the city .
 Battle of Campaldino, heralding the start of a period of Florentine dominance in Tuscany, heralded the end of the first period of Italian dominance in the region .
 The Eleanor Cross in Geddington, Northamptonshire, England, features an ee ogee arch, marking a milestone for the English Gothic style . It was a milestone in the development of the Gothic style in England .
 Venice moved its glassmaking industry to the island of Murano in 1291 . To limit the risk of disastrous fires, the city moved its industry to Murano .
 Venetian glassmakers were the only ones in Europe to master the art of producing clear glass . The art of making clear glass was perfected by Venetians in 17th century .
 The following year he ordered the erection of 12 so-called Eleanor crosses to mark the passage of her funeral cortege to London . Though unpopular with the English, she and Edward enjoyed a happy marriage .
 Genoese fleet defeated the Venetians off Laiazzo in 1294 . The contest for mastery of the Mediterranean between Genoa and Venice continued .
 William Wallace was outlawed for killing one of Edward's sheriffs in 1296 . He killed one of the sheriffs and was outlawed by the king for killing him . So he was banned from entering the country .
 Edward launched a campaign to subdue the Scots, defeating them at Dunbar, and taking the Stone of Destiny—the Scottish coronation stone—back to London . The following year Edward took the Stone back to London, taking it back to the Scottish capital .
 Venetians, destroying all but a few ' of their ships and killing up to warfare and overseas fundraising . Venetian destroyed 7,000 men. Venetia destroyed all but one of its ships .
 Factionalism still plagued the city, with a drawn-out power struggle between aristocratic nobility, the new mercantile nobles, and the powerful guilds .
 In 1301, the Whites expelled the Blacks, only for them to return when Charles, count of Valois, entered the city . The Whites were expelled by the Whites in 1301 but returned when Charles invaded the city of Paris .
 Includes representatives of the ' towns and clergy—and received ' their backing'
 Boniface excommunicated Philip and called for the Pope to face criminal charges . Philip called for Pope to be charged with criminal charges against him .
 Hereford Mappa Mundi Europe was able to direct a large fleet and maintain the primary Crusader army in Outremer, France .
 Templar knights rose to prominence all over Europe, especially in England, where the Master of the Temple was the first baron of the realm . Templar knights were first barons in England . Templar Knights rose to be the most successful knights in Europe .
 Master William Marshal ruled the country as regent for the young after the fall of Outremer . The Templars were struggling to stay afloat, and presented an easy lands and cooked up charges of heresy in which to indict .
 Philip's officials simultaneously arrested every Templar in France on October 13, 1307 . The arrest took place on that date .
 They were accused of a variety of crimes, including sexual and occult outrages and worshipping an Idol . They were also accused of worshiping an idol .
 Such maps encapsulated the : medieval world view on the eve of the Age of Discovery .
 Dante is the greatest Italian poet to have lived and one of the most important writers in European literature . Dante is one of Italy's most important poets and author of the works .
 He Is best known for his epic poem the Divine Comedy, and for his tragic love for Beatrice . Beatrice, who married another and died young, died young .
 Dante spent much of his life traveling from one city to another . Exiled from his native Florence for political reasons, Dante spent his life in cities around the world .
 Europeans probably picked it up from Spain and contact with the Mongols . Europeans probably got it from Spain, contact with Mongols, and it's a sign of life .
 The first record of cannons forged from iron comes from Metz in 1324 . Later that year, an English fortress in Gascony was bombarded for a month .
 Mali Empire of West Africa reached its height under Mansa Musa . The Mali Empire extended from the Atlantic to Nigeria, and from the Sahara to the rain forest .
 His great wealth was based on Mali’s gold, and when he traveled on pilgrimage to Mecca in 1324-25, he dispensed so much gold on his . passage through Cairo that he destabilized the economy .
 The travels of Ibn Battuta aiiteete . Route of the Ibn Battututa to Mecca to Mecca . Europe .
 He made seven further journeys, visiting 1325-1345 almost every corner of the Muslim world .
 Pisano won a commission to craft a set of bronze doors for the Baptistry of Florence, finishing them in 1336 . Greatly influenced by Giotto, Pisano was commissioned to craft the doors in Florence .
 The Tughluk dynasty of the Delhi sultanate had expanded the reach of the Muslim state, reducing neighboring Hindu kingdoms to vassal status, and repelling a series of Mongol incursions .
 In 1325, Muhammad Tughluk murdered his father and took the throne . He established a reputation for cruelty, establishing himself as a cruel ruler .
 In 1327, he transferred the capital from Delhi to Daulatabad for defensive reasons, forcing the population to relocate . The population of Delhi was forced to relocate from Delhi .
 France, who was sent to France , in 1325 to arrange the marriage of : god, is shown carved ona rock : surface in Vijayanagar, the heart : of the last great Hindu empire .
 Gascony to France ' and acknowledged : Robert the Bruce ' as king of an independent : Scotland . Robert was king of a 'independent : Scotland' Robert was acknowledged as king .
 Edward Ill (r.27' 77) had Mortimer ' hanged and began O S ge ' his own rule . Edward Ill had Mortim Mortimer hanged and started O S Ge Ge ' .
 Edward claimed the French crown, triggering the start of ' the Hundred Years’ War . French territories forfeit, while . Edward claimed . the crown, while : Edward claimed French territories . while . the French '
 Marinid forces destroyed the Castilian fleet in Gibraltar . The Garait of Gibraltar was the site of the battle .
 The Battle of Rio Salado is considered to be the defining battle of the Reconquista . It ended forever the threat of Islamic incursion into the Iberian Peninsula from Africa .
 Marinid dynasty of Morocco gathered a vast force and destroyed the Castilian fleet in the Strait of Gibraltar . Marinid had overthrown the Almohads in the mid-13th century .
 Edward III of England (r.27-77) had taken out huge loans from Florentine bankers, especially the Peruzzi family .
 With the king of Naples also defaulting on loans, the Peruzzi were bankrupted, throwing Florence into economic chaos . With the King of Naples defaulted on loans they were also bankrupted .
 Edward Ill was free to invade France at the naval battle of Sluys in 1340 . Edward Ill gained a master of the English language at the battle of the Sluy in France .
 He landed in Normandy in 1346 and took Caen, but retreated in the face of a huge French army . The 1346-year-old was forced to retreat from Caen in Normandy .
 This was largely thanks to the indiscipline and arrogance of the French knights and the effectiveness of the Welsh and English longbowmen . This was due to the strength of Welsh, English and Welsh longbowsmen .
 The English use of combined aristocratic and yeoman forces had produced a powerful new form of army . The English army was created by the 18th century .
 Clement VI bought Avignon from Joanne of Naples in 1348, and work continued on its papal palace . Clement VI of 1348 bought the city and it became a papal town .
 Scholars and artists were attracted to the papal city, briefly among them the Florentine Francesco Petrarch (1304-74), who had been crowned poet laureate in 1341 .
 In 1354, the Nasrid king of Granada, Yusuf Il, was murdered by his son Mohammed V (133891) who took the throne . Yusuf I was killed by Mohammed V in 1354 . In 133891, Mohammed V took over Granada .
 Under Mohammed, the Alhambra became a treasure of Islamic architecture . The fortress-palace of Granada was further developed under the reign of king Mohammed .
 Turkish dynasty soon seized the peninsula, securing themselves a foothold in Europe . Led by Orhan, the Turkish dynasty was soon seized by the Turks .
 The Court of the Lions is at the heart of the Alhambra palace . It was built by Mohammed V as the winter residence of the royal family . The Alhamba palace was built in the 1930s as a winter residence .
 BOHEMIA emerged as a powerful state under the Premyslid dynasty in the 13th century . Bohemia had emerged as the most powerful state in history .
 Pedro |, thereby placing control ane ‘ institution and advance the . Despite having a limp, and the of the . of the Castilian navy in the . fortunes of Bohemia. Pedro . Pedro .
 Charles IV issued the Golden Bull in 1356, which regularized the election of the emperor to a majority vote of seven electoral princes . The papacy would have no role in the election process .
 China was reunited by conquest from the south, as a native rebellion drove out the Mongol Yuan dynasty . China was united by conquest, as the Yuan dynasty was driven out .
 In 1368, rebels under Zhu Yuanzhang established the Ming dynasty, setting up a strong, centralized government . The position of the emperor was strengthened, but so was access to the bureaucracy .
 Printing is the impression of marks on a medium— eastern Asia but perfected by German printer paper . Paper is pressed against form to produce imprint most commonly ink on paper .
 His printing cuneiform, was a form of printing composed of press . Press was so advanced that, except for refinements indentations made by a stylus in clay, indentations were made in clay .
 Printing intheas new typefaces and mechanization of the modern sense of the word first arose In 8th-century — presses and paper handling, the basic process remained unchanged until the 19th century .
 In the 1880s, the development of linotype allowed stamps to reproduce multiple copies of asingle text, a typesetter to compose lines of type using a complete with images, such as the Diamond Sutra, keyboard, rather than by hand . Blocks of wood carved into bas-rel
 Stereotyping made the earliest datable printed book . It made it possible to duplicate complete pages for multiple ea 7 printing .
 In the 20th century, filmsetting enabled setting Gutenberg’s MECHANICAL PRINTING rapid photographic creation of printing plates .
 Block printing was laborious and slow, as each block was specific to one page . At the end of the century, computers allowed every page to be printed on a single page .
 Movable type was a major aspect of printing, from typesetting and graphics wooden coffin, advance (see panel, opposite], first achieved in to inking and drying, to be done on one machine . Movable types were a major part of printing .
 The first metal movable type is cast in bronze in Korea and is used to produce the Jikji Simche Yojeol, a Buddhist scripture . JJ Thomas Carlyle was a Scottish essayist and historian .
 Columbian printing press first to replace screw with levers and weights . Early Korean book “1% oy e 1790s-1820s Metal presses
 Invented in China in 11th century, movable type is refined by Wang Shen, who uses over 60,000 wooden types in his treatise . Printing using carved wooden blocks and ink is known as xylography .
 The key technology in the printing revolution was movable type, in which each character in a script had a corresponding single, small block, or type, allowing lines of type to be assembled and then reordered for different texts . In offset printing, the inked image is transferred from the
 The first book, printed by movable type cast in bronze, was published in Korea in the late 14th century .
 Gutenberg improved upon this technology by developing a technique that enabled rapid, precision casting of metal type . Gutenberg’s press for industrial-scale Gutenberg created a screw production press for pressing inked type, set on a wooden frame .
 This was a dramatic improvement on the traditional method of taking impressions by means of rubbing . This was the first attempt to take impressions by rubbing .
 Laser printer offers technology that would once have filled an entire workshop . Laser printer is now a desktop printer . Laser printers can be used to print anything from scratch to print .
 A 16th-century painting captures the triumphant return of the Doge to Venice after victory over the Genoese .
 The Dardanelles was a key part of the Byzantine Empire and the Silk Road . Along the lucrative trade, along which flowed, the trade was vital to the Byzantine empire and beyond it . It was triggered by the continuing contest for control of the trade routes through the Dard
 Byzantine emperor John V Palaeologus granted to Venice the Aegean island of Tenedos in 1376 . The island is key to the Dardanelles, the gateway to the world's largest waterways .
 Genoans defeated the Venetians at Pola and, in 1379, seized Chioggia in Italy and blockaded Venice . In the ensuing war, they defeated the Venice and blocked the city from the rest of Italy .
 Under Vittorio Pisano, the Venetians counterblockaded the Genoese fleet, starving It into submission . The Venetian fleet was starved into submission by its own forces .
 Venice now controls the Levantine trade . Genoese maritime power was broken . Venice now controlled the Levantines trade .
 Clement Vil was known as the “executioner of : Cesena’ for his brutal suppression : of arebellion in the Papal States . Clement Vil acted as a papal legate after the death of Clement Vil .
 Western, or Great Schism, saw rival popes installed in Rome : and Avignon until 1417 . The Great Schisms saw rival Popes install in Rome and in Rome .
 Dominican mystic and miracle worker Catherine of Siena travelled to Avignon to convince Gregory XI to return the papacy to Rome in 1376 .
 The Black Death and Subsequent Labour Shortages contributed to rising social tension in England . The deaths of black people in England contributed to social tensions .
 Around 1362, for instance, the poor country priest William Langland had written Piers Plowman, a poem in English sympathizing with the plight of the poor peasant . The poem was published in 1362 .
 Motokiyo, who wrote Biblical egalitarian sect, knownas | the Lollards, was winning widespread support . The Lollards were partially inspired by Wycliffe, and were part of the Lollard .
 In 1377, the so-called Bad ‘ Parliament, dominated by the king's son John of Gaunt, Earl of Lancaster, introduced a poll tax . The subsequent parliaments extended it, causing widespread grievance .
 In 1381, attempts to reintroduce serfdom triggered the Peasants’ Revolt, which saw peasants rising against landlords, burning manors, and destroying records . Attempts to re-introduce Serfdom in 1381 saw peasants rise against landlords and burning man
 Il cleverly appeased the rebels; Tyler was executed and the revolt was brutally suppressed . Tyler's execution was followed by a brutal suppression of the revolt .
 Jodo was elected king by the Portuguese parliament and, with English help, defeated Castile at the Battle of Aljubarrota, in 1385 . Jodo defeated the Spanish king with the help of the English .
 He freed Portugal from Castilian influence and, after marrying the daughter of John of Gaunt, founded the AngloPortuguese Avis dynasty . In doing so, he freed Portugal of Castile influence and founded the Avis .
 Philip the Bold of Burgundy inherited the county of Flanders in 1384 . He added the county to his extensive territories . The county was added to his vast territories .
 France, ruled by the young and mentally ill if Charles VI, was now of ' ' dominated by rivalry between the houses of Burgundy and Orléans'
 Geoffrey Chaucer's unfinished poem is 17,000 lines long . It vividly illustrates the medieval world view on social, religious, and moral matters . Chaucer was a 16th century poet who died in 17th century .
 JAGIELLO of LITHUANIA was crowned king of Poland and converted to Christianity in 1386 . He was the last PAGAN RULER in Europe, the last king of Europe .
 Timur Leng (see 1356-65) completed his conquest of Persia | in 1386 and raided deepintothe Caucasus, sacking Tbilisi in Georgia and capturing the Georgian king . The Georgian king was captured in the raid .
 When the Golden Horde attacked his Central Asian territories, in 1387, he was forced to turn back and meet them . However, when the army of the Golden . Horde attacked him, he turned back and met them .
 The spectacular success in converting Europe posed extreme challenges to the Church, as it struggled to reconcile temporal and spiritual power . The Church struggled to find a way of reconciling temporal and Spiritual power .
 Canterbury Tales, partially modeled on Italian author Giovanni : Boccaccio’s Decameron, tells the story of pilgrims on the road to the shrine of Thomas Becket . Canterbury Tales was begun in 1387 .
 The start of the MING DYNASTY in China triggered a change in North Korea . China was considered a client state by the Ming, which was considered to be one of its clients .
 The Koryo empire had supported the new Chinese dynasty, but this did not prevent the Ming from threatening to invade . The Ming dynasty threatened to invade the Koryosan empire .
 Yi Songgye, a leading general who favored the Chinese, seized power in Korea in 1388 . He was one of the most powerful men in Korea to have seized power .
 In 1392, as King Taejo, he founded the Yi dynasty, also known as the Choson . The Yi dynasty was taken from an ancient Korean kingdom .
 Taejo restructured his government on the Chinese model . He instituted wideranging land reforms to redistribute estates from the hands of the oligarchy . The yangban were replaced by technocrats known as the yangbans .
 Anatolia to revolt, but Bayezid as the Period of eros *S, % : swiftly reduced most of them . Northern and Southern Ul pe ae Aswan @ & eiedine 2p, 4 Arabian bringing their territories under : F 25 Sea : direct Ottoman rule
 The city of Tenochtitlan was founded in 1325 . It was located on a marshy island in a partially brackish lake .
 Tenochtitlan means “Place of the Fruit of the Cactus’ —a reference to the vision that supposedly informed the choice of the location . Tenochoitlan is the name of a Mexican town in the region .
 In this vision, the tossed heart of a conquered enemy landed on the island where an eagle wrestled with a snake on a cactus growing out of a rock . The image was depicted on the presentday Mexican flag . In the vision, an eagle and a snake wrestled on a
 They expanded their political territory through marriages, alliances, and conquest . Meanwhile, they expanded their © political territory by marriages and alliances .
 Tenochtitlan was laid out ona : grid pattern, with quarters arranged around acentral ' sacred district, regarded as ' the center of the world'
 Hofoenyezjan jo ayAq Lake » Texcoco Mixiucan o * Zacatlalmanco *Mexicatzincgo ivory . Hofoen Yezjanjo ay aq Lake is a lake off the coast .
 Causeways connected Tenochtitlan to other settlements on the lake and the mainland . Causeways were used in the early Map of Tenochlitlan .
 Songhay gold coin is from Gao; rich : and powerful, the city provided the basis for building the empire . 15th century, Mali declined and : Gao won its independence, ' beginning the growth of the Songhays Empire .
 Timur massacred the population of Baghdad and launched an ' invasion of Syria' Timur was the first Mongol to invade Syria in the 13th century . Timur invaded Syria .
 In 1405, he embarked on a campaign, but died en route to China and was buried at his capital, Samarkand .
 Timur was a devout Muslim and a patron of the arts and architecture . Despite his reputation for cruelty, Timur had a reputation for being cruel . Timur died in 1877 in the city of Timur's capital, the capital of the Mongol Empire .
 His enormous empire did not long survive him, quickly breaking down into a Timurid state ruled by his son Shah Rukh . His empire soon fragmented further, with his son ruling it further .
 The Burgundians, who favored peace with the English, were popular in Paris and the north . The Armagnacs, who were anti-English and pro-war, had the support of Queen Isabeau of Bavaria, the great nobles, and the south .
 Zheng He (1371-1435) was a Muslim captured from Yunnan in China as a boy, castrated, and pressed into military service . Zheng He was named grand, or high-ranking, eunuch at the imperial court in 1404 . In 1404,
 The following year he led the first of seven epic voyages of discovery . The next year he took part in a series of expeditions to explore the world .
 Order of Teutonic Knights had brought Prussia and much of the Baltic coast under their control . Poland was cut off from the sea by the Order of the Knights' advance .
 The union of Poland and Lithuania under King Wladyslaw II Jagiello (c.62-1434) posed a new threat to the Order .
 Jagiello was unable to keep the powerful Polish nobles in order ' and thus could not press home ' his advantage' Jagiellano was unable .
 Thorn, concluded the following year, failed to secure Polish : access to the Baltic and enabled © the Teutonic Knights to regain : some of their advantage . Thorn's defeat in the Battle of the Baltic in 14th century allowed the Knights to retake their position .
 He worked during a period of : monastic revival in Russia, when the Eastern Orthodox Church offered comfort in the face of internecine war and the hated Mongol Yoke—the tribute and service exacted by the Golden Horde .
 Rublev was celebrated for pioneering a new, more serene and symmetrical style . Though inspired by the great icon painter Theophanes the Greek, Rublev's style was serenrenalistic . Rublev is a Russian-born Russian painter .
 Andrei Rublev's greatest icon, painted around 1410, shows the three angels who visited Abraham Abraham . The Holy Trinity was painted by Rublev in 1410 .
 In 1413, Henry IV of England died and his son, Henry V, came to the throne . Henry V (1386-1422) was Henry VIII of England . Henry VIII died in 1413 .
 He’s fourth and greatest expedition in 1413, he visited Calicut in India, and reached Hormuz on the Persian Gulf . He sent ships to explore down the : African coast as far as Malindi in Kenya .
 Fe Fe Fe tried and deposed the last antipope, Benedict XIII, and as the sole true pope . Fe Fe was deposed by the COUNCIL of CONSTANCE by trying and deposing the last . antipope Benedict XIII . Fe tried to depose the last
 The English used new tactics and weapons, especially the longbow, to devastating effect . France was the most powerful nation in Europe, but the English used tactics to win .
 The war drained resources on both sides, but forged a new degree of national identity for both countries . The war was fought in Afghanistan, Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 Illustration from Chronicle of Ulrich von Richental shows papal electors taking leave from Emperor Sigismund at the Council of Constance .
 Sultan Sultan had successfully restored the Ottoman state after the Timurid invasion . His navy had come out worse in a conflict with the Venetians at the Battle of Gallipoli in 1416, forcing the Ottomans to recognize Venetian claims .
 The siege was unsuccessful and Mehmed was distracted by an uprising led by the Sufi theologian and preacher Sheikh Bedreddin . The uprising was suppressed, and the sheikh was executed . Mehmed died of his injuries .
 The Visconti family had ruled Milan since 1277 . Their domain had spread to encompass much of northern Italy, reaching its height under Gian Galeazzo , sole ruler from 1385 .
 Sultan Murad Il Murad defended and extended the Ottoman Empire . He made marriage alliances with the chief monarchs of Europe; was made hereditary duke In 1395; mastered Verona, Vicenza, Padua, Pisa, Siena, Assisi, and Perug
 Filippo Maria saw this empire disintegrate, but set ' about restoring it, regaining Genoa in 1421 . Gian assassinated in 1412, he had assassinated Gian .
 The dauphin, based at 2 Bourges, refused to accept this, ' and the Hundred Years’ War (see © 1411-15) continued .
 In the 1420s, the Italian or High Renaissance gathered pace, particularly in the field of painting and the visual arts . The High Renaissance was a major cultural movement in Italy .
 Ghiberti was one of a host of other artists, including Brunelleschi, Jacopo della Quercia, Masaccio, Donatello and Donatelli .
 Tommaso di Ser Giovanni di Simone created some of the most influential artworks of the Renaissance . Simone's artworks include works of artworks from the 16th century .
 Timur’s descendant, Ulugh Beg (1394-1449) built a great observatory in Samarkand in 1424 . Doge's Palace, which had been evolving since its origins in the 9th century, embodied many of Timur's descendants .
 Bodkin point is an uncomplicated, squared, metal spike used during the wars of the Middle Ages . This type of arrowhead was extensively used in the wars .
 Joan failed to take Paris, however, and the following year, she was captured by the Burgundians, who ransomed her to their i The Arnolfini Marriage by Jan van ' # “i Eyck is noted for its detailed interior .
 FROM 1431 TO 1433, ZHENG HE made a seventh and final expedition, returning to the Persian Gulf . From 1431-1433, he made a 7th expedition to the region .
 China’s period of exploration had come to an end with the death of Emperor Yongle in 1424, after which the Ming dynasty returned to its former isolationist policy . Despite this last trip, this last visit was the last of the Ming Dynasty's last .
 Surrendering the lead in exploration to Portugal and the Europeans would have profound consequences for the Chinese and for world history . China would not have to surrender exploration to the Europeans and for history .
 Cosimo de Medici was dominated by the Albizzi family, who extended the city’s control of Tuscany in the 1380s .
 The attempts of Visconti Milan (see 1421-22) to gain control over all of Tuscany forced Florence into a ruinously expensive war . Milan was defeated after alliance with Venice saw Milan defeated by Florence .
 A leader of the peace party was wool merchant and banker Giovanni de Medici, possibly the richest man in Europe . He was possibly the wealthiest man in the world .
 Compact, and civil war broke out between the factions, which represented different classes as well as religious ideals . The factions represented different religious ideals and different classes .
 Sukhothai kingdom of Thailand ' had increasingly threatened the | Khmer Empire ' through the 14th century . Sukhothsothai was increasingly threatened by the . Khmer . Empire .
 In 1428, Le Loi, leader of SHIP but new elections saw him : Vietnamese resistance to the ZHENG HE’S . The following year, : Chinese occupation, expelled the SHIP marking the start of Medici : Chinese and founded the Le dynasty .
 Jan van Eyck (c.90-1441) was Flemish painter . Jan Van Eyck was one of the most famous Italian painters of the Renaissance .
 Van Eyck produced some of his greatest masterpieces in the 1430s . The painter was known for his mastery of realism and his perfection of oil painting .
 In 1432, he and his brother Hubert completed their largest surviving work, the altarpiece of St. Mary's Altarpiece, in 1432 .
 Later that year, in London, van Eyck painted the Portrait of an Unknown Man and the Man with the Red Turban; possibly a self-portrait . The Portrait is believed to be a self portrait .
 Joan of Arc was turned over by the English to the French ecclesiastical authorities for trial in 1431 . In 1431, Joan's trial took place in France . Joan was executed by the French church authorities for treason .
 She was found guilty of heresy, and burned at the stake in Rouen, France . She was burned at stake in the city of Rouen .
 Cosimo Cosimo combined business acumen with political shrewdness, winning popular support for his policies . Cosimo won popular support with his policies. Cosimo's policies won him popular support .
 The superior organization and tactics of the Hussites, first under Jan Zizka Andrew Prokops, made them militarily powerful . The Hussites were the first to be militarily strong in the early 1900s .
 Negotiations with ecumenical Council of Basel in 1413 led to the Compact of Prague, or Compactacta, under which moderate Hussites agreed to go back to the Catholic Church .
 The windrose mosaic at Sagres in : Portugal—possibly a sundial—was commissioned by Portuguese and, after his death in 1424, under Prince Henry . ' trigger the 1434 abandonment of Angkor and the transfer of the Khmer capital to Phnom Penh,
 Portuguese explorers pushing out : dangerous and terrifying : otherworld . Otherworld.com .
 With the Treaty of Arras, the Burgundians and the French king, Charles VII, made peace . But the English, unwilling to accept the terms, withdrew from negotiations . The English were unwilling to take the terms .
 The following year, the French alliance took Paris from English control . The next year, Paris was taken from French control by the alliance .
 The 1430s saw increasing tension between the papacy and conciliar movement . Conciliar movement held that the Church ought to be governed by a Church council, rather than an individual pope .
 Pope Eugenius IV summoned a General Council at Basel in 1431, but it was dominated by antipapal sentiment . In 1437, he tried to transfer the Council to Ferrara, where it would be more amenable to him .
 It began with invasion by the rival Chancas, who besieged Cuzco, and were completely defeated . It was followed by the defeat of the rival Cuzcan .
 Expansion in the reign of Pachacutec : to receive free education before ' going on to King’s College, : Cambridge .
 Byzantine emperor John VIII Palaeologus arrived in Europe to plead for help from the Council of Ferrara in 1438 . With the Ottomans (see 1286-90) occupying territories on all sides of the tiny remnants of the Byzantine Empire, and threatening Constantinople itself, the
 MACHU PICCHU (meaning “Old Peak” in Quechua, the language of the Incas) is a mountaintop citadel Cuzco . The name means "Old Peak" or "Machu Picachu" in Que
 Construction probably began in the 1440s, under the auspices of Pachacutec . Construction is thought to have started in the 14th century .
 The maximum population of Machu Picchu was possibly only around 1,000, and it is thought that it served as a ceremonial center, as well as being an impregnable stronghold for the Inca elite in case of attack . Machu Picchu is thought to have
 In 1443, a crusading army defeated the Ottomans at Nis, in Bulgaria . Resistance to Ottoman occupation of the Balkans increased, and in 1443 the army defeated them .
 Machu Picchu : High above the Urubamba : Valley in the Peruvian . Andes, onan : inaccessible ridge, : lies Machu . Picchu, : sacred citadel of . the Inca .
 HENRY THE NAVIGATOR’s project to open up the coast of Africa was met with scepticism at home in Portugal . One of his ships returned with gold dust and slaves, prompting an acceleration of activity .
 In 1445, explorer Dinis Dias sighted the mouth of the Senegal River, which offered a trade route deep into the African interior . Dias rounded Cape Verde, the westernmost point of Africa, on the coast of Africa .
 Dias returned the following year as part of a fleet of caravels intending to plant the Portuguese flag and explore what Henry believed might be the western branch of the Nile . Another of Henry's captains, Nuno Tristao, sighted the Gambia River . Nuno
 In the mid-15th century, Great Zimbabwe was just under half the size of the population of London . In the 15th century the population was half that of London's population . The population of Great Zimbabwe is now estimated to be just under 50% of the London population .
 IN 1449, ASHIKAGA YOSHIMASA BECAME SHOGUN, or military dictator, of Japan . ASHikaga Yoshimasa became a military dictator in 1449 .
 Repeated famines triggered constant uprisings in Japan . Ashikaga practice of issuing tokuseirei or “acts of grace’ to cancel debts, damaged the economy . Repeated famine and debt-crippling famines led to constant uprising .
 Yoshimasa presided over cultural flowering at his Higashiyama estate . Despite this, Yoshimas presided over a cultural flowering .
 Nicholas V, elected in 1447, was intent on bringing an end to the schism caused by his predecessor's clash with the Council of Basel (see 1435-37), and on restoring peace to Italy and achieving harmonious relations with other rulers . Nicholas V was elected in
 At the Concordat of Vienna in 1448, he made concessions to Emperor Frederick III and the other German princes, who in return abandoned the Council of Basel and recognized some papal powers . In return, he agreed to a treaty with the Emperor of Austria and other princes .
 The Council of Basel finally disbanded and Felix V abdicated in return for a cardinalship . The following year, the anti-pope Felix V was forced to abdicate . Felix V is now the Pope of the Roman Catholic Church in Rome .
 This marked the final victory of the papacy over the conciliar movement . The papacy's victory over conciliarism marked the end of a long-standing papacy .
 Palaeologus acceded to the throne in Constantinople . He would be the last Byzantine emperor . He was the last emperor of the Byzantine Empire .
 Constantine XI Palaeologus succeeded to the remnants of a once-great empire, left without the resources to defend itself . The arts flourished in the arts during the reign of Constantine XI .
 He was the last emperor of Byzantium, providing a unique bridge between east and west, ancient and modern . The state had lasted throughout the medieval period, with a state that had lasted for centuries .
 He died on the walls of Constantinople, having done everything in his power to secure its defense . The second Battle of Kosovo in 1448, ' regaining control of Albania, was the second battle of Kosovo .
 The 16th and 17th centuries were determined by new horizons, as new lands were explored and new Ideas formulated . The Reformation and Invention of the 16th century was a formative period of history .
 This 16th-century fresco depicts the siege of Constantinople, which began on December 25, 16th century . It is the second pair of doors he completed, they show scenes from the Old Testament .
 Lorenzo Ghiberti completed his men; the French, scarcely 100. Sustained by Lorenzo Ghibti completed their men .
 Bordeaux itself fell again to the 80,000 men against only 7,000 French troops . Bordeau defeated the French in the second round .
 Milan, Venice, Florence, the Papal States, and Naples were 7 the signatories . The signatories were signed by Milan, Florence and Venice .
 The treaty had been given additional impetus by the fall of Constantinople to the Ottomans a year earlier . It became clear there was a need to present a united Christian front . The treaty was given extra impetus when it was presented to the world a year later .
 His method of printing meant that thousands of copies of books could be made relatively easily . Thousands of copies could be printed relatively easily and easily .
 Prussia (conquered by the : Teutonic Knights two centuries earlier) had become resentful of . its lowly status within the . Baltic territories of the . Order . In 1454 the Prussian Estates revolted, and asked for Polish military support, beginning what :
 Plantagenet houses of York and Scemeaneansnteninetine reef ae Lancaster, both had tae gra pcaihey srudemman Seen ; 3 claims to the throne .
 A Turkish miniature painting showing Mehmed II's forces attacking Belgrade’ “which they tried unsuccessfully to take from Hungary in 1456.” “They tried unsuccessfully . to take the city’
 Mehmed II pressed ahead in his determination to conquer the world for Islam . OTTOMAN EXPANSION CONTINUED in the BALKANS and GREECE . Mehmed I II continued to expand his empire .
 The Ottomans conquered the Peloponnese in southern Greece in 1456 . Athens fell from the city of Athens, with the fall of the Greek capital . Simultaneously, the Ottoman Empire also conquered southern Greece .
 Louis Xl acceded the French throne in July 1461, marking a critical point in the evolution of the French state . The French state was founded in 1461 by Louis Xel .
 The medieval monarchs of France, whatever their nominal power, were heavily limited in their influence . The medieval French monarchs were heavily restricted in their power .
 Artois, Picardy, and Burgundy 2 itself under his rule, but by a ' combination of inheritance and : clever diplomacy had added : Roussillon, Cerdagne, Maine, Provence, and Anjou . The French Revolution was founded in 17
 Grand Duchy of Moscow was founded in March 1462 . Ivan III ‘the Great’ was the son of Ivan III "the Great" Ivan III .
 Europe's largest medieval brick castle and is in what is now Poland . Castle was Europe's biggest medieval castle and in what was then known as Poland's largest .
 Poland-Lithuania and the Teutonic Knights fought in 1466 . The war ended with the Second Treaty of Torun . Poland and the Knights were founded in Palestine .
 15th-century katana, with scabbard, is typical of those used in the Onin war .
 Los Reyes Catolicos, the Catholic : Monarchs—were jointly ruling : Castile and Aragon, although the : kingdoms were not formally ' unified'
 Spain's potential to emerge as the 'dominant force in Renaissance : Europe was unmistakable under Ferdinand and Isabella . Europe's potential for dominance in Renaissance in Renaissance was obvious .
 It had been a hesitant process, limited by ship types, principally galleys and cogs, that were unsuited to long-range exploration . It was limited to ship types that were not suitable to long range exploration .
 Its goals were to trace the trans-Saharan gold trade to its source and exploit the West African slave trade . Its goals are uncertain beyond a general hope to trace it to its origins .
 The death in 1460 of Prince Henry, ‘the Navigator,” had made further progress unlikely . Prince Henry was the early champion of Portuguese exploration . He died in 1466 .
 In 1469 Portuguese king Afonso V agreed to allow a Lisbon merchant, Fernao Gomes, to continue to push Portuguese efforts south along the West African coast . In exchange for an annual fee, Gomes was allowed to continue pushing Portuguese efforts .
 Fernao Gomes continued the age of exploration begun by Henry the : Navigator as depicted in the : Monument to the Discoveries, Lisbon . Fernao . Gomes was the first Portuguese explorer to discover the Americas .
 Christian powers, notably Venice, : Expansion of Burgundy North . CONQUEST of Constantinople in 'in an attempt to enlist them in . in an attempt . to enlist . them in the . Ottoman expansion . Christian struggles against . territories held by Charles at. set out not merely to extend
 Philip's grandson, Philip the Good, then added parts of northeast France and much of modern Holland to his list of territories . Philip's first son, Philip, was the son of Philip the Earl of Saxeldenburg .
 The Janissaries of the Ottoman army parade with the drums that were used to urge the soldiers into battle .
 Charles the Bold inherited this ' state within states in 1467 and . determined not just to make it a continuous territory—which by . 1472 he had succeeded in . succeeded in doing : through an audacious ' combination of purchase and . conquest—but to assert its independence as a
 The body of the duke was discovered face down in a frozen pond . They were comprehensively routed and the body was found in the pond .
 William Caxton was an English merchant whose travels introduced him to printing . Louis XI seized the Burgundians French territories, but those in the Low Countries passed to the Habsburgs with the marriage of Charles's only child, Margaret, to the future Holy Roman Emperor, Maximil
 He established the first printing press in England in 1476, printing the first book a year later . The first book was printed a year after he established the printing press .
 First printing press in England, established by William Caxton in Westminster, London, produced its first book in 1477 . Caxton’s printing press was established by the Duke of Burgundy, Charles the Bold . Thousands of thousands of people died in the process, including the Duke
 Ottoman control of the Greek : island Negroponte and ' of Lemnos in the north Aegean . Ottoman rule of the area was based on the island .
 Madeira has been colonized by Spain and Portugal since the early 15th century . Madeira is the island of Portugal and Portugal, which was colonized in the 15th and 16th centuries .
 Canaries and Portugal's claims to : the Azores and Madeira, and The accession of Isabella I to the . Portuguese rights in West Africa . Portugal .
 The goal of the Spanish Inquisition was to impose an overarching Christian Catholic identity on all Spanish territories . Founded by Ferdinand and Isabella in 1478, the goal was to establish an overarching Catholic identity .
 Tribunals were held in which heretics were punished and expelled . Heretics included Jews and those who had converted to Christianity from Judaism .
 BY about 1440, THREE SEPARATE MOSSI KINGDOMS had become established in West Africa, roughly in present-day Burkina Faso . Three separate Russian-speaking countries were established in the region .
 Songhay raiders exploited the gradual decline of Mali by raiding deep into Mali territories . They made use of formidable cavalry, from about 1480 they exploited the decline of the Mali . Songhays raided deep into the Mali territories in the 1480s .
 The year 1482 saw two crucial developments in the continuing Portuguese exploration and settlement of West Africa . The year of 1482 was the year of the Portuguese exploration of the continent .
 The first was the construction of Sao Jorge da Mina, now called Elmina Castle, on what was later known as the Gold Coast and is today Ghana . The first is the construction on what is later known known as Ghana's Gold Coast .
 West Africa to the Gulf of Guinea ' were generally benign, aided by northeast trade winds and the : Guinea Current . To the south they were much more arduous, with the Guinea Current to the south .
 By 1700, European explorers and colonizers had established themselves globally . By 1700 Europeans had already established themselves in Europe .
 European explorers were motivated by glory, Christian zeal, and—above all—gold, spices, and slaves . Europeans were motivated to find gold, spices and slaves, and to conquer the world .
 With overland routes blocked by Muslim states, maritime routes offered the prospect of outflanking them . Overland routes were blocked by Islamic states, but maritime routes were possible .
 By the 1550s, they had conquered two empires -- the Aztecs and the Incas -- and created a huge New World empire . The Incas were the first Incas to conquer the Americas .
 Though futile, this paved the way for two further European empires there . The Empire of Europe was founded in 17th century .
 Ships sailed for months at a time to cross the vast oceans, often with crude systems for navigation . Ships sailed with crude navigation systems .
 Relations with native peoples also proved fraught and almost invariably ended violently . Relations with Native peoples often ended up violent and often violent .
 Europeans generally saw natives as a resource to be exploited and Christianized . Europeans generally used natives as resource to exploit and Christianize . Europeans used natives to Christianize the natives .
 The startling death tolls in the New World were more the result of the dislocation of settled ways of life and of imported European diseases than of deliberate policy . But the death toll was more than a result of a dislocation, rather than deliberate policy.
 The sudden intermingling of previously separate worlds had a dramatic impact in both directions, with crops and animal types introduced to new environments .
 Most of what remains of the Great Wall of China was rebuilt during the Ming dynasty . England and possessions . England .
 Lancastrians and Yorkists appeared to have been settled for good in 1471 . Lancastrian and Yorkist were rival Plantagenet claimants to the English throne . The battle was fought in the 13th century .
 Yorkist Edward IV seized the throne from the hapless Lancastrian Henry VI in 1461 in 1470 . He was forced from it by a group of vengeful magnates . The Yorkist had seized from Henry VI's throne .
 In 1471, with Burgundian support from Charles the Bold (see 1472-76), Edward retook the throne . Edward's reign ended in 1471 with the help of Burgundians .
 Edward V was only 12 years old and his mother’s family, the Woodvilles, saw the boy-king as an obvious opportunity to proclaim themselves regents . The problem was that the new king, Edward V, was just 12 . Edward V's mother's family,
 The Duke of Gloucester was competent, intelligent, and loyal . This at least was the view of the dead king's most consistent champion, his brother .
 Gloucester characteristically preempted the Woodvilles by seizing the throne himself, as Richard Ill, executing them and imprisoning Edward V with his younger brother in the Tower of London where both were then murdered . Gloucester killed Edward V and imprisoned his brother Edward V, Edward V's
 Tudors, England was significantly . strengthened, its magnates Richard Ills much larger force, which . tamed, and its government : comprehensively overhauled in this destabilizing infighting . Tudors . were significantly : strengthened . in Tudor .
 The Renaissance (literally “rebirth”) grew out of the Italian Middle Ages and marked a reevaluation of European thought . The second The Renaissance was born in Italy in 16th century .
 Florence gave rise to artistic and architectural revolution, and later, to scientific one . It gave rise, first in Florence, to an artistic and scientific revolution .
 Two further expeditions were despatched in 1487 to investigate routes to and across was charged with investigating the East African coast as well as the Indian Ocean . A further expedition was also sent to investigate the East Africa coast .
 15th-century iron Mamluk helmet is decorated with inlaid silver calligraphy . The helmet was worn by Mamluks soldiers .
 The OTTOMAN-MAMLUK peace treaty of May 1491 ended a war that had begun in 1485 for control of the Western Asia and Red Sea trade routes . The treaty was the result of a peace treaty between the two nations .
 Neither side gained much but the war exhausted the Mamluks financially, making their subsequent conquest by the Ottomans in 1516-17 inevitable . The Mamluk was defeated by the Ottoman Empire in 1515-17 .
 By 1490, Vladislas II (14561516) ruled over a vast kingdom, including Poland-Lithuania, Bohemia, and Hungary, whose crown he accepted in 1490 . He accepted the crown of Hungary, which he accepted .
 Despite the size of these territories, they had little influence on Europe as a whole . The territories were ruled out of Europe as well as the continent .
 Poland-Lithuania—vast, desolate, and impoverished, was on the margins of Europe . Poland-Ukraine was once on the brink of Europe, but now it's on the edge of Europe again .
 Hungary and Bohemia, although more sophisticated, remained not just separate kingdoms but uneasy rivals . Hungary, Bohemia and Hungary were still uneasy rivals in Bohemia .
 Isabella presided ' over the fall of the Kingdom of Granada, marking the end of a 10-year campaign to claim the last Moorish territory in Iberia . The end of the process begun in the 8th century—the Christian reconquest or reconquista .
 Spain was anxious to match the spoils ' flowing to Portugal from its West ' African ventures . Spain was also keen to match Portugal's success in the region .
 Christopher Columbus made four transatlantic voyages . Columbus believed that the riches of the East could be reached by sailing west from Spain . Columbus was born in Genoa, Italy, in 17th century .
 His first journey (1492-93) was followed by others in 1493-96, 1498-1500, and 1502-04 .
 He was the first European to sight South America, in 1498, and charted the Caribbean . He charted most of the Caribbean, charting most of South America .
 20th-centilry paiating depicts King Manuel | of Portugal blessing Vasco da Gama and his expedition as they get ready to set sail from Lisbon . King Manuel was King of Portugal .
 The Italian Wars saw an intermittent 65-year struggle between France and Spain for control of Italy . Charles VIII of France of France wanted to assert claim to the kingdom of Naples .
 Its opening salvo, which ended in 1499, was both destructive and inconclusive . The first salvo in the 1499-1499 war was both a destructive and ineffectual .
 Leonardo was a self-taught polymath, a painter, sculptor, inventor, inventor and scientific enquirer . His restless genius drove him to embrace a limitless range of projects, but to complete almost none . The first phase ended with the Battle of Fornovo, fought
 Vill found his former Italian allies, : notably Milan, had joined forces with Venice, the papacy, and the * » Holy Roman Empire to oppose him . By about 1496, an outbreak of what was commonly called the French pox [so-named as it was first recorded
 In May 1498, Vasco da Gama consolidated this achievement when he continued into the Indian Ocean and reached Battle of Zonchio . This woodcut depicts ships in the first battle of the Ottoman-Venetian War .
 da Gama made a vast sweep westward into the : South Atlantic . Portuguese mariners had hugged . the African coast, but made a . vast sweep into the South Atlantic.
 Of greater significance was 'the growing realization that this ' was indeed a New World' of greater significance .
 The Mughal Empire was one of a bloc of sophisticated, centralized, highly cultured Muslim empires that dominated West Asia in the 16th and 17th centuries . With the Ottoman Empire to the west and the Mughals to the east, it formed one of the blocs .
 Shah Ismail I launched a burst of conquest across Persia in 1405 . His troops surged westward across Persia, putting an end to the political vacuum that had followed Timur's death .
 Ismail was a Shi'ite Muslim and vigorously promoted his faith as the official state religion . Proclaiming himself Shah of Persia, Ismail | was the Shah of Iran . Ismail is a Shi-ite Muslim .
 By 1501 the Safavid Empire extended to occupy a swath of Western Asia . Checked out of the Caspian Sea, by 1501, the empire had spread to Western Asia.
 The spread of Islam in East ' Africa was reinforced by the ee Michelangelo’s David . Completed by Michelangelo in 1504, this giant marble statue of » biblical hero David stands at 17 ft tall .
 The sultanate rapidly established itself as a major power in the region . It threatened both Ethiopia and the Ottomans in Egypt .
 Sistine ceiling Commissioned by Pope Julius II, the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican is one of the masterworks of Michelangelo . Commissioned in the 1960s, it was commissioned by Julius II .
 Serrdo was able to continue to the Moluccas using native craft . The Spaniard had to turn back in the Banda Sea to avoid being forced to return .
 Portuguese explorer Francisco : Serrao successfully reached the : Moluccas after : others had turned back .
 Makassar @ Flores Sea mba Antonio de Montesinos denounced the “cruelty and tyranny” of the settlers .
 Moroccan dynasty after 1511—the : Sa’dis—who filled the political vacuum created by the crumbling ' of Marinid rule in the 1480s . The Sa'dis dynasty took over from the Marinid dynasty .
 Safavids were successful in confronting the loose Uzbek confederation of peoples of Central Asia to their north . Venetian alliance. : Hemmed in on the west by the . Ottomans and threatened to the south by the Portuguese .
 Juan Ponce de Leon discovered Florida in April 1513 . Spanish exploration of the Caribbean in the immediate aftermath of Columbus's 1492 crossing .
 It was the first Spanish contact with the mainland of North America and the basis for subsequent claims to the region .
 Ponce de Leon discovered the Gulf Stream in his attempt to circumnavigate his island . The discovery of the wind systems of the central Atlantic was the same as the discovery of Columbus in the 1500s .
 "The exercise of political power requires violence and deceit," the book's central theme is that it requires violence to exercise power .
 Niccolo Machiavelli was a functionary in Florence, where he witnessed the power of aggressive rulers first hand . He witnessed, in 1502-03, that of the pope's illegitimate son, Cesare Borgia .
 He completed several diplomatic missions, but in 1513 was arrested and tortured . In 1513, he was tortured and executed in prison .
 Control of Egypt consolidated the Ottoman presence in the eastern Mediterranean . It also gave them access to the Red Sea, giving them control of Egypt .
 In doing so, they found themselves in direct conflict with the Portuguese, who had been actively probing the Red Sea since 1513 . The Portuguese were active in the area since then .
 The stage is set for another round of conflict between the Muslim world and the Christian West . The stage was set for a clash between Muslims and Christians in the West .
 Martin Luther nailed his 95 Theses to the door of All Saints in October 1517 . The Reformation was the religious revolt against the Catholic Church instigated by Martin Luther .
 Church in Wittenberg, Saxony, was part of a growing protest movement against religious practices and corruption in the Catholic Church . Church was built as part of what was a growing : protest movement .
 The election of Charles V as the Holy Roman Emperor in 1519 appeared pivotal . The election was a pivotal moment in history .
 For the earnest Charles, the imperatives were clear—to preside over a prosperous, pan-European Catholic entity which, properly mobilized, would then rout the Ottoman menace . Charles was determined to lead a prosperous and prosperous Catholic entity, which he hoped would rout the Ottomans .
 Few of his subjects were prepared to surrender traditional ‘liberties’ to a distant, foreign ruler . Almost none was prepared to finance him; and religious differences persistently intruded . Few of the subjects were . prepared to . surrender traditional "liberties" to a foreign ruler
 The prospect of Habsburg domination alarmed every major European power, above all France . Simultaneously, the prospect of that domination alarmed other major European powers .
 Emperor Charles V : Few rulers were more dutiful than : Charles V or as conscious of their : divine destiny . Charles V was conscious of his destiny .
 The belief that the West was discovered by European explorers from Columbus onward than a new continent, proved tenacious .
 It was widely held that a navigable passage to the East through these landmasses must exist . It was likewise held that it was also believed that such a passage would exist .
 Verrazzano persisted in the belief that the Pacific was within reach . But he said it was still a long way from reaching the Pacific Ocean .
 The German Peasants’ War of 1524-25 was a sharp reminder of the way that the language of the Protestant reformation could be appropriated by groups who usually lacked a voice in politics .
 The revolts were attempts by huge numbers of the politically disenfranchised in Germany and Austria, by no means all of them peasants, to end what they Saw as abuses against them by the Church and nobility .
 The size of Charles V's empire made it effectively ungovernable . Habsburg were unknown Asian coasts, rather than Asian coasts . Border of Holy ENGLAND possessions 1525 .
 ‘al Babur’s Mughal empire could only be created—and sustained—by force . Battle of Pavia a ‘Al Babur's’m empire could not be created, and sustained, by force . The Mughals were defeated in the
 Ottomans obliterated a combined HungarianBohemian force at Mohacs in August 1526, 1526 . The alliance provided further justification to renew their conflict with Hungary . In 1526 they obliterated the combined Hungarian Bohemian force in Mohacs .
 Babur hailed from Ferghana in central Asia, from where he had been expelled . Babur was the first ruler of the world's most powerful city of birth .
 In 1522, however, he captured Kandahar, an important staging point on the road to India . In 1526, he defeated the Afghan Sultan of Delhi, Ibrahim Lodi, and declared himself emperor . He declared himself Emperor in 1526 .
 At its height at the beginning of the 18th century, the Mughal empire (“Mughal” is Persian for Mongol) covered almost the entire subcontinent .
 Early astronomy was closely linked to mythology, of the gravitational force controlling that movement . Newton’s telescope religion, and prognostication, was closely associated with mythology .
 In the 19th century, distance to Uiront vier) observations were used to measure time, devise the Sun and nearby stars was accurately measured, calendars, set the dates of religious festivals, and Spectroscopy was introduced, and advances in for astrological prediction .
 For millennia, it was theoretical physics provided explanations for believed that the Earth was the center of problems such as how Stars generate their energy the cosmos . The Earth is the center for theoretical physics .
 Many thought the Universe consisted of only our hydrogen beta line . sodium lines own Milky Way Galaxy. sodium lines .
 Edwin Hubble measured the speed at which distant nebulae were receding, and it was realized that they were independent galaxies . Edwin Hubble later realized that these galaxies were galaxies .
 It was proposed that the other forms of electromagnetic energy, such as X-rays and radio waves, should be considered .
 Using spectroscopy, these electromagnetic emissions can be broken up into a spectrum of colors . Spectroscopy can also break up electromagnetic emissions using spectroscopic . The spectrum is a spectrum that can reveal a range of colors.
 Nicolaus Copernicus published his heliocentric model in 1543, which put the Sun at the center of the cosmos . Is widely considered to mark the birth of modern astronomy .
 After 1609, the newly invented telescope revealed magnesium lines expansion had been caused by the Big Bang . The Big Bang was caused by a massive explosion, scientists say .
 Findings from a host of new astronomical modern space astronomy have supported by dark absorption lines, each corresponding to objects . Dark absorption lines have been used to support new astronomical discoveries .
 The 17th century also also the Big Bang theory, but it has also been a different chemical element . The 'Big Bang' theory was also based on the theory of Big Bang .
 Much of the Universe the intensity of these lines, a star’s chemical of the laws of planetary pote ieee ener ater aoe consists of dark matter and dark composition can be discovered . By investigating saw the establishment discovered that much of the . intensity of the lines,
 Further study motion by Johannes De ire ee energy, the nature and origin of the origin of can also establish its temperature, relative velocity, ; ne ; and the pressure and density of its atmosphere .
 Babylonians produced the first calendar by integrating the 365.25 days of the solar year with the 29.53 days of lunar month .
 This demotes that prevailed until the Earth to being just one of the 16th century . The Earth was the last to be on the surface of the planet .
 Isaac Newton made his first reflecting telescope in 1668 . His telescope was the first to be used by modern astronomers . Modern telescopes have mirrors up to 10,400MM in diameter .
 Shortly afterward, he made a second model, which stands about 8in high . Shortly afterward he made another model, a model of the same height .
 Newton's telescope was the first to use a primary mirror rather than a lens to collect light . Newton's telescopes were the first of its kind to use primary mirrors rather than lenses .
 Early radio telescopes detect radio waves from the Sun and distant galaxies . They fly past, orbit, and land on planets, moons, asteroids, and comets . Radio astronomy—begins ayy. . 1 ‘ie | kk. on galaxies, and expanding expanding on galaxies
 The Sack of Rome i deeply embarrassed Charles V, it meant his dominance in Italy was confirmed . Charles V's dominance in the country was confirmed by the Sack of the Rome .
 The Sack of Rome was the most shocking event of the Italian Wars . Charles V's Imperial troops stormed Rome in 1527 . The Italian city was the birthplace of the Roman Empire .
 Roman Emperor, Charles V was the natural ally of the Catholic : Church just as he was the . enemy of Lutheranism . Yet not only was Charles now at j — n 1527 shocked Europe and devastated the Church . Yet he also devastated the Catholic Church .
 Ottomans were the most dynamic and dominant presence in the Western Hemisphere . Suleiman's rule was marked by a succession of victories in the Balkans, the Middle East, and North Africa .
 Hesse and Saxony promised to aid each other if Charles V attempted, by force, to reimpose Catholicism . Charles V tried to re-establish Catholicism in Hesse .
 Francisco Pizarro took control of the Peruvian Inca Empire in 1532 . He took over the Inca empire from the Spanish conquistador .
 Like Cortés’s invasion of Mexico, its success depended on internal divisions within the Inca Empire, and a combination of religious zeal, greed, and superior military means . The whole was driven by Pizarro, a man of huge ambition .
 European penetration of South America was also taking place, albeit on a far smaller scale . On the other side of the continent, further European penetration was taking place .
 Portugal established its first permanent settlement in Brazil at Sao Vicente in 1532 . In 1532, Portugal established the first permanent Portuguese settlement in the country . The first Portuguese colony in Brazil was established in 1531 .
 This was the nucleus of what by the end of the century would be a huge colonial enterprise based on slavery and sugar plantations . The nucleus of the colonial enterprise would be the largest colonial enterprise in the world .
 In 1532, hostilities between Germany's Schmalkaldic League and Emperor Charles V ceased with the signing of a treaty at Nuremberg . The treaty was signed in 1532 .
 Henry would remain a devout Catholic to the end of his life, opposed to all attempts to reform Catholic practice . Henry would be opposed to reform efforts .
 Henry wanted a divorce from his Spanish wife, Catherine of Aragon, after 24 years of marriage . Catherine had yet to give birth to a son . Henry wanted divorce from Catherine, who had never had a child . Catherine died in 17th century .
 Henry VIII married Anne Boleyn in secret in January 1533, four months before he divorced Catherine of Aragon . Henry VIII had Anne in secret before his divorce from Catherine . He had a daughter with Anne in 1533 .
 The initial Catholic response to the Reformation was hesitant and uncoordinated . It was led by a series of individuals rather than the Church itself .
 The Jesuits, the Society of Jesus, were established in 1534 by a Basque nobleman, Ignatius of Loyola . The Society of Jesuits were established by a Spanish nobleman . They are now known as the Jesuits of Spain .
 Loyola's goal was to produce a new generation of highly educated priests to spread a new militantly Catholic faith . Loyolas' goal was producing a new . generation of . educated priests .
 Roman Catholicism was abolished in Roman Catholicism . Henry VIII abolished Roman Catholicism in favour of his interests .
 The Pilgrimage of 3 Grace saw the largest uprisings HAVING BROKEN WITH ROME, it followed that all the structures of the Catholic Church in England should be taken over by the state . It followed that the state should take over all of the structures .
 This was not just a question of wanting to eradicate papal authority in England, says Pope Francis . Pope Francis was not trying to eradicate the papal's authority, he says .
 Henry VIII was determined to have the Catholic wealthy, and this was money he needed to have . Henry VIII, who was strapped for cash, wanted the money to buy .
 In 1535, the king's secretary, Thomas Cromwell (c.851540), took charge of the two-part dissolution of the country’s monasteries . Cromwell was the secretary of the king who oversaw the dissolution .
 The dissolution involved systematic vandalism and saw the greatest transfer of land ownership in England since the Norman Conquest in 1066 . Starting in 1536 and culminating with all the great monasteries in 1539, the dissolution took place in England .
 Spanish exploration of North America in the 16th century proved discouraging . Spanish explorers failed to discover the continent .
 Francisco Vazquez de Coronado ' headed a still larger force north : from Mexico, penetrating as far : as Kansas . Francisco Vazquez de Coronado headed north from Mexico to Kansas .
 None of these ventures would be followed up until the end of the century . But none of the ventures would ever be followed-up until the next century .
 Jean-Francois de la Rocque de Roberval, with Cartier his deputy, : and was a dismal failure . Cartier was a poor leader of France .
 According to Fernao Mendes Pinto, the incident occurred on the island of Tanegashima, to the south of the main Japanese archipelago .
 The Portuguese were intermediaries between China and Japan, whose merchants had been forbidden to trade with the Chinese as a result of persistent raids by Japanese pirates . Not only did the Portuguese introduce firearms to Japan, they became intermediaries .
 Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543) published On the Revolution of the Heavenly Bodies . In 1543, Copernic wrote On the revolution of the heavenly Bodies. In 1544, Coprenicus published On The Revolution of The Heavenly Bods .
 Copernicus’s observations of the heavens were based on those of Greek and Arab astronomers . Copernic's observations were based not on his own observations, but those of those of the Greeks and Arabs .
 Gold and silver shipped to Seville from Chile and Mexico from 1503 to1660 . Silver was more important than gold and silver .
 Vesalius’s On the Fabric of the : Human Body was published in 1543 . Also published in the same year was Vesalusius's On the Fabrics of the Human Body . Vesalurus’ book was published at the same time .
 Charles V had to skirt its threat to his authority as Natives and llamas were pressed i into service to transport silver from Potosi, Bolivia . Charles V was forced to skirt the threat of his authority in 1531 .
 The result, decided at the Battle of Miihlberg in April 1547, was ' overwhelming military success ' for Charles . The result of the battle was 'an overwhelming success '
 Spanish Empire, for it was New 2 World silver from Potosi that drove : Spanish trade with China just as Protestant of Trent aimed to eradicate corruption, make the Church's teachings more coherent .
 France temporarily sidelined in 1546 after he feel able to confront it directly . Persistently Ottomans, he had had little option but to appease the league [see 1532]
 In 1545, Spanish colonists in northern Mexico, it would prove it financed Spain's attempts to European dominance . Spain would finance its attempts to become dominant in Europe .
 In the same year, at Trent in the Italian Alps, the Catholic Church Reformation by reforming and remodeling itself . The Catholic Church in Trent reformed and remodeled itself .
 The Council project itself as a dynamic and rise to a series of new Catholic 1951-52 and 1959-63 . The Council was formed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Henry VIII's Church of England was Protestant only in its rejection of papal authority . Henry VIII was Protestant in his rejection of the papal's authority .
 He was a consistent champion of the Indians in the face of routine brutality by the Portuguese colonizers . He was consistent champion for the Indians .
 Many of the outward forms of Catholic worship, including bell-ringing, were forbidden . Bells were also forbidden in the Catholic Church .
 France allied with the Ottomans in the Mediterranean, and with a series of German Protestant princes, notably Maurice of Saxony, in Germany . It was also allied with a number of Protestant princes in Germany, and the Ottoman Empire .
 England would make a late and disastrous contribution to the Spanish cause In 1557 .
 Henry VIII's daughter, Mary, became queen in 1593 and married Charles V's son, the future Philip II of Spain, in 1554 . This came about because Mary's marriage to the future king, Philip II, was made after she married the future queen of Spain .
 That the ruler of an England that had been Protestant since 1534 should be married to the son of the most militantly Catholic ruler in Europe is easily explained . The queen was married to a son of a Catholic ruler who had been a Protestant since the 1534 .
 Mary 1 was determined on the full restoration of Catholic —and papal —supremacy . Where her brother, Edward VI, had been aggressively Protestant, she was no less aggressively Catholic .
 For the first time Protestantism was seen : to be as intolerant of heresy as Catholicism as Catholicism . For the ' first time Protestants were seen as intolerants of heresy .
 The Peace of Augsburg of 1555 made plain that Charles V could never impose himself militarily on those of his nominal subjects within the Holy Roman Empire who had embraced Protestantism .
 Charles allowed his brother Archduke Ferdinand, Holy Roman Emperor designate, to negotiate a compromise, the Peace of Augsburg, agreed in September 1555 . Charles accordingly, and reluctantly, agreed to the peace of Augustsburg .
 At its heart was a formula—cuius regio eius religio — that allowed each ruler to impose his own religion on his territory .
 The choice was between Catholicism and Lutheranism only . Calvinism was not included in the choice .
 The accession of the 14-year-old Akbar to the Mughal throne in 1596 marked a decisive moment in the dynasty’s fortunes . Akbar was 14 when he became the ruler of India in the 15th century .
 His father, Humayun, had seen a substantial erosion of Mughal power in the face of Afghan and Hindu advances . His father saw the erosion of his power in face of the Afghan, Hindu advances.
 Akbar fought off a determined Hindu attempt on his throne at the Second Battle of Panipat in November 1554 . Akbar presided over an enormous expansion of Mughal power .
 The claims of Russia’s czars to be the sole legitimate heirs of Rome led naturally to a belief that the expansion of Russia by conquest was not just desirable but inevitable . The expansion was inevitable .
 By 1552 China agreed to allow Portugal a trading post in Macau on the south coast of China . The Chinese, always suspicious of Portuguese intentions, had thawed during the 1540s .
 The Spanish trading system would prove a crucial link in the Portuguese, later Spanish, global trading system . It would, in turn, prove a key link to the Portuguese and Spanish trade system .
 In 1557, Mary | of England (see 1552-54) was persuaded by her husband Philip II to join Spain in its renewed war with France . Mary of England joined Spain in 1557 .
 Calais had been English since 1360 and was the country’s last foothold in continental Europe . This proved disastrous, leading directly to the loss of Calais to the French in January 1558 . Calais was the last foothold to the continent .
 Mary had been unable to have children and when she died in November 1558, she was succeeded by her Protestant half-sister Elizabeth . Elizabeth was the daughter of Anne Boleyn .
 By the terms of the treaty, Philip II . was tacitly making plain m that the . contributions of the Netherlands to the conflict had been to advance Spain's Italian goals . Philip II. made it clear that the military and financial contributions .
 Future conflict in the Spanish Netherlands was more or less guaranteed . Future conflict between the Netherlands and Spain is expected to be inevitable .
 Astrakhan began the expansion of its boundaries and its territory and Black Sea . The result was the death of the French king, Henry Henry .
 In the Edo period much ingenuity went into the designs of carved toggles called netsuke . netsuke stops inro from slipping off belt human figure connecting cord .
 The merchant class grew wealthier and better educated, and began to enjoy arts that were previously the preserve of the landowning elites and the samurai warrior class . In Japan, the merchant class became wealthier and educated .
 Japanese craftsmen were inspired by the culture of ukiyo (Floating World}, itself inspired by Buddhist idea that all is illusion . Mount Fuji top piece emphasizes height .
 In Edo Japan ukiyo became associated with fleeting pleasures, from dallying with courtesans to attending kabuki dance dramas . Ukiyo was once associated with dashing with courtesses and playing with courtiers .
 18th century brass lantern disassembles into five parts . Intended for exterior use, probably at an entrance approach, this monumental brass . lantern disassembled .
 18th century Buddhism lay at the heart of Tokugawa ideas of a coherent society . Wooden Buddha figure 18th Century Buddhism was key to Tokugwa ideas .
 Ivory figure of an old woman carrying a bundle of faggots carries the inscription of Gyokusen . Imari charger is dominated by blue, pink, and orange shades .
 The Livonian Order lost East Prussia in 1525 when the Teutonic Grand Master, Albrecht von Hohenzollern, converted to Protestantism . Russia, Sweden, Poland, Denmark, and Denmark dismembered the Baltic territories from 1561 .
 Livonia was a Crusading frontier entity . Originally a victim in part of the Reformation, but more of PolishRussian rivalries . Neither willing to see the other strengthened In the region at its own expense .
 The killing of 80 Huguenots at Vassy : in northeast France in March 1562 : was the spark that began the French : Wars of Religion crown or the nobles, whether : Catholic or Huguet .
 Protestants were known as Huguenots, from the Swiss: German Eidgenossen or “oath companions” Protestants were Huguensots . Protestants were also known as “huguens’s”
 It was intended to underline the piety as well as the majesty of Spain’s rulers .
 The first modern naval war ensued, with sailing ships, rather than galleys, heavily armed with cannon . It was fought in the early years of the first naval war .
 Both countries were competing for control of the maritime invasion routes . The Danes supported by the semi-independent German city of Luibeck .
 Custom-built men-of-war ships were the most formidably powerful weapons of the period . But the ships were prodigiously expensive and expensive .
 Florida on the banks of the St. John’s River on the site of what today is Jacksonville .
 Spanish force determined not to allow French settlers, especially : Protestant ones, to encroach on : a territory where they enjoyed superiority . The Spanish force was determined to protect the area from French settlers .
 All the settlers and 'the relieving force, bar a number of women and children, were » killed . All the settler and the relieving . force were killed .
 Breugel’s Massacre of the Innocents has a Biblical subject, in reality it is acommentary on Spanish brutality during the Dutch Revolt .
 Ivan IV never had to contend with the substantial vested interests— mercantile, aristocratic, or clerical — that frustrated his counterparts in Western Europe . Ivan IV (see panel, right) never faced a substantial vested interest that frustrated Western Europe. Ivan IV was the only son of
 His principal opponents were the Cossacks, the boyars, the ‘al Spanish settlement St. St. 'al Spanish’ St. Louis . The boyars were the free-ranging frontiersmen, and the Russians .
 Augustine in Florida, founded by Spain in August 1565, is the oldest continuously inhabited European settlement in North America . St. Augustine is named after Spain's hereditary nobility . It is also known as the oldest continually inhabited North American settlement .
 The Cossacks were co-opted as allies by the obvious strategy of bribing them . From 1565, the boyars were dispossessed, and in most cases slaughtered .
 Their former estates became lvan’s ‘private estates’ The oprichina was a vast area of central Russia that became part of a new nobility .
 The Netherlands, whether : Protestant or Catholic, had no desire to submit to Philip’s rule ' given that this would mean ' surrendering its own ‘liberties’ — IVAN THE TERRIBLE .
 In 1563, a Japanese daimyo who in 1563 had converted to Christianity, gave permission for Portuguese traders and missionaries to establish a port at a fishing village . Nagasaki .
 Until the suppression of Christianity in Japan in 1614, Nagasaki, a Jesuit colony, was almost entirely Catholic . Nagasaki was Portugal's most important trading center in East Asia .
 The most urgent task facing Akbar in his consolidation of Mughal power in India (see 1555-564) was the defeat of the Hindu Rajputs .
 This was a decade-long campaign, which climaxed in 1569 with the fall of the fortresses of Mewar and Ranthambore . The campaign ended in 15th, 1569, when Mewar fell from its fortresses .
 Akbar married a series of Hindu princesses, tying his defeated enemies to him in matrimonial alliances . Having secured the submission of the principal Rajput rulers, he had 36 wives in all .
 Last of Jagiellonian rulers of Lithuania and Poland to produce heir led to formal union between the two states .
 This new PolishLithuanian Commonwealth became the largest territorial state in Europe . Poland was the first Polish nation to become a nation of its own .
 The move was prompted by Sigismund's desire to ensure that his dynasty’s territories were preserved, and the need to protect Lithuania from the Ottomans and the Russians . The move prompted by the desire to protect his dynasty's territories, and to protect them from the Russians
 The Northern Rising of November 1569 was the most serious threat to Elizabeth I’s ' pragmatic Protestantism' Elizabeth I was the prime minister of the 15th century .
 Gerardus Mercator was an engraver and a mathematician as well as a skilled cartographer . Mercator projection remains the most familiar map of the world .
 From the 1570s, three galleons made an annual round-trip between Acapulco in Mexico and Manila in the Philippines . From the 1670s to the mid-1600s, the ships made a round trip to the Philippines every year . The first time three
 Spain imported silks, spices, porcelain, lacquerware, and ivory in return for New World silver . In return for silver, Spain brought in silks and spices .
 An estimated 20,000 Ottomans and 7,500 Christians died at the Battle of Lepanto . Christians failed in the wider goal to retake Cyprus, the threat of : Ottoman expansion in the western Mediterranean was ended .
 Catherine de Medici inspects a pile of corpses at St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre . The Huguenot Francois Dubois was the leader of the French Revolution .
 Inca state was set up in the Upper Amazon in 1539 under a minor Inca noble, Manco Inca Yupanqui, in a small settlement, Vilcabamba .
 Catherine de Medici feared for her son’s throne as she was alarmed by growing Huguenot power .
 Spain waged an intermittent, generally ineffective campaign against the Spanish in the 1930s .
 Vilcabamba was overrun in 1572 and the last Inca leader, Tupac Amaru, was executed . Vilabamba is one of the Inca's last cities to fall victim to the Spanish conquistador .
 In 1566, a delegation of Dutch nobles appeared before Margaret of Parma . Margaret was half-sister of Philip Il and governor-general of the Netherlands .
 The name was taken up by the protesting Dutch, particularly the Sea Beggars . Privateers (or pirates) attacked Spanish shipping from 1568 to 1568 .
 The Sea Beggars depended to a considerable extent on support from England, discreetly doing what it could to disrupt Spain .
 On his death in 1559, she became monarch in all but name as France fell into turmoil . Her first two sons, Francis Il and Charles IX, proved too young and inexperienced, and Henry III was facing a deteriorating political situation .
 Huguenot takeover was in the : offing and could only be forestalled : only by killing all the principal : Huguensots in the city . Huguennots were in the process of taking over the city of Paris .
 Algiers In 1529, Tripoli in 1551, and Bugia in 1555, were lost to the Spanish . Al Qaeda in the Middle Ages was a major factor in the rise of terror in North Africa .
 The result was a near ' continuous fire' against which the Takeda clan’s conventional cavalry and infantry were helpless . The result of the attack on the Japanese capital was the result of a near constant fire .
 Spain's efforts to suppress the ' Dutch Revolt (see 1572-73) foundered in 1575 . Spain's attempt to suppress Dutch revolt foundered .
 The Ottomans’ attempts to confront the Safavids in Persia were distracted by their conflicts with Spain . Just as PHILIP II’s attempts to . reassert his authority over the heretical Netherlands were derailed by his . simultaneous need to confront . the Ottom
 The pause in the conflict after the fall of Tunis in 1574, confirmed by a peace treaty in 1580, freed both states to pursue their goals elsewhere . The peace treaty between the two states was confirmed by the peace treaty .
 The fall of Tabriz in 1585 saw both Azerbaijan and Georgia incorporated into the Ottoman empire . The Ottomans had a string of conquests in Georgia and Azerbaijan that saw them incorporated within their empire .
 In August 1578, the king of Portugal was killed at the Battle of Alcacer Quibir in northern Morocco . Sebastian was killed in the battle, which took place at the end of 1578 .
 Ahmad al-Mansur was confirmed as the new sultan of an Ottoman-backed Morocco . He was to be confirmed as a new Sultan of Morocco .
 Philip II was forced to agree not just to pull out his troops but to restore traditional privileges across the provinces . After the Pacification of Ghent (see 1576), Philip II agreed to restore the traditional privileges .
 On the question of religion, he remained adamant— Catholicism must be restored everywhere, he said . But on the . question of . religion, Pope Francis remained adamant .
 To the miseries ' of the Netherlands were added » the horrors of civil war . The Dutch Civil War was the first civil war of its kind .
 The rawhide : helmet with copper : gilt was so effective it was widely imitated . In Europe in the 17th century, the helmet was widely admired .
 Philip Il of Spain’s claim to his authority, while his Songhay territory yy Ze the Portuguese crown after the reorganization of the tax system in 1625, was made good in August 1580 by a combination of military force and bribery . The Portuguese crown became vacant
 United Provinces—declared their : : : avoid problems of inflation created ' by a paper currency and debased ' coinage . The U.S. has declared its currency to avoid inflation .
 With Spanish king now technically deposed, a new throne, that of the Netherlands, was created and accepted by the Duke of Anjou , brother of Henry Ill of France . The Dutch throne was created by the brother of the Spanish king .
 Francis, Duke of Anjou, was made king of the Dutch in 17th century . He ruled the Dutch from 16th century until 18th century, when he became king of France .
 It was introduced to simplify China's tax system and to entire Ming economy . Redistribution of land guaranteed the revenues needed to complete his conquests .
 Pope Gregory XIII (1502-85) decreed a revision to the Julian Calendar, introduced in 46BCE, in 1582 . Julian Calendar underestimated length of every year by 11 minutes . Julian calendar has been updated since 1582, when it was introduced .
 The Battle of Zutphen in September 1586 was a comprehensive defeat of the combined Anglo-Dutch forces by the Spanish . The battle was the result of a combined defeat by the combined forces .
 In a series of plundering voyages to the Caribbean, Drake had highlighted how Spain’s lucrative New World trade could be disrupted . Drake had been exploring the New World in his first voyage .
 In April 1587, Elizabeth despatched him on a mission to Spain with a goal of further raiding and destruction . He was sent to Spain by Elizabeth Elizabeth in 1587 to further raiding .
 She almost immediately changed her mind, but her message never reached Drake . Characteristically, she almost immediately reversed her mind . The message was sent to Drake .
 Christianity in Japan thrived when introduced by the ' Portuguese in the mid-16th ' century . Catholic cousin, Mary, Queen of ' Scots, executed in 1587 as a dangerous claimant to her throne .
 By about 1580, there were an estimated 130,000 Japanese Christians, most in and ' around Nagasaki . Most of the Christians were in Nagasaki, most of them in and around the city .
 It showed how outright military success was elusive, and that logistical difficulties confronted any long-range military operation . The operation was the first of its kind in Afghanistan .
 Launched on May 30, 1588, the Armada was the victim of English seamanship, of lengthening lines of supply, and of the weather . The gale-wracked Spanish fleet was forced home in disarray .
 Spanish hopes of exterminating Protestant heresies were decisively checked . The 16th century was the last year of the Inquisition .
 Elizabeth faced many problems on her accession to the English throne in 1558 . She faced religious division, economic hardship, and threats from Scotland, France, and Spain . Elizabeth faced economic hardship and religious division .
 She overcame them with a combination of guile and intelligence . She presided over a reinvention of England as a defiantly self-confident Protestant nation .
 France, stabbed by Dominican monk, brought Henry of Navarre : to the throne and Spanish Armada ' plunged France into crisis . France stabbed by a Dominican monk .
 Mughal device served as an elaborate and . elbow helmets with nose and neck guards . as well as Dastana forearm guard protector to deflect enemy arrows and blades .
 Forearm guards (dastanas) were worn by Mughal warriors to shield limbs from glancing blows . Date unknown .
 Mughal rulers See dominated most of India for more than two centuries . Solid weapons could crush enemy skulls, even through plate armor .
 Mughal kings blended Persian and Islamic Ivory priming powder horn military and artistic influences into India’s indigenous Hindu culture . Through military might 2S carved in ivory and administrative prowess they integrated Hindus ~~ ~~ and Muslims into a rich culture of imperial splendor .
 The Date unknown result was one of the most impressive medieval empires, which at its height commanded vast wealth . The Mughal empire assimilated Hindus into its ruling elite .
 This powder horn, expanded education, and provided patronage in the arts and literature . used on hunts, has an antelope shape. used to have been used in hunting . The powder horn was used to provide patronage for the arts .
 Hunting and horsemanship were favorite pastimes of Mughal rulers, who created huge hunting parks . Hunting parks were created by the rulers of the Mughals . Hunt paintings were created in 17th century .
 Miniature painting, introduced as manuscript illustration, was most prized . Miniature paintings were most prized.
 The extraordinary wealth of the Mughals was evident in their love of jeweled objects . TESS NNN IES SS Sarpech dates unknown .
 17th century Jade could only be worked using diamond dust, so it was highly prized in Mughal society . This sarpech was made of gold, emeralds, diamonds, rubies, and a pearl .
 The splendor of the Mughal court is clear from this painting of the emperor Jahan among his nobles, grouped in strict hierarchical order around the throne .
 The rigid torque or necklace was known as a hansli, because it was designed to rest on the wearer's collarbone . Jahan, the fifth Mughal emperor, was the fifth emperor of the Mighal Empire .
 Mughal craftsmen were famed for the intricacy of their work . Talisman date unknown . Mughals were famous for their intricate work .
 Hideyoshi based himself at Edo, where the feudal nobility, now subservient to him, were required to spend every other year . From 1590 Hideyoshoto based himself in Edo where he lived .
 It proved a highly effective elaborate social structure was who had to pay heavy taxes . Paris besieged Paris in May 1590. (see 1588-89) besieged in 1590 .
 The siege was broken in September by Spanish troops under the Duke of Parma . The siege began in September and was finally broken by Spanish forces .
 The invasion involved a ' perilous four-month crossing of the Sahara by a fighting force of 4,000 men sustained by 8,000 camels . The invasion took place in the Sahara and involved a force of four months crossing the Sahara .
 Seven-year war began in the spring of 1592 when Japanese forces mounted a sustained invasion of Korea . The war lasted for seven years with Japanese forces occupying Korea .
 Japanese land victories in Korea were matched by Korean naval victories . The heavily armed and protected Korean turtle ships proved decisive against Japan's weakened fleets .
 Chinese intervention late in the year tipped the balance against Japan . China intervened in the way of Japan's economic success .
 Hideyoshi renewed the campaign in 1597, sending larger forces to Japan . In 1597 he sent larger forces into the country to defeat the rebels .
 The result was a further defeat for Japan in 1598, but the savage fighting devastated Korea . The result of the brutal fighting was further devastating for Japan .
 The Rialto Bridge over the Grand : Canal in Venice was completed in : 1592 .
 In this Portuguese map of Mombasa, Fort Jesus is depicted bottom right . Fort Jesus was built in the 1920s and is located in Momba .
 The OTTOMAN-HABSBURG FRONTIER, generally stable after the renewed Ottoman attempt on Vienna, was a key focus of Ottoman-Christian conflict . In 1529, the Ottoman-Hambamburgian fortress was the focus of the Ottoman-
 A series of inconclusive campaigns followed In Hungary and the Balkans . Ottoman vassals of Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia supported the Habsburgs .
 The Treaty of Zsitvatorok of 1606 was to leave the frontier in a state of simmering uncertainty . The net result of the eventual peace settlement left the frontier with simmering tensions .
 Father Diego Escobar de Zambrana baptized Maria, daughter of Juan Jimenez de la Cueva and Maria Melendez . Maria was baptized in St. Augustine, Florida, in June .
 The event was recorded in the oldest public document in what would become the United States . Is the first authentic record of a child born to European settlers there .
 Fort Jesus in Mombasa, East Africa was built at the command of Philip Il and completed in 1593 . Fort Jesus was completed at the end of the 15th century .
 It proved to be crucial to Portuguese endeavors in the Indian Ocean throughout the 17th century .
 All four Dutch ships set out for the East Indies in 1595 made it back safely to Amsterdam with their cargo in 1599 .
 The final French War of Religion was played out after 1595 . The French Wars of 1595 were the last of the French Wars .
 Henry IV converted to Catholicism in 1593, succeeded in winning broad acceptance as king . Henry IV succeeded by converting to Roman Catholicism .
 League, supported by Spain, while demonstrating to Huguenots : that, Catholic or not, he was no puppet of the Spanish monarchy . League . League, while . demonstrating to the Huguensots : . that, . that . he was . no puppet . of the
 Spanish-Catholic League force . in Burgundy was followed by the following spring by a renewed Spanish offensive that saw the . capture of Calais and Amiens . The following spring, the Spanish captured Calais and . Amiens and captured Calais .
 The inevitable sieges by Henry © followed, and the capitulation of Amiens in September 1597 ' marked his final triumph .
 Toyotomi ordered the deaths of 26 Christians, including six Franciscan missionaries and 20 Japanese . The ban on Christianity in Japan had been enforced only partially since 1587, but in December 1596, he killed 26 Christians in Japan .
 On February 5, 1597, in Nagasaki, Japan, they were strapped to crosses and speared to death . The men were strapped with crosses and killed in 1597 .
 The Edict of Nantes of April 1598 was symbolized by the Edict . Henry IV brokered by Henry IV in France after 1597 . Edict symbolized the uneasy compromise .
 Protestants in France were granted the right to organize a quasi-independent state within France . Under it, Protestants in the country were granted right to form quasi-separate state . Protestants were able to organize an independent state of France .
 The Crown guaranteed their security, paying them to garrison their towns . Not only could they practice their religion freely, other than in Paris, but the Crown guaranteed them security .
 The French Wars of Religion ended in a pragmatic end to a French War of Religion . But the end of the French Wars was not enough to satisfy no one, and that's not enough .
 William Shakespeare exerted more influence on English literature and European drama than any other writer . The Huguenots still felt themselves unequally treated compared to the Catholics, while the Catholics were horrified that the Huguensots should be tolerated at the age of 16 .
 Between April and August The Spanish lost 80 percent of the fleet anchored at Cadiz . The Spanish fleet was at the center of the world's largest naval base .
 The Dutch set many of their ships on fire to deny Armada, the Dutch determined 2 to break into the spice trade . Armada was the first ship to set fire to the Dutch in order to deny the Armada .
 Stone Age society was remarkably well adapted to the new environment . Although theirs was still a Stone age society, they were remarkably adaptable to the environment .
 Known as the Classic Maori phase, the culture was distinguished by elaborate wood s carving, patterned bone tools and weapons, and substantial earthwork settlements . The culture is known as the 'Classic Maori' phase, and is distinguished by intricate wood carving .
 The establishment, with royal mee ane . ane tf) Se ih es yi \ J) Pa ; + n trading with Surat, a key center of Indian Ocean trade, in 1608 .
 Its navigators outflanked the Portuguese In the Indian Ocean . They exploited them with a single-mindedness that left their predecessors floundering .
 James did manage to drive through repeal of mutually hostile laws . Although they remained two quite clearly separate countries, sharing only a common monarch, James managed to drive the repeal .
 The closest he came to the union he sought was an Anglo-Scots flag, the Union Jack, known for his preferred French flag . He had already been King of Scotland, as well as the medieval castle, with high walls, was vulnerable .
 Many fortified towns were beyond the range of contemporary guns, and a blockade was the only practical means of taking them . So much so that many fortified towns could not be taken by modern guns .
 The death of Czar Boris Godunov in 1605 brought to a head a political crisis rapidly engulfing Russia . Ships of English goal was one of the ships of the day .
 Russia came to terms : with Sweden in 1617 at the cost of ' giving up its access to the Baltic' In 1619, the Polish-Russian conflict was ended by Russia ' ceding substantial territories on : its western border .
 Jamestown was the first permanent English settlement in North America . It was established in 1607 on the James River in what is now Virginia .
 After sailing through the Tuamotu Archipelago in February 1606, he reached the New Hebrides in May, but was swept out to sea by the trade winds . He was forced to return to New Spain .
 The expedition had a second ship, under the command of Luis Vaez de Torres . The expedition was led by the expedition's first ship .
 He discovered the strait that bears his name between New Guinea and Australia . Continued to the west, he discovered the continent in the process of sighting the continent . The strait bears the name from New Guinea .
 In the event, his discoveries, meticulously noted but never published, would not be followed up by Spain . Spain would not follow up .
 The first permanent English settlement in North America was established in 1607 . On May 4, 1607, the first permanent settlement was established .
 Coin depicts the Doge of Venice receiving the city’s banner from a dominating St. John's Cathedral . Coin was made in 16th century Italy .
 Lippershey’s device was crude, only magnifying by three times . It was soon exceeded by others, and soon became commonplace .
 It was still a milestone in the development of scientific observation in 17thcentury Europe . But it was still an important milestone in scientific observation .
 Since 1606, the Dutch had been trying to broker a truce with Spain to halt the ongoing wars of the Dutch Revolt . The Dutch were trying to stop Spain's ongoing wars with the Spanish .
 The Dutch claimed the region for the Dutch intended to do. River to present-day Albany, New York . The area was claimed by the Dutch to be the birthplace of New York City .
 Both had been sparring for control of the duchy of JulichCleves in Germany, threatening a renewed pan-European religious conflict .
 With Henry's death, both could now legitimately retire with no loss of face . Henry's widow: "I'm not going to be able to retire. I'm not afraid to."
 Galileo Galilei, born in Pisa, was an Italian scientist who, despite obstruction from religious orthodoxy, revealed an entirely new, scientific understanding of the world . Less than a year after Hans Lippershey claimed to have invented a telescope, Galileo .
 The Church regarded his revelations as heresy but, reluctant to condemn him outright, did its best to accommodate him . Church regarded him as a scientist but accepted his revelations .
 King James I of England authorized a new English translation of the Bible in 1604 . In 1604, King James II of England approved a new Bible translation .
 It was felt that both contained minor inaccuracies and neither fully reflected the doctrinal authority and structure of the Church of England .
 The new translation was published in 1611 as The Holy Bible . It was the work of 47 scholars under the direction of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bancroft .
 By the 18th century it was widely regarded by all English-speaking Protestant churches as the definitive English-language Bible . The Bible was accepted relatively slowly by the Anglicans, but was widely accepted by all Protestant churches .
 Lippershey’s device, had devised this explosive revelation was OXFORD his own. It was only when the revised edition was issued in the late 18th century that it became commonly referred to 15 Lipperhey‘s device . This explosive revelation is OX
 Galileo began to observe the ‘three fixed stars, invisible to the naked eye, that were next to the planet Jupiter . It was with this basic instrument that, in January 1610, Galileo began . Galileo .
 Scholars from each institution translated the Bible from Greek, Hebrew, and Latin into English in 1604-08 . King James Bible was translated into English between 1604 and08 .
 Denmark and Sweden at the mouth of the Baltic—was a central preoccupation in the continuing Scandinavian ' struggle for supremacy in the Baltic . The Danish city of Copenhagen was the center of the battle for dominance in the region .
 Dutch and England in particular 'supported the Swedes once : a Danish victory threatened. : Future conflict was, in effect, ' merely postponed .
 Jamestown in Virginia endured : what was known as the Starving Time, a systematic attempt by the Powhatan Indians to starve the colony into submission .
 Nicotiana rustica was so harsh as to be unsmokeable . Indians cultivated tobacco but the native strain was so hard to smoke .
 Its results were generally only to inflame religious passions and create tensions that still slumber today . It created a Catholic underclass, creating tensions that today slumber in the Catholic community .
 The title page of Don Quixote, part one of w hich was published in 1605, and part two in 1615. AS < Qo oo a oo oF ye > a
 The influence of France's legislative assembly waned in the 17th century . The Estates-General withered almost entirely . The European Union was established in China in 17th Century .
 France would not meet again until 1789, by which point France would be on the verge of revolution . But it would meet again at the end of the 17th century, when it would be at its peak .
 China was grappling with financial crisis and social breakdown in 1615 . By 1615, China was struggling to cope with a financial crisis .
 Wei Zhongxian had ' ensured the execution of the leading Donglin academics' by 1624 . By 1624, we had ensured that the leading academics were executed .
 In 1615, the Dutch cemented their 1609 claim to the region of present-day Albany by building Fort Nassau at the same site . The Dutch built the fort at the site in 1615 .
 Since 1599, he had united other Manchu tribes in the Eight Banners military system . He had united them in the military system.
 Dutch expedition under Jakob le ' Maire and Willem Schouten found ' anew route through open water ' to the south, naming its southernmost island Cape Horn . Cape Horn was named by the Dutch .
 Gorée Island, to the south of | Africa’s Cape Verde, was 2 purchased by the Dutch from its ' Portuguese owners in 1617 . Gorée is located on the island of Gorée .
 The 1617 Treaty of Stolbovo 2 ended the war between Russia 2 and Sweden that had lasted seven ' years . The treaty was the result of a treaty between Russia and Sweden .
 By 1648, Germany was a scene of wholesale destruction and slaughter . It was mostly confined to Germany, which by 1648 was scene of slaughter .
 Ferdinand’s quest to erase Protestantism from all his dominions became a Europe-wide fight for supremacy involving, at different points, every major European power . Initially a religious conflict, Ferdinand's quest to eradicate Protestantism became a European-wide battle .
 Sir Walter Raleigh was executed by beheading at the Tower of London on October 29, 1618 . Raleigh was the English soldier and explorer and explorer who led the British expedition .
 He was one of the early English colonizers of Virginia, North America . His failure to find the legendary South American city of El Dorado had sealed his fate .
 The Atlantic slave trade reached its peak in the early 17th century . It was in the 18th century that it was reaching its peak . English privateers (state) were among the most successful privateers in the world .
 Slaves transported from a series of slave forts on the west coast of Africa to the burgeoning European colonial lands of the New World . Slaves were transported to the European colonies from Africa .
 Male slaves were branded with irons on the Atlantic Ocean crossing, which about 25 percent died . About 25 percent of slaves died during the Atlantic crossing .
 The work of the English philosopher Francis Bacon was to have a lasting impact . Bacon's work was the work of a philosopher who had a lasting legacy .
 The Dutch had first attempted to establish a trading post in Java in 1596 . The Dutch tried to supplant the Portuguese in the East Indies .
 From 1602, they also had to contend with English efforts to infiltrate themselves in the East Indies . The Dutchmen were also faced with English attempts to infiltrate them in the region .
 In 1619, the Dutch struck back decisively, ousting the English and their Javanese allies, and establishing themselves in Jayakarta, which they renamed Batavia . The Dutch established themselves in Batavia in 1619 .
 Novum Organum, one of the : great books of philosophy, was : might have expected . The book was written in 17th century .
 Thereafter, they scraped a desperate existence, dependent on uncertain reinforcement from England and their own meagrerere efforts . Thereafter the World Cup, they were forced to rely on their own efforts .
 The expiration in 1621 of the Twelve-Year Truce between Spain and the Dutch Republic in 1609 was, perhaps predictably, the signal for a further round of Spanish-Dutch conflict . The expiration of the 12-year Truce was the signal that a further conflict was likely to
 Both sides had increased their armies and navies in expectation of a resumption of the war . Both sides increased their navies to prepare for a return to the conflict .
 Indies were the only known sources of nutmeg and mace, spices that commanded a huge ' premium in Europe . Indies, were the . only known : sources of . nutmeg, mace and spices .
 Dutch, actively encouraged by the Governor-General of the East : Indies, Jan Pieterszoon Coen, set 'about the extermination of the . islanders'
 Richelieu claimed that his goals were ‘to destroy the military power of the Habsburgs, to humble the great nobles [of France], and to raise the prestige of the House of Bourbon in Europe’
 It was ambitious, and involved alliances with groups that 2 had little commitment to his program . The program is ambitious, but involved alliances that have little commitment, he said .
 The price of confronting enemies abroad and Protestants at home would be popular revolt in France against the financial and military burdens imposed by him . Eventually, the price would be public revolt against the burdens imposed on him .
 Huguenot military power at home ' (see 1597-98) was a permanent 2 threat to France's stability, but that persecution of Protestant worship would lead to last-ditch : resistance at home and imperil : France's alliances with foreign 2 Protestant powers, on
 Dutch, taking Breda after an : 11-month siege, while France became covertly involved in ' supporting an anti-Habsburg struggle in northern Italy . This was an attempt by Richelieu to sever the Spanish Road, the tenuous but vital link between Habs
 Peter Minuit, director-general of the Dutch West India Company's New Netherlands settlement, bought Manhattan island from its American Indian inhabitants on May 26, 1626 .
 Always strapped for money, , armies took funding into their own hands and imposed taxes directly on the peasants and the towns .
 Roman High Baroque was a strong Catholic response to the Protestant Reformation . It reasserted classical Renaissance architecture, reasserting classical Renaissance .
 After more than a year, the Huguenots lose control of the Protestant enclave in France . The loss of the town ended in October 1628, 1628 .
 The siege was Richelieu’s response to lingering hopes of Huguenot opposition to the French Crown . It was designed to crush resistance and dismantle its still formidable military . The siege took place in 17th century .
 Richelieu acknowledged their right to religious toleration, but made sure they could mount no further threat to the Crown .
 The publication in 1628 of On the Motion of the Heart and Blood, by royal physician William Harvey, marked one of the major discoveries of the 17th century . The discovery of the motion of the heart and blood was published by the royal physician .
 It explained both the circulation of the blood and the functioning of the heart, by using observation and experimentation .
 Chief minister of France, Cardinal ' Richelieu, inspects the formidable : sea wall defenses of La Rochelle, ' during the siege of 1628. emperor in 1628 .
 A way Polofcd woodcut depicting the siege yr ERG by the Holy Romar Empire . Were SF ts ts NW were SF ts NW .
 The Catholic Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand II was clearly winning the religious war . It was still essentially a religious war against the Roman Empire . Ferdinand II won the war with Ferdinand II .
 Sweden's Lutheran king, Gustavus Adolphus, presented himself as the savior of the Lutheran princes of north Germany . Exploiting this, Sweden's . king presented himself . as a savior of . north Germany. Exploited this .
 He had spent previous 19 years fighting the Russians, Poles, and Danes for control of the Baltic . He now hoped to dominate its German coast too - and did so .
 Marie de Medici was the second wife of King Henry IV of France . She attempted to displace : Cardinal Richelieu in 1630 .
 Russia besieged Smolensk in October 1632 . Russia was anxious to recover its losses to Poland-Lithuania under the Treaty of Deulino .
 Polish forces were unable to attempt a lifting of the siege for almost a year . Polish forces had been unable to try to lift the siege of the city for nearly a year.
 Battle of Lutzen, near Leipzig, : might then have confirmed 2 Swedish territorial ambitions in : Germany had King Gustavus Adolphus not been killed in the : battle .
 Galileo Galilei was 2 called before the Roman : Inquisition of the Catholic 6,000 6,800 : Church . Galilei called 2 called by the Roman . Inquisition . Galileo was called to the Roman Catholic Church in Rome .
 Albrecht Wallenstein led an Imperial army in defeat at the Battle of Lutzen . The defeat was one of the last times that Wallenstein was in charge of the Imperial army .
 Although generally successful, he was distrusted by almost everyone . He was believed to be negotiating a separate peace with the West .
 In February 1634 he was murdered by some of his own officers . He was charged with treason by Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand II, but was killed by his own soldiers .
 The Habsburgs won the battle of Nordlingen in southern Germany . It was not a conclusive end to the war, with the Swedes having failed to follow up their victory .
 Swedes on the verge of pulling out : of Germany, the French now took : the field themselves . The French now take the field in themselves .
 Swedish armies progressively ravaged Germany, gradually reversing previous losses, so Germany was 'devastated'
 Fasilides founded a permanent imperial capital at Gondar in 1636 . He founded the city in 1632 .
 The Fasil Ghebbi is a fortress complex that became home to Ethiopia’s emperors until the 18th century . The buildings he constructed there included the Fasil .
 Descartes, an advocate of rationalism, produced Discours de la Méthode in 1637 . He was an advocate for rationalism and a proponent of science .
 Price of TULIP BULBS COMPARED TO the annual incomes of a person who is a skilled trader and then suddenly nose-dived, allegedly ruining many investors' lives .
 A luxury item, they were seen as a safe haven for investment in an uncertain time . The luxury item was seen as an investment in the uncertain times .
 Tulip Mania prices are difficult to be certain about, and have been disputed . anecdotal evidence suggests significant highs in Tulipmania prices .
 It granted all of Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) to the Ottomans, while handing the city of Yerevan [in present-day Armenia] to the Safavid Persians . It also gave all of the region of modern Iraq to the Ottoman Empire .
 The problems that would eventually lead to the execution of Charles I of England in 1649 stemmed from the king's high-handed conviction that he could always impose himself on his kingdoms .
 This was not exclusively a matter of royal versus parliamentary authority . This is not exclusively an issue of royal vs. parliamentary authority, it was a matter for the Queen .
 Kirk elders considered any attempt to impose Anglican religious uniformity little better than papism . For their part, Scotland's Kirk elders, much like their Puritan counterparts In England, considered any attempts to impose uniformity .
 Pedro Teixeira’s : Amazon expedition was immense : and expensive . The expedition was an expedition to explore the Amazon in the Amazon .
 Pedro Teixeira (d.41) became the first person to make the return journey of the entire : length of the Amazon River . He reached Belém, at the river's mouth, more than two years after he had set out .
 An illustration of Malacca was taken from the Portuguese by the Dutch in 1641 . The Dutch took the picture of the city from Portugal .
 In April 1640 Charles recalled the parliament he had dismissed 11 years earlier . Charles had dismissed the parliament in 1639 .
 Determined not to submit to its lists of grievances, he dismissed it, but a second Invasion in August forced a recall . He dismissed it but it was a second invasion forced him to recall .
 Parliament presented a Grand Remonstrance, an accusation of royal abuses of power . Parliament presented the accusation in December 1641, 1641 . Parliament accused the royal of abuses of his power .
 The king responded, in January 1642, with an attempt to arrest his parliamentary opponents . The king tried to arrest the opponents, but the king died in 1642 .
 Poussin’s A Dance to the Music of Time shows four dancing figures representing poverty, labor, wealth, and pleasure in a perpetual cycle . Four dancing figures represent poverty, work and pleasure .
 French painter Nicolas Poussin completed A Dance to the Music of Time in 1640 . The work was a key work of the era .
 The course of the English Civil War that began in August 1642 was never Clear cut . The Civil War began in 1642 .
 It pitted a king bent on absolutism against a Parliament determined not so much to overthrow the monarchy as to reassert its claim to shared sovereignty .
 As the opening battles fought, Charles | proved himself a surprisingly obstinate and able war leader . Charles proved himself to be a surprisingly stubborn and able leader .
 He was soon to become undone, not just by his compulsive deviousness but by the fact that he found himself confronting increasingly assertive and better organized Parliamentarian forces .
 Oliver Cromwell (1599-1658) was a Puritan, East-Anglian country squire and Member of Parliament . Cromwell was a member of Parliament and a country squirter .
 Second Battle of Breitenfeld in October 1642 saw another decisive victory for Sweden in the Thirty Years’ War . Battle took place 11 years after the village had seen King Gustavus Adolphus defeat a Holy Roman Empire army .
 Rocroi marked the end of its dreams of European imperial dominance . Rocrois marked the . end of . its dreams .
 In this engraving, Torricelli demonstrates the existence of : atmospheric pressure through the : use of mercury-filled tubes . The barometer was created by the Italian scientist in 1903 .
 In May, the Manchus, allying with a remnant Ming force, crushed Li's army at the Battle of Shanhai Pass . Li's forces were defeated by the remnants of the Ming army . Li died at the end of his reign in China .
 By the autumn, the first Manchu Qing emperor of China, the six-year-old Shunzhi Emperor, had been installed in Beijing . The first Qing emperor was installed in the autumn .
 ' ultimate victory was . virtually guaranteed » when the main army : of Charles | was ' annihilated by Parliament's newly ' formed New Model Army . Naseby in June 1645, 'ultimate victory was virtually guaranteed'
 Only some areas of the vast empire were governed directly by the Manchu or settled by the Chinese . Only some of the empire was governed directly or settled in China .
 Carisbrooke Castle, on the Isle of Wight, England, was where Charles was imprisoned for 14 months, from 1647, after his defeat in the English Civil War .
 The Potala Palace, seen atop the Marpo Ri hill, rises more than 1,000 ft : (300 m) above the valley floor .
 The Massachusetts Bay Colony banned Jesuit priests from the colony in 1647 . Jesuit priests were banned from Massachusetts Bay colony .
 Founded as a staunchly Puritan enclave, the colonists loathed the Jesuits as a sinister manifestation of popery . Founded in 17th century, the colony was known for its Puritanism .
 French Jesuit missionaries in Canada were increasingly alarmed by the movement . They were determined that a movement “subversive to society” should have no place in the new colony . Also, they had converted many Huron and American Indians .
 As prehistoric humans skills advanced, clubs and stone hand-axes gave way to carefully crafted wooden spears . Wooden spears were used to hunt animals or impale fish .
 Even more effective weapons married wooden shafts with razor-sharp flint blades to form axes . Like arms and body armor, shields could be functional, decorative, or even decorative .
 During the medieval period in Europe, knights held high status in society, shields were embellished with elaborate scenes of courtly devotion or prowess in battle .
 Wooden bow combined with arrowheads made from sharpened flint proves a deadly combination . Wooden spear 5500-3300 BCE used to strike victims from a safe distance .
 Soft, easily worked metals such as copper replaced flint, followed by stronger, sharper, and longer Bronze Age and Iron Age swords, daggers and javelins .
 Until the advent of firearms, the history of handheld weapons Is one of variations on a theme, culminating in the sophisticated forging processes of Japan’s samurai swords, which at their height in the 14th-16th centuries wrapped Super-sharp steel around a flexible iron core .
 Chain mail was perfected in France in 11th-century France . Plated helmets, breastplates, and wooden shields were used by classical Greek and Roman armies .
 Full suits of armor were costly, so they were also used as status symbols . Full suits were costly so they became status symbols, and were also considered status symbols.
 Early armies use plated helmets, but most soldiers rely on leather caps . Most soldiers use leather caps instead of plated ones .
 Plated body armor is an early invention, but it is expensive and not always practical for movement in battle . Attic helmet 1400 BCE .
 Armor reached its greatest decorative heights during the Renaissance . Bronze ax was Mycenaean armor 5 te i two sections of skull plate join at comb .
 Adding carbon to iron produces steel, which allows bladed weapons to be mass-produced . Early Chinese crossbow 3rd-4th century weapon .
 Chain mail worn over a gambeson [padded jacket] saves lives . Chain mail was the first big change to sword design since Roman times. Chain mail is worn over gambeson .
 Gloves now have jointed fingers, while shoulder plates bring freer movement and less exposure . rotating cylinder, meant that multiple shots could be fired before reloading, allowing multiple shots to be fired .
 Paris was ' taken, the royal family fled, and Mazarin was : twice forced into exile . Mazarin: " Paris was taken and Paris was never taken again . Paris was . taken, and the royal . family fled . Paris . was taken . and Paris taken .
 War in Germany was brought to a close with a series of treaties collectively known as the Treaty : of Westphalia .
 France was still at war with Spain [as it would be withdraw its troops] as it would have withdrawn its troops . France would have been able to withdraw troops from Spain as it was at war .
 This depiction of the execution of King Charles of England outside the Banqueting House, in London, was painted by English artist John Weesop .
 High Court of Justice carried by a vote of 68 to 67 . Convicted as “tyrant, traitor, and murderer’ was carried out by a majority of the court .
 In reality, there Is little doubt that since the triumph of the parliamentary New Model Army, dominated by Oliver Cromwell, his death became a possible outcome to the crisis . The death of the soldier became possible outcome of the crisis.
 The awkward question was whether one form of tyranny was being swapped for another . "The tyranny of tyranny is not being replaced by tyranny of the past," says CNN's John Defterios .
 The royalists had an obvious figure to rally round, Charles's elder son, also called Charles . The royalist had the obvious figure in his party to rally around .
 Hobbes argued for absolutism of a sovereign authority in Leviathan . Hobbes published Leviathan in 1651 . The book was published by Thomas Hobbes .
 It was an early example of social contract theory [individuals in society are united by mutual consent] and was profoundly influential . It was a model for social contract theories .
 In 1648, the Khmelnytsky Uprising saw a Cossack revolt against the rule of the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth in the Ukraine, which had been awarded to Poland under the Treaty of Lublin of 1589 .
 The uprising climaxed in 1651 with the Battle of Berestechko, the largest single battle of the 17th century . The uprising began in 1649 and ended in 1654 .
 The ultimate effect of the struggle was a weakening of the Commonwealth, which was already wracked by internal disputes among its querulous nobles .
 The Coronation of Louis XIV is a tapestry fr oma painting by Charles Le Brun, court artist to Louis XIV . It shows the young Louis about to receive his crown .
 Taj Mahal, in Agra, India, was completed in 1653 after 19 years . One of the world's most famous structures, it was completed 19 years ago .
 Mughal emperor Shah Jahan's mausoleum was built in memory of his third wife, Mumtaz Mahal . It combined Indian, Persian, and Islamic styles of architecture .
 Various types of government for the new republic had previously tried, including military rule, while parliaments were formed and dissolved, generally by the irascible Cromwell .
 Inevitable that the vacuum could be filled only by the restoration of ' the actual king-in-waiting, the ' future Charles Il. Il. Charles . The future Charles I.I. will be the future Charles II .
 Khmelnytsky Uprising, the partial dismemberment of the Polish' Lithuanian Commonwealth by ' neighbors eager for territorial ' gains became inevitable . Khmelnnytsky's Uprising was the partial . dismemberments of the . Polish' Lithuania . Commonwealth by . ' neighbors
 Years’ War, the following year Sweden, too, invaded the country . The most enduring consequence ' of this calamitous period was not merely Poland's loss of the Ukraine to Russia under the ' Treaty of Andrusovo in 1667; rather, that Orthodox Russia was immensely boosted
 In two days, fed by relentless winds, it destroyed almost 70 percent of the city, consuming paper and wooden buildings . Around 100,000 people died in the two-day disaster .
 The SwedishDanish Wars of 1657-58 and 1658-60 developed into a largely separate conflict over control of the Baltic . Denmark joined the coalition confronting Sweden in Poland in June 1657 .
 Sweden had made consistent gains at Denmark’s expense since the mid-16th century . The prize, control of The Sound, the strategically and economically vital entrance to the Baltic, still under Danish control .
 Charles X of Sweden outflanked the Danes in the winter of 1657-58 . In February, he marched his troops across the frozen Baltic to Copenhagen .
 The Treaty of Roskilde in 1658 confirmed Sweden's territorial dominance . The treaty was signed by the King of Sweden in the 1658 .
 The second war, if less favorable to Sweden, still underlined Sweden’s Baltic superiority . Sweden's Baltic superiority underlined by the war .
 Ottoman Empire captured the Aegean islands of Lemnos and Tenedos from the Venetians in 1657 . Ottoman Empire now reinvigorated by Grand Vizier Koprulu Mehmed .
 The islands were used by the Venetians to blockade Constantinople, the Ottoman capital . The islands dominated the approaches to the Dardanelles .
 It ended two years of infighting between him and his brothers for their father's throne . This despite Shah Jahan still being alive, the throne was ruled by his brothers . It ended the infighting for the throne .
 Mughal emperor Aurangzeb is attributed to the Indian artist Bhawani Das . The near continuous warfare of his 49-year reign, In which immense i \ Conqueror of the World .
 A combined Anglo-French force defeated the Spanish in 1658 . France, on June 14, 1658, defeated Spain in the battle .
 Franco-Spanish War that had : begun in 1635, and as such the : last battle of the Thirty Years’ War . As such the battle was the last battle in which the Spanish and Spanish armies fought .
 English, to steal whatever advantage, commercial or ' territorial, they could over Spain, : hence the pragmatic alliance between Oliver Cromwell's : Puritan England with Louis XIV’s : Catholic France .
 Today, it 2 constitutes the oldest continuous 2 measurement of temperatures ' in the world . Today, the temperature measurement is the world's oldest continuous temperature measurement .
 Diarist John Evelyn recorded the overwhelming reception of Charles II in London in May 1660 on his restoration as king .
 By any measure, Charles's restoration was a vindication of the principles of kingship, as well as of the contradictory limitations of Oliver Cromwell's republican experiment . The restoration of Charles's reign was a triumphant vindication .
 Worldly, Knowing, and, at heart, lazy, Charles was always ready to compromise with his parliamentary opponents .
 His weakness for pleasureseeking combined with his instinctive sympathy for Catholicism, especially when funded by Louis XIV in France, highlighted a still unresolved political crisis . That said, his weakness . combined with . his instinctly sympathy for . Catholicism, he said, highlighted an unresolved political . crisis .
 France was divided made him aware of the need to develop a style of personal assertiveness ' and grandeur .
 FOR ALMOST FOUR DECADES the Dutch East India Company had controlled western Formosa . Its trading base Fort Zeelandia was at its heart .
 The Chinese Ming dynasty captured the fort in February 1662 . It was inadequately supplied by water, and was captured by the Ming dynasty .
 The pace of scientific investigation in the 17th century led Europe's scientists to share ideas, and then to form bodies devoted to a better understanding of science . Europe's scientific investigation led to the formation of bodies dedicated to science .
 In 1662, the Royal Society, the world’s oldest such scientific body, was founded in London . The Royal Society is the world's oldest such a scientific body .
 That it had royal approval showed how both the practical application of science and the pursuit of pure knowledge had become of interest to the state . That it showed how practical application to science and pursuit of knowledge became of interest .
 The people of New Amsterdam plead with its director-general, Peter Stuyvesant, not to resist the English warships gathering in the harbor .
 English raids on Dutch shipping and trading posts in this year were result of a desire to win as much Dutch trade as possible .
 English fleet arrived at New Amsterdam, the capital of the Dutch North American colony of New Netherland, in August 27, and demanded its surrender .
 Although the Ottomans gained favorable peace terms, ' their invasion was curtailed . The Ottoman invasion of the Ottoman Empire was also curtailed by the peace treaty .
 Adolf Ehrhardt, shows an attack by — : the Habsburg cavalry in the defeat of : the Ottomans at St. Peterburg, in the Battle of St. Hotham .
 Hooke's Micrographia was the first work under the patronage of the Royal Society . Hooke was a natural philosopher and polymath Robert Hooke . The work was first published by Hooke in 1903 .
 It was not merely the first time that those other than a closed circle of specialists had been made aware of the remarkable world revealed by microscopes . But it was not the first .
 His drawings of an ant, louse, and flea, lovingly detailed and precisely executed, sparked particular astonishment at the complexity of this hitherto unsuspected microworld .
 Robert Hooke’s : 1665 publication, : Micrographia, : shows a detailed illustration of anant . Anant .
 The Four Days’ Battle was an English attempt to destroy the Dutch fleet before it could grow to challenge them . The battle was the biggest engagement of the Second AnGLO-DUTCH War, which began in 1665 .
 The English suffered such losses that it handed the initiative to the Dutch . However, the Dutch were able to defeat the English .
 Dutch raid on the Medway River in June 1667 in the Thames estuary . Disaster then followed for England in 1667 after a daring Dutch raid .
 As the Great Plague ended, a new disaster overtook London, the Great Fire . The Great Fire burned from September 2 to 5 .
 London was still a medieval city, filthy and unplanned, with no great Spaces and few public buildings of note . It was still an unplanned medieval city with few great spaces and few buildings .
 The City, which was the commercial heart, was especially overcrowded and unsanitary . The City was the heart of the city, but was overcrowded . The city was the most densely populated city in history .
 As an arm of the state it was also : interested in discovering discoveries that could enrich its country, such as : in agriculture and armaments .
 The PolishLithuanian Commonwealth's calamitous war with Russia had begun In 1654 . The TREATY of ANDRUSOVO in January 1667 ended the war . In 1667, the Polish Commonwealth was defeated by the Treaty of Androva .
 It also climaxed The Deluge—its dramatic decline above allin the face of Russian expansion . It also culminates The Delug—its .
 Russia granted Smolensk and present-day Belarus . Russia could for the first time claim to have unified the Slavic peoples of the region .
 The completion of the Piazza San Pietro, by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, in 1667, saw Baroque Rome . Bernini's work in the 1667 saw the completion of his masterpiece, Piazzazzazzi San Pietre .
 Many of Rome's public spaces were ambitiously rebuilt by a series of architects to make them deliberately imposing, and worthy to be at the center of the Catholic Church . Architecturally, the public spaces have been rebuilt in Rome to be worthy of the city .
 The War of Devolution began in continuing claims to the Spanish Netherlands . The Spanish Netherlands was part of the Spanish colony of the Netherlands .
 France took some Habsburg cities in Flanders, as well as Franche-Comté to its east . It saw France take some of the most important cities in the region .
 England, Sweden, and the Dutch Republic forced the isolated Louis : to return most of his gains by the 1668 Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle . The Treaty was the high point of urban planning in . 1668 .
 Lost, by English poet John Milton : , gave the English language one of its greatest literary achievements .
 Louis XIV directed French forces at Lille during the War of Devolution . Siege of Lille was the French capital of the French city .
 The Portuguese trading post was part of the dowry of Catherine of Braganza, Charles Il’s Portuguese wife . The post was passed to the English Crown in 1662 .
 In 1668, the king leased it to the East India Company for an annual rent of £10 . It made it the Company's third trading post in India after Surat and Madras .
 Bombay Castle completed in 1675, from 1687 it became the focus of all the Company's trading in India . It resisted attempts to storm it by the Mughals and the Dutch .
 Welsh privateer (state-sponsored raider) Henry Morgan, famous for his attacks on Spanish settlements in the Caribbean, succeeded in one of the most daring assaults ever . Morgan captured the well-protected Spanish trading city of Porto Bello, in Panama .
 It won him both great wealth and further English support for his buccaneering endeavors . It also won him English support .
 Philip Il’s seizure of the Portuguese crown in 1580 was a sign of Spanish power . Recognition of Portuguese independence in 1668 under the Treaty of Lisbon was evidence of its decline . House of Braganza confirmed as rulers of Portugal .
 From 1640, Portugal had been in open revolt against Spain . In 1665, a combined Anglo-Portuguese force inflicted a crushing defeat on them .
 1670 Portuguese glazed tiles decorate the Sao Miguel Fortress in Luanda . The fortress was a key military strongpoint in the colonization of Angola in the 17th century .
 Aurangzeb's supposed religious persecution of Hindus and other minorities was one of the reasons for the Mughal Empire's disintegration .
 Aurangzeb was said to have systematically destroyed Hindu temples . Akbar had pursued an active policy of religious toleration as the most effective means of controlling his Hindu vassals .
 He banned the use of music, central to Hindu practice, perhaps in 1669, to this effect . In addition, he also banned use of Hindu music .
 He also had drawn up an exhaustive digest of Muslim law, the Fatawa-eAlamgri, said to be rigorously imposed .
 The number of Hindu temples said to have been destroyed varies improbably from 80 to 60,000 .
 That Aurangzeb was strongly anti-Christian, though, seems certain to have been true . Auranzeb was a strong opponent of Christianity, though .
 They learned that the best furs came from the Cree territory to the north of Lake Superior . They had learned that they had learned from Cree territory .
 The U.S. proposed a base in Hudson Bay via Hudson Bay rather south . The base would be easier to reach via the Canadian Strait of Spruceruce .
 The Hudson's Bay Company would become one of the great commercial enterprises of England, the basis of its claim to Canada, and source of regional rivalry with France . The company became one of England's most successful commercial enterprises .
 Dom Pérignon was a monk at the Benedictine Abbey of Hautvillers, in Champagne in northeast France, in 1670 . The claim that he invented the sparkling wine is largely discounted today .
 Stepan Razin, the Cossack leader, rose up against the nobility and the czar’s bureaucracy . He was devoted to eliminating the bubbles such wines produced, as : the pressure they built up in the ' bottles tended to explode them .
 IN 1671, PORTUGAL ended the INDEPENDENCE of the kingdom of Ndongo, in what is today Angola . The Portuguese ended the kingdom's independence in 1671 .
 A Portuguese colony had largely dominated the Ndongo since the 16th century . A rebellion by their king, Philip, in 1671, saw Portuguese troops capture the capital and take control of its territory .
 Anti-French alliances threw Spain and the Dutch Republic together after 1659 . Fears of Spanish dominance in Europe had allied France, England, and the Netherlands .
 The French would accompany the American Indians on fur-trapping expeditions . The English, and the Dutch before them, usually took delivery of furs from the Indians at their trading posts .
 The EXTENSIVE WATERWAYS of North America provided a ready-made means of exploring its interior . The waterways of the U.S. provide a ready to explore the interior .
 They turned back for fear of arousing Spanish hostility, but discovered the Missouri and Ohio rivers . They also confirmed that the river led to the Gulf and not the Pacific . The expedition found the Ohio and Missouri rivers .
 English exploration inland from their scattered coastal settlements was much more hesitant, rarely coordinated, and additionally blocked by the Appalachian mountain chain . English explorers were often more hesitant and rarely coordinated .
 Gabriel Arthur spent a year with a group of Tomahitan Indians in present-day Georgia . He unwittingly discovered what in the 18th century would be the principal route to Kentucky and the west .
 Qing coopted some of the more powerful Ming generals, making them regional governors and allowing them considerable latitude in their rule over what became almost independent territories . The Qing took over China from the Ming dynasty in 1644 .
 It was felt that if they enriched themselves, as they did on a prodigious scale, the less likely it was that they would revolt against them . It was thought they would be less likely to revolt against the government .
 The risk was that their progressively greater revenues would be matched by greater pretensions to rule China . The risk is that they would be more likely to do so if they were successful .
 In 1674, the Revolt of the Three Feudatories broke out across southern China in those provinces controlled by the three most prominent rebels . Wu Sangul, Shang Kexi Gungdong and Geng Jingzhong were joined by lesser Ming governors .
 In 1675, MUGHAL EMPEROR AURANGZEB ordered the execution of Tegh Bahadur, ninth guru of the Sikhs, after he refused to convert to Islam . He was executed in 1675 after refusing to convert, killing him .
 Sikhs would pose a growing military threat to Mughal rule, and contribute significantly to its collapse . It would be several years later that, under Singh's leadership, the Sikhs posed a military threat .
 The pattern of religious opposition to the Mughals was already well established in many parts of India, most obviously in the Western Ghats where Shivaji had declared the Maratha Empire .
 On June 18, 1675, a combined Prussian and Brandenburg army met and defeated a Swedish army, led by Count von Wrangel, near Fehrbellin, in Brandenburg .
 The Scanian War was itself a by-product of the Franco—Dutch War . It was a crucial moment in Sweden's long struggle to impose itself as the dominant Baltic power .
 Defeat at the hands of an otherwise relatively minor German state dealt the Swedes a lasting blow . The Swedes were defeated by the German state .
 The Asante dominated West Africa from the 1680s to the 17th century .
 Henry's intent ‘| vast dome and spire, with details to realize the . pragmatic reasons rather than had been to lift the city from medieval slum to a . capital worthy of the first power of Europe . Henry wanted the city to rival Rome for its Imposing public buildings
 The Louvre Palace was significantly enlarged and remodeled . The east wing encapsulated the French taste for Classicism at its most austere and precise .
 L'Hotel National des Invalides is the most famous hotel in Paris . The hotel was built by Louis XVI of France in 18th century .
 Les Invalides was conceived on a grand scale, with vast formal gardens ' picked out in gold' Designed by Liberal Bruant, the gardens were designed by the architect .
 Racine, Pierre Corneille (1606: 84), and Moliére thrived : under royal patronage, captivating : court audiences in different ways . Racine's work was first published in 17th century .
 There is doubt as to which European can claim to have ' seen the falls first' There is no doubt that the first Europeans have seen the Falls first .
 French Franciscan missionary : Louis Hennepin is generally credited with their discovery in 1677 . Frontispiece from the third edition of John Bunyan's The Pilgrim’s Progress is published in February 1678 .
 The underlying principle of the Act, which is incorporated into the American Constitution, remains fundamental to most Anglo-Saxon legal systems as an ultimate guarantee of individual liberty . The Act, passed by Congress in 1996, was passed by the U.S. Senate in 1996 .
 In August 1680, the Pueblo people of the colony of New Mexico rose against the Spanish occupiers . They drove them from the area for 12 years . The Spanish were driven out of the area .
 The Asante kingdom was formed from : the Akan, who dominated West ' Africa . It was founded in about 1680 . The kingdom was founded from the Akans .
 Canal du : Midi was a navigable inland waterway ' that stretched between the . Mediterranean Sea and the ' Atlantic Ocean . France to extend itself than the . construction of the Canal du . Midi . Canal du: Midi, a . navigationable inland . waterway .
 The Pueblo of southwest North America, so called by the Spanish for their pueblos, or villages, were famed for their sophisticated and elaborate pottery .
 It is characterized by a light background on which are painted stylized animals and repeated abstract patterns in ocher, black, and gray coloring .
 Peter the Great as czar of Russia brought to a close this vast nation’s vague, imperial influence as a semipower on the margins of Europe . The 1682 coronation of nine-year-old Peter brought to an end Russia's vague imperial influence .
 Peter's childhood was scarred by revolt, and it left him determined to punish his internal enemies . Peter was determined to reshape Russia as a western European power . Peter became a Russian president in 1877 .
 His version of Versailles, recreated on the edge of the Baltic, did not amount to much more than a statement of intent, but by the end of his reign Russia was a massive power-in-waiting, looming over Europe .
 York Facto P vast areas of North the Mississippi, confirming that . America claimed by these territories contained neither . AM ERI CA Cre Cre & ican France, as wellas the easily exploited wealthy natives ee RP pays pen Sere areas under Spanish nor obvious sources of gold, F
 As with the previous Ottoman attempt on the city in 1529, this was a direct assault on the Christian West . This was the first attempt to take over the city from the Ottoman capital .
 1683 Ottoman assault was a frantic final attempt to regain former glories in the face of internal weakness . But whereas 1529 had been the climax of a series of conquests that had seen the Ottomans sweep across Hungary .
 The siege was broken in September at Kahlenberg by a combined Imperial-Polish force led by the Polish king, Jan III Sobieski . Confronted with renewed resistance, the siege was finally broken .
 League of the Holy Roman Empire, Poland, and Venice, formed in 1684 under papal authority, driving them south ' across the Balkans . League of Holy Roman empire, Poland and Venice formed under pope's authority .
 Taiwan's Tunging kingdom, a supporter of China's ousted Ming, supported military assaults ' against the Qing since 16461 .
 Maunder Minimum, which had : begun in 1645 as a result of reduced sunspot activity, had by Thames Frost Fair, 1683-84 .
 The EDICT of Nantes, agreed by Henry IV in 1598, was essential to ending the French Wars of Religion . Henry IV signed a treaty with the Spanish king to end the French wars of religion .
 France's substantial Protestant Huguenot minority granted religious toleration in return for accepting Henry as king . Of necessity, it was a compromise .
 In October 1685, with the Edict of Fontainebleau, Louis XIV revoked it . The Edict was revoked by Louis XIV in 1685 .
 There was practically no European state that permitted religious toleration . There were no European states that permitted toleration of religious tolerance .
 In the NUMBER OF HUGUENOTS 'T WAS CLAIMED FLED FRANCE after LOUIS XIV ISSUED THE EDICT OF FONTAINEBLEBLEBLEAU religion, and that religion was Roman Catholicism . The number of French Huguettes who
 Huguenots who fled the country were among the most industrious In France . They were eagerly embraced by those countries to which they emigrated, chiefly England, the Dutch Republic, and Prussia .
 Charles III, younger brother of Charles I, brought a curious : incompetence to a brief : occupation of the English and Scottish thrones . Charles I was the youngest son of Charles III and Charles II .
 Dutch painting shows William III's fleet departing the Netherlands for England at the start of the Glorious Revolution of 1688 .
 The next month, William III of Orange landed in England with an army of 15,000 . William III arrived in England in 1777 .
 These two events provoked a kind of volcanic eruption in European political history . The two events were provoked by the events of the 1930s and 1940s .
 Louis's invasion, almost immediately bogged down in winter mud, eventually led to an eclipse of French power in the face of a Europe united in opposition to him . William III had become not just the joint monarch of England [with his wife, Mary] but the leader of the pan
 Isaac Newton published the universal law of gravitation in 1687 . It is one of the most remarkable of all scientific discoveries . Newton's discovery was one of his most remarkable discoveries .
 Glorious Revolution of 1688, was a triumph of Parliamentary authority, and England would be immeasurably strengthened . England would have been immeased by the revolution .
 James II of England abandoned an army he sent to confront William in 1688 . He fled to Louis XIV’s France after the invasion .
 Charles II had been happy to be financed by Louis XIV, but he had disguised the fact . Charles II was happy with the fact that Louis XIV was financing his son's birth .
 In March 1689, he landed with a French-financed army in Ireland, and attracting substantial Catholic support briefly threatened the new Dutch Protestant settlement . In 1689 he landed in Ireland with an army of French-funded troops .
 The Stuart Jacobite claim to its thrones in Britain would complicate French diplomacy, and seem unlikely to change political reality .
 Mehmed II extended Ottoman rule across the Balkans and seized Constantinople in a blaze of conquest . His son, Mehmed Iemmed II, expanded Ottoman rule in the Balkans . The Ottoman Empire ruled over the Balkans for decades .
 Under Selim | , the Safavids were contained at FORMIDABLE OPPONENTS Christian—Balkan force was defeated . Christian-Balkans force defeated .
 Most feared troops, the janissaries, from the conquered peoples of the Balkans, converted to Islam . The most feared troops of the . conquered peoples . of the conquered . Balkans, the . most feared . troops, from . conquered nations of the Balkan . Balkans . converted to
 Ottoman state began as a small frontier principality preying on Christian Byzantium . The Ottoman state is now a modern state of the Ottoman Empire .
 Suleiman the Magnificent (r.20-66) expanded Ottoman territories deep into Hungary and almost as far as the Atlantic . Suleimim expanded Ottoman territory into Hungary, reaching almost all of the Atlantic Ocean .
 Ottoman power seemed irresistible . Ottoman power was buoyed by its leadership of the Muslim world . The Ottoman Empire was rich and technologically advanced .
 The empire's decline after the failure of the siege of Vienna in 1683 was the result less of internal weakness than of the growing strength of its European opponents . The Empire's decline was due to growing strength in Europe, says historian .
 Size of the Ottoman Empire by the turn of the 20th century, the 2 MILLION SQ MILES 0.0.0 . Ottoman Empire was 2 million square miles from Istanbul .
 A third of the invading hly trained were recruited centuries earlier . Thousands of soldiers were recruited to fight back .
 Mamluk Egypt conquered in 1517, and Safavid Persia in 1518 . Egypt was the most sophisticated state of its time . It was conquered by the Mamluks of 1517 and ruled by the Safavid .
 Greece, Serbia, Romania, and Montenegro were now independent, and other European powers had taken over North Africa and the Black Sea . Greece, Serb, Montenegro, and Serbia, now independent .
 Attributed to a European ambassador 1600 EUROPE Black Sea mS ie. TERROR OF THE TERROR of the Black Sea .
 Turkey was reduced to its Anatolian heartlands, sparking nationalist conflict with Greece and Armenia . Turkey's loss of Anatolia was seen as a source of conflict between the two countries . Turkey is now the most populous country in the world .
 ENGLISH EAST INDIA COMPANY had been a presence in Bengal since the early 17th century . The company had been in Bengal for more than a century .
 Fort William, named after William III, was established in 1690 in what is now Calcutta . Seeking greater security for their trade, a new base, Fort William was established . Fort William is named for William III .
 The fort, continually enlarged and improved, would be critical to the later British dominance in India . The fort would be a key to the British dominance of India . It would be the first British fort to be built in India and would have been a British stronghold .
 At sea the Grand Alliance enjoyed a clear superiority over France at sea . They made many more mistakes than they did in 1688 and 1697 .
 Trials for witchcraft were of the world came through experience of it, and that the basis of this understanding was reasoned, empirical (based on observation) thought . The basis of the theory was that witchcraft was witchcraft .
 James I at the Battle of the 2 Boyne, in Ireland, was decisive in maintaining the Protestant ' supremacy that had been established there by the Glorious : Revolution of 1688 .
 In 1692 the Kangxi : Emperor issued an edict of : toleration of Christianity . Of Salem remains hard to explain, but it's not clear why .
 At 11:43am on June 7, 1692, a catastrophic earthquake struck Port Royal, capital of the English colony of Jamaica . Port Royal was one of the most important ports in the Caribbean, and a legendary base for pirates .
 With the subsequent tsunami and outbreaks of disease, the death toll was about 5,000 . The death toll from the tsunami and outbreak of disease in the 1990s is about 5.5 million .
 In Salem, Massachusetts, in late 1691, young girls started having fits and hallucinations, citing demonic possession . Salem, Mass. Mass., Massachusetts, was the site of the Salem witch trials in 1691 .
 Grand Alliance forces gather outside Namur, where a French garrison is besieged . William III of England led the forces of the Grand Alliance . The French garrison was besieged by William III's forces .
 The eruption on January 11, 1693 of Mount Etna, in Sicily, proved a cruel reminder of the power of nature . The eruption was the worst of the Little Ice Age (see 1683)
 The eruption set off an earthquake that devastated Sicily and large areas of southern Italy and Malta . It set off a quake that devastated parts of the island and set off the eruption .
 About 60,000 were killed in Sicily alone, and thousands of square miles became uninhabitable due to lava flows and tsunamis . Thousands of square mile of Sicily were uninhabited .
 For several years after the summer of 1693, a series of famines swept western Europe . In 1693 and 1694, the worst of the famines was in Spain, Spain and Italy .
 Little Ice Age saw bitter winters give way to dismal, rain-soaked summers, and stunted crops rotting in fields . These were among the most calamitous consequences of the Little Age, with bitter winters giving way to droughts .
 The vast majority of Europe’s peasants, themselves the overwhelming majority of the continent's population, had a subsistence existence at best . Root vegetables, bread, and oatmeal as their staple diet .
 In the face of these near Biblical visitations of mass misery, there seemed to be no answer . In the past week, the world has been gripped by a wave of violence .
 Later ' Dutch settlers there called it a 2 “dodaars,” which was a reference ' to what they saw as the knot of tails at its rear .
 By perhaps 1693, the ' dodo, a flightless bird that was ' related to the pigeon, had become ' extinct .
 In July 1694, ENGLAND FOUND a NOVEL SOLUTION to the problem of a lack of funds that had plagued | the combatants of the Nine Years War . Sees 0” ye oe 0 NY)
 The Bank of England was modeled on the Bank of Amsterdam, founded in 1609 . The bank served both the Crown and government, and was closely modeled .
 A private venture , it immediately loaned the government £1.1 million . The government loaned it at an annual interest rate of 8 percent and for an annual service charge .
 It also created a National Debt, but at the same time allowed England not merely to finance its own part in the war but to finance allies . The debt was created to help finance the war and help finance its allies . It also allowed England to create a National debt, but also created
 The bank was possibly the most significant factor in Britain's subsequent emergence on the world stage . The bank is now the most important factor in the country's development .
 European colonialism in the 17th and 18th centuries had the simple goal of money . European colonialism was the main source of money in Europe .
 In the New World, the Spanish had conquered two rich civilizations and found a vast silver mine . The Spanish conquistador's first voyage to the Americas was in search for gold .
 The Portuguese in Brazil had found only native peoples and tropical jungles . Sugarcane plantations worked by slave labor were the source of its marginal profits .
 It transformed colonial Brazil, as did the later discovery of diamonds in the same region . The discovery of the first diamond in the region was discovered in 1881 .
 Khalkha (Outer Mongolia) by : the nomadic Zunghar people of Central Asia in 1690, who were anxious to forestall a possible Chinese takeover of the region . A confused series of campaigns under the ruler, Galdan, as wellas a civil
 Kangxi Emperor led a Khalkha Chinese army across the Gobi : Desert into Mongolia and crushed ' the Zunghar . Kangxi emperor led a . army across . the . Gobi Desert Desert .
 Ivan's disabled half-brother, Ivan, ' attacked Azov with a combined land and naval force, capturing : the city in July 1696 . The invasion failed, sparking only : his disabled half brother, Ivan .
 Ottoman defeat at the Siege of Vienna in 1683 marked the beginning of a protracted Ottoman decline . Habsburg Austria emerged as a European power to challenge France, England, and the Dutch Republic .
 After 1683, Austrian Imperial armies pursued the retreating Ottomans south across the Balkans . The process climaxed at the Battle of Zenta, in Serbia, in September 1697 . The battle took place in Serbia .
 The crushing of a Sikh revolt in the Punjab in 1699 saw the Mughal Empire at its zenith . Under the Italo-French general Eugene of Savoy, who fought the Sikh revolt, was under the Savoy .
 From its Afghan heartlands, it had grown under Akbar, taking all but the tip of India’s subcontinent by the end of the 17th century . India had taken over all of its territory from its heartlands to become dominant .
 The harsh rule of Aurangzeb saw many revolts, and the later rise of the Marathas left the Mughals as puppets . The later rise  left the later Mughal rulers powerless . The Maratha dynasty was defeated by the Maratha Empire .
 The treaty was signed at the palace of Huis ter : Nieuwburg, the country house of William of Orange, in Ryswick, in the Dutch Republic . The Ottomans were massacred as they attempted to cross the Tisa River . About 10,000 drowned
 Newcomen, working with Savery, produced his atmospheric engine, that a viable commercial use of it was found .
 Charles I died in 1700 of the childless king of Spain . He nominated Philip of Anjou as his successor . Philip was the grandson of Louis XIV of France .
 Charles hoped that French power would preserve the Spanish Empire if ruled by a Bourbon . Charles hoped to preserve Spanish power if he ruled by French power .
 Louis accepted the vast increase in family prestige and French influence . But opposition to the succession and its increase in French power grew hugely . Louis accepted it and accepted it, but opposition to its rise in power grew .
 The accession in 1697 of the 15-year-old Charles XII to the throne of Sweden was the signal for Sweden’s Baltic rivals, Denmark, Saxony, Poland, and, increasingly, Russia, to attempt to end Swedish pre-eminence .
 Charles, “the Swedish Meteor,” would prove himself a general of genius in the Great Northern War of 1700-21 . In fact, in the conflict that followed, the Swedish Meteor was a major success .
 Stradivarius violin made by Antonio Stradivari entered a golden age in 1700 . Italian violin was made by Italian Antonio Stradoivari . He defeated the Danes and then, over on the other side of the Baltic, at Narva .
 Renaissance music evolved from later Renaissance music, above all in Italy, but developed to reach a new level of polyphonic tonal and instrumental complexity .
 It sowed seeds in rows, performing work that previously required several laborers . The seeds were sowed in rows of rows .
 A major time-saving device, it sowed great numbers of seeds in neat rows . A major labor-saving tool, it was a major time and labor-free device .
 Although not taken up at once, it later proved popular with large landowners and would lay the basis of modern productive agriculture . It was laid under the basis for modern productive farming .
 No sooner had the Nine Years’ War ended than Europe’s powers found themselves In another lengthy and costly war . Europe's powers find themselves in another lengthy, costly war.
 The surprise choice of Philip, duke of Anjou, as King Philip V of Spain greatly disturbed the European balance of power . Louis XIV did nothing to discourage fears of a FrancoSpanish military alliance . Philip, Philip V, was King Philip of Spain .
 He took over military duties in Philip's lands, moving troops into the Spanish Netherlands to defend them from the English and the Dutch .
 With renewed confidence then recognized James III, son of the exiled James II, as king of England . James III was son of James II who was exiled from England .
 With England and the Dutch Republic backing Austria’s claims to the Spanish throne, armed opposition to France was now guaranteed . England and Dutch Republic backed Austria's candidate, Archduke Charles of Austria, in Spain .
 The War of the Spanish Succession that began in 1701 sawa Grand Alliance oppose the unification of the French and Spanish thrones .
 It would last until 1713-14 and redraw the map of the continent and the world . It would be the first time the continent had been redrawn .
 25 ships of an Anglo-Dutch fleet defeated a 2 Franco-Spanish fleet . Battle of Vigo Bay, October 1702, was an early encounter in the Spanish Succession .
 Samurai warriors 'asronin emerged from | the Japanese civil wars of the 2 14th and 15th centuries . Freelance Samurai warriors emerged from . the . Japanese civil war of the . 14th to 15th century .
 ' respected lord, Asano Nugatory, ' was forced to commit suicide after assaulting an official who had insulted him . In 1701, a respected lord committed suicide .
 The Battle of Blindheim turned the War of the Spanish Succession in favor of the Grand Alliance . The Duke of Marlborough and Grand Alliance won the battle .
 The battle halted a Franco—Bavarian march on Vienna, and Bavaria played no further part in the war . The battle ended the Franco-Bavarians' march to Vienna .
 Gibraltar peninsula on Spanish mainland was seized by combined Dutch-English force in 1704 . Gibraltar was ceded perpetually to Britain in 1713 .
 The Duke of Marlborough sat astride his horse in this tapestry, now hanging in his eventual home, Blenheim Palace, England .
 Husaynid dynasty was established ' in 1705 when Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali ' was recognized by the Ottoman sultan as governor of the province .
 The Boston : News-Letter provided English : colonists in America with news of : England's political events and wars . of French-Canadians and : American Indians .
 English mathematician and astronomer, published A Synopsis of the Astronomy of Comets in 1705, in which he described the : parabolic orbits of 24 comets .
 AURANGZEB, sixth Mughal emperor of India, died in 1707 . Death marked the start of the decline of the empire . The death of Aurangzeb marked the end of the Mughala Empire .
 Aurangzeb's successors squandered the dynasty’s fortunes while losing control of regional governors, who went on to built their own empires . Aurangzb's successors lost control of the regional governors .
 The tenth and last guru of Sikhism, Gobind Singh was a powerful figure in Indian history . Aurangzeb, disturbed by the growing power of the Sikh Guru, had GURU GOBIND SINGH . The 10th and last Sikh guru was the last Guru of
 In 1699 he transformed Sikhism by creating the Khalsa (Pure), a community of the faith that trained as warriors . The Khalsa embraces all Sikhs, now the Sikh community of all .
 Aurangzeb considered coming to terms with Gobind Singh, but the rajas of the Sivalik Hills remained hostile . Gobind was assassinated in 1708, and Aurangabab was assassinated .
 Emperor Aurangzeb reigned for 48 : years, from 1658 until his death in : 1707, but for 27 of those years he was at war with the Marathas . He died before ' they could meet, but died before meeting .
 Britain joined Dutch forces to seize Minorca and Sicily from France in 1708 . Both were used as military bases during the War of the Spanish Succession .
 Ignace Micgucs painting shows Savoy's troops confronting the French at the Battle of Malplaquet . Ina detail of a painting of the battle is shown .
 The Battle of Malplauquet in 1709 was the bloodiest of the War of the Spanish Succession (see 1701) and the entire 18th century .
 Grand Alliance forces under the Duke of Marlborough attacked the French at Malplaquet, France, southwest of the French-held fortress of Mons, which lay over the present-day Belgian border . The French were defeated in the battle .
 In gaining possession of the battlefield, the Allies suffered more than 21,000 casualties, twice as many as the French . The French retreated In good order and remained a future threat, but the French retreated .
 Charles XII of Sweden had been leading forces in a march on Russia . Meanwhile, in the Great Northern War between Russia and its western neighbors, Charles XII was leading forces .
 Ottoman Empire to go to war : with Russia in 1710, but accepted terms : in 1711 . Peter the : Great accepted terms with Russia . Ottoman Empire was defeated by Russia .
 Meissen factory, near Dresden, ' produced the first successful European porcelain' In that year, the Meissens factory, . near Dresden produced the . first successful . European porcellain . In that .
 In November, a large Danish invasion force landed in Sweden virtually unopposed . A large Danish : invasion force landing in Sweden was unopportunistic .
 Until the 18th century, it was impossible for explorers and mariners to determine their position accurately . Se OSE on Zo) 1450-1749 | A NA .
 Today, thanks to developments in navigational technology, it is possible to pinpoint locations to within a few meters .
 The earliest sailors had no means of accurate navigation other than by sight . They relied on landmarks along coastlines, judging distances and directions from the positions of the Sun, Moon, and stars, and using simple sounding devices to keep ships from running aground .
 English clockmaker John Harrison was the first to make accurate timepieces that enabled longitude to be calculated with precision . Invention of instruments such as the magnetic compass, astrolabe, and sextant John Harrison .
 Calculating longitude relies on accurate timepieces, which did not exist until John Harrison developed his chronometer in the 18th century . Calculated longitude therefore relies on accuracy of timepieces . John Harrison's chronometer was developed in the late 1800s .
 Longitude lines run vertically on a map and are measured in degrees east or west of Greenwich, England . Greenwich is located in Greenwich .
 Sailors start to use astrolabes to estimate latitude by measuring the angle of the Sun or a particular star above the horizon . They meet at the poles and are farthest apart at the equator . Sailors started to use the astrolabe in 1480 to measure latitude
 H1 was impractically large, a problem Harrison solved in 1759 with his H4 chronometer . The H1 chronometer was made by John Harrison in 1735 .
 Elmer Sperry invents the gyroscopic compass in 1759 . He then makes improved versions, culminating in the H4 in 1758 . The introduction of satellite-based GPS makes it possible to determine an object's position when it cannot be seen .
 Portuguese-held Rio de Janeiro, incapacitated Portuguese ships in the harbor, and only spared the city’s defenses from destruction on payment of a ransom .
 French morale, which had been at a low since their withdrawal from the Battle of Malplaquet , was raised by this proof that French long-range naval power had not been extinguished . French morale was raised .
 In North America, the Tuscarora War began in North Carolina . It was fought between Tuscaroras American Indians and settlers from Britain, Germany, and the Netherlands . The war was started by the American Indians .
 The settlers and northern Tuscarora American Indians began to kidnap and sell them into slavery, and appropriate their lands . The settlers began kidnapping and selling them in the south, selling them into slaves .
 The southern Tuscarora retaliated in September with widespread attacks on settlements in which hundreds of settlers were killed . Hundreds of settlers died in the attacks .
 Losses at Rio de Janeiro : Caught unawares by a French naval . attack . Three ships tried to escape, one drifted aground, and one was destroyed .
 Designed by Christopher Wren, it was the fourth church to occupy 2 its site . Its predecessor was badly damaged in the Great Fire of London in 1666 .
 Dutch sailors infected with smallpox inadvertently caused a catastrophic decimation of the native Khoisan people in 1713 . William Penn was not an opponent of slavery .
 Netherlands, and Britain ceded Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, and Gibraltar . Britain also ceded Nova Scotia and Gibraltar to Newfoundland .
 The final conflict between the two powers ended in 1718 : with an Ottoman victory and : Venice's loss of the Peloponnese, ' its major possession in Greece .
 The state of war in Europe created a profound sense of lawlessness in the late 17th and early 18th century .
 This was most marked in regions where desperate efforts were being made to seize colonial power . This was particularly marked in areas where desperate attempts to seize power were made .
 Edward Teach, known as Blackbeard (c.80-1718], became a target for the authorities after he took charge of his own ship in 1717 .
 In North America, the signing of the Treaty of Utrecht (see 1713) had failed to bring an end to the hostilities between the European colonizing powers, and, in turn, these were struggling to dominate competing American Indian tribes .
 In Europe, King Louis XIV of | France diedin 1715, leaving the infant Louis XV as his heir . Louis XV was born in 1715 .
 Baroque developed from the masses and madrigals of the Renaissance . A style of European music that began around 1600 and lasted until about 1750, baroque .
 It had a stronger emphasis on counterpoint and rhythm, greater expression of emotion, and gave greater importance to the solo voice and instrumental solos . It was the first version of the album to be released in 2005 .
 Monteverdi and Cavalli were early practitioners of opera . It established opera and established opera, with Montever di Capri, Cavalli, and others .
 This erupted into the First enamel-work asi by their : Jacobite Rebellion . W715 this erupted into . the First Enamel-Work asi .
 Spain ceded Sardinia and Sicily to Savoy, but the treaty was ignored by King Philip V of Spain who sailed to capture the islands .
 Austria joined the Quadruple Alliance on August 2, 1718 . Austria joined Britain, France, and the Dutch Republic in 1718, expanding it into the Quadraple Alliance . Austria was the last major ally of the British, French and Dutch Republic .
 War of the Quadruple Alliance was declared on December 17, 1718 . This freed Charles's forces to turn their attention to Spain, and the war began .
 In the War of the Quadruple Alliance, 28,350 men were killed or wounded, including more than 2,000 from Sardinia, which was invaded by Spain .
 The Triple Alliance was the Triple Alliance (see larger Spanish warships were captured, while the smaller ships escaped) George Byng clashed with the Spanish invasion fleet in the Battle of Cape Philip .
 Quadruple : Alliance, now joined by Savoy, attempted to curb Spain in Sicily . But was defeated on October 15 in ' the first Battle of Milazzo'
 The Austrians attacked in Sicily and eventually the Spanish occupiers capitulated . Disease forced both forces to withdraw, but disease forced them to withdraw .
 By the turn of the 18th century the colony had begun to exploit the region's logwood (Haematoxylum campechianum], which yielded an important dye used for textiles and paper .
 In 1720, slaves were first imported to this area of the so-called Mosquito Coast to expand logging operations on the Belize River . Many slaves from Jamaica and others directly from Africa were brought in to the area .
 1720 saw the end of the War of the Quadruple Alliance [see 1718] with the signing of the Treaty of the Hague . The year 1720 was the year that ended the war .
 Philip agreed to abandon his claims to Sicily and Sardinia, which came under the control of Austria and the Duchy of Savoy . The duke was titled king of Sardinia .
 In North America, the French returned Pensacola in Florida to King Philip V, along with places they had occupied In the north of Spain, receiving trade advantages In exchange .
 Maratha expanded : their empire to the north, : south, and east . Maratha expansion : The Maratha empire expanded .
 Bajirao’s army struck out into Hindustan . Recognizing the weakness of the grip that the Mughal Empire, based in Delhi, had on the states around him .
 This helped him negotiate peace treaties with Mughal authorities in the Deccan . He also negotiated peace agreements with the Mughals in the region .
 GREAT NORTHERN WAR between Sweden and Russia ended by the Treaty of Nystad . Great Northern War ended in a treaty signed by the Russian Empire of Russia and Sweden . Great Britain and Russia fought in the Great War .
 Russia successfully challenged Sweden's supremacy in the Baltic by attacking cities on the Swedish east coast in 1719 . In 1719, Russia had successfully attacked Sweden's east coast .
 An alliance of the British and Swedes in 1719 then gave Sweden British navy protection that discouraged further raids .
 Deified ancestors Moai were erected by clans on Easter Island to watch over their fields . The Nystad Treaty restored Finland to Sweden, but former Swedish Baltic territories in Estonia and elsewhere went to Estonia .
 The three ships chanced upon Easter Island (now Rapa Nuil, so-named because It was ' discovered on Easter Sunday' Roggeveen also discovered the Society Islands and Samoa .
 Europe's success depended on the enthusiastic cooperation of certain tribes in West Africa for transporting slaves to the new colonies . The slave trade depended on cooperation from certain tribes . The slaves were transported to the colonies by Europeans .
 King Agadja presided over a culture of enslavement and human sacrifice . In Dahomey, in what is now the Republic of Benin, he presided over enslavement .
 By 1724 Dahomey had become the Europeans principal source of slave labor . His conquest of neighboring Allada in 1723 provided a ready source of captives for sale . Dahomeys had become a major source of slaves for Europeans .
 St. Petersburg, founded in 1725, was rehoused in 1783-85 on the Neva River . The city was re-founded in 1723 and moved into the city in 1780 .
 THE TREATY OF THE HAGUE [see 1720] did not end rivalries between the major European powers . The TREATy of the Hague was not an end to European rivalries .
 In 1725, Austria signed the Treaty of Vienna with Spain, gaining trading advantages In the colonies for its Imperial Ostend Company . In exchange, Austria abandoned all claims to the Spanish throne and promised to help Spain recapture Gibraltar . Austria also agreed to give Spain trade advantages in the colonies
 In 1726, Britain embarked on an attempt to blockade Spanish treasure ships at Porto Bello, Spain . Marta Skowronska was the future wife of Peter the Great .
 She was secretly married to Peter in 1707, and reigned as Russia's first female monarch . She reigned from his death until her own death until she died .
 In her reign, she was supported by the Supreme Privy Council, which wanted to deny power to the aristocracy . She was supported in her reign by the council .
 To the southeast, the Afghan Persian lands were being encroached upon by Ottoman forces, who were linked to the previous regime by an OttomanSafavid alliance . By then, the Afghans had already been invaded by the Ottoman forces .
 Ashraf Khan defeated the Ottomans in a battle near Isfahan at Kermanshah . Peace was eventually declared at Hamadan, Persia, in 1727 .
 Jonathan Swift first published Gulliver's Travels in 1726 . Satirical novel Clergyman and writer Jonathan Swift was first published by Swift .
 Kyakhta was signed by Imperial : Russia and the Chinese Qing : Empire . It remained the basis of relations between the two until : the mid-19th century .
 PETER THE GREAT was determined to discover the full extent of his lands to the east .
 Danish seaman Vitus Bering was commissioned to follow the Siberian coast northward from the Kamchatka Peninsula . In 1728 Bering sailed into the narrow Strait, now named after him, that separates Siberia and Alaska .
 Bering established that Siberia reaches its eastward limit at the strait . By sailing farther north, Bering proved that Siberia was at the end of the Bering Strait .
 Bering suspected that there must be land farther east, but it was only during a second voyage, in 1741, that he first saw the coast of Alaska across the strait . Bering's first voyage to Alaska was during his second voyage to the island .
 After nearly a decade of consolidating their power under Bajirao, the Maratha people struck out into the Deccan region surrounding their homeland . The Marathis are the descendants of the Marthis .
 In a strategic masterstroke, the Marathas cornered the nizam’s army in a waterless zone, where it refused to fight . The Marathaas refused to engage in the battle, refusing to fight.
 In consequence, the nizam abandoned his leadership claim and payment of chauth was resumed . In consequence of the decision, the payment was resumed.
 The first such state was Bondu, in Guinea, formed in the late 17th century . Bondu was formed from Bondu in the 17th Century .
 The Islamic Fulbe took power from the existing leaders and nonIslamic Fulbe people . Futa Jallon was centered in Guinea but sprawling over neighboring territories . The Fulbe ruled over Guinea and neighboring Guinea .
 A confederation of provinces was formally created in 1735 with its capital at Timbo, Guinea . The confederation's capital was Timbo in Timbo .
 Other areas affected by the Fulbe Jinad included the formerly declining Bornu Empire (in present-day Nigeria), the fortunes of which underwent a significant revival . The fortunes of the Bornu empire underwent a major revival in recent years .
 The Yoruba had invaded and defeated Dahomey in 1728, but resistance continued until 1748 . Yoruba were defeated by the Yoruba after a protracted and bitterly fought campaign . Dahomeenans fought back in 1748, when they were finally defeated .
 Traditional Chinese opium pipe has a knobshaped bowl in which the drug (dried latex from the opium poppy) is vaporized when the bowl is heated . Opium pipe and poppy are traditional Chinese opium pipes with a knob shape .
 Prussian army became the fourth-largest in Europe, with 60,000 soldiers, despite having the twelfth-largest population in Europe . It was founded in 1732, becoming the last of the Thirteen Colonies established by Britain .
 Named after King George Il, the new state was intended to strengthen the British presence in the south . Named after Britain's King George I, the state was named after King of the South .
 The first settlers began to arrive in 1733 and included many released from debtors prisons . Many of the first settlers included many debtors .
 Heavy rains then destroyed winter crops of wheat and barley, and insects decimated the following year's rice crop . Heavy rains and insects destroyed the rice crop in 2012 .
 Voltaire was a prolific writer, historian, and philosopher of the French Enlightenment . He disseminated his radical humanist ideas . His works ranged from essays and historical works to poems, plays, novels .
 French explorer, scientist, and mathematician, joined expedition to Peru in 1735 .
 He traveled down the Amazon to Cayenne, Ecuador, making the first scientific exploration of the river . After falling out with his colleagues, he continued alone to Quito, Ecuador .
 Returning to Paris in 1744, he published the journal of his travels and discoveries in 1751 .
 The Mayans had been making flexible rubber for centuries . La Condamine introduced the product to Europe in 1736 .
 By the early 18th century, the Portuguese, Spanish, British, French, and Dutch had slave-worked sugar plantations in Brazil .
 The first sugar refinery on Mauritius was built at Ville Bague in the north . Soon to follow was a sugar refinery in the island's north .
 Nader was crowned shah of Persia in 1736 . The battle-ax belonged to Nader, who was the ruler of Persia from 1736 to 1788 .
 In 1732, ' a trading fort had been erected at ' the site of present-day Vincennes, but in 1735 the traders were ' joined by a wave of agricultural ax head inlaid with 2 silver a calligraphy workers .
 Vincennes is the foremost French trading post in Indiana . It was also the dominant center of French culture in the region .
 In 1737, Nader moved against Persia’s former Afghan overlords by occupying southern Afghanistan . Nader is known for his role in the 1737 invasion of the country .
 When Tahmasp and Abbas were murdered in 1740, the Safavid dynasty was extinguished . The Safavid Dynasty was extinguished in 1741 .
 Russia, joined by Austria in 1737, ' intended to seize the Crimea and : gain access to the Black Sea, at : : the same time ending raids by : Crimean Tartars'
 Hussein Hotaki took refuge in the citadel during the Persian siege . He surrendered after it was bombarded by Nader Shah . Hotaki surrendered after the siege .
 The Afghan Ghilzai people were expelled from Persia in 1729 by Nader Shah (16981747) and he was determined to eliminate the remaining threat posed by the Afghans . The Afghans had been expelled from Iran in1729 .
 Nader Shah's Persian force swept through Kabul and crossed the Indus in December 1738 . Afghanistan was then part of the Mughal Empire, centered in Delhi, but the governor had been powerless to stop the Persian force .
 Hostilities broke out once again between Britain and Spain in '1739 . Hostilities between the two countries broke out in 1739 .
 Frederick II ascended to the throne in 1740 after the death of King Frederick William I of Prussia . Frederick II was the son of Frederick II, Frederick II .
 Frederick II had been fond of music, poetry, and philosophy in his youth . Frederick II was a keen lover of music and philosophy .
 He studied Niccolo Machiavelli's works in preparation for kingship . In 1739 he wrote a refutation of the Renaissance Florentine’s ideas, Anti-Machiavel .
 His rule was characterized by modernization, tolerance, and patronage of the arts . He ruled the country for decades .
 Frederick the Great expanded the borders of Prussia far beyond their historical limits, then defended these acquisitions against massive coalitions of powerful enemies . Frederick became known for his political and military feats by which he first expanded borders .
 Frederick Ils first opportunity to expand Prussia‘s frontiers arrived quickly after his accession . Frederick Il’s first chance to expand his frontiers was quickly after he became king . Frederick IIls first chance of expanding Prussia was to explore the world .
 The Habsburg emperor, Charles VI, died in 1740 and was succeeded by his daughter, Maria Theresa . Maria Theresa (171780) was to rule Austria’s hereditary domains with her husband, Francis Stephen, as Holy Roman Emperor .
 Most of Europe took sides in what became what became the War of the Austrian Succession . Britain, the Dutch Republic, Sardinia, and Saxony supported the queen .
 In the late 17th and 18th centuries, : successive leaders enhanced the power and territory of Brandenburg-Prussia : through military and political means . In the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries: successive leaders .
 Between 1680 and 1750, 70,000 Scottish-Irish emigrants left Ulster for North America, 4,000 moved to Britain, and 16,500 left for Europe . Church, most of whom were descendents of families who had colonized the Irish north in the 17th
 Frederick II of Prussia (see 1740-41) took advantage of a successful gambit . Frederick II's 'seizing of SILESIA' proved a success gambit.
 The Austrian army had challenged the Prussians but had been defeated in the Battle of Mollwitz in 1741 . The Prussian army had defeated the Austrian army .
 In 1742, Maria Theresa of Austria and the victorious Prussians signed the Treaty of Berlin, by which a large part of Silesia was ceded to Prussia . Maria Theresa signed the treaty in 1742 .
 The treaty brought an end to the First Silesian War . The wider European conflict known as the War of the Austrian Succession continued until 1748 .
 In 1742, Swedish astronomer Anders Celsius developed the Celsius, or centigrade, thermometer . Celsius was invented by Anders Celsius in 1742 .
 In Spanish Peru, a new leader of the native people, Juan Santos Atahualpa, a Jesuit-educated man claiming to be a direct descendant of the murdered Inca king, began a rebellion in Quisopango in 1742 . In 1742, he began a revolt
 The Spanish mounted a military campaign against him in 1742, and again in 1743, 1746, and 1750, but never defeated him in his home territory in the Andes .
 18th-century French instrument, intended for measuring outdoor temperatures, features Celsiusss scale, with a range of -15 to +45 degrees . The instrument was designed for outdoor temperatures .
 In India, the struggle for power continued between the Maratha people (see 1720) and the nizam of Hyderabad, the semiindependent representative of the Mughal Empire . The struggle for the power of the Marathis continued between Maratha and Hyderabad .
 The Marathas seized Trichinopoly, leaving Murrarao Ghorpade as governor of the town . The town refused to pay tribute to the nizam and refused to be paid tribute .
 Russia had occupied ' Finland, and the treaty moved the Swedish border north . The treaty was made after the annexation of Finland .
 Finland was returned to the : Swedes, who in exchange accepted ' Adolf-Frederick of HolsteinGotthorp , a client of Empress Elizabeth of Russia, as . heir to the Swedish throne .
 Its discovery and use first allowed small, previously nomadic, hunter-gathering societies to settle in one place, transform the landscape, form communities, and establish civilizations .
 Long, flat three-field system of crop rotation revolutionized of the Middle East around 10,000 sce. Most archaeologists agree that the earliest plants were domesticated in Fertile Crescent region .
 Fig is thought to be the first truly cultivated food, depressions in the earth . Voyages to Asia and the discovery of the New World in ; emmer wheat, barley, lentils, chickpeas, and flax seeds .
 The 15th century had a profound impact on agriculture and agriculture . They cleared areas of woodland using the 15th Century had a significant role in agriculture .
 The first animals axes as well as fire to make space for crops and worldwide, as crops and animals were exchanged . Sheep and goats were the first animals to be domesticated were sheep and goats .
 5000 BCE Sumerians develop core agriculture . Large-scale cultivation, . monocropping, irrigation, and the use of a specialized ; agricultural labor force allows the Sumerian culture to flourish .
 In the mid-1700s, he significantly redesigned the single-furrow horse plow . He remodelled the mouldboard, which was now made of iron, making it stronger and more efficient at turning soil .
 From the end of the 16th century in Europe in Europe, landowners began to take a more scientific approach to farming .
 This entailed following such practices as crop rotation to ensure that soil fertility was not depleted . This included using more efficient machinery such as improved plows, and cross-breeding livestock to avoid genetic weaknesses .
 As world populations of the New World the mechanical reaper to the high-impact and rise, the search for results in an is the first step in the environmentally damaging new ways to feed more unprecedented cultural mechanization .
 Vertical exchange of animals harvesting crops in much mid-20th century, green hydroponic farms in and plants, including ' Tobacco less time than could be' and sustainable practices urban spaces .
 The port of Mombasa was used in the 18th century for trade in gold, ivory and slaves .
 In 1744, Mombasa seized power from the Omanis . The Arabs of Oman took over, and in 1744 the new governor took over . The new governor of Mombas seized power there .
 He was killed by Omani assassins in 1745, but his brother stirred up a rebellion and the assassins were executed . His brother, ‘Ali ibn Athman [r.46-55] stirred up rebellion and was executed .
 Ali ibn Athman proclaimed himself Sultan of Mombasa, thereby securing the port's independence from Oman . Ali Ibn Athman was the first ruler of the Mombas region to become a Sultan .
 In the Second Silesian War, the Austrians tried to regain Silesia . The Prussians defeated the forces of Empress Maria Theresa in 1745 in the battles of Hohenfriedberg, Soor, and Kesselsdorf .
 Maria Theresa finally recognized 9,000 PRUSSIANS Losses at Hohenfriedberg . The victorious Prussians had significantly fewer casualties than the Austrians and their allies from Saxony .
 Jacobite chiefs rallied chiefs of several Scottish : Highland clans to march on : England . Scotland and rallied the Jacobite : chiefs of various Scottish clans .
 The battle ended the Second Jacobite Rebellion and wiped out Jacobite hopes of regaining power in Britain . The battle was fought in 17th century and ended in 1717 .
 In 1745, an English farmer ' began experiments in selective animal breeding that were to ' revolutionize animal husbandry . The experiments were intended to revolutionize agriculture .
 Christians were subjected to : renewed persecution from 1746 : to 1748 as a matter of imperial policy . Qianlong Emperor , ' Christians were . subjected to . renewed persecution . Christians were subject to renewed persecution in 1746 .
 Robert Bakewell’s new breeding methods at : his Leicestershire farm . This 1842 engraving depicts a New Leicester ram .
 From this developed the idea of a battery, originally a group of Leyden jars combined to generate a more powerful electric charge . The battery was developed by the inventor of the Leyden jar .
 In 1747, the powerful Persian overlord Nader Shah was murdered by his bodyguards . He had become paranoid and mercilessly cruel, and his guards killed him in 1747 .
 A grand assembly in Kandahar, Afghanistan, recognizes the Map of Madras . The 1750 engraving depicts the Indian port, together with its British Fort of St. St. George . The map was created in 1750 .
 Nader’s Afghan lieutenant, Ahmad Khan Abdali, (also known as Ahmad Shah Durrani, 1722-73) was head and founder of the modern state of Afghanistan . Abdali was captured by a French naval expedition in 1746 .
 Royal Navy, proved that scurvy, a ' sometimes fatal disease common during long voyages, could be ' treated by eating citrus fruit . However, only in 1795 did the : Royal Navy begin to use lemon juice to prevent and treat scvvy .
 A fireworks display on the Thamés River on May 15, 1749, ofganized 7 the Duke of Richmond to celebrate the signing of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle .
 The Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (present-day Aachen) was signed in 1748 . The war was concluded by the signing of the Treaty of 1748, signed by the King of Spain .
 Prussia’s conquest of Silesia was recognized, France regained some of its colonies in exchange for withdrawing from the Netherlands, and Britain's Asiento contract with Spain was renewed .
 His army of 12,000 horsemen was met in the Battle of Manupur by a defensive Mughal force of 60,000 . His army was met by a defence force of more than 60,00 men .
 Abdali’s Afghans held their own until 1,000 of them were killed by an exploding gunpowder store . They fled, devastated, they fled .
 Under Hyder Ali, the Mysore Empire seized territory from the Marathas, Hyderabad, and neighboring kingdoms . Hyder Ali was the founder of the Hyderabad dynasty . Hyderabad was ruled by Hyder Ali in the early 1900s .
 Platinum was discovered in South America by Spanish conquerors . Platinum was found in the region of South America .
 Spain hoped that by allowing Portugal some concessions it would discourage any further Portuguese territorial expansion in the region . Spain hoped to discourage further territorial expansion of the region by allowing some concessions to Portugal .
 Marquis of Pombal was a controversial political figure . He was appointed prime minister of Portugal in 1750, the year José | took the throne . The Marquis was the first Portuguese prime minister .
 His 27 years in power Saw economic and social reform, and the expulsion of the Jesuits . Saw economic, social reform and expulsion of Jesuits in Italy .
 William Hogarth's 1751 work Gin Lane depicts the & ‘/ ‘yy “ public drunkenness and social problems caused by cheap gin .
 ENGLAND was experiencing an alcohol crisis fuelled by the popularity of cheap gin . The darkly satirical engraving Gin Lane by William Hogarth was issued in 1751 . Gin Lane was illustrated by the darkly satiric engraved by Hogarth .
 Gin Act of 1751 attempted to limit the amount that could be bought . Public outcry over the social effects of gin led to the Gin Act . Gin Act was passed in 1751 .
 Dzungaria and Tarim basin by fighting the Mongolian tribes : for control to this key part of the : steppes . Dzunaria and . Tarim . basin . by fighting for control of this key region .
 The 18th-century painting on the ceiling of a Bavarian church exemplifies the work of the Rococo movement . Rococo was the movement that dominated European decorative arts .
 Rococo evolved out of the Baroque, but its details and flourishes were even more ornate and often playful . Rococo is a form of Rococo that evolved from the original Italian style .
 The period is often associated with French design during the reigns of Louis XV and Louis XVI . This Buddha statue is in the Sulamani Pahto temple in Bagan, Burma, which was built in 1181 but contains images from the Konbaung period .
 Burma had been divided among warring factions until a chief, Alaungpaya, united the country . AlaunGPaya began to unite the country through a series of military victories, and established the Konbaung dynasty .
 Britain and France were eager to gain territory in Burma . They were willing to arm Alaungpaya’s enemies .
 British and French troops were driven out of Alaungpaya . But for the next seven years, AlaunGPaya resisted both threats, and British forces were forced out .
 In Britain, the public went to bed on 2 September and woke up on 14 September .
 American inventor, politician, and diplomat : had made the decision to change ' from the Julian calendar to the : Gregorian one, joining the other western European countries that had changed the calendar hundreds of years before .
 The old Julian calendar put around 11 extra days between vernal ' equinoxes, making the celebration ' of Easter arrive earlier each year . XIII, who chose to make the : change when it became clear that the old Julian Calendar put around : 11 days between the vern
 Irish-born physician and collector amassed 71,000 different objects . Collection includes books and manuscripts about a wide range of subjects .
 He had realized the scholarly value of his collection, which he bequeathed to Britain . Like other intellectuals and scientists across Europe, he was part of wider Enlightenment intellectual currents .
 Sloane's contemporaries across Europe were engaged in collecting and other scientific pursuits . Sloanes' contemporaries across ; Europe were also interested in collecting, other . scientific pursuits, such as collecting .
 The Treaty of Pondicherry temporarily halted tensions between France and Britain, whose troops were technically employed by corporations the East India companies . The treaty was signed in 1903 .
 The treaty recognized the British-backed Mohammad Ali as the new Nawab of Carnatic . The treaty was a key factor behind the dispute . Mohammad Ali had been a key figure in the dispute between India and India .
 It was later estimated by scientists to be around an 8.6 magnitude event . Scientists later said it was an 8 magnitude earthquake . The event was the largest magnitude earthquake ever recorded in history .
 The earthquake also triggered a tsunami that destroyed settlements further south in the Algarve region . Estimates of the number of deaths from the earthquake range from 10,000 to 10,500 .
 Voltaire was inspired to write his Poeme sur le désastre de Lisbonne about the event . Immanuel Kant wrote 3 ¥ a series of essays about the disaster .
 Marquis of Pombal immediately took action, making sure fires were put out and the dead were quickly buried . The Marquis was responsible for putting out fires and burying the dead quickly .
 He then began the rebuilding of the city, including the construction of buildings meant to withstand another earthquake . The city was rebuilt by President Obama after the earthquake .
 Although it was not the first English dictionary, it quickly became the most celebrated and authoritative dictionary .
 The interests in the region and became a target for the British when war was declared in 1756 . The region was a target of the British during the British invasion .
 The Seven Years' War was fought in theaters from India to North America to Europe, making it a truly global conflict . The war was fought across the world, with many theaters in India, North America and Europe .
 The earlier War of Austrian Succession left many territorial issues unresolved . The War of Austria Succession was the first of its kind .
 The Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle did not settle the dispute between Prussia and Austria over the province of Silesia . The province is located in southeast Prussia, bordering Austria .
 Prussian King Frederick II ruled for 46 years . Known as Frederick the Great, he ruled the Prussian kingdom . Frederick II was also known as Frederick Frederick III .
 Frederick's reign was marked by a liberal spirit . Frederick's interest in culture and philosophy was evident in his reign .
 Frederick II transformed the small kingdom of Prussia into a European power . Frederick II's military prowess earned him a reputation for his military prowess . But it was his reputation that earned him his reputation .
 The French sent 15,000 troops to the island, where the British had only around 2,500 . The French had 15,500 troops, while the British only had around two,500.
 The sizes of the armies involved in the Seven : Years’ War are shown here . Menatarms : The sizes are shown below .
 Bengal, Siraj-ud-Dawlah © (1733-57), who France supported, attacked the British in Calcutta . Many of them imprisoned many of them in Fort William .
 Robert Clive recovered Calcutta for the East India Company and Britain by defeating the Nawab of Bengal at the Battle of Plassey . Clive recovered the city for the company and Britain .
 The Holy Roman Emperor Francis declared war on Prussia . He was married to Austria's Maria Theresa . He declared war against Prussia in 1881 .
 King Frederick II then attacked Bohemia, though he was defeated by Austrian troops . Frederick II was defeated in Bohemia by Austrian forces .
 Although Prussia defeated Austro-French forces in Rossbach in November, they lost to Austrian troops in Leuthan in December . Prussia also lost to Austria in December, losing to French forces in November .
 In Morocco, Muhammad III brought stability to the country as sultan after 30 years of unrest . Muhammad III was sultan in Morocco .
 Muhammad was known for curbing the power of the Barbary pirates, who raided towns across the Mediterranean . Muhammad was also known for his role in curbing piracy in the region .
 Robert Clive Calcutta was recaptured for the British by Major General Robert Clive at the Battle of Plassey . Major General Clive was the first British commander to recapture the city .
 The British won key victories over France by taking Fort Duquesne and Louisbourg in North America and claiming Senegal in West Africa .
 Britain and Prussia defeated the French near the banks of the Rhine at Krefeld in June and Russia at the battle of Zorndorf, on Prussian soll, in August .
 Afghans and Marathas were fighting on a different front in India . Meanwhile, in India, warfare was breaking out on a separate front . The two sides were engaged in a fierce battle between the two sides .
 Afghanistan emerged independent under the rule of Ahmad Shah Durrani (c. 1722-73) who wanted to gain control of the nearby territories of the Punjab and the Upper Ganges . After the death of Nader Shah, his Persian empire began to disintegrate and Afghanistan emerged .
 The neighboring Marathas, who felt they should rule over the territory, then went to war against the Afghans . The Afghans were defeated by the Marathis, who wanted to rule the area .
 Sabah bin Jaber (c.52-1762) was the emir of an emerging territory that would soon become known as Kuwait . He was the first emir to be elected in the Utub confederation .
 Luis Paret y Alcazar a depicts palace life in his painting Charles // Eating Before His Court . Charles VII of Spain is depicted eating before his court in Charles VII .
 JF Voltaire, French writer, from Candide, 1759 for the British . For the British, the Seven Years' War reached a turning point . Voltaire's Candide is based in Candide .
 The French West Indian island of Guadeloupe was taken in May, July and September . The Canadian territory of Quebec was also taken in September .
 They also defeated French naval forces off Portugal at Lagos Bay in August and at Quiberon Bay in November .
 Germany, followed in November . by further defeat by the Austrians : in the Battle of Maxen in Saxony . The Austrians were defeated by the Germans in the battle .
 The seal was made for the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade . Josiah Wedgwood made the seal for the society .
 Abolitionist groups were also established in other countries involved in slavery, such as France and France .
 Josiah Wedgwood transformed his craft with his style and technique . The potter was born into a family of English potters . He is known for his pottery work .
 He set up his own business in 1759 and became potter to Queen Charlotte . Queen Charlotte was a favourite potter with the Queen .
 King George was born in Britain, which he ruled for nearly 60 years . He ruled the country for nearly six decades before his death .
 George III was the first king from the German royal dynasty, the Hanoverians, to be born in Britain . George III took over the throne of England in 1760 . He was born in London .
 Before his death, he left instructions for the 12-year-old George to separate the Electorate of Hanover from England and reduce the national debt . When he took the throne, George was 12 .
 After the death of his father, George fell under the influence of John Stuart, Third Earl of Bute, who was his tutor and adviser . George was the son of Stuart Stuart, who died in 1881 .
 Fleet size in the Seven Years’ War . Many important battles were at sea, ' and British naval strength became even more superior to that of France .
 Bute ' became prime minster in 1762 . His wishes were 2 made manifest when he became prime minister .
 Hyder Ali, the ruler of the Indian kingdom of Mysore, became an enemy of British East India Company troops . The conflict had ' begun after the Mongols refused to pay the annual tribute the Chinese government had demanded .
 Seven years' war intensified within Europe, it also reached a climax in the colonial possessions .
 The port had been settled by the French East India Company in 1674 . It had become one of France’s main bases of operations for trade as well as ongoing fights against the British East India .
 This victory followed another one against the French the previous year in Wandiwash, in southeast India .
 In India, the fighting between Afghans and Marathas (see 1758) came to a head in the battle of Panipat, in the north of the territory, on January 14 . At the same time in India, in 1758, the fight between the Afghans and the
 Some 75,000 Marathas were killed and 30,000 captured in the battle . The battle was bloody, with high casualty rates . Some 25,000 of the Marathis were killed .
 Ahmad Shah Durrani, who led the Afghans, was forced by his troops to return to the throne in Afghanistan . However, he was forced to return in Afghanistan after his troops forced him to return .
 The Marathas and British began to divide the former Mughal 2 territory among themselves . This outcome meant that the Marathis and British had to divide their territory . The outcome was that the British and Maratha began to split the territory .
 The war contributed to the weakening of the Maratha Confederacy and the further decentralization of its power . It led to the breakup of its kingdoms and subsequent battles over territory with Britain .
 Hyder Ali was building up his army and consolidating his power base in order to take control of the territory . Farther south, in Mysore, another future enemy of Britain, Hyder Ali . Hyder Ali built up his armies and consolidated his power to take over Mys
 British and French troops were fighting in the Caribbean . The British used Guadeloupe as a base from which to take Dominica from the French .
 Spain had entered the conflict, : and Britain’s naval fleet was making preparations to attack : Spanish ships . Spain entered the war, and Britain's naval fleet made preparations .
 India was the site of important : battles in 1761, not only for Britain : and France, but also in the fight : between Marathas and Afghans . India was also the scene of the fight between Maratha and Afghans.
 When Peter III became emperor, he made clear his support of Prussia in the Seven Years’ War . He then pulled Russia out of the conflict . Peter III made clear he supported Prussia .
 Catherine the Great's reign was marked by Russian aggression and territorial expansion . Catherine was one of the most successful monarchs in the world .
 She introduced wide-ranging reforms in agriculture, industry, and education . The reforms include reforms to agriculture and industry .
 She was known for her love of literature and particular fondness for French philosophers and writers, including Voltaire, with whom she corresponded for 15 years . She also relaxed Russia's censorship laws .
 As the Seven Years War continued, Spain became further drawn into events as the British occupied its key Caribbean port of Havana . Spain was drawn into the war by the British occupation of Havana in Cuba .
 Britain was able to use troops in India to occupy Manila, in the Philippines, which was also a Spanish colony . In addition to this, Britain was also able to occupy the Philippines .
 At the same time, Spain and France entered a secret agreement known as the Treaty of Fontainebleau . The treaty was signed at the end of the Spanish-French war .
 Catherine the Great reigned from 1762 until 1796, oversaw the territorial expansion of her adopted country . The German-born empress of : Russia . reigned between 1762 and 1796 .
 The cost had been enormous— the lives of hundreds of thousands of soldiers, and mountains of money . The cost was enormous, says President Obama. The cost of the war was enormous .
 Britain's national debt rose from £75 million to £133 million; Prussia raised taxes and debased the taler three times . Prussia also debased its taler by debasing it three times and raising taxes .
 Grenada, Dominica, St. Pierre and Miquelon were territories in present-day United States east of the Mississippi River . The Caribbean islands of Grenada and Dominica were part of the U.S. territory .
 St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Tobago, are among the countries in the Mediterranean . Minorca, St. Minorca and Senegal are also among the Mediterranean islands in the region .
 They also formalized their cessation of the Louisiana territory to Spain . The Spanish rulers formalized the cessation of Louisiana territory .
 Britain returned to France the valuable Caribbean sugar Islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe; Belle Island, off the coast of Brittany; and the slave-trading island of Gorée in West Africa . In exchange, Britain returned the valuable islands to France in exchange for the valuable sugar
 France regained its Indian factories, but they were not allowed to fortify them . France also regained control of its factories in India, but not fortifying them .
 Under the Treaty of Hubertusburg, the borders of 1756 were reinstated . Austria ' retreated from Silesia and Prussia left Saxony, and Europe reverted to : its former boundaries . In the Ohio River valley territory, a chief of the Ottawa people was angered by the
 The Sugar Act clamped down on tax avoidance on imported molasses in North America . The move angered traders and colonists . The British government brought in the Sugar Act in an attempt to fill the void left by war .
 Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was on a three-year tour of Europe with his family . Mozart's musical prodigy was on the tour at the time of his birth . He died in 17th century .
 He visited Munich, Brussels, Paris, and London, where his father Leopold presented him to play at the royal courts . He also visited Brussels, Brussels and Paris .
 While in London he met the German composer Johann Christian Bach . Bach was an important musical mentor for the composer .
 Enlightenment was a time of questioning many established beliefs in Europe in the mid-18th century . The Enlightenment was an era of questioning established beliefs and ideas .
 Fear of revolution led to a desire + ee Grand Duchy of Warsaw , and the among Europe's statesmen to maintain the status ; MBrising regions of Germany, Italy, and the Low Countries quo .
 The Bay of the Bay of France had been annexed to France . Although there were threats from liberal and liberal and Bay of that had already been annexed .
 Munich ©, Bete ok England England . France had a far larger eee of italy iis, * ¥, ae > | t iy Marseille 7.30: Marseille vs. Marseille .
 At encroach on Russia were met with state 1812 its height, it comprised humiliating defeat in 1812. nearly 600,000 men . At the height of the 1812, Russia was met with a state of state 1818 at its height .
 The assassination of the Austrian archduke Franz Ferdinand by Serbian nationalists in 1914 sparked World War I . Franz Ferdinand's assassination sparked the global conflict that would reshape Europe .
 Vienna system swept away by the wave of nationalism that crossed Europe from the mid-19th century . The Vienna system was swept away .
 Countries such as Italy and Germany unified by the time Europe sat on the brink of war in 1914 .
 The population of the Allied countries at the outset of World War | was more than double that of the Central Powers . Norway © Spain .
 Greece HE Ottoman Empire BW Albania Mi Luxembourg ™ Denmark > Serbia M Bulgaria M Bulgaria 5. million 3. million . H Montenegro ™ Portugal Romania Blely |) Yugoslavia .
 Allied Powers had far greater forces to mobilize in 1914 than the armies of Central Powers . Russia, France, Britain, Belgium, Belgium and Serbia had far more troops to mobilize than Central Powers did .
 Colonial rule within British and Spanish colonies in the Americas is on the rise . This year would be one of a year of growing discontent with colonial rule within colonies .
 In May, the residents of Quito, Ecuador, protested against the imposition of a new system of tax administration . The new system is aimed at increasing revenues for Spain's depleted treasury . Spain has been hit hard by austerity measures in recent years .
 The rioters drove out the royal officials, installing in their place a government that controlled the city . A year later, troops arrived to reestablish royal control .
 Britain’s American colonists were growing angry at similar revenue-raising exercises . Farther to the north, Britain's American colonists grew angry at such revenue raising exercises .
 This piece of legislation stipulated that all American colonists would have to pay a tax on every piece of printed paper they used . The legislation was passed by the first American colonists in 1777 .
 The device was an improvement on the spinning wheel because it could power 'multiple spindles' The device could power multiple spindlers .
 James Hargreaves’ invention : revolutionized cloth production . A woman working at a spinning : jenny in an early 19th-century mill .
 JAMES FRANCIS EDWARD STUART DIED in 1766 at the Palazzo Muti in Rome . He failed in his mission to be restored to the British thrones as James Ill. Stuart .
 His birth in 1688 had initiated the Glorious Revolution, forcing his father James II to take his family to France to live in exile . James II was born in France, but his family was exiled to France .
 After the royal family fled, the English Parliament passed the Act of Settlement of 1689 . It barred any Roman Catholics from succession to the throne . The Act was passed by Parliament in 1689, barring Roman Catholics .
 The Stuarts, however, had many supporters in England, Scotland, and Ireland . They were also supporters in Scotland, Ireland, and England .
 Several attempts were made to return James Ill, or the ‘Old Pretender’ as he became known, to the throne . The most notable was the risings of 1715 and 1745, the most notable being the attempts of 1745 .
 Charles took up his father’s fight, but to little avail . Over the course of his exile his son, Charles as “Bonnie Prince Charlie” or the “Young Pretender” — also took up the fight . Charles was known as ‘Bon
 Charles never recovered from his defeat at the Battle of Culloden . He made later efforts to secure support from France and the Holy Roman Empire for further uprisings . Charles was defeated in the last clash of the 1745 rising .
 German doctor Johann Freidrich ' Struensee infiltrated the court and exercised much . influence over the weak king, eventually enacting . policy and enacting policy and ' having an affair with the . queen' Struensensee was finally arrested and executed .
 Christian's reign were in name : only, and from 1784 his son, ' Frederick VI , acted vas regent: & 1A depiction of the Jesuits being expelled from Spain .
 The Society of Jesus was instrumental in the settlement of territory in the Americas . By 1767 had extensive missions . Jesuit settlements in the New World were established .
 The Spanish Crown grew concerned about the Jesuits' activities in the American colonies . Like the Portuguese, the Spanish Crown was growing concerned about their activities .
 Jesuit resistance to paying tithes to the Crown was symptomatic of longer-running struggles between the order and the king . One of the underlying causes for concern had been resistance to tithes .
 At issue was the Jesuits’ growing influence and wealth in Spanish America through their schools, extensive landholding, and agricultural success . The Jesuits' schools, land holdings, agricultural success led to their growing influence .
 Charles III decided to expel the Jesuits from his realm . Claimed he was ‘moved by weighty reasons, Charles III expelled them . Charles III claimed he was moved by 'weighty reasons’
 This enabled the Crown to confiscate valuable Jesuit land and property . The Crown was able to seize valuable Jesuit property and land .
 His next assignment was an expedition to the South Pacific . The expedition will take him to the region of the Pacific .
 The mission was organized by the Royal Society, with the Admiralty providing the a ship . The Admiralty provided the ship .
 The Endeavour set off from Plymouth on August 25 and arrived in Tahiti via Madeira, Rio de Janeiro, and Cape Horn on April 13, 1769 .
 Cook then headed further south encountering the island later known as New Zealand . Cook then encountered the New Zealand island .
 He eventually sailed from there to the unknown eastern coast of Australia . He landed in Botany Bay where he landed in what became known as Botany .
 The Endeavour returned to England in 1771 and was hailed a success . Captain Cook's expedition was hailed as a success by the end of the voyage .
 Captain James Cook and his crew at the watering place in the Bay of Good Success, Tierra del Fuego . Captain Cook's crew set off the attack on the coast of the island . Cook was the first to set off with his crew .
 Clowns to provide entertainment 2 during the inter-udes, and the : modern circus was born .
 Ottoman Empire pushed the two into the Russo-Turkish War ' of 1768-74 . Ottoman Empire had pushed the : two into Russia-Turkey War . Russo War was fought in Russia between 1768 and 74 .
 NORTH AMERICA showed no sign of abating, though its inhabitants still knew very little about the vast western territory . The SETTLEMENT of NORTH America showed no signs of . abating .
 Daniel Boone set off for a hunting expedition in present-day Kentucky in 1769 . Boone was the first white man to set out to hunt in the Kentucky area . Boone set out for the expedition in the 17th century to hunt for the first time .
 Along the way he worked out a better route along the Cumberland Gap, a plateau in the Appalachian mountains . Along the route, he also found a better way to get around the Appalachian Mountains .
 This became part of the Wilderness Road, a trail blazed by Boone and the Transylvania Company . It was later used by settlers to cross the mountains and reach the Kentucky territory .
 Boone and his family moved to Kentucky | in 1775 and established one of the first towns, Boonesborough . Boone's family established the first town in Kentucky . Boone was the founder of the town, which was named after Boone .
 The Spanish, too, were looking to expand their territory in North America . The Spanish were looking for territory in the United States .
 Charles IIl was eager to populate with Spanish settlers after rumors that Russia was planning to move into the area . They had claimed a region in present-day southern California that Charles Il. was eager .
 To this end he sent Franciscan friars to establish missions in the region . The Franciscans established missions in Spain .
 Spanish Franciscan Junipero Serra began work on a series of missions throughout Spain's California territory . Serra's first mission was in California, California .
 The first mission was established in 1769 in San Diego de Alcala . Over the course of the next 54 years a chain of 20 further missions was built along the California coast .
 The British government was still left with the question of how to raise money in the colonies . After the failure of the Stamp Act the British government faced the problem of raising money .
 The legislation included duties on paint, paper, glass, lead, and tea imported to the American colonies . It also included reorganization of customs to cut down on smuggling .
 Marie Antoinette would become one of the most . infamous queens of France . '
 Englishman Richard Arkwright worked with clockmaker John Kay to develop a spinning frame .
 Arkwright opened a series of textile factories in Engand and Scotland . The venture was a success and the textile factories became profitable . Arkwright's factories were a success .
 Arkwright’s inventions are considered an important part of the Industrial Revolution . The Industrial Revolution transformed Britain from an agricultural economy to a manufacturing one . Arkwright's inventions helped transform Britain into a manufacturing industry .
 The mills saw the development of the mass-production factory system which would be adopted all over the world . The mills were the first to develop mass production factories .
 Poland faced the first of three partitions of its territory . The first of the three partitioned territories of the country . Sweden defeated the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 This resulted from Russia’s defeats of the Ottoman Turks in the RussoTurkish War . Austria and Prussia were alarmed by Russia's defeat of the Ottomans .
 Frederick Il aimed to shift Russian expansion from Turkish territory to the Polish—-Lithuanian Union, which was weakened by civil war . Frederick Il wanted to shift the Russian expansion to the Poles-Lithuans Union .
 On August 5, Russia, Prussia, and Austria signed a treaty . The treaty, signed in the late 18th and early 19th century, changed rural, agrarian economies to ones based on manufactured goods .
 This transformation began in England, and was facilitated by the arrival of inventions such as the spinning jenny and the use of steam power (see 1775], which led to the growth of industries such as textiles in cities like Manchester .
 New technologies soon spread OTTOMAN EMPIRE throughout Europe, and other countries such as France, Germany, and Belgium were seeing similar economic shifts as agricultural workers left the countryside for jobs in growing urban centers .
 In England, a legal case was mounted over a slave, James Somersett, who had been brought © from Jamaica to England in 1771 ' and was due to be sent back . James : Somersett was due back in England and had to be returned to Jamaica .
 Brits were becoming Increasingly agitated by the number of restrictions being placed on them . Even If some had unexpected benefits, such as a reduction in the price of tea, they were becoming agitated .
 He claimed to be the deposed emperor Peter Ill, promising to abolish serfdom . He traveled around Russia claiming to have been Peter Ill . He was deposed .
 Russia also was experiencing unrest, led by a Cossack called 29,000 willing troops . The unrest was led by the Cossacks, Russia also experienced unrest . Russia is also experiencing unrest .
 Palestine and Syria, but by 1773 he was defeated by Ottoman forces and died from wounds : while in prison in Cairo .
 Representatives from each of the 13 colonies except Georgia met in Philadelphia to discuss what to do about the Intolerable Acts . Representatives from all of the colonies met to discuss the legislation .
 These acts were issued In retaliation for the dumping of tea in Boston harbor and growing American rebellion . The act was issued in retaliation for dumping tea in the Boston harbor .
 Boston harbor must be closed to all but British ships . British officials would not be tried for crimes in the colonies but in Britain instead, allowing them to act with impunity .
 Quebec Act enlarged the boundaries of the Canadian province . It allowed the continuation of French civil law in conjunction with British criminal law . It also guaranteed religious freedom for the many Catholic settlers . Also included was the Quebec Act, which enlarged the borders of the province .
 They objected to the expansion of Quebec into territory they believed was theirs . Many were suspicious of the type of government that had been installed there .
 Peninsula as independent, ' meaning Crimea was free from ' Ottoman rule' Peninsula . Peninsula was independent, meaning Crimea is free from " Ottoman rule" Peninsula .
 British officials feared an armed rebellion in the 13 American colonies . The issue of ‘taxation without representation’ in the colonies had begun to worry British officials .
 Paul Revere (1735-1818) set off from the city that night to warn fellow four-way valve controls that British troops were on the march .
 This style of tricorne was worn by : American colonists fighting for : the Continental army . as territorial boundaries, stood a better chance of being protected : by Britain .
 Many others simply wanted to avoid participation in either side of the conflict . Many others wanted to be involved in either way .
 War was the result of the East India Company's intervention into the Maratha Confederacy, a union of five clans : that came to power after the collapse of the kingdom of Maharashtra . War was result of : the company's intervention in Maratha .
 In partnership with Boulton, Watt ' began to manufacture these engines in 1775 . Watt began to make the engines in partnership with the French company .
 The document outlined reasons for the decision to separate from Britain while asserting certain natural rights . The document was published in 1963 .
 The Declaration of Independence declared that all men were created equal and had the right to ‘life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness’ — would not, however, apply to everyone .
 Enslaved Africans, some of whom had been fighting on the U.S. side, were excluded . Some of them had fought on the Americans side of the war .
 The year 1776 also witnessed the publication of many influential works . The year of 1776 was the year of science fiction and science fiction .
 Scottish philosopher Adam : Smith published An : Enquiry into the the the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations . Adam Smith outlined the advantages of free trade, changing the way politicians and the public thought about economic expansion .
 Fall of the Roman Empire by Edward Gibbon : was published in 17th century .
 Elector Maximilian III Joseph died, last of the Wittelsbach line, died . Charles Theodore was Elector Palatine was crowned .
 Charles had no legitimate heir but several bastards for whom he sought land . Charles was forced to give up his estate to the bastards he wanted to inherit . Charles died in 1877 .
 He signed a treaty with Joseph II of Austria to cede Lower Bavaria to Austria . In exchange for part of the Austrian Netherlands, he ceded Lower Bavarian to Austria In .
 War of the Bavarian Succession broke out in 1778, ending in 1779 . This angered Frederick Il of Prussia and the war of the German Succession began . The war was the first of its kind and ended in 1780 .
 Spain and Portugal settled ongoing disputes in the Rio de la Plata region with the First Treaty of San Ildefonso . Portugal and Spain finally settled disputes with Spain in the 18th century .
 The Elector Palatine, Charles Theodore, had no legitimate heirs . Charles Theodore had several illegitimate ones . Charles Theodor was the son of Charles Theodore . He died in 1783 .
 Traditional Hawaiian clubs may have been used in the attack that caused James Cook's death . Cook was attacked by traditional Hawaiian clubs in his native New Zealand .
 Captain Cook set out for a third voyage in 1776 to search for the Northwest Passage . The fabled Arctic shortcut was supposed to connect the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans . The Northwest Passage is supposed to have been a fabled shortcut to the Arctic Ocean .
 By 1778 he had made the first European contact with the Hawaiian islands . He had already made contact with them .
 He later sailed back to Hawaii, where he was killed by Hawaiians in 1779 . A dispute over a missing boat led to his being killed .
 It was founded under the patronage of Maria Theresa of Austria to replace a theater that had been destroyed in a fire . The theater was built to replace the theater that was destroyed .
 The new theater was built on the site of the church of Santa Maria alla Scala and financed by wealthy patrons . The theater is located in central Italy .
 A Xhosa family, from a painting by French naturalist Pierre Sonnerat . XG Ve < 22: XHosa family . XHSA family .
 The Xhosa people live in remote regions hundred of miles north of Cape Town . They are living in remote areas hundreds of miles from Cape Town, South Africa .
 These tribes had settled in the territory long before the Boers arrived . The Boers had settled there long before they arrived .
 Both groups were cattle farmers and competed for rich pasture land for their herds . Both groups of cattle farmers were competing to protect their herd .
 Attempts were made to establish a border between the Fish and Sundays Rivers, but both groups violated any agreement . Attempts to establish any agreement were made by both groups .
 Dutch settlers in South Africa moved away from Cape Town, deep into rural areas where they raised livestock . Tension turned to violence with the Xhosa raiding Boer cattle and murdering some herdsmen .
 These skirmishes amount to the first Xhosa War did not resolve the root cause of the dispute . Access to grazing lands and water was the issue of the war .
 As British company attempted to extend its reach outside of Bengal, it often met resistance from Indian princely states .
 The fighting did not completely settle the conflict between the two sides . The fighting continued until 1799 .
 Unrest in India was not the only military preoccupation for Britain . Britain was now fighting on many fronts, including in India .
 In addition to the ongoing war in North America, dispute broke out with the Dutch . The Dutch are also involved in the war .
 The Dutch were supplying arms to the rebelling colonists, and a dispute erupted over Britain's seizure of Dutch ships . Dispute erupted after Britain seized Dutch ships from the Dutch .
 Dutch maintained Britain should 'respect their neutrality, but the _ British did not agree . The » Dutch maintained that Britain should respect their neutrality .
 Buganda is located on the northern : shore of Lake Ukerewe (Lake Victoria) It emerged as a regional power as it expanded its territory .
 Tupac Amaru II was born José Gabriel Condorcanqui in Cuzco, Peru, around 1742 . He renamed himself after the last Inca leader, who ruled the Incan Empire from 1945-72 . He ruled the empire between 1945 and 1972 .
 The U.S. Constitution took a decisive turn at the battle of Yorktown, Virginia, on October 19 . The battle took place at Yorktown in October 19, 1777 .
 Cornwallis was forced to surrender after a French naval blockade . Cornwallis had no option but to surrender .
 Revolutionary War was the last major battle of the Revolutionary War . Official recognition of American independence would not come until later .
 This cartoon depicts an American :_rifleman as worn out and badly : equipped . American riflemen : This cartoon is an American .
 These laws had been designed to place Ireland under the rule of the English Parliament . They were designed to put Ireland under English rule .
 With many of the restrictions in these Acts lifted, lreland was able to establish some degree of legislative independence .
 Political participation was only open to Protestants, and the unrest this arrangement eventually prompted in the largely Catholic territory meant that self-rule had a short life span . Despite the new freedoms, however, political participation only opened to Protestants .
 In Siam, a new ruling dynasty was established—the Chakri—after a power struggle following the demise of the previous ruler, King Taksin, who had left no heir . The Chakri was established after a power-struggle following the death of the former ruler,
 Rama was established by Rama | (17371809], who had been the chief commander in the army . He had won loyal support fighting against the Burmese .
 Frieze depicts the signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1783, in which Britain recognized the independence of its former American colonies .
 The document gave formal recognition to the United States and established the boundaries of the 13 states that it comprised . The document was published in 1903 .
 Although the settlement saw the establishment of the United States, there was still a significant European presence . Spain still held large territories to the west, with Spain holding large territories .
 Treaty of Paris extended U.S. borders to the Mississippi River under the treaty . It retained Minorca, which it had regained the year before, and Florida territories in Florida .
 Montgolfier had the ' first public trial of a hot air ' balloon officially recorded . The balloon was the first public . trial of the hot air balloon .
 A later Montgolfier balloon, named Le Flesselles, was sent over Lyon with seven passengers on January 19, 1784 . This engraving shows a later version of the ride .
 Joseph Montgolfier was one of those on board . He was the first person to fly aboard the ship .
 The British presence in India had evolved through the East India Company . The 18th century saw a growing tension between the EIC and the British government .
 The India Act 1773 had already brought the company under tighter control . Its demands for government money to cover the cost of its many battles prompted further action .
 Act stipulated trade and territorial rule were to be two separate activities . Act also stipulated that trade, territorial rule and trade was to be a separate activity .
 Cartwright's loom became an integral part of the textile industry in Britain . Cartwright’s loom was an integral feature of the British textile industry. Cartwright was a pioneer of the loom .
 The design was later improved by the American businessman Francis Cabot Lowell, who saw the looms In operation on a visit to Britain . The looms were widespread on both sides of the Atlantic after 1820 .
 In Burma, the Konbaung dynasty’s King Bodawpaya (1745-1819) had captured the coastal kingdom of Arakan the previous year . In Burma he had captured a coastal kingdom .
 He decided to move to the east and invade the kingdom of Siam but was defeated . Bolstered by this victory, he decided to invade Siam .
 Jean-Francois de Galaup, the comte de Lapérouse, was sent by Louis XV/ on an expedition to map out the uncharted waters of the Pacific for his military prowess .
 In Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, inventor John Fitch (1743-1798) had set up the Steamboat Company with the aim of designing a steam-powered boat . In 1798, Fitch set up a steamboat company in Philadelphia .
 Fitch found success ahead of his rivals in August 1787 when the Perseverance successfully sailed on the Delaware River . Fitch was the first ship to successfully sail on the river in 1787 .
 By 1790, a fledgling steamer service was running between Philadelphia and Trenton, New Jersey, but Fitch struggled as he struggled to attract investors . Fitch had trouble attracting investors .
 First steamboat : John Fitch managed to take : steam-engine technology and apply : it to boats . The first steamboat was built in 1903 .
 July 23, the United States signed a treaty with Morocco which assured safe passage for U.S. ships in exchange for trading on equal terms . Prussia mourned the death of Frederick Il. Frederick I.
 This 19th-century engraving depicts the coastal settlement of Sierra Leone, West Africa . Attributed to Frederick II, king of Prussia .
 Many slaves were abandoned by their masters and the ‘black poor” of London were left with no means of support .
 Granville Sharp arranged for a free settlement to be established in Sierra Leone, West Africa . Sharp was an abolitionist who helped establish the settlement .
 These initial settlers were later joined by slaves from Nova Scotia, Canada, who had fought for the British in the American Revolutionary War . The initial settlers included slaves from the British and slaves from Canada .
 At the same time, West Africa was still rife with other European slavers . The slave trade was rife in West Africa at the time of the time .
 The U.S. Constitution Is the oldest written constitution in the world still in use . The United States Constitution is the oldest in use of the world .
 It was adopted on September 17, 1787 and has been amended 27 times to deal with issues such as freedom of speech . The Constitution was adopted in 1787 . It has since been amended to address issues such a free speech .
 George Washington led the Constitutional Convention and became the first U.S. president in 1789 . George Washington was the first president of the United States from 1789 to 1788 .
 During his presidency, the first ten amendments, known as the Bill of Rights, were ratified . The first 10 amendments were ratified during his presidency .
 Charles Ill died, and his son, Charles IV, inherited the crown . After 30 years on the Spanish throne, Charles III inherited the throne .
 His wife, Maria Luisa of Parma, and her protééé Manuel de Godoy, ran the country and the empire, leading it into disaster . His wife and her political protégé Manuel De Godoy were prime ministers .
 In France, as In Britain, there was growing public support for the abolition of slavery . In France and Britain, slavery was abolished in 1881 .
 The Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade had been established in Britain in May 1787 . It was established with the aim of ending the slave trade . The Committee was established in 1787 to end the trade .
 ' up the Société des Amis des : Noirs (Society of the Friends of : the Blacks), which called for the abolition of the slave trade and slavery, but also urged ' equality for people of mixed race'
 Magyar ' nobles were unhappy about ' Joseph Il's reforms (see 1765), in particular the introduction of German as the official language of government and secondary : education .
 Scottish inventor James Watt makes improvements to the Newcomen engine by adding a condenser . Watt develops engine that rotates a shaft instead of pumping .
 Thomas Savery joins forces with Thomas Newcomen to create the much-improved atmospheric steam pumping engine . Savery’s engine is the first steam-powered steam engine to be developed by Newcomens .
 The power of steam was not harnessed until the 17th century, but scientists had understood its potential for hundreds of years . Newcomen’s atmospheric engine AM POYV was the first steam engine to harness steam .
 As far back as the 1st century CE, the aeolipile was a device that illustrated the possibilities of water vapor . Hero of Alexandria had discussed the device in the 1th century CE .
 The aeolipile worked by heating water in a mounted sphere that had two bent nozzles . It was designed to heat water in the sphere by heating it in a sphere .
 First indication of experiments with steam power . Although it had no practical use at the time, this was the first indication of steam power experiments .
 More dramatic developments took place in the 17th century, when the first boiler was invented . First boiler invented in 17th Century .
 Although it was little more than a pressure cooker, from this point onward, a steady stream of innovations followed . From this point on, the company went on to develop a new generation of innovations .
 By the 18th century, engineers had realized how steam-powered devices could be used to pump water out of mines . This was an important issue in light of the growing demand for coal in Europe during the Industrial Revolution .
 Scientists soon realized that steam could also be used to power engines . The steam was used to make steam engines .
 Thomas Newcomen invented a steam engine in 1712, but it was the improvements made by James Watt that made the device more efficient . Watt's improvements in the steam engine made it more efficient in the early 1800s .
 Watt's key innovation consisted of condensing steam, so that the engine did not need to heat and cool the cylinder, making it far more efficient . Watt's innovation was to condense steam, instead of heating and cooling the cylinder . Watt invented the first steam engine in 1903 .
 Steam power was being used to fuel ships and locomotives, enabling them to travel farther and faster . Soon, steam power was used to power ships and trains . Steam powered trains and trains powered by steam .
 The United States vessel Savannah becomes the first ship to cross the Atlantic using steam power as well as sails . Savannah is the first vessel to use steam power and sails in the Atlantic .
 George Stephenson applies steam power to locomotives, and his “Rocket” becomes a commercial success . The era of sails ends soon after .
 Sir Charles Algernon Parsons develops steam turbine generator, which produces huge amounts of electricity . Stephenson's 1884-97 The steam turbine was the first steam turbine to be built in 1903 .
 Controlled nuclear chain reactions create heat in reactors, which boils water to produce steam and drive a steam turbine in order to produce electricity . Steam turbines and nuclear power are used to power large ships such as the Jitanic .
 Representatives of France’s ‘Third Estate’—the people—wore the ‘Tennis Court Oath’ not to separate until they had established a constitution in France . 1789 Representatives of the . “Third . Estate”—the . people—
 The decision was made to summon the Estates-General, France's representative assembly . The Estates General is the French parliament's most powerful body .
 It had not met since 1614, so between January and April elections were held to select deputies . It was the first time the deputies had met in 1614 .
 First Estate (the clergy); the Second Estate; and the Third Estate—the people) First Estate is the clergy; the second Estate; the third Estate is people; the people . First Estate: The clergy, the second estate; the clergy and the people. The people .
 The First and Second Estates wanted voting to be by estate rather than a vote per head . The issue was how much voting power to give the Third Estate . The First, Second and Third Estate wanted to be outnumbered by the public .
 French countryside was already in a state of unrest due to : grain shortages . The French countryside, which was : already in an unrest, was already . already in state of . unrest .
 As the National Assembly knew, slavery did not sit well with the ideas espoused in the Declaration of the Rights of Man . Slavery was abolished in 1881 .
 Free people of color faced inequity in France and its empire . Neither did the inequity that free people faced in France or its empire.
 In 1790, Vincent Oge and Julien Raimond argued that because they were property owners, they ought to be given full rights . They argued in Paris that because of their property rights, they should be given them full rights. The two wealthy mixed-race planters argued
 Ogé was frustrated by the Assembly's failure to confront white planters on this issue . Ogé continued his protest back in Saint-Domingue and continued his protests .
 Rearerst Yosiah Harmar met with defeat when he mounted a campaign against a coalition of American Indians in the Northwest Territory . It was quickly suppressed .
 This illustration shows a version of : the French Revolutionary emblem : issuing the famous call for liberty, : equality, and fraternity or death . The French revolutionary emblem was issued by the French Revolution .
 VINCENT OGE and Jean-Baptiste Chavannes (c.48-1791] were in hiding in the Spanish colony, Santo Domingo . They had helped Ogé organize the 1790 revolt .
 Their bones were broken on a wheel and their heads placed on stakes . They were, however, returned by the Spanish to Saint-Domingue, where they were killed .
 By May political rights were granted to free people of color, if born of two free parents . This was met with outrage | in France, and by May political right was granted . In France, people born of free parents can have political rights if they have two parents .
 Slaves in Saint-Domingue had also been hearing a mixture of news and rumors about events in Paris . Slaves had begun to hope they would see abolition .
 A week later, Boukman and his followers launched a massive revolt in the north of the island . A week after the revolt, the island's leader took control of the government . The revolt was the first of its kind in the country's history .
 It draws on a range of African traditions, especially those of Benin, the former home of many slaves .
 Oge fled to Santo Domingo after Oge was forced to flee to the country . Oge is a native of Catholicism, the religion and Oge also incorporates Catholicism in his name .
 The Catholic practices slaves adopted enabled them to disguise their true religion from their masters, with Catholic saints standing In for Loa worshiped in Voodoo .
 This new system of belief allowed slaves to form their own identity . It also provided a way of organizing resistance, as In Saint-Domingue . The belief system was created by slaves in the French Revolution .
 A detail from the painting Battle of Valmy, by French artist Emile-Jean-Horace Vernet, shows Prussia’s defeat by France . C QP NS eK NX: <2 es xO op 1S Q@ e)
 National Assembly declared war on the Holy Roman Empire on April 20, 1792 . The French government declared war in 1792, perceiving it as a threat to the Roman Empire .
 Emperor Leopold II signed the Declaration of Pilnitz with Frederick William II of Prussia, swearing to defend Louis XVI and destroy Paris if anything befalled him .
 Austrian and Prussian troops set off for France . Provoked by the French call to war, Austrian and German forces set off to France .
 News of this enraged the French people, who thought they had been betrayed by their king and the aristocracy, and on August 10 a group of revolutionaries found Louis XVI when they stormed the Tuileries Palace . Louis XVI was found by revolutionaries in August 10 .
 The king and the rest of the royal family were jailed in the Temple prison . The king was jailed for life in the temple prison .
 Mary Wollstonecraft was an early advocate for women's rights . She was an English writer and advocate of women’s rights .
 She published A Vindication on the Rights of Woman, in 1792 . She was influenced by events in France and subsequent debates in Britain .
 The work, calling for the education system to allow girls the same advantages as boys, was controversial . The work was called for girls to have the same opportunities as boys .
 The book has endured as a work of early feminist philosophy . It would be many years before any changes were enacted, but it has endured .
 British with Chinese tea—for which they were paying China in : opium produced in Bengal . The trade was ' proving a profitable trade' for the British .
 National Convention of France condemned Louis XVI to death on January 18, XVI XVI . Louis XVI was executed in 17th century .
 On January 21 he was taken to the Place de la Révolution, Paris, where he was guillotined . He was guilledotined on January 21 .
 His wife, Marie Antoinette, remained in prison until October, when she appeared before a Revolutionary tribunal . Marie Antoisette remained In prison until . October, she appeared . before she appeared in court .
 Marie Antoinette’s death occurred during the Reign of Terror, which was the result of a decree on September 5 that made “terror” the means of governance . The decree made ‘terror’ the means .
 Eli Whitney’s cotton gin separated cotton seeds from the plant's fiber more quickly than if done by hand, which increased cotton production greatly . Eli Whitney's cotton gin was a machine that separated seeds from cotton .
 In Saint-Domingue, fighting was complicated by the arrival of British troops . Robespierre—the Jacobins— also become involved in the surveillance of potential suspects .
 This 2 escalated into a battle of words ' over who had the right to settle | in that territory . This 2 . escalated into an argument over who should have been allowed to settle in the territory .
 Committee suspends suspect's right to public trial and legal assistance . Juries instructed to issue either acquittal or death verdict .
 This measure was passed in June, but little more than a month later a revolt in the National Convention ended the reign of Robespierre . This measure is passed in the June 18th, 18th and 17th century .
 Known as the Thermidorian Reaction, it refers to 9 Thermidor Year II (July 27, 1794), the date in the French Revolutionary Calendar . The date is known as July 27 in 1794 .
 This change to the calendar system began in 1792 and lasted until 1806 . The change was made to the British calendar system from 1792 to 1806.
 17,000 people were officially executed and hundreds ' of thousands arrested the previous year, and patriots organized the Polish Rebellion of 1794 . The Terror had exacted a high price—some 17,500 people were executed .
 Toussaint Louverture, former slave and military leader, was a leader of the Dutch colony of Malacca . He was one of the first French settlers to settle in the Malacca area .
 The Strait of Malacca remains a key trade route linking Europe and Africa to China . The Strait is still a vital part of the world's trade route .
 The War of the First Coalition was drawing to a close, negotiated partially with three treaties under the Peace of Basel . Elsewhere in Europe, the war was also drawing to an end, negotiated partly with three treaty deals . The Second World War ended in 1918 .
 These agreements gave German lands west of the Rhine River to France . They ended Franco-Spanish fighting around the Pyrenees mountains . Spain's cessation of Santo Domingo to France led to the end of fighting .
 The engraving shows a maroon settlement in Jamaica . This meant the French now had control of Maroon colony .
 Maroons are former runaway slaves who had established their own autonomy . Maroons were former runaway slave slaves who set up their own autonomous autonomy .
 The fighting that had ' begun in Saint-Domingue showed few signs of abating . The whole island of Hispaniola was covered by the French Revolution .
 Mungo Park, a Scottish surgeon and explorer, finally located the Niger River .
 He embarked from the River Gambia in 1795, and reached Ségou (in present-day Mali], which lies on the river . After prolonged illness and four months spent captive, he was captured and spent four months .
 The first documented inoculation was completed by British physician Edward Jenner (1749-1823) on May 14 . Jenner completed the inoculation in May 17, 1823 .
 Jenner experimented by using cowpox, a similar but less lethal virus often contracted by milking infected animals . Jenner experimented with cowpox in an attempt to prevent the deadly smallpox virus, which killed thousands across Europe .
 James Phipps inoculated with cowpox taken from Sarah Nelmes, a dairymaid . The experiment entailed inoculating eight-year-old James with the cowpox .
 The early success of this experiment led to the development of the modern vaccine . Vaccine was developed in the 1930s and 1940s, and the vaccine was developed .
 In Europe, French army commander Napoleon Bonaparte took charge of the French army in northern Italy in March . Napoleon took charge in March after the Battle of Italy .
 He was given orders to seize Lombardy, and went on to win many victories over the Austrian army . He was subsequently forced Austria into peace negotiations .
 Austria recognized the French puppet state, the Cisalpine Republic, and ceded the Austrian : Netherlands to France . Austria recognized France as a puppet state . The Netherlands was also ceded to France by Austria .
 Lotus, a secret Buddhist sect, : sought to overthrow their Manchu ' rulers and restore the previous . ruling dynasty, the Ming . Lotus sought to oust the Manchu and restore their previous . rulers . Lotus .
 White Lotus attracted much support, but ultimately failed after ' eight years of fighting . White Lotus was founded in 1981 .
 Richard Wellesley was appointed Governor-General of Bengal in 1797 . Britain's territorial claims in Bengal began when Irish nobleman Wellesley became Governor General of Bengal .
 He left for Calcutta in November and set about increasing British territory through both military and diplomatic channels . He left in November .
 This period also saw efforts to professionalize the East India Company . This period was also seen as a period of professionalizing the company .
 Some of these measures were considered controversial at the time . These included setting up a college in order to teach junior clerks subjects such as Indian languages .
 Napoleon Bonaparte was born in Corsica and educated in France . He became an army officer in 1785 . He was the first French president of the French Revolution in 1881 .
 His successful campaign in Italy was followed by further military and political victories . His success in Italy led to further successes in Italy .
 In 1804, he was declared emperor and led France on to more battles, though with diminishing success . He drained the nation’s resources and ultimately led to his downfall . He was declared king of France in 1804 and died in 1807 .
 France still considered Britain an enemy despite the end of the War of the First Coalition in 1795 . The war of the first Coalition was officially overrated by France .
 The French mooted the idea of a possible invasion, but it was ultimately rejected due to Britain's superior sea power and naval defenses . The French were defeated by the British in the Battle of Britain in the Second World War .
 Napoleon proposed to attack the British on the colonial front in India, via Egypt, which he also hoped to conquer . Napoleon wanted to get around the Royal Navy and disrupt valuable trade in India .
 Napoleon took 35,000 troops, capturing the Mediterranean island of Malta along the way . He set off from France, taking 35,500 troops and capturing the island .
 Napoleon quickly defeated Mameluke troops at the Battle of the Pyramids . Napoleon quickly reached Alexandria in July, defeating Mameluk forces at the battle . Napoleon arrived in July .
 Protestant Protestant prisoners, suspected of being loyal to British rule, were executed by Irish nationalists in Wexford during the revolt . Protestant prisoners were executed on August 1, 1918 .
 Revolutionary France, ' but the British, » : learning of these plots, had forced the : rebels to change their : plans. Revolutionary France .
 The kingdom of Kandy, whose subjects occupied the interior of the island, remained independent . Their autonomy became a cause for concern for British governors in Ceylon .
 Theobald Wolfe Tone : and James : Napier Tandy (1740: 1803), the group had made numerous Wexford paintings . Wolfe Tone and Tandy made numerous trips to Ireland .
 Once Napoleon Bonaparte had returned to France from Egypt, he began to focus on his political future . He plotted a coup d’état that involved dissolving the Directory, the body that had been governing the country since 1795 . A French expeditionary force sent Napoleon Bon
 Napoleon took charge of France as First Consul after the 18 Brumaire Coup of November 9 . Napoleon was the first Consul of the French Directory .
 It fell into British possession by 1801, but it took years of study before anyone could translate it .
 In India, soldiers for the East India Company emerged victorious from a violent battle with the fearsome Tipu Sultan . The battle took place in Mysore, India, in 1881 . Soldiers for the company emerged victorious against the Sultan .
 Ancient practices, such as bloodletting to cure illness, were replaced with ones that were born of a more rigorous scientific approach . Ancient practices were replaced by ones that are born of the more rigorous approach .
 People have attempted to treat disease since prehistoric times, but until the 18th century medicine was based on superstition, natural remedies, and unscientific practices and theories .
 There had been progress in anatomy and surgery, but overall, medicine remained primitive . Overall, medicine was primitive, but it was still primitive .
 In the 18th century, medicine started to become more scientifically rigorous . Significant advances were made, such as the development of a vaccine for smallpox in 1796 . The development of smallpox vaccine was the first vaccine to be developed in Europe .
 The 19th century saw the establishment of the germ theory of disease, the introduction of antiseptic techniques and anesthetics, and the use of X-rays to image the body .
 Around 1900, pharmacology began to make great progress, with the invention of aspirin in 1897 . The first synthetic antibacterial drug in 1908 was the first synthetic antibiotic in existence .
 During the 20th century, more vaccines and drugs were developed, such as antibiotics and anticancer drugs . Vaccines and drugs have been developed during the last century .
 Surgical techniques also became more sophisticated . Successful organ transplants were performed, and keyhole surgery became routine .
 In diagnosis, scanning techniques were invented, and screening became widely used . Screening techniques are now widely used in diagnosis and diagnosis .
 From the late 20th century, genetics also began to have a significant impact on medicine . Genetic causes of diseases were discovered and genetic testing was developed .
 In 1851, British physician Arthur Leared invented the binaural stethoscope, with an earpiece for each ear . In the 1940s, Americans Maurice Rappaport and Howard Sprague developed the modern acoustic stethoscopes . They have two “bells�
 The electronic stethoscope uses an electronic sound sensor and amplifier . Stethoscope is the latest development in the world of medical technology .
 Medical and especially surgical knowledge advances due to the practice of mummification, which gives doctors greater insight into anatomy . Trepanned 1550-700 BCE .
 The Brussels-born surgeon writes his influential anatomical work, with accurate diagrams of human anatomy based on many dissections and operations .
 British obstetrician James Blundell performs the first successful human-to-human blood transfusion, using a syringe to transfer blood between the patients .
 i Jenner's inoculation point is the ad first vaccine created for any disease, and J Jenner’s work saves countless lives . Antiseptic machine was used to make air in operating rooms free of microorganisms .
 British scientist Godfrey Hounsfield invents the first commercial CT scanner in 1971 . Robotic suturing 1971 and 1977 CT and MRI scans .
 The Battle of Marengo was a victory for France over Austria . The battle was fought in Italy in the 18th century .
 Despite previous treaties, French military action increased In aggression . Despite previous treaty, French action increased in aggression .
 Austria, Britain, Russia, Portugal, Naples, and the Ottoman Empire formed the Second Coalition in 1798 . By 1799, the coalition was formed by Austria, Russia and Britain .
 Napoleon scored a significant victory against Austria in the Battle of Marengo . The result of the battle was French control of northern Italy . Napoleon's victory in the battle took place on 14 June .
 Spain, meanwhile, had done little to develop its Louisiana territory in North America . Spain lacked the resources to settle it, lacking the ability to do so .
 Napoleon put pressure on Charles IV to return Louisiana to Spain . The Spanish monarch obliged . Charles IV's Louisiana was returned to Spain in 1877 .
 Napoleon agreed not to give the land to c 7 a third power . Under the terms of the secret Treaty of San Ildefonso, Napoleon agreed to give it to a third party .
 William Pitt the Younger concluded that the solution to the “Irish question’s” was a political union . The British prime minister concluded that a political solution was needed .
 The Act of Union, also approved by the British Government, came into effect on 1 January 1801 . The act of Union was passed by British Government .
 Pitt had hoped the move would allow the granting of concessions to Catholics . But the bill maintained a ban on Catholics holding public office .
 In 1783 treaty, the Bagratid dynasty agreed to Russian protection, in return for assurances that its territorial — Integrity would be fy preserved .
 Virginia-born planter and slave-owner Thomas Jefferson was a leading republican . Jefferson was one of the primary authors of the Declaration of Independence .
 For all the influence of his writings on issues Like liberty, he did not free his own slaves during his lifetime . Yet for all of his influence, he didn't free himself during his life .
 Nguyen Phuc Anh was a powerful general who, with the help of French mercenaries, was able to defeat the rival Trinh family . After 30 years of civil war, Vietnam was united under the leadership of Nguyen Phuu Anh .
 Nguyen Anh declared himself emperor, taking the name Gia Long, and reestablished the Nguyen family as the ruling dynasty . The Nguyen family reestablished itself as the Vietnamese state of Vietnam .
 Ongoing warfare in Europe and further afield came to an end with the Treaty of Amiens in France . Ongoing war in Europe ended with the treaty of Amien in 1918 .
 Under the terms of the treaty, Britain kept the colonies of Trinidad, which had been taken from Spain, and Ceylon, which was captured from the Dutch .
 Egypt was restored to the Ottoman Empire, and France agreed to relinquish Malta . France also relinquished Malta to Egypt .
 William Pitt and Napoleon Bonaparte carving up the globe around the Peace of Amiens for Haitian independence .
 The capture and exile of General Toussaint Louverture in 1803 was a turning point in the war against France . The capture of the French general was the ultimate turning point of the war .
 He drove out the remaining British forces on the island, before taking up the title of governor in 1801 . He had joined the French Republican cause ten years earlier .
 Napoleon was displeased with Louverture’s successes and was infuriated when he defied orders, riding into Santo Domingo then under French control and freeing the slaves . Napoleon was angered when he freed the slaves, but was not pleased with his actions .
 Napoleon reinstated slavery in 1802 and sent 29,000 troops to reclaim the island . Napoleon sent troops to retake the island, which is now a French colony .
 After months of fighting, Louverture was invited to negotiate a settlement . Louvertures were invited to discuss a settlement with the government of France .
 The battle for abolition then fell to his deputy Jean-Jacques Dessalines . The abolition of the state of slavery in France was abolished in 1881 .
 Most of Napoleon's troops in Saint-Domingue were killed on the battlefield or ravaged by yellow fever . Dessalines’ men drove out the remaining soldiers .
 French reinforcements were held up by a British blockade of French ports as part of the ongoing war, and France abandoned the island . The island was eventually abandoned by the British and French forces .
 Napoleon wanted to raise money by selling undeveloped land in North America . The cost of fighting in Haiti had put further strain on France's troubled finances . Napoleon decided to sell the land to raise funds for France .
 The massive Louisiana territory almost doubled the size of the US . The following year it was extended south to include New Orleans . Settlers settled further west came to depend on trade along the Mississippi River .
 St. Louis . dr <m (fem ge Bk prom + seem + seem | bh 4b) A sketch of an evergreen leaf from William Clark’s Ss Bit He and Meriwether Lewis spent years exploring the vast Louisiana territory .
 Jean-Jacques Dessalines declared the independence of the new republic of Haiti on 1 January 1804 .
 It was the first— and only— former slave colony to throw off colonial rule and slavery . It was also the first-to-be-former-slave colony in the world to throw .
 Haiti's birth was met with a wary reception from the slave-owning U.S. States did not want Haiti setting an example to the southern states, a concern shared by Britain, whose slave colony of Jamaica was also in close proximity .
 Napoleon's defeat in the Caribbean did little to weaken Napoleon's stranglehold on power in Europe . Napoleon's victory over the British Empire in the 18th century did not weaken his power .
 In 1804, he made France a hereditary empire, ostensibly to ward off assassination attempts, but also to showcase his own might . France was made hereditary empire by Napoleon III in 1804 .
 President Thomas Jefferson to : find the Missouri River, establish relations with the indigenous people of the region, and find the : fabled Northwest Passage . President Jefferson to find the . Missouri River .
 Napoleon Bonaparte's most far-reaching reforms was to codify French law . Ais is a form of form of law that was codified in Napoleon's first law .
 The Napoleonic Code was a civil code created in 1804 to break from the institutions of the past . It was created with the intention of breaking from the past institutions . Enacted in 1803, it was the first code to be created in France .
 France’s defeat in the Caribbean was overshadowed by victory against Russia and Austria, which had been pulled back into war . France's defeat in Saint-Domingue was soon overshadowed by the victory against Austria and Russia .
 Napoleon declared himself the king of Italy, then comprising Venice and northern Italian kingdoms . Napoleon had declared himself himself the King of Italy . Napoleon also declared himself to be the Italian king .
 Britain, Austria, Russia, and Sweden as members of the Third Coalition . This act provoked the formation of a Third Coalition against France, with Britain and Austria joining .
 Deciding against an invasion of Britain, Bonaparte sent forces to Ulm, Bavaria (September 25-October 20), where he was victorious . Deciding not to invade Britain, he decided to send forces there .
 France suffered a humiliating defeat at the hands of the British in the Battle of Trafalgar . The Battle of Ulm ended the day after the battle, ending all men equal, ending any hereditary nobility .
 Napoleonic Code was disseminated throughout French-controlled territory in Europe and beyond, making it highly influential . An adapted version is still in force in the Dominican Republic today .
 It was adopted by some of the new Latin American republics, including Bolivia and Chile . It was also later adopted by other Latin American nations, including Chile and Bolivia .
 Europe, occupying Vienna and ' defeating Russia and Austria : at the Battle of Austerliz on : December 2. Russia defeated Austria and Austria . Europe occupied Vienna and occupied Vienna .
 Russia suffered a devastating defeat against France at the Battle of Jena on October 14 .
 122,000 French troops and 114,000 Prussians met in combat . Fought in Jena and Auserstadt in Saxony (southeast Germany) Fought between French and Prussian troops .
 Frederick William III decided internal reform in Prussia was necessary in order to bolster the country’s flagging fortunes . Prussia's internal reform was necessary to boost the country's fortunes .
 The transition later proved profitable for agriculture, it took years to implement the changes . Although the transition proved profitable, the changes were difficult to implement .
 Napoleon wanted control of the Holy Roman Empire, which would expand his territory in Germany . Napoleon wanted to take control of Germany's Holy Roman empire .
 Emperor Francis II was in no position to challenge France and abdicated, officially ending the empire, of which France took possession . Francis II's abdication was officially the end of the empire .
 In the Middle East, the Islamic holy pilgrimage site of Mecca was invaded by members of the Arabian Saudi dynasty . The Saudi dynasty practiced a strict version of the religion known as Wahhabi .
 In 1805, they had captured Medina, which, like Mecca, was under the control of the Ottoman Empire . Medina was captured by the Ottomans in 1805 and was captured in 1806 .
 They also made incursions into the Arabian Peninsula, sacking the city of Karbala, in Iraq [also under Ottoman rule] and extending their influence south to Yemen, a cause for concern among Ottoman officials .
 Russia, alongside Prussia, had reentered the hostilities against France with the Battle of Eylau (February 7-8) in eastern Prussia . Russia and Prussia were involved in the battle, which took place in eastern Germany .
 The battle was inconclusive and resulted in a stalemate, with both sides losing more than 20,000 troops . The battle ended in an inconclusive draw-and-draw draw .
 Francisco Goya’s painting The Third of May depicts the French troops A executing Spanish insurgents involved in the Madrid uprising . Goya's painting shows French troops executing the insurgents .
 Napoleon now turned toward the Iberian Peninsula . Napoleon was already in control of most of western and central Europe .
 The Portuguese refused to back a French boycott against Britain, sending troops into Portugal via northern Spain . Enraged by the Portuguese refusal to back the French boycott, he sent troops into the country .
 Ferdinand VII was forced to abdicate after being lured to Bayonne by Napoleon's offer to mediate . Napoleon was the king of France, but was soon overthrown . Napoleon died in 1803 .
 As Charles VII had already abdicated, Napoleon was able to declare his brother, Joseph Bonaparte , the new king of Spain, triggering the Peninsular War . Charles VII was now able to proclaim his brother as the new Spanish king .
 When news of these events reached Spain's colonies, there were furious outbursts . The Spanish colonies were devastated by the events in Spain .
 In Santo Domingo loyalists mounted the War of Reconquest, driving out the occupying French troops and declaring the island once more under Spanish control .
 British troops met early defeat at the Battle of La Coruna, northwest Spain, fighting French troops under Napoleon's direct command . The battle took place at the end of the 18th century, when British troops were defeated .
 Britain was victorious at the Battle of Talavera, southwest of Madrid, under the leadership of Arthur Wellesley . Wellesley, later known as the Duke of Wellington, led the British assault .
 The Spaniards, while fighting the French, had also been establishing provincial bodies, called juntas, in order to organize their resistance . The Spaniard had also established provincial bodies to organize resistance .
 The central junta in Spain had also issued a decree declaring the American territories to be more than just colonies, but still a part of the monarchy . The decree also declared the U.S. territories as part of Spain's monarchy .
 It soon became clear that not all the colonies would stay on the path of loyalty to the Crown . While debates about this were underway, similar American juntas were set up in the UK .
 Flintlock pistols were widely used in the Peninsular War . Flintlock pistol pistols were used in this period . Flintlocks pistols were also widely used .
 Spanish politicians called a congress, known as a Cortes, on September 24 in the port of Cadiz . Spain and Portugal still controlled the majority of Central and South . The Cortes is a Spanish congress of politicians .
 Deputies numbered 104, with 30 representing the colonial territories, although more arrived later . Deputies were made up of 104 deputies, with more arriving later .
 The Cortes declared itself the source of national sovereignty and began to draw up a constitution . Spaniards were divided as to the extent they wished the government to be restructured . The constitution was drawn up by the Cortes of Spain .
 The colonies represented a population far greater than Spain’s, meaning Cortes Cortes . Cortes was the Spanish king's first king, who ruled Spain in Spain .
 The peninsular politicians wished to avoid this, yet needed the colonies’ continued support . The colonies needed the support of the British government, but it was necessary to avoid the situation .
 Some members of the public in the colonies began taking matters into their own hands . The colonies are in the midst of a crisis of sorts .
 One of the rebels involved in the deliberations for independence, Simon Bolivar, had recently returned from England, where he had tried to elicit British support for their cause, but he was unsuccessful .
 They feared the machines would eventually replace them, thereby forcing them into unemployment and poverty . They feared they feared they would eventually be forced into unemployment .
 He was inspired by the writings of Enlightenment thinkers on the issue of liberty . He was sent to Europe at 164, inspired by Enlightenment thinkers .
 Soon after returning to South America in 1807, he became involved in independence conspiracies .
 Later known as El Libertador, he led much of northern South America to independence from Spain . He was later known as the leader of South America .
 He also ruled Gran Colombia, but the political union ultimately failed . He was also ruler of Gran Colombia .
 Napoleon's Continental System was intended to damage the economy of Britain . Russia, like Portugal, decided to resist Napoleon's plans to impose a system .
 Napoleon resolved to mount an invasion in retaliation for Russia's withdrawal from the region . Russia had withdrawn from it in 1810, and Napoleon decided to invade it .
 He sent more than 500,000 troops to Russia in June and won early victories at the battles of Smolensk on August 17 and Borodino . He arrived with his forces in Moscow on September 14 .
 Napoleon's troops began to falter as the brutal Russian winter set in . Russian troops held off any further advance, and Napoleon's forces falter .
 The Grand Armée was running short on food and many soldiers died . Many soldiers, unaccustomed to such extreme cold, died . Soldiers were running short of food and died .
 His troops took Medina in 1812 , and Jeddah and Mecca the following year . His troops also took Mecca and Medina .
 France had nearly 185,000 troops, but the allies outnumbered them with more than 300,000 soldiers from Austria, Russia, Prussia, and Sweden . The allies outnumbered France with nearly 200,000 French troops .
 Napoleon refused to sign a peace deal that would put France's boundary back to the Rhine River and the Alps . Napoleon refused the peace deal, even though he had already lost the battle .
 Russia and Persia signed the Treaty of Gulistan, in which Russia was given a large area of Persian Caucasus territory . Russia was caught up in the Napoleonic conflict, but was also entangled with territorial deals further east .
 The territories, which had been a dominion of Persia, had appealed to Persia's shah for help in resisting Russia . The territories had appealed for help to resist Russia .
 In Venezuela, Simon Bolivar had won an important victory against the Spanish and captured Caracas . Spain's forces would later defeat him, forcing him into exile for two years .
 He went to Jamaica and Haiti to regroup and enlist further support before returning to Venezuela . During this period he went to Haiti and Haiti and enlisted further support .
 He abdicated on April 6 and was exiled to the island of Elba, off the Tuscan coast of Italy . He was exiled from the island in April 2013 .
 Louis XVIII (1755-1824)—brother of the beheaded Louis XVI—was placed on the French throne . To replace him, Louis XVI was placed on a French throne.
 A painting depicts the 17th-century Temple of Tooth, located in the kingdom of Kandy, where one of Buddha’s teeth is preserved .
 Napoleon entered Paris on March 20, 11 months after his forced departure from France . Napoleon rallied enough supporters to help him mount his return, and he entered Paris just 11 months later .
 Napoleon defeated Prussia at Ligny [in present-day Belgium] on June 16 . Napoleon mounted attacks against his enemies, defeating Prussia .
 Napoleon Bonaparte was forced to abdicate and go into exile . This clash was the definitive defeat : of Napoleon . Napoleon was defeated in this clash .
 A native inhabitant in Alaska, Alaska, territory which Russia had claimed . Russia claimed the territory .
 Father Sokoloff was sent to Sitka, in the Alaska territory, to build a church in the town as part of Russia's bid to colonize the region . Russia sent him to build the church in Sitka .
 Alaska had lingered as an outpost but settlements began to grow as trade in sea otter furs flourished . Alaska was once an outpost, but settlements grew as otter fur trade flourished .
 In southern Africa, Shaka (c.87-1828) took over the rule of the Zulus . Shaka was a fierce warrior who took over from the ruling Zulus in southern Africa . He took over Zulus from Zulus and took over .
 General José de San Martin led around 3,000 troops from Argentina into Chile through treacherous passages in the Andes mountains . General San Martin launched a surprise attack on royalist forces in the Battle of Chacabuco in February .
 Serbia had also been fighting once more for independence, after being invaded by the Turks in 1813 . Serbia was also fighting once again for independence after it was invaded by Turks in the same year .
 The Second Serbian Uprising was successful, and most of their former rights were regained by 1817 . Most of Serbian Serbians regained their rights by the end of the war .
 Egyptian forces led by Muhammad Ali recaptured the holy cities of Mecca and Medina . Muhammad Ali led the Egyptian forces to recapture the holy holy cities .
 Wahhabi power had spread quickly, and from their Arabian base they had secured control of Mecca, Medina, and Jedda . Wahhabi influence had grown quickly from their base in Saudi Arabia .
 Muhammad Ali received his orders to defeat the Wahhabi and return the cities to Ottoman rule . Ali received orders to return Syria and Syria to the Ottoman Empire .
 A final siege of the capital Diriyah (in present-day Saudi Arabia) put a temporary end to Wahhabi ambitions . The siege of Diriyah in Diriyah was a temporary stop to Wahhabi ambitions . Saudi Arabia was ruled by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in the 18th
 Battle of Maipu on April 5 secured independence for Chile when loyalist troops suffered a crushing defeat . José de San Martin led the effort to secure Chile's independence .
 Cochrane, the rebels also managed to break the Spanish hold on the coastline of Cochrane . Cochrane was the first rebel to break into the region to break down the Spanish government's control of the area .
 Baron Karl von Drais de Sauerbrun was impressing crowds with a two-wheeled machine that was the precursor to the modern bicycle . The draisienne was created in the early 1900s in Paris .
 Mary Shelley published her first novel, : Frankenstein, in 1878, and it remains a literary classic today . Denis Johnson © designed a “pedestrian curricle,” later known as a dandy horse .
 Peterloo Massacre turned from a protest about high food prices and lack of popular suffrage into a massacre . The massacre took place at Peterloo's Field in Manchester, England, in the 19th century .
 Magistrates, concerned about the size of the crowd, ordered the Yeomanry [voluntary cavalry officers] to arrest the speakers, but they attacked the crowd when they refused to make way . Magistrates were concerned with the crowd's size and ordered the troops to arrest them .
 Stamford Raffles ' arrived in Singapore, which was then part of the Riau-Johor The East India Companies monopolized trade between Europe and Southeast Asia, India, and the Far East from the early 17th century . Stamford . Raffles arrived at Singapore in the early
 The charter for the Dutch Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie was revoked in 1799 .
 Sweden's Svenska Ostindiska Companiet folded in 1813, while Britain's East India Company traded until 1874 . Sweden's Sweden-based Sven-Ovenindiksa Company traded in 1812 .
 Arm band from Sarcee people, a nation of Plains Indians, is beaded into a pattern using blue, pink, black, and yellow polka dots . Trade beads were obtained from white traders .
 Millions of aboriginal people lived in North America, but their population declined drastically when the Europeans arrived . Europeans arrived, bringing new diseases and weapons .
 Made of black velvet, this lroquois hat has intricate beadwork and a floral pattern woven around the bottom . Glenary hat 1860 e IROQUOIS .
 European explorers encountered diverse cultures in the North American continent . From the Arctic world of the Aleut, Innu, and Inuit to the hot, dry home of the Hopi in the southwest of the southwest, North America is home to diverse cultures .
 Trade was one way Europeans exerted their influence on native populations . Native tribes such as the Sioux, Blackfoot, Sarcee, and Arapaho in the Great Plains were soon in regular contact with Europeans .
 This hide-working tool scrapes the hides of sea otters and whales hunted by the Aleut . Wood, bone, fiber and fiber were used to make this fishhook .
 The wood Is carved into a U-shape, with points of bone at both the ends . The wood is carved into an U-shaped shape, with the bone points at both ends .
 Chieftain’s headdress of Yellow Calf, the last chief of the Arapaho, was made with feathers and decorated fur . Sewing kit consists of tools made by carving bones and a pouch made from seal skin and animal fur .
 Plains Indian raiding parties were often armed with bows and arrows, shields, lances, and scalping knives .
 The issue of slavery could not be ignored in the settlement of western territories . The U.S. began the settlement in western territories with slavery .
 The southern states had become increasingly dependent on slave labor . Most of the northern states had abolished the practice, but the southern states were dependent on slavery .
 When Missouri territory petitioned for statehood in 1817, it caused a political crisis over whether the federal government had the right to restrict slavery in this territory . The Missouri territory became a state of Missouri .
 The Missouri Compromise allowed slavery in Missouri, but not in any new state north of 36°30’ latitude . The solution to slavery in the state was known as the Missouri Compromising . It was the first state to allow slavery in that state .
 Much of Europe convulsed by political unrest, with revolts in the Italian states, Portugal, France, and the Low Countries . France, Italy, Portugal and France were among those revolts .
 In 1823, France’s Louis XVIII—who Egyptian Mameluke soldiers were former slaves—were former slaves . Egyptian soldiers were ex-slaves .
 By invading Sudan, Egypt hoped to add Sudanese captives to their ranks . Egypt hoped by invading Sudanese citizens to be added to its ranks .
 Slave population was small in Missouri, the question of ' permitting slavery in the state 2 caused a political crisis in the US .
 People from across Greek society, including the Orthodox Church, plotted their liberation . Resentful at years of living under oppression, people from across the Greek society began planning liberation . The Orthodox Church is one of the most prominent institutions in Greece .
 These organizations involved people living on the islands, but also had significant support from the large Greek diaspora . These organizations were supported by people living in the islands but also by people from the larger Greek community .
 At the same time, rebels in the Americas were able to take advantage of Spain's internal crisis and weakness to make the final push for independence . Spain was weakened by the crisis and internal conflict .
 Mexico managed to secure its liberation after Mexican royalists, upon hearing the news of events in Spain [see 1820], decided that self-rule was the only way to avoid a liberal regime as had happened .
 On August 24, a treaty was signed recognizing Mexican independence, and on May 19, the former royalist Agustin de Iturbide crowned himself emperor . Farther south, the Congress of Cucuta was formed and formally established Gran Colombia, consisting of present-day Colombia
 In Peru, José de San Martin led his troops into Lima and declared Peru independent, though fighting for independence continued . In Peru he declared Peru an independent, but fighting for freedom continued .
 Pedro, the son of the king of Portugal, declared the colony's independence . Pedro, Pedro, had declared Portugal's independence from Portugal . Pedro declared the colonies' independence .
 Portugal's court, fleeing Napoleon, arrived in Brazil in 1808 . The Portuguese court had been fleeing Napoleon in Brazil .
 After John VI returned to Portugal in 1821, he left his son, Dom Pedro (17981834), in charge of the kingdom of Brazil, as Prince Regent . Dom Pedro was left in charge as Prince of Brazil .
 Dom Pedro, frustrated by the attempt of the Portuguese Cortes to reduce Brazil to its pre-1808 colonial status, issued his Grito de Ipiranga declaring Brazil's independence and crowning himself Emperor Pedro I . Santo Domingo, on the island of Hispaniola,
 Santo Domingo’s neighbor, Haiti (previously Saint-Domingue), grew concerned that France or Britain might sneak through . Located on the West Coast of Africa, alongside slaving ports, a colony for freed slaves was established by the American Colonization Society .
 Domingo and launch an attack to ' recolonize and re-enslave the : island island' The island was invaded by a group of soldiers .
 Jean-Pierre Boyer arrived in Santo : Domingo with his forces . Boyer was Haiti’s first president .
 American Colonization Society, founded in 1816, advocated they ' be returned to Africa . American Colonized Society was founded in the 1816 .
 The Alaungpaya dynasty’s invasion of northern India led to Britain declaring war . Britain eventually captured the coastal city of Rangoon, capturing the city .
 Monroe attempted to set boundaries between Europe and the Americas . He was concerned about the possibility of European incursion into the new republics of Latin America .
 The doctrine stated that the U.S. would not interfere in the internal affairs or wars of European powers, nor in any colonies in the Americas . The western hemisphere was closed to any further European attempts at colonization .
 His time in office was a period during which the United States began to emerge as a serious global power . His time was during a period when the U.S. emerged as a Serious global power.
 This period was known as the ‘era of good feelings,’ and was marked by significant economic growth and general public optimism . This period of prosperity was known to be known as 'good feelings’
 America is composed of Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, and Costa Rica . America was composed of six countries . Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Honduras .
 Local leaders decided to break away and establish a 2 federal republic, with the capital ' in Guatemala City . The local leaders decided 'to break away'
 Burma (present-day Myanmar, see 1752), had been making incursions into the northern ' Indian state of Assam, bringing ' them into contact with the British, : who were occupying the region .
 The Romantic poet Lord Byron was inspired by the Greek struggle for independence from the Ottoman Empire, and went to Greece to fight . Byron fought for independence in Greece and fought for the independence of the Greek Republic .
 Greece's independence bid attracted the public's attention across Europe, especially among writers and artists . The fight for independence from Greece intensified in Greece .
 English Romantic poet Lord Byron is famed for his poem Don Juan . Byron is famous for his Don Juan poem . Byron was a member of the English Romantic movement known for his poetry .
 Byron had arrived in Greece the previous year to help fight in the struggle . Byron had been in Greece for a year and helped fight in Greece . Byron was in Greece to fight for his country's independence .
 While he was abroad, he contracted a serious illness and died on April 19 in Missolonghi . However, while he was overseas, he died of an illness .
 In Peru, a decisive victory at the Battle of Ayacucho, December 9, meant the end of Spanish rule . To the north, loyalist forces were still holding out against rebel troops, in one of the last bastions of fighting .
 Simon Bolivar and Antonio José de Sucre helped defeat the Spanish in 1811 . The arrival of the Spanish troops in Peru was a much-needed boost .
 Bolivar wanted this territory to unite with the rest of Peru, but Sucre had already agreed with the rebel leaders that it would become a separate republic . Sucre agreed to the rebels' request that it become a republic .
 In honor of Bolivar’s help, the rebels named the new nation Bolivia . They invited Sucre to be its first president, which he accepted . Sucre accepted the invitation to be Bolivia's first president .
 With the creation of Bolivia, all the former Spanish colonies had become independent nations . With the exception of Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines, the former colonies became independent nations.
 George Stephenson (1781-1848], : a colliery mechanic, improved ' on that design and caught the attention of a group of investors who wanted to link the towns of : Stockton and Darlington . Darlington was in the middle of a coal mining region and the »
 Persians attempted to take back the territory of Georgia in 1825 . Tensions between Russia and Persia restarted over the Caucasus region . Persians and Russia were involved in the 1825 war .
 A crushing defeat at the Battle of Ganja on September 26, 1826 halted the Persian advance . However, the defeat at Ganja halted the Persians' advance .
 Russian troops then marched into Persia, eventually taking Tehran, leaving the Persians no option but to accept defeat .
 The Treaty of Turkmanchai put the Russian border at the Aras River, returning the Caucasus territory to Russia . It was negotiated by the Russians and the Turks in the Caucasus .
 America had become one of the kingdom's largest trading partners . In Hawaii, United States missionaries had started to settle on the islands . America was one of its largest trading partner with the kingdom .
 The United States was looking to protect its growing interests there by formalizing trade arrangements . It convinced the regency government of King Kamehameha III of Hawaii to sign the Hawaii-United States Treaty of 1826 .
 The treaty stipulated that there would be peaceful and friendly political and trading relations between the two countries . The treaty was signed in 1903 .
 In France, inventor JosephNicéphore Niépce took the world’s first photograph, known as View from the Window at Le Gras . The photograph was of a barnyard in France .
 As Greece fought against the Ottoman Empire, neighboring powers began to call for an end to the conflict . The Ottoman Empire was defeated by the Greek Empire .
 Britain, France, and Russia joined together to sign the Treaty of London on July 6, which demanded the establishment of an independent Greek state . The treaty of London demanded that Greece establish an independent state .
 The Ottomans refused, confident they had the land and sea power to defeat the Greeks . They refused to give up on their offer to help them defeat them . The Greeks died in the Battle of the Medidid in 1877 .
 Turkish-Egyptian fleet went up against British, French, and Russian forces at the Battle of Navarino on October 20 . Ottoman resources were put to the test as a Turkish and Egyptian fleet faced a British and French force .
 The Russo—European ships sunk three-quarters of the Ottoman fleet . This humiliating defeat led to the eventual withdrawal of Turkish troops from Greece .
 Ottoman fleet was devastated but not a single allied ship was lost . Battle of Navarino was a one-sided battle in which not one of the allied ships were lost .
 José Gervasio Artigas was the father of the Uruguayan independence movement . He had been in exile for several years when the country was liberated .
 The TREATY of MONTEVIDEO recognised the independence of Uruguay in August 1828 . Uruguay became the first country to have its independence from France . Uruguay was officially recognized by the Treaty of the French Revolution .
 The area, then known as the Banda Oriental, was disputed between Brazil and Argentina . The area was then known to be disputed between the two countries .
 The territory established its independence from Spain and Argentina in 1815 . It had been under Spanish control but during the wars of independence in South America .
 Lavalleja, with Argentinian support, defeated Brazilian troops and founded an independent Uruguay . Uruguay became an independent nation in 1883 .
 Daniel O’Connell, a Catholic lawyer, called for England to repeal its anti-Catholic laws . He argued that the laws could not claim to be representing the people of lreland .
 In 1828, O'Connell stood for parliament and won, though he was not allowed to sit in government because of his Catholicism . He was elected to parliament in 1828 and won .
 His victory attracted the attention of the British prime minister, Arthur Wellesley, the Duke of Wellington (see 1815), who was Irish though not Catholic . Wellesley was Irish but not Catholic, and his victory attracted his attention .
 Catholic Relief Act 1829 allowed Catholics in Ireland and England to take seats in Parliament and hold public office . Act was passed in 1829, allowing Catholics to hold seats in parliament and hold office .
 In 1825, inventor George Stephenson (see 1825) unveiled a new locomotive engine, known as the Rocket, which reached speeds of about 36 miles (58km) per hour . Elsewhere in England, the Rocket was unveiled in 1825 . The Rocket was a locomotive
 He had entered the Liverpool and Manchester Railway competition for best new engine . The engine was entered in a competition for the best engine .
 This year saw progress of the railroad in the US, with the first American-built steam locomotive, Tom Thumb . This year also saw progress in the railway in the United States .
 In 1830, a race was Staged against a horse-drawn cart to prove the superiority of steam power .
 The horse won on this occasion due to a techinal fault with the train, but the point was made and the owners of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad agreed to switch to steam trains .
 The rebellion had been triggered by Charles's attempt to enforce repressive ordinances, such as suspending the freedom of the press and modifying electoral law so many people lost their right to vote . The rebellion was triggered by his attempt to impose repressive ordinances .
 Louis-Philippe’s succession to the throne signaled the arrival of power for the bourgeoisie, who were his chief support, rather than the aristocracy . He remained in power until 1848, and he remained in office until the end of that year .
 Around the same time, revolts were taking place in the Italian and German kingdoms; in the Netherlands; and in Russia, as the Polish living under Russian rule rose up .
 Husayn (r.18-38], had struck a : French consul with a fly whisk, giving the French a pretext for 'an unpaid debt between France and the dey' Husayn .
 Congress of Vienna forced the Belgian territories to unite with the Dutch, creating a buffer between Russia and France . Belgium had been under French control, but the Dutch had united with France .
 This move proved unpopular and tensions grew over the intervening years . It was the first time the U.S. government had taken steps to take action against the country's leaders .
 By August 1830, inspired by events in France, the Belgian Revolution had begun . The Belgian Revolution was inspired by the events of 1830 .
 On January 20, 1831, the new state of Belgium was officially recognized by Britain and France, though not the Netherlands . The new Belgian state became Belgium in 1831 .
 Belgians were forced to choose a monarch with no direct connection to other major European powers . The Belgians chose a monarch who had no direct connections to other European powers.
 Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld was the uncle of Britain's Queen Victoria . He ruled until 1865, and ruled until 1864 .
 Syria was annexed by Egypt until 1840, when the latter was forced to return the region to the Ottomans . The same year, Syria was finally returned to the Ottoman Empire .
 A bill was drafted, aimed at transferring votes and redistributing seats from small ‘rotten’ boroughs controlled by the nobility to the more populous industrial towns . A bill has been drafted to redistribute seats from “rotten boroughs’s” to
 This caused serious riots in many cities, as well as a political crisis with the prime minister, Charles Grey (1764-1845), who threatened to step down over the matter . Charles Grey threatened to resign over the issue .
 The size of the first cotton spinning machines meant they were best operated by children . The first cotton spin machines were the largest of its kind .
 Charles Darwin noted the Galapagos cactus finch for Texan independence . Charles Darwin said the finch was one of the species noted by Darwin for Texas independence .
 Many moved to Texas territory, which was part of Mexico . Many decided to live in the Texas territory . The U.S. became a nation of immigrants to the west .
 Mexican authorities wanted tighter control over this large territory . But the settlers rebelled in October 1835, launching the Texas War of Independence .
 Amendment Act of 1834 Galapagos in September 1835 . General Antonio Lopez de Santa progressed rapidly . General Lopez de Santo continued to advance rapidly .
 Conditions in Factory Act appointed inspectors the workhouses were deliberately . The rebels managed to hold them off during a battle at a San to monitor factories and limited 'harsh' conditions .
 The Alamo proved a provided some relief for the elderly, : were granted permission to species (see 1859]. rallying point for Texans bent on ill, and impoverished . In China, British merchants work on the evolution of different . different . species of different | defeated but the Alamo
 Out of this engage in trade after legislation In Britain, the National . In Britain the National. National revenge. revenge. For the first time, the . National. revenge .
 General grew a system of workhouses, ended the East India Company's Colonisation Society . Soon after, General grew an army of workhouse workers .
 Muhammad Ali, the pasha, angered by a failed promise from the Ottoman sultan to give him the territory . Muhammad Ali was angered by the sultan's failure to promise him a new territory .
 Founder Edward Gibbon Wakefield came up with a scheme for populating colonies based on the sale of land and a tax on the price of the land .
 Experiments had been taking place for decades over the question of how to transmit electric current through wires .
 In 1837, two British inventors secured a patent for an electric telegraph device that allowed for communication through wires . Texans had needles that could point to specific letters and numbers .
 Samuel Morse received a patent free young children, and compensated : 4 settlement, in which Egypt was Charles Darwin, Charles Darwin . France got involved, demanding Mexican forces in the battle fought .
 Reforms, restricting migration : to urban areas and instigating price controls, failed . Reforms also aimed at restricting migration to urban regions . But they failed to succeed .
 Travel by sea was also being revolutionized by many innovations in the early 1900s .
 Kingdom Brunel had also been involved in other engineering projects, including : the Great Western Railway . Brunel was also involved in the creation of the British Railway .
 While British trade in China continued to expand, so too did the Chinese opium problem . British opium problem was a major problem in China in the 1980s .
 East India Company started exporting the drug to China in order to trade it for tea, which it then sent to Britain . Decades earlier, the East India _ Company had started exporting . The drug, produced from poppies, grown in Bengal, was produced in Bengal .
 On March 30, 1839, one frustrated Chinese commissioner ordered British warehouses and ships in Canton to be destroyed . The Chinese government ordered the destruction of the British warehouses .
 Britain sent warships in retaliation, attacking China's coastline in the First Opium War . Britain's warships attacked China's coast in retaliation for the attack .
 Tensions between Egypt and the Ottoman sultan erupted again in the Second Turko-Egyptian War . Meanwhile, tensions between the two nations erupted again .
 Charles Darwin's five-year voyage on the Beagle led him to consider scientific evidence In new ways . The Beagle was a warship Archipelago carrying ten cannons .
 Thales noticed that if he rubbed a piece of amber against fur it would attract bits of dust and feathers lying nearby . Although he did not know it, he had stumbled on what we know today as Static electricity .
 As the 1800s progressed, understanding about electricity rapidly increased, and new innovations were rolled out in quick succession . Electricity was the key to the development of electricity .
 By the dawn of the 20th century, many of the technologies were in place that are still with us today . They have since been further adapted and refined, including batteries and light bulbs .
 Today, the scientific challenge is to find ways of generating electricity that do not cause pollution . The challenge is finding ways to generate electricity that don't cause pollution.
 Inventor James Wimshurst developed a device that could generate static electricity and store it in a vessel called a Leyden jar . The device was developed by the inventor of the Leyden jars .
 Wimsturst machines used to make electricity charge . Wimstirst machines were used by scientists studying electricity in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Alessandro Volta creates the first battery, known as the voltaic pile . Pieter van Musschenbroe and Ewald Georg von Kleist independently invent a device that allows static electricity to be stored .
 English physician William Gilbert published his famous work on magnetism . Gilbert's work was the work of a physician in England .
 Benjamin Franklin flies a kite during a storm, with a key tied to the string, and proves that lightning is a form of electricity . Benjamin Franklin proved that lightning was a type of electricity in the Leyden Jar .
 Michael Faraday worked out a way to make electric lighting practical and safe for public use . He spent years working out how to use incandescent bulbs to make electricity practical .
 Thomas Edison's invention of the light bulb is credited with revolutionizing the lightbulbulbullet . The light bulb was the first light bulb to be developed in the United States . Thomas Edison was the inventor of the bulb .
 JJ Thomas Edison, United States inventor, 1903 wires carry electricity to and from wires . This English inventor played an important role in furthering knowledge about the relationship between magnets and electricity .
 His discovery of metal end screws was a vital step in the development of what would become the electric motor . Into lamp contact transmits electricity into lamp contact .
 Faraday worked out that the interaction between electricity and a magnet would lead to the constant rotation of current . Faraday used a wire carrying electricity, a magnet, and a bowl of mercury to test his theory .
 Godalming, Surrey, brings to a close the era of the gas lamp when it wires its streets with electric lighting . Hoover Dam 1881 was the world’s first public electric lighting.
 Like liquid water, steam is also harnessed for electricity by devices like the turbine, created by Charles Patton . Steam turbine 1884 .
 Growing worries about pollution caused by the older ways of generating energy lead to the development of ‘green’ technology, such as wind turbines . Scientists discover that atoms can be used in controlled nuclear reactions .
 The development of stagecoaches meant post could be delivered all over Britain . Stagecoaches were used to deliver post all over the country . Post was delivered by stage coaches in the early 1900s .
 EUROPEAN SETTLEMENT OF New Zealand had gradually increased over the previous decade, and included the introduction of many missions . New Zealand became part of the European Union in 1994 .
 Settlers traded with the Maori, who were already living on the island . Europeans traded European muskets for Maori crops and livestock .
 In 1840, William Hobson approached Maori chiefs with the Treaty of Waitangi . Hobson (1792Zealand, New Zealander) approached the chiefs with a treaty of sovereignty .
 Nene was a warrior and chieftain of : the Maori Ngatihoa tribe in the early 1842]. Lieutenant-governor of New : 19th century .
 Britain's ships sailed up the Pearl River, capturing forts around Canton, followed by ports of Amoy and Ningpo . Britain's troops continued to fight in the Opium War .
 A preliminary agreement to end the war, drafted in January and known as the Convention of Chuenpee, ceded Hong Kong to the British . The document was written amid continued hostilities and was never ratified . It was drafted but never ratified by the British government .
 Egypt and the Turks ended their second war over Syria . Egyptian troops withdraw from Syria, with Egyptian troops withdrawing from Syria .
 The OPIUM War between Britain and China finally came to an end after British troops took further territory, reaching Nanking In August .
 Chinese officials sued for peace, resulting in the Treaty of Nanking on August 29 . Treaty was signed by Chinese officials in Nanking, China, on August 31 .
 China forced to pay an indemnity of $20 million to the British and officially Foochow, Ningpo, and Shanghai to British trade . China was forced to . pay an . indemnity .
 Industrialization and the mining industry resulted in many children being forced to work under dirty and dangerous conditions . Many children were forced to live in dirty conditions under dirty conditions .
 In Britain, social reformer Anthony Ashley Cooper, seventh earl of Shaftesbury, became a peyam .
 Massachusetts passed legislation to limit a child’s work day to ten hours . In the US, a child's work day can be limited to 10 hours a day .
 Plans were also made to open ports of Canton, Amoy, and Amoy . Plans were rejected .
 The slave trade and the practice of slavery still persisted in many ' countries . The slaves were sold in slave ships and shipped to Europe .
 Portugal's 1818 treaty with Britain and subsequent treaties were not honored, nor was slavery abolished in its bP @ colonies . Portugal's slavery in its colonies was not abolished in 1818 .
 In 1842, British ships were allowed to attack Portuguese slave ships off East Africa . A further treaty allowed British ships to attack slave ships in the region .
 The territory was annexed by the I , ' 1 , ) and J | l , J | Roy in 1843 .
 Many Boers decided to move farther north to what later became the Transvaal and the Orange Free State, joining the emigration of Boers from the Cape Colony . The Great Trek was known as the Great Trek .
 The issue of illegal land sales caused increased tensions, culminating in the Wairau Massacre on June 17, in which a chief's wife and 22 Europeans were killed .
 Friedrich Engels wrote about the condition of the working classes in England . The Prussian philosopher wrote about working class in the working class .
 The son of a prosperous businessman who owned textile mills in Prussia and a cotton mill in England . He was also a successful businessman .
 Duarte launched their fight for the independence of the Spanish-speaking side of the island of Hispaniola . With neighboring Haiti distracted ' by its own civil war, Duarte and his fellow rebels were able to eject the Haitians and declared the new : Dominican Republic independent from Haiti on February
 The Palm House at the Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, was built in 1844, constructed with plate glass and iron . Meanwhile, Samuel Morse (see 1837) had managed to get funding .
 More than one million people died in the famine that lasted five years . More than 1 million people were killed by the potato crop failure .
 The crop failure, due to late blight, was particularly devastating because for millions of the rural poor, the potato was their staple food . The potato was particularly devastated because of its importance to rural poor .
 Rather than intervening directly, the government directed landlords to shoulder the burden .
 Small tenant farmers had no crops to sell, rents went unpaid, and landlords ran their tenants off the land . Many small tenant farmers were unable to sell their crops .
 The blight responsible for the failure of Ireland's potato crop was Phytophthora infestans, a mold that caused rot within two weeks . The mold caused rot in two weeks.
 Blight spreads quickly when humidity stays above 75 percent and temperatures above 50°F for two full days . Both factors were present during the summer of 1845 .
 The U.S. claimed the new Rio Grande was located at the Nueces River . The United States claimed it lay farther north of the Rio Grande . The Rio Grande is located in Texas .
 A diplomatic mission was sent to Mexico City in 1845 to settle the matter, as well as to attempt to purchase the New Mexico and California territories . These efforts were met with a snub, and the mission failed .
 The following year, Mexican troops crossed the Rio Grande and attacked soldiers stationed there . Mexican soldiers crossed the border to attack soldiers stationed in the area .
 The United States President, James K Polk (1795-1849) declared war, and fighting lasted until Mexico surrendered in 1847 . The U.S. President of the United States declared war .
 Legislation to protect domestic ' agriculture by limiting the import ' of cheap grain and fix prices had state’s southern border was at the . establishment of the Anti-Corn | Law League in 1839 . Legislation to . protect domestic agriculture by . limiting the . import 'of cheap grain
 The control of exports also limited the external market for British goods, the government says .
 He gained the support of Algerian tribes who aided him in his fight against the French . He gained support from the tribes of Algeria .
 In Germany, a telegraph line connecting Frankfurt to Berlin was installed by a firm owned by Werner Siemens (1816-92), who had developed a technique for seamless Insulation of copper wire . In Germany a telegram line connecting Berlin to Frankfurt was installed .
 English author Emily Bronté (1818-48) published Wuthering Heights . Meanwhile, English author Emma published the novel .
 Although not met with much critical acclaim, it later became one of the most influential literary examples of the Romanticism movement . The novel was published in 1897 and published in 1925 .
 The League of the Just changed their name to the Communist League . It was a revolutionary group of Germans known as the League of The Just .
 Engels and Marx were charged with developing a program of action for the Communist Party . The result was the pamphlet that became known as the Communist Manifesto .
 Marx believed the gulf between rich and poor in Europe meant conditions were ripe for a socialist revolution . Marx believed that the gulf in Europe was the perfect conditions for a revolution .
 In February, only a couple of weeks after the manifesto’s publication, the streets of Paris ' erupted into revolution' Only a few weeks after publication, Paris erupted into a revolution .
 France had been suffering an economic depression and a ' minister named Francois Guizot had come to symbolize the ' government's inability to alleviate : the situation .
 Company considered Singh's COMMUNISM laid the foundation of a political movement that sought to share —a vast area of land that included : force of 100,000 Khalsa the means of production, such as land or factories, equally among California . Company considered . Singh's communism laid the
 Communists aimed to create a classless and stateless carpenter named James Wilson to confront . Communists wanted to confront the classless, stateless James Wilson .
 Yemen, at the foot of the : struggles led to a workers’ : Empire, Germany, and the Italian other countries. Yemen, Yemen, and Italy were at the bottom of the . struggles .
 Germany saw street fighting in mid-19th century . Bonaparte had ' ' Germany saw a lot of street fighting. : Sea. Sea. War. Germany .
 of Prussia promised to grant explorer and missionarynamed : PRE-RAPHAELITES ' France . Prussia also promised to give explorer and . missionarynamed Pre-Raphaelites France .
 High food ' was appointed, while many of its about—known today as Lake : painting at the Royal Academy, prices, prices and economic depression, territories, such as Hungary, Ngami.
 China had also tried to drive out Christian missionaries, thereby limiting the influence of Christianity . In the same way China had tried to keep European ships from its ports, it had also .
 By the mid-19th century some 200,000 Chinese had been converted . Thousands more were familiar with the religion . Despite this, by the 19th century, thousands more had been familiar with it .
 In 1850, officials sent troops to disband a religious society whose beliefs were loosely based on Protestant ideas . The society was disbanded by troops after it was disbanded .
 Hong Xiuquan believed himself to be the younger brother of Jesus Christ . He launched a revolt that became the Taiping Rebellion . The Taiping rebellion was led by a sect of the Chinese sect that believed themselves to be Jesus .
 Many starving peasants joined the ranks and fighting went on for 14 years, claiming millions of lives . Drawn by his call to share property, many starving peasants join the ranks .
 Some six m i} ry ry Z a | hand-colored lithograph shows the Crystal Palace at the Great Exhibition of zt illion people visited it in six months .
 The Great Exhibition, as it became known, was housed in the Crystal Palace, an exhibition hall made of glass and iron built for the occasion . The Crystal Palace was built in a glass-and-iron building made of the material .
 Six million people pored over 100,000 exhibitions between May 1 and October 31 . Some six million people visited the 100-million exhibitions .
 Of the 14,000 participating exhibitioners, almost half were from overseas . Almost half of the exhibitioners were from abroad .
 An enormous variety of agricultural and manufactured items were on display, ranging from the Koh-i-Noor diamond from India to tapestries from Persia, and British engineering equipment . An enormous range of items was on display .
 In the same year as this global event, a telegraph cable was laid across the English Channel, facilitating rapid international communication . This year's event was the first time telegraph cables had been laid across English Channel .
 Wales the same year prompted a : gold rush that tripled the country’s : population over the next ten years . Wales’ population tripled in the next decade . Wales the . same year . prompted a gold rush .
 HOSTILITIES HAD ONCE AGAIN flared up between British troops and the Burmese . British troops had once again been attacked by Burmies in Burma .
 After making extensive territorial gains in the last war against Burma (see 1823), Britain was eager to control more of the area . Britain was keen to control the area, especially in Burma .
 Wider control would create an overland coastal connection from Calcutta in India to Singapore port in Singapore . It would create the overland connection between India and Singapore .
 The East India Company also wanted access to the teak forests in Burma . The company wanted to gain access to teak forest in the region .
 In 1852, the British seized a ship belonging to Burma's king, and this was enough to start the Second Anglo-Burmese War . The British seized the ship from the king of Burma in 1852 .
 Lasting only a few months, British troops were able to take southern territory, ousting the reigning king, Pagan Min . His brother, Mindon Min, was willing to accept British control of southern portion of the kingdom .
 Muslim Tukulor chief Umar Tall capitalized on unrest between the Dinguiraye and Bambara people to wage a jihad (holy war) on part of upper Senegal, taking control of the territory .
 Commodore Matthew Perry brought Japan a railroad car as a gift . This was followed two years later with a similar acceptance of the settlers’ new Orange Free State .
 U.S. had been charged with opening up trade between the United States and secluded Japan . Japan was secluded and isolated from the world .
 Japan had been under international pressure to open up its ports to foreign merchants for years . Japan had faced international pressure for years to open ports to foreigners .
 Dutch were the only Europeans allowed very limited access to trade in Japan . The Dutch sent a mission in 1844 urging the country’s rulers to allow in more ships .
 U.S. government was eager to secure trading rights in East Asia and so sent Perry to further negotiate . Perry was sent to negotiate for the United States to secure East Asia trade rights .
 He arrived on July 8 and refused to leave until he had delivered his letters . He arrived in the U.S. in July 8 .
 The Japanese relented after a few days and took his papers, which requested a trade treaty . The papers requested a treaty, but the Japanese refused .
 Treaty of Kanagawa was concluded the following year . They eventually consented to the terms .
 As China was contending with the Taiping Rebellion, another uprising broke out in the central and eastern provinces . The uprising was centered in China's central and east provinces .
 The rebels were composed of many outlaws, as well as peasants from famine-stricken areas . Many outlaws and peasants were involved in the rebellion .
 With the government otherwise engaged, the rebels were able to form armies and begin the Nien Rebellion . Nien rebels formed armies and formed armies in Nien .
 Over the course of the next 15 years they gained control of much of northern China . Although they were eventually defeated, they were able to gain control .
 The conflict was fueled by the decision of Czar Nicholas | to declare the right to protect Orthodox Christians living under Ottoman rule . The conflict began in 1881 .
 September they landed troops in 2 Russia's Crimea territory and ' began a siege of Sevastopol . September they land troops in . 2 Russia’s Crimea territory . September . began the siege .
 Had it not been for French intervention, 'the casualty rate would have been higher than 40 percent' Had the casualty rate . would have gone up to 40 percent . Had the French intervention .
 MISSIONARY DAVID LIVINGSTONE was exploring the interior of Africa (see 1849) on his second expedition . MISSIONary David Livingstone was exploring Africa's interior .
 He was convinced a trade route to the sea existed, and sailed up the Zambezi River in November 1853 to find it . He sailed to find the route to sea .
 He was the first European to see the falls and renamed them Victoria Falls . He was first European visitor to Victoria Falls in 1877 .
 King Mongkut signed commercial agreements with Britain and the U.S. in an effort to open up Siamese trade . Siam was known for its interest in the West .
 U.S. filibusterer William Walker surrenders to Costa Rican troops . Walker was captured by Costa Rica troops in Costa Rica .
 WILLIAM WALKER arrived in the country in 1855 with 58 men, declared himself president . He had arrived with a group of 58 men . He was the first person to declare himself president of the country .
 He was initially invited by Francisco Castellon , who had been trying to organize a liberal revolt . He was invited by Castellan, who had tried to organize an uprising .
 Walker intended to establish Nicaragua as a Slave state . Southern U.S. states wanted to enlarge slaveholding territory as abolitionism grew .
 Walker was captured by invading Costa Rican forces and later shot . Walker was eventually captured and shot by invading forces in Costa Rica .
 English painter Thomas Jones Barker 'S The Relief of Lucknow co mpleted in 1859, depicts British forces defending this colonial city after the end of a prolonged siege .
 Their new rifle cartridges were reputed to be greased with pork and beef fat . The cartridges were said to have been greased in beef and pork .
 The cartridges were for a new type of rifle, the Enfield, and to load them the ends of the paper cartridges needed to be bitten off . To load them they needed to bite them off to load the new rifle .
 For Hindu and Muslim soldiers, allowing beef or pork fat in their mouths went against their respective religions beliefs . For Muslim and Hindu soldiers, it was against their religious beliefs .
 A much larger proportion of Indians than British served in the army, making an uprising involving the Indian troops a serious threat . Added to this rumor were various other grievances, together with a British Indian army in 1857 .
 The paper cartridges contained powder and a bullet . Enfield rifle and cartridges were made from paper .
 After removing the cartridge's end, the powder was poured out into the barrel . The powder was then poured out of the barrel into the gun .
 British army was similarly brutal, ' and they recaptured Delhi in : September and Lucknow the : following March . The British army also recaptured Lucknow in September .
 This conflict was the culmination of frustration with the East India Company's rule as well as creeping westernization as Britain annexed more territories and sent out more officials .
 Mutiny had shown the level of Indian discontent and anger, which would continue to grow under British rule, while at the same time helping to fuel the independence movement . Mutiny was the first Indian uprising against British rule .
 British troops had returned to battle in China . In additon to the conflict in India, British troops returned to China .
 Supreme Court in 1857 voted against freeing : Scott on the grounds that he was ' not entitled to rights as a United States ' citizen, including the right to sue : ina court of law .
 A contemporary oil painting illustrates the 1860 Battle of Guadalajara during the Mexican Reform War between liberals and conservatives . The battle was fought in Mexico's first major war of its kind .
 Juarez and other liberals drafted a new constitution curbing military and ecclesiastical privileges . Juarez was the justice minister in the government as justice minister . The constitution curbs the allocation of special courts for civil trials and landholding rights .
 The constitution, which also prohibited slavery and called for a democracy in Mexico, went into effect in 1857 . Mexico's constitution also banned slavery, called for democracy .
 City on January 1, 1861 as president, taking control of the : whole country, and he once again | put the constitution into effect . City on New Year's Day: "The constitution is now in effect"
 U.S. Marines under the command of Colonel Robert E Lee smash the armory door at Harper’s Ferry, behind which John Brown and his men were besieged . France, meanwhile, was — p, — AS _ — France .
 Outer MONGOLIA Port Arthur Peking . Singapore Sumatra . Netherlands Ea Bares WW Spain . Spain . Europe in Asia . Asia .
 India was governed directly from London by the Viceroy in 1857 . Goods such as spices were imported to Europe from colonies in colonies .
 This was brought about on November 1, 1858 by governor-general Charles John Canning . Canning became the first Viceroy of India .
 The period, known as the Raj, lasted until Indian independence in 1947 . The French sought a foothold in trade with India .
 In 1859, the coalition ' captured the key port of Saigon, | where a garrison of 1,000 troops . later faced a year-long siege from 1860 to 1861 . The siege lasted for a year .
 Vietnam’s king, Tu Duc (1829-83], : in 1863, in which three provinces were ceded to France . Tu Duc was the Vietnamese king of Vietnam .
 The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 made trade between Europe and Asia quicker and cheaper . The opening made it easier and cheaper for Europeans to travel to Asia .
 CONSTRUCTION work has begun on a canal that would link the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea . The canal would be a link between the Mediterranean and Red Sea, and the Mediterranean .
 It would cut voyages between Europe and Asia by thousands of miles by allowing ships to avoid sailing around the Cape of Good Hope . It would allow ships to sail around the world by avoiding sailing around Cape of Hope .
 In 1854, French official Ferdinand de Lesseps managed to obtain permission from the khedive of Egypt, Said Pasha, to construct a canal at Suez . The canal was built in 1854 .
 Canal Company (Compagnie : universelle du canal maritime de : Suez) was set up and given the ' right to run the canal for 99 years ' after its completion . Canal Company was given the right to operate the canal after completion of the Suez Canal .
 The Democratic candidates, Douglas : and Breckinridge, combined had : more of the popular vote, but Lincoln : won the necessary electoral votes . Aclear majority : The Democratic candidate won the electoral vote . Lincoln won the election .
 The split in the U.S. Democratic Party ahead of the 1860 election precipitated the secession of Southern states to a confederacy in 1861 .
 abolitionism kept growing, with more of the public supporting it over the 1850s . But a gradual approach was not possible, since abolitionists kept growing .
 The United States was economically divided, which intensified the debate over slavery . The U.S. was divided economically, and slavery was a key factor .
 The South was mostly rural, and slave labor was used to grow cotton, tobacco, and rice . The South used slave labor to grow crops such as rice, cotton, rice .
 The more urban Northern states, in contrast, had a high population of immigrant workers . Northern states had a higher immigrant population than urban areas .
 Lincoln's presidential victory was the last straw for Southern slave owners . By December 1860 South Carolina had seceded from the Union .
 Forage cap, with regiment badge, : as worn by northern Union soldiers : during the Civil War .
 The Southern Confederacy equated to a new nation, and as such, needed a flag . Giuseppe Garibaldi attacked the Kingdom of Two in Italy .
 The national flag of the Confederacy, known as the ‘Stars and Bars,” closely resembed the northern states Union flag . The Confederate national flag was known as ‘The Stars and Bars .
 To avoid confusion on the battlefield, a new battle flag was adopted, first by the Army of Northern Virginia, and Later by all Southern forces .
 British, French, and Spanish forces arrived to collect payment on the money they were owed . Czar Alexander II of Russia in Mexico .
 After the War of the Reform (see 1858) President Benito Juarez had declared in 1861 that he was placing a moratorium on the payment of interest on foreign debt for two years . Juarez placed a moratorium in 1861 on payment of foreign debt .
 The lending countries disputed his decision, and soon resorted to armed conflict . The lending . countries disputed him decision .
 Bismarck built up the army and also tried to develop a German national identity . He fought against the Catholic Church and tried to stem growth of socialism .
 Union troops attempted, | but failed, to capture the Confederate capital, Richmond, by advancing up the peninsula east of Yorktown . Union troops failed to capture Richmond by advancing .
 Austrian archduke Ferdinand Maximilian Joseph was invited to become emperor of Mexico . As a result, he became the first Austrian to be invited to take over the throne .
 He accepted, thinking that he had been voted in by the people, and became Maximilian I the following year . He accepted the throne, thinking he was voted in, and then took over .
 In the US, Abraham Lincoln tried to persuade Confederate states to return to the Union by giving them Emancipation Proclamation . Lincoln read the proclamation before his cabinet members .
 The Union Navy had captured the port of New Orleans, and occupation of the city followed . The city was occupied by the Union Navy, which captured it .
 Confederate defeat at the Battle : of Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, was part of what would eventually become : the London Underground, also known as the Tube .
 Union troops from July 1-3, had marked a turning point in the war . On the battlefields, Union troops . On July 1, 1863, the Battle of Gettysburg was the turning point .
 In Britain, Londoners were thrilled by the opening of the Metropolitan Railway . The Metropolitan Railway ran underground from Farringdon Street to Paddington . It was the first underground railway to be opened in Britain .
 President Lincoln made General Grant commander-inchief of the Union forces . Grant was the first president of the Civil War to take command of the U.S. Grant was a Union general in charge of the Confederate Army .
 Sherman pursued a “scorched earth” policy, destroying rail lines and setting towns on fire from Atlanta to Savannah, Georgia . Sherman set fire to rail lines, setting fire to towns across the state .
 Relations between Denmark and Prussia, part of the German Confederation, had soured . Relations between the two nations were soured in the early 1900s .
 A brief war was the result of a revolt by the Germans in the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, which were living under Danish rule . The war was a result of the revolt against the Danish rulers . The duchy duchys were living in Danish rule
 The issue of which states would be allowed to have slaves became the central political focus between the North and South .
 The 18 free states of the North and the 15 slave states were on the brink of war . By 1860, the . 18 free state of the . North . and the . 15 slave . states were at the brink . of war.
 Speers the U.S. began to settle its ILLINOIS aa eee western territories . Speers settled the Illinois aa-eee west territories in 17th century .
 KENTUCKY petitioned to become a state in 1817, its slavery status . NORTH CAROLINA ue ae TERRITORY ae prompted a political crisis .
 “Xs p * Mange oS atch to the ced Rie clenee.” April 6-7, 1862 .
 One of the compromise acts in 1850 was to allow Utah and New Mexico territories to reach a decision on slavery when they became states . The act was part of a compromise act to allow the territories to become states .
 The Kansas-Nebraska Act applied this principle for people in those states, allowing them to vote on the issue . People in Kansas and Nebraska will be able to vote for the same reason .
 The act also controversially repealed the Missouri Compromise, causing further anger in the North . This act also caused anger among the North, particularly in Missouri .
 The shells fired at Fort Sumter, South Carolina, in 1861 not only ripped id aT-mxeL OT aLem Valea against each other, but also the Confederacy of Southern states took up arms in defense of slavery .
 Wi Territories opened to slavery . WH Area not subject to standard territorial laws . The issue was not only Ideological, but economic .
 Southerners felt that their rural, agrarian livelihood was under direct threat from the policies of the federal government . The federal government's policies threatened their rural livelihood .
 President Abraham Lincoln asked the question about freedom for slaves in the North . The question was about more than freedom for the slaves, Lincoln said . Lincoln's response to the question was to the industrial and urban North .
 The industrial North had a much larger population than the mostly agrarian Southern states . The Union navy blockaded ports causing prices in the South to skyrocket . The price of a cup coffee in the North was the highest in the world .
 By the time the South conceded defeat and surrendered in 1865, both sides had been heavily battered—but the country emerged united . Both sides were heavily battered but the South emerged united.
 The war was also significant because It was the harbinger of modern warfare . The war is also significant . It was also important because it was a harbinger .
 iDatem ere le estome[-telk]," "actomaareyt the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional" "Slavery was legal in all the territories" "slavery" was illegal in Missouri and the territories .
 They argued that it was up to states to decide to ban slavery, but that territories were not states . They argued it was a state to decide, but it was not states, and territories were states .
 The estimated cost to the Confederacy, including the emancipation of the slaves, was around $2. billion, inflicting serious damage to the Southern economy . Estimated cost of the Confederacy was $2 billion, including emancipation .
 This painti wel ng by Candido Lopez depicts the arrival of the Allied Army at Itapiru, Paraguay . The Allied Army arrived in Paraguay in the early 1900s .
 The war had left the United States intact, but more than 600,000 men had been killed and half a million wounded . The U.S. survived the war, but over 600,00 Americans were killed and a million injured .
 The American Civil War was over, but the situation in Mexico remained complicated . The Civil War ended in 1865, but Mexico remained at war footing .
 Eyre was recalled to England after a public outcry . Eyre had to be recalled to Britain after the incident .
 The cause of the war dated back to the Talambo Affair in 1862, when Spanish immigrants were attacked by Peruvian workers . Spanish immigrants attacked by workers on Talambo estate in northern Peru in 1862 . The war was the result of an attack on Spanish immigrants on the estate .
 Spain seized the Chincha Islands off the coast of Peru in 1864 . Spain's demand for compensation was ignored, so it seized the islands . Spain seized them after it was ignored by the Peruvian government .
 Peru's General Mariano Ignacio Prado declared war on Spain in January 1866 . Peru's general declared war against Spain in 1866 and declared war .
 Chile, fearful of a renewed Spanish presence in South America, joined Peru . Chile joined Peru in 2010 . Peru was the first country to join Chile .
 Spain bombed Valparaiso in Chile on March 31 and Callao in Peru on May 2 before a ceasefire the following week . They tried to close their ports, but Spain managed to close them . Spain bombed the ports in Chile, Peru and Chile before the ceasefire the next week .
 This was the last attempt by Spain to recapture South American territory . Spain's last attempt was in 18th century Spanish conquistador .
 Painting shows Peruvian troops defending the fortified port of Callao, Peru, while being bombarded by the Spanish navy . Spanish navy bombarded the port in the 16th century .
 France abandoned Mexico's emperor, Maximilian |, who had been installed at their behest as well as that of Mexican monarchists . France abandoned the emperor at the end of the war .
 He was captured by liberal forces, court-martialed, and executed on June 19 . His execution came after he was captured and executed by liberals .
 The U.S. received a huge boost with the purchase of the vast Alaska territory from Russia .
 For the price of $7. million, the United States received 663,268 sq miles (1,717,856sq km) of territory . The U.S. also received a total of 1,700sq km of territory for the price .
 Karl Marx had published the first of three volumes in what would become one of his most influential works, Das Kapital . In Europe, Karl Marx (see panel, right) had published three volumes of his influential work .
 The book, through an examination of the capitalist system, tried to address larger economic and historical questions about the nature of class and social relations . The book was published in 2008 .
 In Prussia, tensions with Austria had led to the Seven Weeks’ War the previous year . Prussia and Austria had been at odds with each other over the years .
 This period, known as the Meiji Restoration, was a time of long-lasting social reforms . Reforms included the ending of feudalism, formation of a national army and implementation of tax systems . A constitutional government was convened by 1890 .
 There was a boom in infrastructure modernization throughout this period, with the arrival of railroads and the telegraph . The arrival of the railways and telegraph was a major factor in modernization .
 When Queen Isabella II was deposed by a military rebellion in Spain, Cubans took the opportunity to launch a war against the Spanish rulers on their island .
 Led by Carlos Manuel de Céspedes, this uprising, known as El Grito de Yara, resulted in The Ten Years War . The campaign of guerilla warfare ended in failure .
 This painting shows battleships in the Ten Years’ War . It was part of the long-running struggle for Cuba’s independence from Spain from Spain .
 In the same year, there was ' also an uprising against Spanish ' rule in Puerto Rico . Yl
 Moshoeshoe asked Britain for help against ' further incursions into Sotho : territory' The kingdom was annexed to the British Crown in 1868, becoming a : protectorate .
 Roe U 2 YO \ S < ° s QO Saar Os Lara neers ees caer nF YO™ Oo ae. oN & R s & x’ oo a 44. oR s . oN .
 Westward expansion in the U.S. continued to grow, aided by the arrival of railroads . Meanwhile, westward expansion continued in the United States .
 By 1869, the first transcontinental railroad had been completed by the Central Pacific Railroad .
 Loe epicts Prussian hussars firing up at a French observation balloon during the Franco-Prussian War in 1870 . The 19th-century painting was painted by Loe in Paris in 1870s .
 Napoleon surrendered to German forces and was taken : prisoner . September 1, where an ill Napoleon was taken prisoner .
 The city was | forced to surrender in early 1871 ' after severe food shortages . The city of New York was forced to . surrender in 1871 .
 The percentage of Spanish and Italian immigrants who arrived in Argentina between 1869 and 1929 has risen steadily since 1869 .
 In Argentina the 1870 population of 1. million would reach 8 million by 1914, with many immigrants from Italy and Spain . Likewise, in Argentina the population of 8 million would grow to 8 million .
 In October a plebiscite, or referendum, made Rome the capital of the united Italy—which became official by 1871 . It was the first time Italian troops had entered Rome .
 The pope was not pleased with his settlement offer and excommunicated Italian king Victor Emmanuel Il . He entrenched himself in the Vatican while Rome developed as the new capital . The pope, however, was not happy with the settlement and moved to Rome .
 The tension between the Vatican and the Italian government would not be resolved until the 20th century . The tension was not resolved until that century .
 A council of citizens, including republicans, Jacobins, socialists, and ' anarchists,governed Paris for over two months . A council ' of citizens . of citizens—including republicans and Jacobins . elected Parisians .
 He was considered a strong ruler, staving off the increasing incursions from neighbors . He was seen as strong ruler .
 By the end of the following decade, Ethiopia had defeated invasions by Egyptian forces, as well as Italian forces .
 Susan B Anthony (18201906) was the leader of the Carlists during the 1872 Carlists out of Spain . In the US, pressure was growing for women to be given the right to vote in the US .
 Susan B Anthony brought her campaign to public attention by illegally voting in 1872 . Anthony was the leader of the U.S. women’s suffragist movement .
 The 19th century in Spain was dominated by the Carlist Wars . One of the leading advocates of the Spanish monarchy was a Carlist . He was one of Spain's leading advocates .
 December 4, the crew of the Dei ' Gratia spotted the Mary Celeste drifting around the coast of : Portugal completely deserted . December 4 was December 4 .
 Bismarck proposed the Three Emperors’ League, an alliance between Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and Russia, with the purposeful exclusion of France . “Mounties” as they became known, wearing their distinctive uniforms at an annual sports event
 Formed in 1873, the league lasted for three years, was later reestablished In secret in 1881 and renewed in 1884, and finally collapsed in 1887 . The league lasted three years .
 At issue were continued conflicts of interest between Austria-Hungary and Russia in the Balkan territory . At issue was the continued conflicts between Austria and Russia .
 Although the slave trade had been suppressed earlier, the practice continued on the island and in neighboring Cuba . The slave trade was suppressed earlier .
 The force was 3 charged with policing the largely ' rural provinces of the . huge ' Canadian territory .
 United States was uncomfortable with the idea of armed troops patrolling the border, so the force’s name ' was changed to the North West : Mounted Police . Later the name would be altered again to : the Royal Canadian Mounted ' Police .
 In March, British military officer arrived in the province of Equatoria, in the south of Egyptian-occupied Sudan .
 He was to take control of the territory but under the auspices of the khedive of Egypt . He was also to take over the territory from Egypt .
 Gordon was tasked with establishing way stations up the White Nile and to suppress the ongoing slave trade . Gordon established way stations in order to establish way stations and suppress the slave trade in Egypt .
 He mapped parts of the Nile and set up outposts along the river as far as Uganda . He mapped areas of the river and established outposts across the Nile .
 In West Africa, a British expedition led by Sir Garnet Wolseley defeated the Asante Empire . He asserted control over the southern part of their territory, known as the Gold Coast .
 Charles George Gordon was invited by Egypt's khedive to govern part of Egypt's Sudan territory . Gordon was a British general and colonial administrator, Gordon was British .
 Soapstone Lohan is a human who achieved enlightenment through meditation on the teaching of Buddha . S ee 1750-1913 | THE AGE OF REVOLUTION .
 Buddhism flourished during the Qing period . The detail of this jade brush holder contains the figure of Taoist philosopher Lao Tzu .
 The ancient Taoist practices were popular in the Ming period but fell out of favor with Qing rulers . The doors of this black lacquered elm cabinet of rectangular outline are painted with a colorful decoration that includes birds .
 Ming-style elmwood chair has a shaped crest rail and curved backsplat with openwork cartouches above a beaded apron . Elmwood chairs have been designed by the 1800s with a curved crest rail .
 Qing dynasty established after the last Ming “Ge fete aunt emperor was overthrown in 1644 . Qing dynasty was established after Ming ‘Gefete aunt’s’ overthrown .
 The flask has a short, contracted neck and one right-angle handles . Rule was instituted . Rule of the flask's design was instituted by President Obama .
 Carved in relief is a Taotie a phoenix on one side, and a mask and sleeping silkworms . silkworm pattern on the reverse is a silk worm pattern .
 Its simple design is embellished with floral and calligraphic engravings .
 Brass wedding bowl 18th century is part of a set of two . The bowl is one of two of two made of brass bowls .
 This one is lined with silver— the other has a gilt silver interior . The base has an engraved design and the interior has been engraved .
 Sancai teapot is sancai porcelain and has a rectangular shape, with raised panels on each side illustrating the four seasons . Pp string of beads are made of painted ceramic and gold leaf .
 The larger beads, called Buddha heads, divide up the smaller beads into groups of 27 . The smaller beads divide up smaller groups of smaller beads, known as Buddha heads .
 The oval Xian seal has an incised inscription on each of the long sides . The device was designed longevity to protect the nail of the little finger .
 Pair of bowed shoes with pointed toes and high heels were worn for outdoor activities by a woman with bound feet . The shoes were worn by women who had bound feet in 1900s .
 The sides of the sides have an intricate embroidered decoration of birds and flowers . The sides have been embroidered with embroidered decorations .
 Silk robe 19th century has a pattern of flowers woven into the fabric .
 Russian artist Vasily Vereshchagin depicts Turks celebrating a victory during the Russo-Turkish War . The design also includes a springtime scene involving flowers and butterflies .
 Hostilities between Russia and the Ottoman Empire were long-running . The two had gone to battle many times over the previous two centuries . Hostilities had been long-lasting and the two had fought many times .
 Christian inhabitants of the two territories rebelled against Ottoman rule, requesting aid from neighboring Serbia . Serbia had a much higher degree of autonomy than Bosnia and Herzegovina . The two territories were Christian territories with a Christian population .
 Serbia too declared war on the Ottoman Empire on June 30, 1876; Montenegro followed suit the next day . Montenegro also followed suit, leading the weakening empire into another destabilizing conflict .
 The Turks won the battle of Aleksinac on August 9, 1876 . Montenegro was initially successful, with a victory in Herzegovina, but Russian support in Serbia did not materialize .
 Egypt continued incursions into Ethiopia, leading its king, Yohannes IV (see 1872), to declare war on the Egyptians . In other parts of the Ottoman world, Egypt continued to make incursions in Ethiopia . In 1872, Ethiopia declared war on Egypt .
 Egypt succeeded in occupying many coastal towns, as well as the inland city of Harar . By 1875 Egypt had succeeded in taking control of many coastal cities .
 The fighting lasted until 1877, by which time Ethiopia had managed to defeat two Egyptian tribesmen .
 In May 1877 he was elected president and 'controlled Mexico for decades' He was elected President of Mexico in 1877 .
 Porfirio Diaz was a Mexican general, politician, and president . Diaz was of mixed European and indigenous descent . He was a member of the Mexican National Socialist Party .
 A drought the previous year affecting the Yellow River —a vital source of water — was compounded by a lack of rain in 1877 and the arrival of locusts . The drought was a result of a drought the year before and the year after .
 In South Africa, the discovery of gold (see 1871) had exacerbated tensions between the Boer settlers and the British, who by this point governed much of the country .
 The Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78 included a five-month siege of the Ottoman Bulgarian town of Plevna . The town eventually fell to Russian forces in the Russian-Bulgarian war .
 Russia also managed to take some key fortresses and a truce was Called . Russia also took control of some key Fortresses in the area .
 A settlement was reached on March 3, 1878, known as the Treaty of San Stefano, which gave Serbia, Romania, and Montenegro their independence . While Bulgaria was granted some autonomy and put under Russian authority, it was given some autonomy .
 European powers were not satisfied with this settlement as there were many competing interests . However, European powers did not agree with the settlement . The settlement was settled in 1883 .
 Britain to establish a presence 2 and a naval base in the eastern : part of the Mediterranean, with the aim of blocking further Russian incursions into the region .
 Second Afghan War (to 1880) was ignited when British agents learned of negotiations between ' Afghan leader Sher Ali Khan and Russia . The war was ignited by British agents learning of negotiations .
 Oil painting shows the defense of Rorke’s Drift on January 22, where a handful of British soldiers faced an attack by of 4,000 Zulu soldiers .
 Atacama Desert region, running along Peru-Chile border, began a dispute over who had control over the region . Peru, Chile and Bolivia were involved in the dispute over control of the area .
 In the previous decade the valuable mineral sodium nitrate had been discovered there . The valuable mineral was discovered there in the 1990s .
 Initially Chilean companies went into the desert to extract the mineral . Issues over territorial control soon arose .
 Chile and Bolivia at first agreed that the 24th parallel was their boundary . Chile and Bolivians first thought that the border was the border between them .
 Bolivia entered into a secret agreement with Peru to defend its interests in the desert . Bolivia was dissatisfied with the deal, but it entered into an agreement with the Peruvian government . Bolivia is unhappy with the agreement, but agreed to protect its interests .
 Bolivia seized property of Chilean companies, prompting Chile's president to send in troops . Bolivia later seized the property of Chile's companies . Bolivia's president sent in troops to Chile's capital, Chile .
 The war of the Pacific took place on land and sea, and was not resolved until 1883 . Chile kept control of the mineral rich Antofagasta region .
 In South Africa, British forces came up against the Zulu nation in the Anglo—Zulu War . The war was fought in South Africa between British and Zulu forces .
 The British wanted to expand into Zulu territory, but this was met with resistance by King Cetshwayo . Sunken ship in War of the Pacific was sunken in Iquique .
 The Zulus had some rifles, but were put to little effective use . British firepower won out despite overwhelming numbers .
 The British established a depot at Rorke’s Drift, which was later attacked by Zulus after their victory in Isandlwana . The depot was attacked by the Zulus in the early 1900s .
 Ferdinand | de Lesseps beganto draw up plans for a waterway connecting the Atlantic and Pacific oceans through the isthmus of Panama . SUEZ CANAL , Ferdinand . de Lessseps [see 1859] drew up plans to connect the Atlantic with the Pacific
 The project got off to a difficult start the following year in 1881 . However, the project was a success story for the first time since the first year of the project .
 There were disagreements over the canals plans, the machinery did not function well in the terrain . Many workers died of disease in the tropical heat, and many workers died from disease .
 Commercial refrigeration began to alter the relationship between consumers and producers . The development of commercial refrigeration led to the development of refrigeration .
 On February 2, the first shipment of frozen meat to survive the journey intact arrived in London from Australia . The first shipment arrived from Australia from Australia and arrived on February 2 .
 Treaty of Bardo that same year, : going to instruct the public to take ' their revenge on Jews . that same . year, . going to . instruct the . public to . take 'their revenge on . Jews' Treaty of . Bardo .
 Cross is a part of the growing : International Red Cross relief ' organization that had been ' founded in 1863 . Cross is part of a growing . International Red . Cross relief organization .
 The Boers in South Africa were settlers of Dutch, French Huguenot, and German descent . They left Cape Province in search of autonomy farther north .
 The earliest settlers arrived in the Cape of Good Hope after the Dutch East India Company established a port in 1652 . The Cape of the Good Hope was established by the Dutch company in 1649 .
 Refrigeration sparked a rise in food transport and the use of vast ships . The refrigeration revolutionised food transport in the 1930s .
 Boers had established the South African Republic in the Transvaal area and begun to use arms to support their claim, starting the First Anglo—Boer War in 1880 . Boers used arms in support of their claim to establish their country .
 British troops suffered a defeat at the hands of the Boer settlers in the battle at Majuba Hill on February 27, 1881, bringing the dispute to an end by March 1881 .
 This led to increasing European interference in Egyptian affairs . European interference was considered legitimate because of the financial debt Egypt owed to Britain and France .
 By 1882, Egypt was bankrupt and the khedive was scarcely able to hold on to his own authority . Egypt's financial crisis was the result of the collapse of Egypt's economy .
 Britain was fearful of what a nationalist uprising might mean for the Suez Canal, in which it had a substantial interest . Britain was also worried about what might happen to the canal .
 British forces decided to mount an attack to stifle any further action . The Royal Navy bombarded the forts of Alexandria on July 11, 1882 .
 Egypt was then placed under military occupation, becoming a British protectorate . Egypt became a protectorate of the British-held country .
 British troops were continuing to fight the Sudanese War against the followers of the powerful Muhammad Ahmad bin Abd Allah . Muhammad had declared a holy war after taking the title Mahdi .
 In Europe, an anti-French union was being formed, known as the Triple Alliance . The Triple Alliance is being formed in France and the Netherlands .
 Italy 2 joined after disputing France's territorial claims in North Africa . Italy joined the French-backed group in 2007 . Italy 2 was disputing French territorial claims over North Africa.
 At the beginning of the year on January 26, Anmad and the Mahdi troops captured the city of El Obeid, situated in the center of the territory . The city is located in the central region of the country .
 Mahdi troops continued their march toward Khartoum, capturing the city after a siege of nine months . The city had earlier been placed under British administration by the Egyptian khedive (see 1874)
 The island of Krakatoa, Indonesia, was destroyed in 1883 when its volcano erupted .
 Madagascar off the coast of East : Africa in a bid to protect French ' territory . Madagascar is located in the French territory of Madagascar .
 In 1885, they reached a settlement ' allowing the French occupation ' at Diégo-Suarez in the north . The French occupied the region in 1885 .
 Conference on Africa (see 1885] : Germany claimed territory in southwest Africa , : Togoland , Cameroon, and ' part of the island of Zanzibar off ' the coast of Tanzania, East Africa .
 Berlin Conference on Africa was held from 1833, Spain and other European | Z 2 this end, the Berlin Conference .
 In 1885 assembled Spain turned to its remaining COUNTRIES . No African leaders were even consulted .
 Portugal initiated the meeting in the interests of protecting its claim to part of the Congo estuary . The meeting was initiated by Portugal in the interest of protecting the area . Portugal is believed to be the only country in the Congo to meet with Congo .
 This claim would, however, be rejected and the river basin was declared neutral in order to protect trade in the region . This claim was rejected and instead of being declared neutral, it was declared a neutral .
 A group of European investors were given part of the Congo region, which was put under the control of Belgium's King Leopold II . The Congo Free State was named after the Congo, named the Congo Free state .
 Mark Twain, American author, on Leopold II's regime in the Congo : the first automobile in the world . Twain: "It was the first car that was built in Africa" Twain: The first automobile was built from scratch .
 Benz Motorwagen was a gasoline-driven, three-wheeled three-wheelerwagen . The first time a car was driven by a gasoline engine, the first was a four-wheelers .
 British antislavery patrols tried to stop ships between the west coast of Africa and Havana . To this end, slavery not only continued, but increased over the course of the 19th century .
 By 1859 this number reached nearly 30,500 . Despite their efforts, the numbers continued to were brought to Cuba .
 By 1866, slave imports had fallen to just over 1,000 and the following year, the slave trade was outlawed by the Spanish legislature .
 The act did not free the considerable number of slaves on the island . However, this act did free a large number of slave slaves .
 Years of gradual abolition culminated in a royal decree that emancipated slaves in 1886 .
 Third Burmese War : Although the war lasted a few weeks, : the insurgency that followed : lasted until 1899, claiming many more lives—as shown in this chart . The war ended in 1899, killing many more people .
 Thibaw's negotiations with ' France over a political alliance ' and the construction of a railway ' line to the Indian border . Thibaw talks with France over political alliance and construction of railway line .
 Czar Ferdinand, the Czar of Bulgaria, was elected ruler of Bulgaria in 17th century . He was the son of Czar Tsar Ferdinand .
 15,000 Bulgarians were massacred by Turkish troops in 1876 . Bulgaria's independence struggle had attracted Europe's attention . The death toll from the 1876-1876 conflict rose to 15,500 .
 Britain and Austria-Hungary ensured Russia would not have influence in Bulgaria . A couple of years later a small Bulgarian principality was established . A few years later it was established a small principality .
 By 1885, Bulgaria had merged with Eastern Rumelia, and after a coup d'état, the two states were unified .
 On July 1887, Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was elected ruler of Bulgaria . Prince Ferdinand was born in 1887 . He ruled Bulgaria from 1887 to 1888 .
 An engraving depicts slaves washing diamonds at a Brazilian mine . Ke ee .
 At the time of their respective abolitions, Brazil and Cuba had large slave populations . Brazil had a large slave population at the time .
 BRAZIL, like CUBA, continued to make use of slaves much later than other former colonies . The slave trade was a form of slavery in Brazil .
 In South America, the republics that emerged from the Spanish Empire had abolished slavery by the middle of the century . The republics in South America emerged from Spain's first republics .
 Like Spain, Brazil had been put under pressure by the British to end the trade, which eventually occurred in 1850 . The trade was eventually ended in 1850, and Brazil was forced to stop it .
 Growing abolitionist sentiment reached the highest level, as the emperor Dom Pedro Il became sympathetic to these ideas . Over the next thirty years, the emperor became sympathetic with these ideas.
 He was interested in the gradual abolition of slavery but was aware of the dangers of a slaveholder backlash . He was also concerned about the danger of the slaveholders backlash .
 In 1871, the Rio Branco Law freed children born to slave mothers was enacted . The law was a gradualist measure that freed children from slave mothers .
 Eiffel won a design contest to build the tower as part of the International Exposition of 1889 in honor of the centenary of the French Revolution . The tower was built in honor to commemorate the French revolution .
 The tower attracted almost two million visitors in the first six months after it opened . Almost two million people visited the tower in just six months of opening .
 Brazil, meanwhile, faced political upheaval as a military coup overthrew leader Dom Pedro Il. Dom Pedro I. Il was overthrown .
 The military, clergy, and aristocracy had been angered by Eiffel Tower . Initially criticized by the Parisian public who thought it unsightly, the tower has come to be an iconic Parisian landmark .
 The late 19th century was a time of extensive colonial rule by European powers . It was a period of extensive European colonial rule .
 Public had lost faith in the enterprise as the death toll ' mounted and construction was plagued by endless problems . Universelle du Canal : Interocéanique and the French : public lost faith .
 Rhodes —who had already established his reputation : in the gold and diamond mines in : South Africa —received a charter : for his British South Africa : Company in 1889 . Rhodes received a charter for the company in 1883 . Rhodes was the founder of Rhodes' South Africa Company .
 Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries the world witnessed a relentless European drive to control territories all over the globe . The 18th century saw the rise of the European revolution in Europe .
 Colonies were a theater of conflict in which Europe's antagonisms were played out . Colonies provided direct supplies of valuable natural resources, but also provided a theater for conflict .
 Imperial Age saw Spain, Britain, France, Germany, Holland, Portugal, Italy, and to a lesser extent, Denmark and Sweden, scramble for territories .
 A country could lose colonies in one war, only to reclaim them later through trade in a wider political game . A country lost colonies in war, but could reclaim them through trade trade .
 In 1810, they made up just was 76 times larger than Belgium, under a fifth of the total population . In 1820, they were 76 times bigger than Belgium .
 By 1910, Britain was well ahead in the imperial race, with an empire covering more than twice as much of the globe as its closest rival, France . Colonial minority Native Spaniards were in the Making tracks United States .
 By 1914, the vast expanse of colonial British Africa was spanned by thousands of miles of railroad track . The region opened the region up to trade and aided communication between territories .
 Most colonial outposts were located along the world's coastlines, as settlements sprung up where ships stopped off . In the 18th century, most colonial settlements were located in the area of the world .
 Trading posts grew into cities, often with European-style architecture to reflect the political changes . Trading posts were built in Europe in the early 1900s .
 Improvements in military power, transportation, and health saw the spread of colonial rule throughout the 19th century . Tropical diseases killed thousands of Europeans .
 Spain had begun empire-building earlier and controlled large parts of Latin America at the beginning of the period . But it had lost almost all of its territories by the 1820s .
 Britain governed subjects in Africa, the Americas, Asia, and Australasia . It ruled Africa, Asia and Latin America .
 The had been reconfigured with the independence of Latin was mostly confined to port cities . Latin was largely confined to ports cities .
 Huge swaths of British had also made a Series of incursions into America . Huge swathes of British also made incursions to America .
 British and French attention had turned to the world were under the control of the older Ottoman India, as the Mughal Empire broke down . The Dutch and Qing empires in the East. continued to expand into Southeast Asia.
 By the 1880s, a new mysticism called the Ghost Dance had emerged among the Sioux people . The belief that an Indian messiah would come in 1891 and unite all the displaced native peoples .
 This newfound belief manifested in trances, dances, and mass frenzy, which worried the U.S. agents who oversaw the reservations .
 United States army troops were called in by the end of the year . They attempted to stop the dances, and the Sioux people rebelled . They rebelled, with United States troops being called in .
 United States soldiers were also left dead, ' many due to friendly fire from » United States machine guns . Many of the dead were killed by friendly fire, many from friendly fire .
 This was the last major conflict between American Indians and the United States Army, although poor relations persisted ' between the two groups .
 This became known as the ‘British Central Africa Protectorate’ in 1893 . It was then officially designated as ‘Nyasaland” in 1907 . It became known known as “Central Africa Protector’s’ Central Africa in 1893 and was then
 Construction began between MOSCOW and VLADIVOSTOK on the TRANSSIBERIAN RAILway in Russia . Construction began on the railway between Moscow and Vladyvostok .
 The project was the idea of Alexander III , and it was known as the Trans-Siberian Railway . Alexander III was Alexander III .
 It stretched from Moscow to the port of Vladivostok, 5 miles to the east . The Russian city was the site of the first Russian city of the Soviet Union .
 Russia received permission from China to run tracks through parts of Manchuria, allowing the completion of the trans-Manchurian line by 1901 .
 Work began from west and east ends and eventually met in the center . The work began from east and west ends and ended up meeting at center .
 By 1904, sections linking Moscow and Vladivostok were connected and running . By 1904 the sections linking the two cities were already running .
 A postage stamp from French West Africa shows an illustration of a native mask . The railroad facilitated the quicker movement of people through Russia .
 Lagos provided a key point from which to seize control of surrounding Yorubaland . Lagos is situated around the lower parts of the Niger River, corresponding with much of modern southwest Nigeria .
 The British overthrew the Ijebu government, part of the Yoruba political system, in 1892 . The British took advantage of existing internal divisions among Yoruba rulers .
 The French exploited divisions in the Muslim Tukulor Empire by signing treaties with its neighbors and building forts within its territory . The French also exploited divisions within the Muslim Empire .
 RACE, CLASS, CREED, OR SEX, IS INHUMAN, says suffragist Kate Sheppard, in the pamphlet Is it Right? 1892 . Dahomey had proven difficult to subdue in the coastal territories around the kingdom .
 The First Franco-Dahomean War ended with a treaty that ceded Cotonou and Porto Novo to France in exchange for payments to the king of Dahomey . The war was the result of a war between France and Dahomean Arabia .
 By 1892 another war had begun, this time over the issue of slavery . However, tensions remained, and tensions remained over slavery .
 The king, Behanzin, was still allowing slave raids, despite the abolition of slavery . The king still allowed slave raids in his kingdom .
 France retaliated, this time with an army of French and Senegalese troops . They overpowered the kingdom, bringing it under French control in 1893 .
 Cuba, then the dominant : world sugar grower, produced : 1 million tons of sugar, four times : as much as Jamaica . In 1893, Cuba produced 1 million tonnes of sugar . Cuba was then the world's most dominant sugar growing region .
 Women won the right to vote in the British colony of New Zealand . Halfway around the world, women in New Zealand also voted for the first time .
 U.S. tariff the following year would cause profits to drop ' to $13 million by 1896 . However, a United States tariff the . following |» year would mean profits would drop to $15 million .
 Behanzin, king of Dahomey, held symbols of kingship while surrounded by attendants .
 Emperor Nicholas II and Empress Alexandra would be Russia's last ruling monarchs . They would be the last rulers to rule Russia .
 He presided over an increasingly troubled country, and would not be able to withstand the social revolution . The social revolution that engulfed Russia in the early 20th century engulfed the country .
 Russia’s neighbor, China, had become entangled in a local conflict in Korea that escalated into the Sino-Japanese War . China had become embroiled in the Korean conflict that led to the death of its own citizens .
 Japan was allied with the modernizing government in Korea, while China backed the royal family . Japan allied with Korea's government in 1950s and 1950s .
 Christian Armenian people were caught up in the nationalist ' spirit of the time, and they tried : to assert their independence . Christian Armenians were also caught up with the nationalist spirit, and tried to assert independence .
 Painting of the Sino-Japanese War : shows the Japanese forces : conquering Jiuliancheng after : defeating the Chinese at Pyongyang .
 Every day every day sees humanity more powerful in the world . Eo oF oo a Wee oP ego"" .
 In Italy, physicist and inventor Guglielmo Marconi (18741937) invented a wireless telegraph . Marconi's invention was the work of Italian inventor Marconi .
 In his initial experiments, using a telegraph key to operate a transmitter, he was able to send electromagnetic waves In bursts that corresponded to Morse code . His initial experiments were using telegraph keys to transmit electromagnetic waves . In bursts of electromagnetic waves, waves were sent to correspond to Morse
 He then used a transmitter to ring a bell that had been placed 30ft away . He used a bell to ring bell that was placed 30 feet away .
 German professor Wilhelm Conrad Rontgen captured a womans hand with rings . However, he found Little enthusiasm for his work, so he decided to use it .
 Marconi paved the way for the : development of radio technology . The device the following year, and : laid the foundation for radio ' technology .
 Abyssinian forces routed the Italian troops in 1896 . Italian invasion of pavestiia in 1896 was the result of an Abyssinian invasion . Italian troops were defeated by Abyssinian troops .
 An enthusiastic Frenchman, Baron Pierre de Coubertin, organized the re-inaugural of the Olympic Games in Greece .
 Coubertin and Brookes wanted to create an international festival of modern Games sport . The Cymer festival will be held in Cymer, France, on September 28 .
 Revival organized the event in Athens from April 6-15 . After years of campaigning, the Coubertin was finally able to organize the event .
 Italy thought it had the right to establish a protectorate over Abyssinia, but this was contested . Under the terms of the Treaty of Uccialli, Italy established an Italian protectorate of Abyssinia .
 April edition of Scribner's Magazine celebrated the revival of the Olympic Games, being held in Athens, Greece .
 Many Cubans were unwilling to accept continued control by Spain . The war had been successful, but many Cubans didn't want it to continue .
 Soldiers managed , to reach Havana by the following year, although they were driven back . Soldiers managed to reach the Cuban capital, Havana, by the end of the year .
 Trouble was brewing between Greece and the Ottoman Empire over the situation in Crete . The Ottoman Empire and Greece were at odds over Crete in the 1920s .
 Greece was determined to annex the territory after a brutal suppression of a Christian uprising on the island the year before . The island was ruled by the Greek state of the island .
 When an armistice was agreed in August, it was forced to pay an indemnity and it lost part of the territory of Thessaly . It was forced by the war to pay for the indemnity .
 José Marti was a key figure in the Cuban revolutionary struggle . He was a writer, philosopher, journalist, and political theorist . He also became a political theorist and philosopher .
 He is considered a national hero for his planning and leadership during the Cuban War of Independence . He planned and planned to win the war of independence .
 By 1897, Britain was the world leader in coal production . Britain was around 695,200, rising from 216,200 ini 1851: Coal mining in Britain .
 The USS Maine was blown up while docked in Havana's harbor . The U.S. made the decision to go to war against Spain after the destruction .
 Cuba and Spain had agreed an armistice on April 9, but the U.S. began the Spanish-American War only a few weeks later . The war began on April 25, 18 months after they agreed a cease-fire .
 United States Navy ships sailed into Manila Bay, in the Spanish Philippines, while another fleet harbor of Cuba, Santiago, where troops then disembarked .
 The United States continued to occupy Cuba, and the following year tried to exclude Cubans from governing, and disbanded the army . The following year, the U.S. continued to try to exclude Cuban citizens from governing . However, the Cuban army was disbanded by the United States .
 US. made incursions into the southern : : Guam and the Philippines .
 Fashoda Incident, which involved : territorial disputes over their respective attempts to expand | in Africa . Fashodai Incident, was a territorial dispute between the two countries .
 Although their troops ' met in Fashoda on September 18, the situation did not escalate into war, as all sides wanted to avoid a battle . The situation didn't escalate into a war, but the situation was avoided .
 British, French, and Egyptian flags should fly over the fort that the French had occupied . French, Egyptian, British and British flags should be flown over .
 Cyclists of the Lancashire Fusiliers took part in the South African War . Women and children were put into camps where up to 25,000 people died .
 HOSTILITIES BETWEEN THE BOERS and BRITISH were once again heading toward conflict . The British government was once again headed toward conflict with the Nazis .
 Boers were demanding that British troops protecting mining interests should withdraw from the Transvaal, but this request was ignored . This time Boers demanded British troops protect mining interests from mining .
 The South African Republic and the Orange Free State declared war on Britain in October . South Africa and the South Africa Republic declared war against Britain . The Orange Free state declared war in October against the UK .
 The South African War would last less than three years but, for the British, it would become the largest since the Napoleonic Wars, as its forces reached some 500,000 men . The British forces would be the largest in the country's history, with some of its forces reaching
 The war was fought across a hostile terrain, which the Boers could use to their advantage . The Boers, whose troops numbered less than 90,000, could use the hostile terrain to advantage .
 The growing presence of missionaries in China was starting to cause public anger . Christian missionaries were causing anger among Chinese people .
 This eventually erupted into the Boxer Rebellion, which was a peasant uprising that aimed to eject all foreigners from China . The Boxer rebellion was the first uprising against foreigners in China . This eventually led to the death of all foreigners .
 Members of the group were also found among the Qing court, and so the movement's violent attacks on foreigners and Chinese converts to Christianity were officially sanctioned . The group was found in China, where it was found to be the most violent group in China .
 After the arrival of 2 reinforcements, the international | force made its way to Beijing, 2 which it captured . 2 of the 2 captured were captured by the international force .
 This 2 put an end to the violence and ' provided for reparations to be ' made' This 2 provided for . reparations, 'made . Reparations .
 Katanga is a southern region of the ' present-day Democratic Republic ' of the Congo . Katanga was a southern part of the Katanga region of Katanga .
 Katanga was soon one of the most highly profitable mining areas in the world .
 The population of the United States had soared, reaching more than 75 million by 1900 . The many Africans employed performed the dirty and dangerous work in the mines for very little pay .
 British troops faced a rebellion : by the Asante, which took eight : months to subdue . The Asante was the first African-American revolt to break out against the British .
 In the US, immigration had ' caused the country's population to nearly double . Across the Atlantic, in the U.S. ' decades of immigration had caused the population to rise .
 The Commonwealth of Australia was established on January 1 . It was the country's first independent state after the constitution was approved . Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia, and Tasmania were the first colonies .
 Queen Victoria died on January 22, 18 months after her death . Queen Victoria was the first queen of her reign .
 She had ruled the nation and empire for 63 years, making her reign the longest by a British monarch . Her reign was the longest in British history .
 The largely peaceful period under Edward VII was known as the Edwardian era . Her son, Edward VII, took the throne, and the period under his rule was called Edwardian . The Edwardian period was largely peaceful but socially stratified .
 Commonwealth stamp showing Queen Victoria is from Australia, which brought its colonies into a federation the same year the monarch died . Queen Victoria died in 1901 .
 Prince Saud Ibn Abdul-Aziz was the first monarch of the modern Saudi state . He was also the first king of the Saudi kingdom .
 War between Boer settlers and the British ended on May 31 . War ended between Boers and British settlers .
 The end of the war was hastened when the British adopted a ‘scorched earth’ policy, which involved destroying crops and livestock to limit Boer supplies . The British used the policy to limit supplies to the Boers .
 The dispossessed Boer women and children were rounded up into concentration camps . Boers had been rounded up in concentration camps by the Boers .
 Under the Treaty of Vereeniging, the Boers were forced to recognize British sovereignty in South Africa, ending the independence of the Orange Free State and the South African Republic .
 Saud set out to take back the territory he had been forced to leave by the rival Rashids . In 1901, Saud, who was living in Kuwait, set out for the first time in 1901 .
 He and his men crept into Riyadh in January 1902 and crept into town, waiting to ambush the Rashidi governor the following morning . The king's men were waiting for the governor to arrive in the morning .
 Saud had taken the city and the territory, with the help of a growing number of supporters . Soon Saud had captured the city .
 Saudi Arabia became the kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 1932, and it remains under the Saud family’s rule to the present day .
 Martinique's Mount Pelée killed around 30,000 people and destroyed the port of Saint-Pierre on May 8 . The violent eruption of the island of Martinique killed about 30,500 people .
 TWO brothers in the US, WILBUR AND ORVILLE (18711948) WRIGHT, became obsessed with the growing science of aviation and were determined to fly .
 They pumped the profits from their bicycle shop into their experiments and built a biplane . The team built the biplane from the proceeds of their bike shop . It was the first biplane to be built by the team .
 In the town of Kitty Hawk, on the coast of North Carolina, they began to conduct experiments .
 Colombian government (which still controlled the isthmus) broke : down . Colombian government still controlled isthus . Colombia still controls the region .
 Panama, with the backing of the US, declared its independence in 1903 . Soon after, in 1903, Panama became Panama's first country to become independent .
 Work on the Panama Canal began in 1979, and work on the canal began . Panama Canal Zone, in which the U.S. would exercise its jurisdiction until 1979, was a zone .
 The United States publication Judge depicts the Panama Canal as the ‘lion in the path’ in this political cartoon . The Panama Canal was intertwined with the infamous Dreyfus Affair . Its roots, < S e Ay) or S ~ ws se’ �
 A scandal involving Alfred Dreyfus (18591935) was a scandal involving a French officer who was cleared . Evidence came to light that cleared him, but it was suppressed . This was a case of a scandal .
 Angry advertisers decided to set up a rival periodical, LAuto-Vélo, later called LAuto . Angry advertisers set up LAuto and LAuto, later LAuto.
 Desgrange devised a month-long : cycling contest (though it was later shortened) which followed the route of Paris—Lyon: Marseille-Toulouse-Bordeaux . The race was organized to promote L'Auto's sales were initially poor, and so a
 The event's first winner was Maurice Garin. accused of treason . The French newspaper Petit Sauer shows how the Ruseiah sick and JAPAN AND RUSSIA had been competing to expand their influence .
 Japan approached Russia in 1903 to suggest they recognize each other's interests in these regions . During this time, Japan had begun to build up its army and navy, and approached Russia .
 The talks broke down on February 6, 1904, and three days later Japan attacked Russian warships, sinking two of them and triggering the Russo-Japanese War . Three days later Russia attacked two of the Russian warships in Japan .
 The United States inventor Henry Ford was able to increase output and push down production . The automobile revolutionized the way speed was increased in the United States .
 By the 1920s many eager consumers could buy a car. Instead of spending days ona dreds of miles in a matter of hours. prices, so that by 1920s. prices were much lower than today .
 By the 1950s, suburbs In the U.S. were planned around the Idea that residents would be driving . This had a profound effect on the landscape as highways sprang up .
 Despite the subsequent problems, the love affair with the car has never ceased . Despite the problems, it's never ceased. Despite the pollution and traffic jams, the car is still popular .
 As people in developing countries become richer, they too want to be car owners . People in developing nations want to own cars, says CNN's Richard Quest .
 The automobile continues to be an integral part of transportation networks all over the world . However, in spite of these issues, it is still a major part of the transportation network .
 Engineers have long been trying to find ways to run cars on other fuels than gasoline, including solar power and battery power . The Ford Model T was the first car powered by solar power .
 Hybrid cars combine a fuel engine with a battery engine, giving the driver better fuel consumption and producing less pollution . Hybrid cars can be driven by a driver with a hybrid engine .
 The Renaissance Italian designs the world's first self-propelled wagon . Leonardo da Vinci's car was the first car to be built in 15th century .
 Nikolaus August Otto patents his fourstroke internalcombusion engine in 1867-77 . Lenoir gas engine ANY COLOR THAT HE WANTS SO long as 1867/77 .
 Karl Benz and Gottlieb Daimler separately develop practical cars with internalcombustustustion engines . Benz three1885 wheeler with internal combustion improves .
 Henry Ford's design classic has many two panels of the features found in today’s cars . The 1913 Ford Model T has many of the same features as today's cars .
 There were calls for a constitutional monarchy in Russia . In Russia, there was a growing opposition to the monarchy .
 In February, Nicholas promised to set up an elected assembly, but this did nothing to stop the unrest . In February this year, he promised an election, but it was not enough .
 June Saw a mutiny by the crew of the battleship Potemkin . Finally, the military joined in, and the mutiny was declared .
 Antirevolutionary forces finally suppressed what became known as the Russian Revolution of 1905 . Although protests continued, anti-evolution forces eventually suppressed the revolution .
 Albert Einstein received his doctorate and international acclaim for his publications . In Switzerland, Albert Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize for his work .
 There had been recorded quakes in 1836, 1865, 1868, and 1892 . Nothing had been done to make the city of 400,000 people better prepared .
 On April 18, San Francisco bore the brunt of what was later estimated to be a 7.2 magnitude earthquake . People as far afield as Los Angeles and Nevada also felt shaking .
 The quake lasted less than a minute, but it wreaked damage that would take years to repair . Buildings collapsed and many caught fire throughout the city . The quake was the first earthquake to hit the city in decades .
 In India, the All India Muslim League was established with the support of the British government . The League was formed with the aim of protecting Muslims' rights .
 Unrest that had been spreading throughout the countryside in Romania culminated in a revolt in 1907 . The revolt was the first of its kind in Romania .
 This was fueled by land issues, as the peasants were forced into exploitative contracts, meaning many farmers had to live in poverty . Many farmers were forced to live under exploitative deals .
 As the rioting spread through villages, up to 10,000 people were killed before it was suppressed by the military . The military suppressed the riots before it could be suppressed .
 Cambodia clawed back some of its western provinces from Thailand due to French pressure . In Southeast Asia, Cambodia had clawed . back some western provinces . from Thailand .
 By 1863, France had established a strong presence in Cambodia, restricting the Cambodian king's powers and installing a governor . France also restricted the king's power .
 This paved the way for colonization by the French, but angered Cambodian nationalists . The French colonized Cambodia in the early 1900s .
 He was murdered during a period of increased calls for a republican government . He was killed during a time when calls for an independent government were made .
 PORTUGAL was founded following the assassination of Charles I in February . It was followed by the birth of Charles II, who was killed by the rebels . Portugal was founded in 17th century after Charles II was assassinated .
 Already a highly unpopular monarch, he made matters worse by appointing his own prime minister . The monarch is already unpopular with the majority of the population .
 Charles and his eldest son, Luis Filipe, were shot in Lisbon on February 1 . Charles was traveling in a carriage in Lisbon when he was shot in the head with his son .
 In Africa, the Congo Free State was abolished and Belgium's government established the Belgian Congo . The Belgian Congo was established in 1903 .
 The Free State had been run by a private company with Belgian King Leopold II ruling over it personally . The State was ruled by the King of Belgium, who ruled the Free State .
 Africans working in the Free State provided the company with valuable rubber and ivory . Africans working for the company provided them with valuable ivory and rubber and rubber .
 Balkans might be undermined because, technically, Bosnia: Herzegovina was still under . Ottoman suzerainty . One of the : Young Turks’ aims was to reclaim ' the territory .
 During this period, Bulgaria’s ' Prince Ferdinand — whose role as leader was not yet 2 recognized by Russia and many . other European countries—took . advantage of the crisis to proclaim . Bulgarian independence from » the faltering Ottoman empire . Austria-Hungary and its allies
 In 1909 the Committee of Union and Progress had taken control of the levers of power within the Ottoman Empire . The Committee would maintain control for the next couple of years, despite internal disputes .
 Hamid II (r.76-1909) ruled as a constitutional monarch, although only briefly . He was deposed on April 27, 1909 . Hamid I was a member of the Ottoman Empire .
 Many of the Young Turks had War of Independence . Austro Hungarian Empire was part of the AustroHungarian Empire . It was also part of Yugoslavia .
 Mexico was once again caught up in the throes of political change . A century after its first revolution, Mexico was caught in political turmoil again . The country's first revolution was in the early 1900s .
 Diaz allowed the development of an opposition, and other groups emerged . Diaz eventually allowed the opposition to him . Diaz was eventually allowed to allow other groups to form .
 This invasion came after British attempts to occupy Lhasa in 1904, which were fueled by fears that Tibet could fall under the influence of Russia . This invasion was the first attempt to occupy Tibet in 1904 .
 China and Britain recognized : China's sovereignty over Tibet . Tibet did not consider it valid, ' and the Tibetans were able to : use the revolution that began : in China the following year (see 1911) as an opportunity to drive out the Chinese .
 For nearby Korea, the consequences of the Russo-Japanese war [see 1904] had severe ramifications . The consequences of this war had severe consequences .
 In 1905, Korea was made a Japanese protectorate, and by 1910 had been annexed . It had allowed Japan to use the peninsula for military operations . In 1910, Korea had been officially annexed .
 Designed by the Catalan architect Antoni Gaudi (1852-1956), Barcelona's Casa Mila was constructed between 1905 and 1970 . Designed by Gaudi, it was built between 1905-1970 .
 Many Chinese always considered the ruling Manchus as foreigners . Despite its longevity, many Chinese always thought the ruling Chinese were foreigners .
 They were resentful at the growing number of Westerners, who had been permitted to move inland from the port cities . They were also resentful that Westerners had been allowed to leave the port .
 The 20th century had been full of unrest for China (see 1900) and this continued to grow as revolutionary groups began to form around the country . The Chinese revolutionary groups were formed in the early 1900s .
 In October, a revolutionary plot was uncovered and the members arrested and executed . The members of the plot were found and executed in October . A revolutionary plot against the government was uncovered .
 Soldiers in Wuchang who knew of the plot decided to push forward with a revolt . They led a mutiny on October 10, which soon spread throughout the country, and the rebels declared Chinaa republic .
 In the US, exiled revolutionary : leader Sun Yat-sen (1866-1925) had heard about the events in China and returned home . Manchus days were numbered.
 Such displays did little to quell the growing nationalist sentiment in the country .
 Marie Curie won her second Nobel Prize, this time in chemistry for her work on radioactivity . Curie, a Polish-born French scientist, was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize for radioactivity in 1903 . Curies' work on the atomic bomb was the work of
 She and her husband, Pierre, had been the recipients of the 1903 Nobel Prize for Physics . She and Pierre won the Nobel Prize .
 In 1911, the world price of rubber was beginning to soar, fueled by its use in new technologies, especially in the production of automobile tires . The price of the world's rubber was rising by the end of the decade .
 Rubber came from the sap of trees that grew in the forests of Brazil, Southeast Asia, and West Africa . Rubber was made from trees that grow in Brazil and Southeast Asia . The rubber came from trees in Brazil, Asia and Africa .
 Morocco was established as a French protectorate under the Treaty of Fez in 1912 . Morocco is now Morocco's most populous country . Morocco has a long history of independence from Morocco .
 Abd al-Hafiz had asked the French to help him suppress internal dissent . The year before the sultan was besieged in his palace, he had asked them to help . The sultan had asked for the help of the French .
 The TREATY OF LONDON OF 1913 officially announced the end of the First Balkan War . The treaty of 1913 officially ended the conflict in Serbia and Montenegro .
 The Balkan League, which had challenged the Ottoman Empire, soon began to disintegrate . However, the League began disintegrating soon after .
 Bulgaria attacked Serbia in June because of a disagreement over the division of Macedonia, although the fighting ended a couple of months later with a SerbianGreek alliance .
 Finland had given women the right to vote in 1906, while Norway followed in 1913 . In northern Europe, women's vote was first given to women in 1906 .
 Davison threw herself in front of 'King George V's horse +: during the Epsom Derby in June . Davison ' threw herself into the air during the Derby' in June.
 Motor Company, which he set up in 1903, had sold nearly 250,000 Model T cars . Motor Company had sold more than half a million cars in 1903 .
 Mexico’s civil war by sending a : port of Veracruz, which prevented : . President Victoriano Huerta from . receiving arms shipments from . Germany .
 PVEREIG CITT eG Aba Luin Huerta’s fall from power in July . were prepared to make poorly equipped and badly organized . Meanwhile, Europe began its concessions, Austria-Hungary .
 Germany's Internationalist German Social . in Austrian-ruled Bosnia . Visit comes during official visit to Sarajevo peace initiatives by Germany .
 © Germany did not want to fight the © vetoed any strike action . Its demands were © Germany's demands were those of its own .
 In order to invade the UK, Ulster Protestant Serbia would reject them, giving France they needed to send an ' paramilitaries, who had been . the Austrians a pretext for military . army through Belgium, whose . on the verge of an armed . neutrality was guaranteed by . rebellion
 Most people ' expected a short war with high casualties, and this was expected to be short . Most people expected it to be a war that lasted a few months .
 Unable to resist the German onslaught, the British | and French were driven back toward Paris . The French and British were driven to Paris by the Germans .
 The German war plan, devised in 1906 by Count Alfred von Schlieffen, assumed that, if attacked on two fronts, France would concentrate its forces along its eastern border . Meanwhile, the trYe * KEY -® German advance (Aug 2-Sept 5) ~The Allies (
 The bulk of the German army was to advance through Belgium and Luxembourg, encircling the French armies . German troops were to move through Belgium, Luxembourg and Belgium to encircle the French .
 The aim was to defeat the French in six weeks, before the Russians could enter the fray . The aim is to defeat France in the six weeks before they can enter the Russian league .
 Prussia the Russian First and Second Armies were crushed at ' the Battles of Tannenberg and : the Masurian Lakes . Prussia . The Russians were crushed by Prussia at the Battle of the Tannenburg and . the battles of the Masuria .
 The First Battle of Ypres was the first battle of the Belgian Revolution in Belgium . It was fought between the British and French troops from 1914-1919 . The battle was fought in Belgium and Belgium .
 Lord : Kitchener's face adorned ' recruitment posters that called : for volunteers to join up and fight. : British Empire . Lord Kitchener’s face adorned ‘recruitment posters’
 German U-boats terrorized the seas, attacking both naval and merchant shipping at will . U.S. Navy and merchant ships were attacked by U.K. U.A. ships in the early years of WWII .
 A German airship taking off from its base for a bombing raid on London . German airships were used to carry out the raid on the capital .
 POWERS OF EUROPE remained locked in a war for which they had been unprepared . POWERS of Europe were unprepared for their unpreparedness .
 The fighting had exhausted munition supplies, so to continue the war the chemical weapons industry was expanded . In order to survive the war, combatants had to vastly expand their armaments industries .
 Governments became aware that the war would be won, or lost, as much in the factories as on the front line . Governments became . aware of the war . as much In . factories as front line, governments became aware .
 Britain set up a new Ministry of Munitions, and in Russia a special War Industries Committee . In Russia the czarist government set up the special war industries committee .
 The French recall conscripts from the trenches to work in factories . Their production problems were accentuated by the German occupation of industrial areas of northeast France .
 Generals » assumed sufficient numbers and shells hurled against these defenses would achieve a breakthrough, but they were wrong . Generals . assumed that sufficient numbers of men and shells would achieve breakthrough . They were wrong.
 The British attempted their first offensive of the trench war at Neuve Chapelle in March . Indian troops led the assault with the Canadian Expeditionary Force fighting for the first time .
 Germans had a similar experience 2 attacking at Ypres in April . Mass offensives led only to mass casualties—over 300,000 British : and French losses in the autumn Champagne-Loos offensive .
 Allied soldiers quickly discovered : means of protection, and the : Allies also adopted gas as a 3 weapon against the Germans . The gas was used by the Allies in the Second World War .
 A shortage of manpower meant that women were recruited into a range of jobs traditionally reserved for men . Women were recruited to work in a variety of jobs, such as nursing and cleaning jobs .
 By 1918, around a third of the 1.1 million workers in French munitions factories were women . They constituted over half of the total German industrial workforce .
 Women also replaced men as agricultural laborers, for example in the British Women’s Land Army . Women replaced men in the land army .
 Germany and Austria-Hungary, : : so this was a diplomatic coup ' for the Western Allies . Germany and the Austrians were the only two countries in the world to join forces .
 Strasser believed that Britain could be “overcome by means of Savage attacks” Soldiers raiding enemy trenches often carried primitive weapons for close-quarters combat .
 British recruitment poster uses sinking of the Lusitania as propaganda to prove the justice | of the Allied cause .
 British troops on the Western Front are silhouetted against the sky, wearing the steel Brodie helmets . The helmets were first introduced in October 1915 .
 Britain and France devised an alternative to the ' costly stalemate on the Western 2 Front, Britain .
 British and French warships were to sail through the Dardanelles Straits into the Sea of Marmara . They were to bring the Turkish capital, Constantinople, under their guns .
 The Dardanelles Straits were seized before the navy could pass through . Three battleships were seized by the Turkish navy in March .
 Faced with tough Turkish resistance on difficult terrain, they failed to break out of their landing zones . The Turkish government failed to reach the border with NATO forces .
 Renewed landings at ' Suvla Bay' in August achieved no greater success . New landings were made at the end of August . The new landings are scheduled to take place in the area .
 Trench warfare, similar to that in France but with conditions exacerbated by heat, is a form of warfare in the trenches .
 The United States entered the war on the Anglo-French side in 1917 . Most of the largest and bloodiest battles of the war were fought in the U.S. most of the major battles .
 The decisive arena of conflict was by the Germans at Verdun and by the Western Germany's Western Front . From the start of the conflict, Verdun was the decisive arena for conflict .
 The Germans invaded Allies at the Somme without breaking neutral Belgium and Luxembourg, overcoming stalemate . The Somme ended in a stalemate with the Allies' victory over the Germans .
 Up to 1918, only a voluntary withdrawal Belgian resistance at Liege and Antwerp. Only a voluntary . withdrawal from Belgium was only voluntary .
 From March 1918 a series of large-scale the Marne, however, French commander General German offensives broke through Allied defenses . Joseph Joffre rallied his forces for a counterand advanced the front line toward Paris .
 Sh oa dee aE offensive and the Germans were pushed back . aided by the arrival of United States troops, the Allies halted HinMenERPe ine . After a desperate struggle at Ypres in the fall of the Germans at the Marne .
 The Eirthect extentor Cermanadvencatole stretched from the North Sea to Switzerland . A successful British Front limel limelMar 1016 1914 .
 French bid to attack the Turkish capital, ""i Belgrade Constantinople, failed dismally at Gallipoli . An Anglowe . French bid for attack on the Turkish . capital, Istanbul, failed .
 Odessa . Odessa is the largest city of Odessa in the region of the Odessa region . Romania and Romania were the only two countries to make it to the region .
 Military aviation expanded W914 Jul 1-Nov 18, 1916 Cambrai + massively through the war . Charleroi War in the skies was a major aviation event .
 By the end of the war, some 12,000 military aircraft were in action at the front .
 Artillery a Chateau-Thierry x Sep 26te “s Jul 18-18 Jul 18, 1918 . First Marne Nov 11, 1918 ; *.s. P + Rifle fire Artillery .
 Major battle fought to delay the advance of British troops fighting to retake the city . The Easter Rising was the first major battle of the Great Depression .
 Russia’s most successful UNPRECEDENTED SCALE opened : Pancho Villa (1878-1923], the : Wappen, or against its rule in Ireland . Prussian Prussian In April, Britain faced a revolt : Russia's most successful .
 German commander-in-chief Erich von Falkenhayn aimed to ‘bleed the French army white’ by drawing It into costly combat . German commander in-chief wanted to 'bleak the French'
 The French reacted as he hoped by sending reinforcements, decimated by the German heavy guns . The French responded by sending more troops to the battlefield .
 Repeated German offensives continued until mid-July, after which French counter-offensives succeeded into December .
 Little territory changed hands and both sides suffered around 400,000 casualties . Both sides suffered little territory change hands and suffered little casualties .
 From December 1915, Anglo-Indian troops had been under siege by Turkish forces at Kut-al-Amara, between Basra and Baghdad . The siege took place between December 1915 and December 1915 .
 Relief forces failed to fight their way through to Kut, so, facing starvation, they were forced to surrender . The Kuti surrender was the end of the Kuti era, when the city was starved of food .
 Taken prisoner, British and Indian soldiers endured terrible hardship . Less than half survived captivity .
 The spiked Pickelhaube helmet was replaced in the course of the . 1916 by the metal Stahlhelm, which . provided better protection .
 Austrians were only ' rescued by the arrival of German troops to support them' The Austrians only 'rescued' when they were rescued by German troops .
 Douglas Haig was British army commander-in-chief in World War I . His assaults on German defenses at the Somme in 1916 and Passchendaele in 1917 resulted in huge losses . In June, General Aleksei ' Brusilov mounted a Russian general .
 In 1918, Haig held firm in the face of the formidable German spring offensives, then presided over a string of British victories . In 1918 he presided over the British victory in a series of victories against Germany .
 The Germans knew that this would mean sinking American merchant vessels and would probably bring the neutral United States into the war . But they believed they could sink enough ships to force Britain to sue for peace .
 Housatonic, was sunk by a U-boat on February 3 off the Scilly Isles . The U.S. broke off diplomatic relations with Germany after the sinking .
 Returning to Russia in 1917, he was determined to radicalize the revolution through the Bolshevik seizure of power . He returned to the country in 1917 and returned to Russia to join the Bolshevik revolution .
 Lenin founded the world's first communist state by the Bolsheviks in Petrograd . Once in control, he ruthlessly stamped out all opposition, and founded the Provisional Government .
 The slow process of building and equipping a mass conscript army began . The army is now a massive force in the Middle East .
 Lenin set up a revolutionary government of People’s : Commissars and proclaimed 'aunilateral armistice' Government survived a coup attempt, but on November 7 it succumbed to an armed takeover by Leon Trotsky .
 Nivelle Offensive was launched in mid-April, however, it proved no ' more successful than previous offensives .
 British army remained committed to offensive bundles of wood to fill the trenches, so that they can drive across them . The British army remains committed to an offensive .
 Cambrai in November, massed : tanks helped British forces advance 4 miles (6km) in one : day—three times the distance ' achieved at Passchendaele in ' three months' Three months later, British forces advanced 4 miles in one day . Cambra
 German counterattack soon » retook most of the lost ground . Any celebrations ' were premature, however, as a German counterattraction soon » took place .
 The long stalemate between Italy and AustriaHungary ended when German troops were transferred to the Italian front in October .
 At the Battle of Caporetto, an Austro-German offensive drove Italian forces into retreat . The battle took place at the end of the Second World War .
 Arab allies, fighting alongside the British army against the Turks, had not been consulted . Arab allies were not consulted .
 Lenin appears in front of the battleship Aurora, which was used led by czarist officers . The 1917 revolution was followed by the Russian Civil So iedee ad Revolution period .
 Communists seized power in Russia in November 1917 . Art had to serve the socialist revolution and disseminate its ideology . Art served to disseminate ideology of the revolution .
 Propaganda mobilized the populace in support of the regime and pilloried its enemies . Propaganda was used to mobilize the population and pillory its enemies.
 Many avant-garde artists believed their revolutionary ways of making art would accord with the political revolution . During the early phase of Communist rule, many avant garde artists thought .
 From the late 1920s Soviet artists were required to depict workers and peasants in a heroic-realist style . Their images reflected the supposed happiness and progress of Communist life . However, under the dictatorship of Joseph Stalin, under Stalin, they were needed to depict .
 The Communist leadership launched an industrialization drive in the late 1920s . Rapid industrialization was launched in 1928 .
 Communist poster urges Soviet citizens HEMESIEHH Mes en a Red Army beating the antito become members of 'O | 0' “Ee oe a AR, lv MY Communist White armies. Workers cooperatives. F é * a q IN 2 AWUUR
 A poster of the World War II era depicts bomber aircraft and a Soviet airman displaying the obligatory optimism of any Communist citizen portrayed in Stalinist art . The poster was created in the 1940s during the Second World War .
 At the start of 1918, the U.S. Expeditionary Force in Europe was still not ready for combat . The United States entered World War I in 1917 .
 Woodrow Wilson announced a 14-point program for a just and durable peace . President Wilson announced the program in anticipation of victory in the war .
 His proposals included freedom of the seas and free trade, disarmament, self-determination for European peoples who did not have their own nation-states, and an international organization to guarantee new borders against aggressors .
 Germany would have to hand back the territory it had occupied during the war . Alsace-Lorraine was taken from France in 1871 . Germany would also have to give back the rest of its territory as well as the territory occupied by France .
 Litovsk, which marked Russia's exit from World War I . With Poland, Ukraine, Belarus, Belarus and Finland, ' and the Baltic States nominally ' independent as client states of Germany, the treaty deprived : Russia of about a third of its : prewar population .
 The German ' military authorities then set ' about ruthlessly exploiting resources in the eastern ' regions they now controlled .
 The humiliating treaty did not ; bring peace to Russia, which was ' already slipping into civil war' Russia .
 Lenin forcibly dispersed 2 a democratically elected Constituent Assembly in : January . Lenin had won : only 25 percent of votes cast . Lenin forcibly dismembered 2 a . democratically elected . Constituents Assembly .
 March 21, the Spring Offensive : or “Kaiserschlacht” struck the British line on the Somme front . The Spring Offensive was the spring offensive of the Second World War II .
 The family was moved to Ekaterinburg in the Urals and placed under close guard by local Bolsheviks . But in April 1918 the family was placed under guard by the Bolsheviks in the city . The family died in 1918 .
 Allies made further retreats and remained on the : defensive until July . Germans failed to achieve the decisive success they needed .
 The Battle of the Argonne was the costliest single battle in American history, with 117,000 U.S. casualties . On September 29, with their Hindenburg Line defenses ' breached and their ally Bulgaria : on the point of surrender, the Germans sought an armistice .
 German troops were still putting up a stubborn 2 defense, and there were not yet . any Allied troops on German soil, but the country was disintegrating from within . President Wilson aligned himself with the : British and French, who insisted that Germany should surrender .
 German navy at the end of 2 October was followed by strikes : and socialist uprisings in major ' cities, where food shortages had fueled political discontent .
 Two days later, a German delegation signed an ' armistice in a railroad car in the Compiégne forest . Two days after the war, the two sides signed a cease-fire agreement .
 World War has been described as ‘industrial warfare” as manpower and economic resources of industrialized states were mobilized for fighting . MASS-PRODUCED WEAPONRY ALLOWS THE SLAUGHTER OF MILLIONS .
 Modern firearms provided armies with firepower on an unprecedented scale . Modern firearms have been used in almost every aspect of the battlefield .
 Formidable defensive systems of trenches, barbed wire, and machine-gun posts made offensive operations costly and tended to lead to stalemate . Formidable defenses made trench warfare costly and costly .
 Weapons used in trench warfare ranged from grenades and flamethrowers to homemade clubs and knives .
 Aircraft added a new dimension to warfare, carrying out reconnaissance and bombing, and strafing ground targets . Artillery shells included shrapnel, high-explosive and gas shells .
 Howitzers were effective in trench warfare because they launched a shell on a high trajectory, dropping onto the concealed enemy . These shells were fired by the French 75-mm field gun, which fired from a wheeled gun .
 Soldiers in trenches used periscopes to keep watch on the enemy line . Without it, soldiers could lose their way in the no man's land between the trenches, rendered featureless by shelling .
 Snipers quickly picked off men who exposed their heads above the parapet . For an infantryman, a shovel was essential equipment, needed to dig trenches .
 Primitive wooden clubs, with mask nails or other metal objects at the striking end, were used by soldiers on both sides as a silent, deadly weapon .
 Effective masks were developed that protected the eyes and face from contact with poison gas and neutralized the gas for breathing . A filter respirator was developed to neutralize the gas in order to protect the eyes .
 Each European leader had his own agenda, inevitably dominated by issues of national self-interest . Each leader's agenda was dominated by national interests . The EU has been dominated by the issue of national interests in recent years .
 In January, communist revolutionaries, known as the Spartacists, tried to imitate the success of the Bolsheviks in Russia © by staging an uprising in Berlin .
 Weimar, set about drawing up . also required to make reparations payments, : which were justified by the assertion that . Germany had been guilty . of starting the war .
 Bolshevik People’s Commissar for : War, Leon Trotsky created a mass Red Army by conscripting peasants at gunpoint : and subjecting them to harsh : discipline .
 The vision of an 'imminent world ' revolution had some credibility at a time 2 when radical workers : and anti-colonial : movements were challenging the ' established authority . in many countries .
 Red and White armies was vicious, and accompanied by : massacres and atrocities on : avast scale . The armies were vicious, accompanied by massacres and . atrocities on an avastscale scale .
 Horthy’s counter-revolutionary National Army marched into : Budapest to suppress the » communists with another reign . of terror . Horthy was the leader of the Hungarian Revolution in Hungary .
 People of all political ' persuasions were disgusted with ' their country’s limited share in : the spoils of victory . In Italy, people of all . political 'convincing persuasions' were disgusted . with 'their limited share of victory'
 Gabriele D’Annunzio seized Fiume with a band of armed followers . The poet was a right-wing nationalist poet and an aviator .
 The Amritsar massacre caused widespread outrage in India and increased pressure for independence . General Dyer, the Amriti massacre, was a member of the British Army .
 British pilot Captain John Alcock © (1892-1919) and his navigator : Lieutenant Arthur Whitten Brown © took off from St. George's Park in St. Mary's Park .
 Alcock’s triumph was short-lived, : as he was killed in an air crash : just six months Later. Alcock was killed by a plane crash . Alcock died six months after his victory .
 Einstein was born to Jewish parents in southern Germany . In September it was announced ' that the observations did indeed confirm Einstein's theory, fundamentally changing the notions of time and space that had underpinned Isaac Newton's ' view of the universe .
 In 1905, he published his Special Theory of Relativity, which was followed by the General Theory ofrelativity in 1915 . He published his General Theory in 1915, followed by his Theory in 1905 and 1915 .
 His theories revolutionized understanding of the relationship between time, Space, matter, and energy . He revolutionized the understanding of time, space, matter and energy in his work .
 From the 1920s Einstein was féted worldwide, but chose exile in the US, away from Hitler's Germany . Einstein chose exile from Germany in the 1930s to escape Hitler's regime .
 In March, units of the nationalist paramilitary Freikorps occupied Berlin and declared the Weimar Republic overthrown . The Weimar republic was overthrown by the Nazis in 1945 .
 Workers walked out, factories and transport shut down, and within days the Kapp regime had collapsed . Within days, the regime collapsed .
 Red Army invaded Poland after some early success against Polish forces . Army into conflict with the Poles . Army enters conflict with Poles after early success .
 The 18th Amendment to the Constitution banned the manufacture and sale of “intoxicating liquors” The move had little influence on alcohol consumption, but provided a massive boost to organized crime .
 Magazine cover celebrates the passing of the 19th amendment to the U.S. Constitution . The amendment gave women voting rights .
 Polish Cross of Valor was introduced by Poland during the war with Bolshevik Russia in 1920 to recognize Polish deeds of heroism . It was introduced during the conflict between Poland and Bolshevik Russia .
 The Amendment, ratified in August, ' guaranteed American women the vote on equal terms with men' Amendment . Amendment was ratified by the U.S. Supreme Court in August . Amendment to the Constitution was ratified last year .
 League's first General Assembly in Geneva in November, but neither Germany nor Russia was among them . Meanwhile, war had broken . outin Ireland, where Britain was resisting the declaration of an : Irish Republic .
 November 21, in an operation ' planned by IRA intelligence chief : Michael Collins , the IRA killed 13 people in Dublin . November 21 was the operation planned by Michael Collins .
 Russian famine victims receive food from a relief train . Millions of people died in the Russian famine of 1921 .
 The United States played a leading role in the international effort to feed the starving . The U.S. played a key role in helping the starving in Haiti .
 Russia experienced one of the most destructive famines of the 20th century . In 1921, Russia experienced a devastating famine in Russia .
 Years of warfare and revolution had laid waste to the Russian countryside . Drought in the Volga region further devastated by drought in the region .
 Lenin's Bolshevik government reluctantly appealed for foreign relief . As hundreds of thousands died of starvation and disease, Lenin's government reluctantly sought help .
 Millions died by the time the famine abated the following year . Despite the distribution of food aid to around 10 million people, millions died in the famine .
 Bolsheviks continued to impose the will of their party upon their devastated country . The Bolsheviks continue to impose their will on their devastated nation .
 Russian Bolshevik government, : its example continued to stimulate : the foundation of Communist ' parties across the world . Its example continued . to stimulate . the foundations of Communist parties across . the world.
 He developed the idea of basing a revolution on support from peasants, rather than industrial workers . The revolution was based on the support of peasants, not industrial workers, he said .
 In the US, racism and anxieties about political subversion were 'routinely rife' in the US .
 The world’s five major naval powers signed the Washington Treaty, limiting the size of their navies . Meeting in the U.S. in February, the five major navies signed the treaty .
 Conference also called for an end to the military use of poison gas and banned submarine attacks on merchant shipping . The conference also banned the use of poisoned gas .
 It was the first effective arms limitation agreement between major powers . The agreement was first effective weapons limitation agreement .
 Britain sacrificed most, accepting naval parity with the United States after long domination of the world’s oceans . The treaty was most controversial in Japan, where nationalists objected to naval inferiority .
 Another hopeful sign of the flowering of peace was the development of international air travel in Europe . The development of air travel was also a sign of peace in Europe.
 In accordance with the Balfour Declaration (see 1917), Britain agreed to allow Jewish settlement in Palestine, but had also given wartime promises to the Arabs .
 In 1922, Israel divided its Palestinian mandate territory along the line of the Jordan River . In 1922 it divided its mandate territory between Palestine and Israel along the Jordan .
 Jewish settlement was allowed to the west, and to the east Transjordan would remain purely Arab land . of which he served only two . of the land .
 Republican Army occupied : Dublin's Four Courts building . After a lengthy standoff, Collins used artillery loaned by ' Britain to bombard the Four : Courts, and retake the building .
 State troops had crushed most ' Opposition by the time the treaty came into effect on December 6 . Protestant northern province of Ulster remained part of the ' United Kingdom .
 Greek city of Smyrna was * occupied by pursuing Turkish surplus of trained pilots and : immigration of Jews to Palestine : Amore positive side effect 300,000 Jews aircraft manufacturing capacity '
 1922 was the year when Benito : Mussolini achieved : power in Italy . Kemalas was its first president . Mussolini was the prime minister of the Italian Republic .
 World War I, Italy's ruling class had been intimidated by waves of militant action, with socialist workers occupying factories and peasants taking over large estates .
 Mussolini threatened to lead his followers in a “March on » Rome” unless he was made head | of government . Mussolini's Fascist followers threatened to take part in the March on Rome march .
 Mussolini ' assumed office as prime minister . Emmanuel Ill ' eventually gave in and Mussolini became PM .
 Murnau's expressionist horror movie Nosferatu to American filmmaker Robert Flaherty’s groundbreaking documentary Nanook of the North .
 Early radio sets were often : Impressive-looking pieces of equipment . Impressive looking pieces of : equipment .
 French, led by fiercely anti-German prime minister Raymond Poincaré, were determined to take action . The French were led by anti-Germany anti-Germainist Prime Minister Raymond Poinaré . The incident took place in the early 1950s .
 In January 1923, French and Belgian troops occupied the Ruhr, Germany's industrial heartland . In January 23, 1923, they occupied the industrial hub of Germany .
 German government responded by encouraging passive resistance . Strike strikes stopped production in mines and factories . German government encouraged passive resistance in response .
 The occupation triggered hyperinflation, and a collapse in the value of the German Mark . The occupation of Germany in 1961 triggered hyper-inflation and hyper-mania .
 Stresemann formed a coalition government, ' and the following month called off ' passive resistance in the Ruhr . Streseman formed a . coalition government .
 November, the Mark was replaced : by the Rentenmark, knocking 2 12 zeros off the old currency and restoring public confidence . November, November, was replaced . by the rentenmark .
 The value of the Mark against the US’s : : dollar reflects the acceleration of : German inflation . German hyperinflation is the result of an acceleration in the rate of inflation .
 He banned traditional dress, ' abolished the Muslim caliphate : system of government, and ' replaced Arabic script with the Roman alphabet .
 In Japan, one of the worst natural disasters of the century struck on September 1 . One of Japan's worst disasters, the earthquake, was a tsunami .
 Gropius rejected traditional artist’s ' hostility to modern technology ' and mass production . In 1919, he rejected the traditional artist's hostility to mass production and modern technology .
 VLADIMIR ILYICH LENIN (18701924), founder of the Soviet Union, died of a massive stroke on January 22 . Vladimir Ilyich LENin died of massive stroke .
 Plan, named for American banker Charles G Dawes, arranged for withdrawal of French and Belgian troops from » the Ruhr (see 1923), and for German payment of reparations : with the help of United States loans . Plan was named for U.S. banker and politician Charles
 He was found guilty of high treason, ' but given a lenient five-year prison sentence, of which he served less ' than a year . He served less than one year .
 Landsberg prison, he dictated : the first volume of Mein Kampf, a statement of ' his political beliefs . Landsberg . prison . Landberg prison . dictated . Mein . Kampf .
 Ascents in balloons sparked the first flying craze but had little practical effect . Ascents were seen in the 1930s and 1940s, when they were still popular .
 In the 19th century, engineers calculated the forces involved in winged flight and experimented with gliders . But it was the arrival of gasoline engines that made powered flight practicable .
 American brothers Orville and Wilbur Wright brothers showed that winged aircraft had passengers in the comfort of pressurized cabins . Orville Wright brothers made the first viable powered winged plane .
 Rocket technology then propelled humans by 1905 had a machine that would stay airborne . The development of flying instruments then improved into space itself .
 Long-distance flying feats made pilots turned flight into mass transportation outperformed winged aircraft . Winged aircraft were slow heroes in the 1920s and 1930s .
 The Wright brothers’ home-built aircraft had a complex control landing skids system with rudders and elevators . Successors to the the same flights were available to paying travel had bridged distances and shrunk the world .
 Passenger Concorde enters service Focke-Wulf company in Germany, aircraft, the Heinkel He 178, air travel zooms into Concorde, the world’s first supersonic passenger and Igor Sikorski in the US. aircraft .
 Art Deco gave a name to the design trend . The exhibition gave an art Deco name . The exhibit was inspired by African, Aztec and Egyptian motifs .
 Art Deco soon set the style for everything from scent bottles to skyscrapers to ocean liners and movie theaters . The style was soon set to be used in everything from perfume bottles to movie theaters.
 Man Ray was one of a host of American expatriates who . flocked to Paris in the mid' 1920s, lured by the vibrant cultural scene and the favorable ' exchange rate .
 John Logie Bird made the first demonstration of a television transmission in a loft in London's Soho district in 1926 . His aim — was to modernize his country along secular Western lines .
 Fifty members of the Royal Institution saw the indistinct, but recognizable moving image of a face . The image of the face was captured by a group of 50 people .
 This nationwide Industrial stoppage, in support of coal miners, paralyzed transportation networks and docks, and closed down factories and newspapers . This nationwide industrial stoppage paralyzed transportation .
 The government responded by mobilizing troops and recruiting volunteers to maintain essential services . The government has mobilized troops and recruited volunteers for essential services.
 The Pahlavi dynasty he founded ruled ' in Iran until the 1970s . nine days later the unions backed down and ordered a return to work .
 In Poland, the nation’s military hero Marshal Jozef Pilsudski led a coup d’état In May, in reaction against the unstable parliamentary government . In May the Polish parliament was overthrown by the government .
 Pilsudski declined the presidency, but effectively took dictatorial powers . He effectively took control of the country's political system .
 Grigori Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev were expelled from the Soviet Union of a cash prize for the first Arkansa, 3° Memphis —~ : the disaster, many thousands of people . Once the favorite to succeed Lenin : in February 1929 .
 Charles Nungesser and Francois Coli set off westward over the Atlantic and were never seen again . On May 8, they attempted to fly from Paris to New York .
 Lindbergh, an airmail pilot, took off from Roosevelt Field on May 20 aboard a custom-built monoplane . Such dramas had wrought excitement to a high pitch when the unknown pilot took off in May .
 He reached Paris in 33 hours and 30 minutes, | but he did it alone . Not only did he succeed In reaching Paris, he also did it solo .
 America's upbeat mood was ' ripe for the world’s first modern consumer boom, which was built around the purchase of cars and 2 electrical goods . America's economic boom was built up to the purchasing of cars, electrical goods and other goods .
 Lindbergh flight in media ' coverage in 1927 was the controversy surrounding the execution of the anarchists : Ferdinando Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti .
 Singer, took $2.2. million at a.u.m. mansion in New Jersey . Singer, who lives in New York City, says he's not worried about his finances .
 In the SOVIET UNION, JOSEPH STALIN began radical economic and social reform . In the 1930s, Stalin became the leader of the Soviet Union . He led the country's socialist revolution .
 Chiang | killer, José de Leon Toral, wasa_ _—:_ penicillin . Abandoning the compromise of . suffered heavy losses when Chiang . wasa . Killer, Jose de Leon . Toral was a . killer .
 Kai-shek turned against them in : member of the Catholic Cristero : Scottish scientist Policy , Stalinlaunched : 1927 .
 He cracked down on businessmen and successful peasants who had made money out of the revolution . The revolution was a major source of revenue for the revolution, but it was also a source of profit .
 Hundreds of ‘bourgeois experts’ —people, such as engineers, were arrested and convicted of sabotage . Hundreds of engineers, who had been valued for their skills rather than their involvement in the revolution, were jailed .
 The warlords who ruled different areas of China either became his allies or were defeated by his army . The warlord's army defeated the warlords in China .
 His ' armed rebellion in response to the Mexican government's ' anticlerical policies' His 'armed rebellion in . response to . the . Mexican government’s 'anti-secular policies'
 Republic’s rigorous proportional representation system, the : Nazis’ minimal support gained : them 12 seats in parliament, the . Nazis' minimal support .
 Born Josif Dzhugashvili, in Georgia, Stalin joined Lenin’s Bolsheviks in 1903 . Of more practical v J. Stalin, Stalin was a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 After Lenin's death he cleverly outmaneuvered other leading Bolsheviks to achieve dictatorial power by 1929 . A sawn-off, doublebarrelled shotgun hidden in a violin case was a typical weapon for gangsters of the 1920s .
 Seven people were shot dead in a garage on Chicago's North Side on February 14 . Seven were killed in the shooting on the North Side .
 Al Capone is a prominent figure in organized crime . The victims of the Valentine's Day Massacre were probably members of the gang headed by Capone .
 The massacre focused public outrage on crime and violence that was rife in U.S. cities . The massacre was the first of its kind .
 The authorities were forced to take action, which led to the arrest and imprisonment of Capone on charges of tax evasion in 1931 . Capone was arrested and imprisoned on tax evasion charges in 1931, but was never convicted .
 Republican Herbert Hoover was inaugurated as president of the United States on March 4, 1918 . Hoover was the first president to be inaugurated in the U.S. on that date . Hoover's inauguration was held in Washington, D.C. in 1918 .
 Frank B Kellogg that murdered millions of millions of its high point of complacency about Prisoners taken : and French Foreign Minister citizens . Yet he presided over United States economic progress, yet he presided .
 Hoover was sworn in as president of the United States on November 15 1929 . Hoover was the first president to be elected to office in the U.S. after the stock market crash .
 Street in an apparently endless : upward curve—about 30 million : Americans had some form of ' stock market investment' Wall Street continues upward curve .
 The first movie to win the Academy Award for Best Picture was Wings, a silent film about World War II . The transition from silent to sound movies was in the midst of a technological revolution .
 Dawes Plan (see 1924) had fixed . payments too high . Young : Plan made proposals for Germany to pay a reduced annual : sum until 1988 .
 In the eyes of Joseph Stalin, smallscale peasant agriculture was an obstacle to be ruthlessly swept aside . Stalin wanted to transform the Soviet Union into a modern industrial state . Smallscale farming was inefficient and tainted with antisocialist self-interest .
 When communist officials sent to villages to organize collective farms, they met widespread resistance . The peasants were ferociously attached to their land and farm animals .
 The authorities ' responded with mass arrests of | ‘kulaks’—better-off peasants— and troublemakers . The authorities responded with . mass arrests . of | "kulak’s’ -- better-off . peasants .
 Mohandas Gandhi was mounting a campaign : of civil disobedience against British rule . Gandhi was leading a campaign against the British government in India .
 British remained committed : to gradually extending India’s limited self-government . British remained . to gradually extend India's limited self . government .
 Jean Mermoz was employed by the French : Aéropostale airmail company, : made the first postal flight across : the South Atlantic, flying a float plane nonstop from Dakar in West Africa to Natal in Brazil .
 This completed an unbroken airmail link that stretched from France to Chile . This completed the unbroken link between France and Chile . The link was completed in 1964 .
 By the 1930s, the Soviet Union was manufacturing its own tractors . Meanwhile, the British cheered flew solo from Croydon in England to Darwin, Soviet tractor .
 His first campaigns of non-violent civil disobedience were in South Africa . He started non-violence campaigns in the South African country .
 Returning to India in 1915 he led the opposition to British rule, although many nationalists rejected his non-violence .
 British aviatrix Amy Johnson made her solo solo flight from England to Australia . Her solo flight was the first solo flight of her own .
 United States unwisely sought relief for its ' farmers and unemployed workers : through blocking imports . U.S. blocked imports of food and medicine from China .
 Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act, which ' became law in June, placed heavy ' duties on thousands of imported goods . The act placed heavy duties on millions of dollars worth of goods .
 Many observers outside Germany were disturbed by the growing support for Hitler's aggressive nationalist extremism . Hitler's support for nationalist extremism was also growing in Germany .
 South American countries were especially vulnerable to the Depression because of their role as suppliers of food and raw materials to the industrialized U.S. and Europe . South America was especially vulnerable because of its role as a source of food .
 In Brazil, an army revolt brought Getulio Vargas to power in November . The army revolt ended in a coup by the army .
 Vargas installed a British airship R107 in a field outside Beauvais in northern France . The airship is named after Vargas Vargas, who installed it in the 1930s .
 In Japan, radical nationalists believed the answer to Japan’s economic problems lay in military conquest . Radical nationalists, including many army and navy officers, believed that the answer was to economic problems .
 Hamaguchi after being shot by a nationalist extremist at Tokyo : station . Hamaguch shot by nationalist extremist .
 On April 14, 1931, King Alfonso XIILOF SPAIN abdicated and fled into exile . His supporters were defeated in ' municipal elections .
 ' } completion also came against a ' background of farm bankruptcies and rising unemployment .
 Austria's largest bank, the ' Creditanstalt, failed, and by July many major German banks also faced collapse . Austria's biggest bank, Austria's ' CreditAnstalt' failed .
 Chancellor Heinrich Briining proposed a customs union : between Germany and Austria, ' and suggested Germany might ' renege on payment of war ' reparations .
 Occupation of Manchuria Korea became a Japanese colony in 1910 . Korea was occupied by Japan .
 In 1931, the Japanese extended into Manchuria, which became the puppet state of Manchukuo . The puppet state became the Japanese-controlled state of China . The Japanese extended its control of Manchia in 1931, which was a puppet state .
 Japanese sphere of documented the casual risks taken r influence 1930 by workers during construction of the Empire State Building . Photographer Lewis Hine Beebul Tory .
 At least 13 million Americans, around 3 million Britons, and more than 5 million Germans were unemployed . At least 3 million Brits, 3 million Germans, and around 5 million Americans were unemployed.
 In Europe, national unemployment benefit programs helped the jobless survive, but in the US, where only piecemeal local welfare programs existed, unemployment led to abject poverty . In the U.S. where only piecesmeal national welfare programs exist, unemployment leads to poverty in the United States
 Thousands became homeless, living in shanty towns ironically called “Hoovervilles” after the United States president . Thousands of people are now living in the shanty-towns called ‘Hoovers’ after the president .
 Hitler suffered frustration in his campaign to : win power through the democratic iY : process . Hitler was frustrated in his bid to win power .
 Veterans gathered in Washington, D.C., to demand payment of parliament in December . Westminster by the British .
 They established a shanty town within sight of the 'Britain and the dominions' Australia, New Zealand, Canada, South Africa, the Irish Free State and Newfoundland .
 Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the : Atlantic . British Empire had truly become Industrial unemployment . German industrial workers had the worst unemployment rate at the peak of the depression .
 President Hoover refused to pay out the millions of unemployed . The protest attracted widespread sympathy from Americans distressed at mass unemployment, but Hoover refused .
 It was the advent of electricity in the 19th century that transformed communications . The advent of technology in the 1800s transformed communications in the world .
 In the 18th century, the French navy developed a system for transmitting orders between ships using semaphore flags .
 From the 1790s, semaphore was used on land, with lines of stations relaying coded messages using large signalling devices . Each message was visible to the next station in the chain .
 From the 1830s, the development of electric telegraph replaced this medium of communication . From the 18th century, it was used to send messages from the world's largest telegraph network .
 The Vindolanda tablets from Roman Britain include a birthday invitation . The tablets were found in Britain in the early Roman times .
 Fire allows smoke signals to be sent over considerable distances . Prehistory Smoke signals were used to send signals to communicate with fire .
 This method is limited to a simple set of prearranged messages . However, this method is only available to pre-arranged conversations .
 Sumerian tablet 2900-2350 BCE Carrier pigeons were used to carry messages in ancient Egypt and Persia .
 World War I. on-off key generating a code that was transmitted along a wire . They will continue to be used by armies in World War II and World II .
 By the 1860s, telegraph wires spanned continents, and underwater cables enabled almost instant communication across oceans . By the 1860s, cables were used to communicate across continents .
 In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the invention of the telephone enabled electronic transmission of speech . Inventors of speech were able to transmit messages using the telephone .
 The discovery that radio waves could transmit sound opened the new possibility of broadcasting . The discovery of radio waves allowed the development of radio broadcasting .
 From the 1920s, “wireless sets, providing entertainment and news, became a common feature of households . “Wireless sets’s” provided entertainment, news and entertainment for the first time .
 The advent of transistors made electronic goods smaller and cheaper, and rocket technology allowed satellites to be placed in space, enabling global access to communication networks .
 The triumph of digital technology and microprocessors from the 1980s made computers almost universal . The rise of microprocessor technology has led to the rise of computers worldwide .
 The Ericsson table telephone dates from 1890 . Jy Rutherford B Hayes, United States President, to Alexander Graham Bell after a demonstration of the telephone, 1876 mouthpiece crank .
 The first telephone exchanges in North America and Europe date from 1878 . The first phone exchanges in Europe and North America were established in the 1880s .
 Hitler celebrated his appointment as if it was a ' revolutionary seizure of power' Hitler, however, celebrated the appointment as a 'revolutionary seizure' of power . Hitler celebrated ' his appointment .
 The Reichstag election of March : 1933 showed stubborn support for . the communists and the socialist . SDP despite intimidation . was partly achieved through ' ambitious public works ' programs, most prominently the . building of a network of autobahns : (highways), that provided employment
 He immediately applied this principle ' to the tottering U.S. banking ' system .
 The measures were neither entirely coherent nor ' uniformly successful' The measures are not entirely coherent or uniformly successful, say experts .
 Farmers were paid to leave land fallow and slaughter animals, to ' raise farm prices' Farmers paid to 'leave fallow or slaughter animals' to raise prices .
 He was elected president four times, from his first presidential campaign in 1932 to four . He attracted the votes of labor unions, ethnic minorities, and AfricanAmericans . Elected president .
 The Stavisky affair was the French Third Republic's first major political scandal . The affair was a year of political turmoil and assassinations in France .
 A crooked financier, Alexandre Stavisky committed suicide on January 8, after the collapse of a dishonest investment scheme . Alexandre Stavisky committed suicide on January 8 after the scheme collapsed .
 The rightwing press accused leading French politicians of profiting from Stavisky’s fraudulent deals .
 Their shoot-outs with police and narrow escapes with narrow escapes were reported with feverish excitement in the press . Their narrow escapes in the past have been reported feverishly excitement .
 Bonnie Parker partner-in-crime Clyde Barrow was the Bonnie and Clyde . American outlaw Bonnie Parker and Clyde were both wanted in the U.S. for their crimes .
 Kirov's death to pass a new ' antiterrorist law, which was later used to justify the arrest : and execution of hundreds of thousands of people . The death was used to pass the new 'anti-terror' law .
 Britain was a relative haven of tranquility, but even there fascism was on the rise . Fascism was on its rise in the 1930s, with the rise of fascism in Europe .
 BUF Ethiopian tribal warriors gather to fight for their emperor, Haile Selassie . Although it enjoyed the backing of some national newspapers, the BUF had some national papers .
 Parts of the U.S. and Canada were swept by giant dust storms as topsoil blew off land ruined by a combination of drought and intensive farming .
 The worst of these ‘black blizzards” occurred in April 1935, affecting a vast area of the plains of Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, New Mexico, and Colorado . The worst was the worst of April 1935 .
 The Dust Bowl created by this THE ESTIMATED AMOUNT OF TOPSOIL BLOWN OFF THE SOUTHERN PLAINS OF the United States BY DECEMBER 1935 . The ecological disaster could no longer support small farmers, who were forced to migrate .
 Many of them found their way to migrant camps in California, where they were exploited as seasonal labor . Many of the migrants were found to be exploited as laborers .
 Relations Act placed the government on the side of workers : who went on strike to gain union ' rights . Relations Act . Act placed government on side of the workers .
 His Fascist state was widely admired, but dreams of conquest led to military adventures and an alliance with Nazi Germany . His state was known for its military adventures, but he was soon overthrown .
 In December 1935, Mao declared that the Long March had been “a ' manifesto, a propaganda force...” proclaiming to the world that the : Red Army is an army of heroes” : But for the time being these “heroes” remained hunted rebels .
 Nuremberg Laws formally defined a Jew as a person with three or four Jewish grandparents . Nuresmberg Laws defined Jews as people with 3 or 4 Jewish grandparents. Jews had to have three or 4 grandparents .
 Mussolini's foreign policy was wrecked by his imperialist ambitions in Africa . This . policy was ruined by his imperial ambitions, he said .
 Chinese communists of the First . Front Army arrive at Yanan in Shaanxi: ' province at the end of the strategic . retreat known as the Long March . October, troops from Italy's east invaded the independent African state of : African Somaliland, invaded the . independent African
 Hoare and French prime minister ' Pierre Laval were forced to resign, economic sanctions ' against Italy went ahead, and Mussolini was pushed into the arms of Hitler . Despite the continuing effects of the economic Depression and the world’s . grave political problems, ' there were many
 The operation was perfectly stage-managed, the marching soldiers greeted by cheering crowds and women throwing flowers . Soldiers were greeted with cheering crowds, and women threw flowers .
 Behind the scenes Hitler and his generals were racked by nervous tension . Hitler's generals were wracked with nervous tension as the German dictator took over .
 German rearmament was still In its early stages and the German army could not have resisted if France had opted for a military response . However, strong public opinion and domestic issues inhibited a stronger stand .
 By doing nothing, the Western allies showed they would not act to uphold international agreements . By not acting, the West showed it would not uphold international agreement . The U.S. showed it was not willing to act on the basis of international agreements, it said .
 The British and French expanded their armed forces in response to developments in Germany . The French and British expanded their forces in Germany in the 1930s .
 Baldwin continued to proceed cautiously . Despite having a mandate for military expansion, Baldwin continued his expansion of the military .
 Nationalist army officers based in Spanish Morocco launched a : military uprising . Nationalists based in Spain launched a military uprising in Morocco .
 A Catholic monarchist, he joined the military uprising against the Republic in July 1936 . He was recognized as sole leader of the Nationalist rebels in September .
 After victory in the Civil War in 1939 he imposed a harsh dictatorship . He imposed a brutal regime of rule following the war .
 He kept Spain neutral in World War II and remained in power until his death in 1975 . He kept the country neutral in the war and kept it neutral .
 Olympics were staged on an : unprecedentedly lavish scale with : impeccable efficiency . Olympic Games were held on an unprecedentedly . lavish scale . Olympics were held in a state-of-the-arted state of secrecy .
 In the fall of the fall, two events took place that would enter Britain's political mythology . The fall of 1914-1919 is known as the first fall of independence .
 The Marconiphone sold in Britain for : 60 guineas, equivalent to about about of DAYS EDWARD VIII REIGNED AS KING BEFORE HE ABDICATED : presidential elections .
 Edward VIII informed ' Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin ' that he intended to marry : American divorcee Mrs. Mrs. Kathleen . Edward VIII told Stanley Baldwin that he planned to marry Mrs. Katherine .
 JJ Franklin D Roosevelt, American president, in his inauguration speech, January 20, 1937 . FDR starting his second term in office as U.S. president .
 In his inauguration speech on January 20, Roosevelt drew attention to persistent poverty in America . Roosevelt's inauguration speech drew attention on persistent poverty .
 He pledged to end this injustice, denouncing ‘heedless self-interest’ as bad morals and bad economics . He denounced ‘emoralism’ and ‘self-interests’ in the United States .
 The president's radical policies brought him into conflict with the Supreme Court . Across the country, a wave of sit-down strikes pitted workers against their employers .
 NS Os ae < oo xé oe oo o ot eo Se oO on y® o® o . a oe cy do” NS oo. om ee ye.
 Picasso's painting was first exhibited in the Spanish Republic's pavilion at the Paris ' International Exhibition in ' summer 1937 .
 The Paris Exhibition also featured grandiose Nazi German and Soviet Russian pavilions, both using monumental sculpture to ' trumpet the glories of their rival political systems .
 The German Zeppelin airship Hindenburg exploded into a fireball while docking at Lakehurst in New Jersey . The Hindenburg airship was the largest airship from the world's history .
 Soviet regime had always been ' executed, imprisoned, or fired' : symbol marked by air disasters . Soviet regime marked by symbol of 'execution, imprisonment, and fired'
 On May 6, the airship Hindenburg, : with 97 passengers and crew on : board, burst into flames as it docked at Lakehurst, New Jersey . The airship was the world's largest airship, the Hindenburg .
 Ohain’s engine powering the first jet flight in August 1939 . Germans forged ahead with the development of a jet aircraft . Ohain's engine powered the first flight in July 1939 .
 Walt Disney revamp of animated movies marked transition of cartoon shorts aimed at children to major film culture . Walt Disney re-imagined Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs .
 The ability of Hollywood to manufacture universally appealing, mass-market films, along with the influence of American big-band ‘swing’ dance music, was laying the foundations for a US-dominated, International popular culture .
 The Soviet Union achieved high economic growth in the 1930s . The annexation of Crimea was the largest annexation of the Soviet Union in history .
 Germany and Austria was a major ' breech of the Versailles Treaty : (see 1919), Britain and France : made no attempt to intervene . Germany and Austrians were a major breach of the treaty .
 Hitler stirred up unrest among the . Sudeten Germans, while ordering ' his generals to prepare for an ' invasion of Czechoslovakia . Hitler stirred . up unrest .
 Chamberlain embarked on an : unprecedented diplomatic initiative, flying twice to Germany for face-to-face talks with Hitler . Although Britain pressured the Czech government into making 'major concessions, this only made Hitler raise his demands .
 Kristallnacht (“Night of the Night of THE APPROXIMATE ADDITION TO THE GERMAN POPULATION by the . ANNEXATIONS OF AUSTRIA AND SUDETENLAND : struck that preserved peace at the expense of Czechoslovakia,
 Post-Munich optimism only only Broken Glass (“Broken Glass”) provided graphic evidence of the extremist nature of the Nazi regime . The Nazi regime was extremely tolerant and tolerant .
 Designed by Nigel Gresley, the steam locomotive function function. Designed to be a record holder for the steam record holder . The locomotive is designed to be powered by steam engines .
 The assassination of a German : diplomat by a Jew in Paris served : attacks on Jewish homes and ' businesses across Germany and : Austria . The assassination served as a cover-up for anti-Semitic attacks .
 Arab prisoners are guarded by a British soldier in the Old City of Jerusalem, during the suppression of the revolt agai nst Britain’s rule in Palestine . Britain agreed to 9 ‘d F / "" Arab prisoners were guarded by British soldiers in Jerusalem .
 U.S. children, without their parents, are allowed to come into the U.K. in the wake of attacks on German and Austrian Jews in November . The United States maintained its existing barriers to immigration .
 Jews were trapped because, although the Nazis were ready to let them leave, they had nowhere to go . Jews were not allowed to leave because they had no place to go in Nazi Germany .
 Welles's radio version of the : alien-invasion classic The War of | the Worlds was broadcast by CBS at Halloween at Halloween .
 Only a handful of countries, chiefly Britain and France, maintained a liberal democratic system . Only a few countries have a liberal democracy system, such as Britain .
 General Francisco Franco's Nationalists triumphed in the Spanish Civil War in the spring, occupying the surviving Republican strongholds of Barcelona and Madrid . General Franco's Spanish Nationalists took over the Spanish capital from the Republican stronghold of Barcelona .
 More threatening for the peace of Europe was German Fuhrer Adolf Hitler’s occupation of Prague, Czech Republic . Hitler's occupation of Czechoslovakia was more threatening than his occupation of the city .
 After Hungary annexed the east, 'Czechoslovakia ceased to exist ' aS acountry. Czechoslovakia was officially declared a republic by Hungary .
 British evacuated 1. million children from large cities, along with mothers with babies and young children . Expecting air attacks, the British evacuated .
 French carried out mass evacuations from the border provinces of Alsace and Lorraine in eastern France . Mass evacuations were carried out from border provinces Alsaced and Lorrain . The French government has been forced to evacuate the region .
 Georgy Zhukov's hard-fought ' victory at the battle of Khalkhin : Gol decided the outcome . The battle was fought in Khalkhhin .
 Slovakia on September 1. Slovakia was part of the USSR from East Prussia, Germany, and Reis GERMANY .
 The destruction of Poland was achieved with breathtaking ' speed' There were no signs that Poland was going to be destroyed . The destruction was achieved by 'breathtaking speed'
 Warsaw surrendered on September 28, and the fighting stopped aweek later . Warsaw surrender on September . 28 . Warsaw surrendered .
 Soviets and Nazis set about ' imprisoning and massacring : Poles in large numbers' Poles were killed by the Nazis and Soviets . Poles were murdered by the Soviets and the Nazis .
 British and French rejected a : peace offer from Hitler, but the troops they assembled in France ' remained passive . The French and British refused to accept the peace offer .
 German Navy's U-boat U-47 penetrated the defenses of : Britain's main naval base at Scapa : Flow, in the Orkney Islands off : Scotland, and sank the battleship : Royal Oak .
 German expansion Between September 1939 and August 1942 Nazi indi KEY German Mess Su kG iy Heals ee S$ ie og 9 SES ener ser seizing control of an area from orway to rete, an e & May 20-Jun 1, 1941 $ Major
 Britain remained free of fie German domination, but was subjected to air attacks by air attacks .
 After the rapid defeat of Poland in April 1940, defeat of the German army swept south to Crete . The Germans invaded Denmark and Norway and intervened in North Africa .
 Its allies — satellites included Italy, Hungary, Bulgaria, Slovakia, Croatia, Croatia and Vichy France . France, Italy and Hungary were allies .
 Greater Germany expanded before and during the war . Netherlands, Belgium, and France also expanded in the region .
 Dunkirk came to a catastrophic Dunkirk in France . But the escaped from Europe through an evacuation from German drive eastward came to Dunkirk .
 The British victory at . “s El Alamein in North Africa in . Sicily Sicily in Sicily . The Soviet triumph at . 3 Stalingrad in 1945 was a Soviet victory .
 In uae KEY Ml Axis satellite Army Air Force carried out a sustained, Yugoslavia, an independent a 1c aad . 1937 WH Italy and Italian large-scale bombing campaign on Sea mera oe .
 The British and French governments, both strongly anticommunist, planned to send an expeditionary force to aid the Finns . French and British governments were both strongly anti-communist . The Finns were forced to leave Finland in 1941 .
 Finnish troops assembled, but Soviet military successes led Finland to seek peace in March . Troops were assembled, and Finland sought peace with the USSR .
 Churchill led an adventurous life as a soldier and war correspondent before entering politics . The failure to help the Finns led to the fall of the government of Edouard Daladier, who was replaced as WINSTON CHURCHILL .
 As First Lord of the Admiralty in World War | | he was blamed for the Gallipoli disaster . He was also responsible for the sinking of his ship .
 In 1939, he returned to the Admiralty before becoming prime minister . In May 1940, he became prime minister in May 1940 .
 A British propaganda poster shows men from the dominions and colonies united in the war effort . The United Commonwealth was formed from the British Empire .
 August, Trotsky was killed by Ramon Mercader, an agent of Stalin's secret police . August, August, was the death of Trotsky, a Russian revolutionary .
 On April 4, British prime minister Neville Chamberlain announced that Hitler had “missed the bus” by failing to launch a major offensive as British rearmament accelerated . Neville Chamberlain said Hitler had missed the bus by not launching an offensive .
 Britain and France sent troops and warships to aid the Norwegians . But they could not prevent a German victory .
 Norway's King Haakon VII was evacuated to Britain with his government to continue the fight from exile . Norway's government continued to fight the British government from exile in exile .
 After the Dunkirk “» German — Allied front — Allied . front confidence in the Chamberlain : evacuation of the Allied advance line . May 21 line . June 4 government. Jun 4 government . After Dunkirk . Allied front .
 On the same day, German forces invaded the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg . The invasion took place in Belgium, the Netherlands and Belgium .
 Rotterdam was heavily bombed by the Nazis in World War II . Dutch forces surrendered to avoid further destruction of the city .
 Dutch Queen Wilhelmina defiantly set up a government-in-exile in London . She was forced to live in exile from the Netherlands . The Dutch Queen set up an embassy in London to help her government .
 Allied troops in northern France advanced into Belgium to meet the German offensive . Allied forces in northern . France advance into Belgium into the . German offensive.
 The Germans unexpectedly delivered a powerful thrust through the Ardennes region into France . The Germans broke through the French defenses at Sedan . The invasion of Sedan was a major success for the French .
 The French army was driven into retreat, allowing the Germans to ' occupy Paris' The Germans occupied Paris on June 14, 1944 .
 The Luftwaffe switched to bombing London from early : armistice had been signed . The RAF was flying over London from September 1918 .
 Social breakdown nor the collapse | Roosevelt had made his hostility toward Roosevelt . NCTM ne Homviog: coordinated a response by : of morale of morale .
 All-metal monocoque fuselage structure laminated wood propeller blade : Supermarine Spitfire i The Spitfire, the RAF’s most famous . fighter aircraft of World War II, could . match the performance of the German Messerschmitt 109 .
 Le. Le. x0 CNN PO oO 9k OF 2"" ooh no~ sh WOT Woe’ EES oe @ mY of CO tien .
 The entry of Fascism into World War II in 1940 extended the war into the Mediterranean and North Africa, where Italy had colonies, including Libya . Libya was one of Italy's most important colonies in North Africa .
 British Commonwealth forces, advancing from Egypt, captured the Libyan port of Tobruk early in 1941 . They took 130,000 Italian prisoners .
 The Italian army also attempted ' an invasion of Greece in 1940, but once again the Germans had to step in . The Italians were forced to withdraw from Greece in 1941 .
 German German paratroopers, like airborne forces all over the world, were considered to be an elite, a status reflected in their stylish badge . Yugoslavia in April was rapidly defeated and dismembered, creating an independent Croatia .
 He had ' already set in motion preparations for an invasion of the Soviet Union, codenamed Operation | Barbarossa . He had already begun preparations for the invasion . Operation Barbarossas was cod-named Operation | Operation | Barbarossa, cod-called Operation .
 Operation Barbarossa was warfare ona ' vast scale' Launched on June 22, 1944, in the Soviet Union . The operation was the first of its kind .
 Axis war casualties rose dramatically between 1939 and 1941, as the war widened its grip on Europe . The casualties suffered by Germany and its Axis allies rose dramatically during the war .
 Operation Barbarossa KEY : The Axis invasion of the Soviet Union : made great progress in the second : half of 1941 . Operation BarbarOSSa was a major success in the Second World War II .
 Scotland convinced that he could ' persuade the British government : to ally itself with Germany . Scotland, convinced that . he could . persuade the . British government . to ' persuade . the . government : 'to ally itself . with Germany. Scotland'
 HMS Hood, Bismarck was sunk by British : battleships . HMS Hood was a British battle cruiser .
 Roosevelt felt he lacked the : popular support needed for : a declaration of war . Roosevelt believed he lacked popular support to declare war .
 The U.S. opposed Japan's expansion into Asia, and ' after Japanese troops : entered French Indochina Canadian navies were less successful at protecting merchant ' convoys against German : submarines .
 March, he introduced Lend-Lease : to supply Britain with military equipment paid for by the U.S. government . March was the first president of the United States .
 October a U.S. destroyer was ' sunk by a German torpedo, but fighting in the snow . A German soldier experiencing the Russian winter during the invasion .
 Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, on ISOROKU YAMAMOTO (1884-1943) In the 1930s, Yamamoto became a leading advocate of naval air power .
 As naval commander-in-chief he was architect of the raid on Pearl Harbor in 1941 . He was the architect of Pearl Harbor raid on Japan .
 The slogan “Remember Pearl : Harbor” was widely used in the U.S. to inspire patriotic support for the war against the Japanese .
 Harbor ensured popular support for war against Japan, but : not against Germany . U.S. supported war against Germany, but not against Japan .
 Hitler chose to declare war on the United States in support of his Japanese : allies . Hitler chose the U.S. to join his Japanese allies .
 British and Dutch colonies in Southeast Asia fought in Coral Sea . Battle of the Coral Sea was fought in the early 1900s . Dutch and British colonies in the area fought in 18 years .
 The Japanese navy was routed at the battles of the proved easy prey for Japan . The seizure of Singapore fell with virtually no resistance . The British base at began with an ambitious thrust .
 Within five months, the Japanese had reached the border losses . Within navy against Midway Island, which led to heavy the Mariana Islands .
 From August 1942, the most intense fighting was in a range of U.S. bomber aircraft . The most intense battle of the Second World War was in August 1942 .
 Australia seemed focused around Guadalcanal, which the United States defeated in Burma and Okinawa, facing a Soviet threatened . But Japan's southward push was eventually held .
 It was not until 1944 that the U.S. invaded Manchuria, and the destruction of cities checked by a clash with United States aircraft carriers . The Japanese surrendered after a sustained advance by atom bombs .
 A naval defeat at Midway in June 1942 ended the period of Japanese expansion . x <a.x. x . x . y . A naval victory in 1942 ended Japanese expansion in 1942 .
 Sixty percent of the Japanese troops who fought in the Burma campaign in 1942-45 lost their lives . Tokyo Nagoya Kobe Osaka Yokohama Kawasaki was one of the most destroyed cities in the campaign .
 Total Japanese casualties numbered around 200,000, compared with 71,000 British and British Indian men who were killed and wounded . Total Japanese and Indian casualties were estimated at around 100,000 . British and Indian men died and wounded during the war .
 U.S. B-29 Superfortress bombers devastated Japanese cities with incendiary devices from March 1945 . Sea of Japan (East Sea) Tokyo Kawasaki 7 PACIFIC OCEAN “Big Six” fire bomb target 2 x Attacks on Japan .
 The dropping of atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki [August 6 and 9, 1945] was followed by Japanese surrender . Japanese surrender followed by World War II .
 In the Central Pacific, the United States navy and marines spearheaded a thrust from the Gilbert Islands to the Marianas . The U.S. Navy and marines led the push .
 The loss of Okinawa in June 1945 placed Japan under imminent threat of an Allied invasion . Japan lost Okinawa to the Allied forces in 1945 .
 SS General Reinhard HeyDRich chaired a conference at Wannsee, a suburb of Berlin, in 1942 . SS General Heyrich chaired the conference at the end of 1942 .
 The purpose of the meeting was to brief German civil servants and foreign ministry officials on plans to systematically deport Jews en masse from every country in Europe .
 Jews were to be transported to camps, from which, it was made clear, none would return . The Jews were sent to camps in Poland, from where they would be sent to death camps .
 In February after token resistance, was a blow to the prestige of the 2 British Empire . In February, the British Empire was weakened by the fall of the Great Depression . The U.S. has been in a state of war with Russia since 2003 .
 American and Filipino soldiers on the Bataan peninsula in the 2 Philippines ended tn April . The two countries ended their operations in the Philippines .
 Australians worried that their country might : be next . British-ruled Burma, Burma, was ruled by the British government . Australians worried about their country being next .
 About 120,000 ethnic Japanese were interned during the war . Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066, which allowed Japanese Americans living in the western United States to be deported .
 General Douglas MacArthur, United States commanding officer, after his ' battles in which both sides suffered heavy losses . General MacArthur, U.S. commander of the U.N. forces, was killed in the Battle of Gen. Douglas MacArthur's battles .
 Chandra Bose’s Indian National Army fought alongside the . Japanese, but far more fought for 'total war' against Japan . National Congress leaders : Britain: Britain: around 2. million Indians .
 The Nazis murdered people from many groups, including Slavs, including homosexuals, and gypsies, but their treatment of the Jews was : was a turning point, but far from SWITZERLAND AUSTRIA HUNGARY without parallel .
 U.S. Navy dive-bombers fly over Midway Island in the Pacific . Midway is a key naval base in the world .
 This was the location of a decisive duel between U.S. and Japanese aircraft carriers in June 1942 . The location of the duel was the site of a major battle between the Japanese and American carriers .
 After suffering repeated defeats at the hands of Field : Marshal Erwin Rommel (18911944), the British Eighth Army, : commanded by General Bernard : Montgomery , won a great offensive victory at Alamein : in October-November .
 Germans responded by extending their military occupation of : France to the Vichy-ruled area . Germans responded to the French occupation of the area by extending its military occupation .
 Soviet Union came : to its climactic turning point at : the Battle of Stalingrad . Soviet Union was defeated by the Soviet Union in the battle of the Second World War .
 Montgomery as an observation post . Stalingrad is of ' symbolic importance because . of its name . Montgomery was used as a military observation post during the Second World War .
 In November, Soviet General Giorgi Zhukov masterminded a 'counterattack' in Russia . He masterminded the counterattack in November .
 The output of U.S. factories and shipyards soared during World War II . The number of workers employed in shipbuilding alone rose from : 100,000 in 1940 to 1. million late in the war .
 In January 1943, Franklin D Roosevelt met Winston Churchill for a conference in Casablanca, Morocco . The conference set the future course of World War II in Europe .
 At the end of the conference, Roosevelt announced that the Allies would accept nothing less than the “unconditional surrender” of their enemies . The Allies would not be satisfied with the surrender of the enemies, Roosevelt said .
 The surrender of Axis forces at Stalingrad in February was a massive setback for Germany . But the Germans remained in occupation of most of Europe . The surrender was a major setback for the Germans .
 Tito led a guerrilla movement that took control of the country in 1945 . Tito was the leader of Yugoslavia during the German occupation of Yugoslavia in 1941 . After the war, Tito took over the country from the Germans .
 He made Yugoslavia a communist state, but resisted | the dominance of the Soviet Union . Yugoslavia was one of the most successful communist states in the world . It was Yugoslavia's first communist state .
 U-boat losses were so high that Admiral Karl Donitz had to withdraw his forces from the Atlantic . U-boats lost so much that Donitz withdrew his forces .
 By far the heaviest land fighting : of 1943 was on Germany’s ' eastern front . U-boat offensive never regained its momentum .
 The Resistance carried out acts of sabotage, gathered intelligence, and mounted guerrilla warfare operations . The Resistance was active during the Second World War .
 Axis forces ' were able to mount a successful 2 counteroffensive at Kharkov in : the spring . The U.S. President, Franklin D Roosevelt, United States President, 1944 | disaster at Stalingrad .
 Mussolini was ' dismissed by King Victor' and arrested . He was arrested and charged with treason . Mussolini died in 1941 .
 The Badoglio government joined the : Allies, declaring war on Germany . Naples toward Rome, Italy, joined the war on the Germans .
 Aside from the casualties, 2 hundreds of thousands were » made homeless and there were 'severe food shortages' Aside from casualties, there were severe food shortages and there was ' severe food shortage'
 A U.S. poster suggests that working in munitions factories can be as glamorous as joining uniformed women’s services .
 Command, equipped with the new: : Lancaster bomber, achieved a ' spectacular success in the : “Dambusters” raid in May . Command . Command, . equipped with a 'spectacular success' in the . Dambusters . raid .
 In July, bombers saturated ' the port city of Hamburg with ' incendiary devices' In July the city was saturated with 'incendiary devices'
 In the U.S. US, women workers were employed in heavy industrial jobs traditionally reserved for men . In the 1950s and 1960s, women were employed as heavy industrial workers in the US .
 This led to racial tensions that erupted into ' rioting in Detroit in June . The rioting was sparked by racial tensions .
 Prime Minister Churchill refused : to allow shipping space, which Flying fortress had to be built . B-17 Flying Fortress at a base in England prepares for a bombing .
 The Eighth Air Force lost 26,000 men between 1942 and 1945 . prevented food from reaching the starving. prevented food being delivered to the starving .
 In Asia, 60,000 Allied prisoners of war and almost 200,000 Asian laborers were forced to build a railroad from Thailand to supply Japanese troops in Burma . Allied POWs were forced into building a railroad to supply troops .
 Around 16,000 POWs and 90,000 Asian workers died while they were building it . The Korean War was the first of its kind in South Korea .
 British, Australian, and Dutch prisoners of war were used by the ' Japanese to build the Burma Railroad .
 German troops blocked the Allied advance on Rome in 1944 . Allied troops were fighting in Italy as the Germans tried to block the advance .
 In January, Allied seaborne landings at Anzio, behind the Germans defensive Gustav Line, failed to break the deadlock . Allied landings in January, behind Germany's Gustav Line in Italy, failed .
 In February, Allied commanders decided to bomb the medieval abbey at Monte Cassino, a key point in the Gustav Line, but this much-criticized act of desecration was also ineffectual . The bombing of the abbey in February, however, was ineffect
 Monte Cassino eventually fell to the Polish infantry in May, allowing Rome to be liberated the following month . Monte Casino was captured by the Polish army in May 1944 .
 In the spring, British Indian troops withstood a Japanese attempt to invade northeast India from Burma from Burma . British Indian forces withstood an invasion attempt in the spring .
 The Japanese offensive was so successfully repulsed that Allied forces were able to mount their own offensive to retake much of Burma later in the year . The Allied offensive was successfully repeled .
 During the night, 18,000 airborne troops landed by parachute or glider behind the German coastal defenses . The German coastal defense was well guarded by the Allies .
 Burma Star was awarded to British and Commonwealth soldiers for service in the Burma campaign between 1947 and 1945 . Soldiers were awarded the Burma Star for their service during the campaign .
 Colonel Claus Schenk von : Stauffenberg carried a bomb in his briefcase to a meeting at Hitler's headquarters at Rastenburg, East Prussia .
 French Resistance fighters began an uprising in the city on August 19, 1944 . General Charles de Gaulle’s Free French forces, ' fighting as part of Eisenhower's Allied armies, raced for Paris .
 Soldiers of United States 7th Armored Division patrol the snowy Belgian town of St. St. Charles . AG aS we Qe oe Soldiers of U.S. 7th . Armored Division in Belgium .
 As the Germans withdrew, the : celebrations in Paris began, and ' so too did reprisals against : alleged collaborators . The Germans withdrew and the Parisians began celebrating .
 Stalin had no desire to help the Poles, who were mostly anti-Russian and anticommunist . Red Army had almost reached ' the city, after pushing westward : through the summer, but Stalin . Stalin : had no . desire to . help Poles .
 Montgomery devised a plan to end the war quickly by northern Germany . Montgomery devised : a plan for a quick end to the war . Montgomery's plan was based on the idea of ending the war in Germany .
 Japanese Imperial Navy was 2 almost wiped out in two great ' battles— the Philippine Sea, and Leyte Gulf in October . The battle was fought in the Philippine sea in June, October and October .
 The German unmanned V-1 flying bomb was propelled by a primitive jet engine and packed with explosives . JJ General Alfred Jodl, Chief of Operations on Hitler’s counteroffensive, was chief of Operations .
 German tanks broke through the U.S. front line and headed for Antwerp . German tanks break through the : United States front line .
 Each agent carried a suicide suicide pill . They used a standard-issue Mosin-Nagant pill to swallow if captured . Each agent used an infantry rifle with a telescopic sight .
 German troops invading the USSR in 1941 were not equipped to face the Russian winter . Improvised boots were used by German troops in the USSR .
 Shortages of food, fuel and other essentials led most combatant countries to introduce rationing . Some made straw boots to protect against frostbite .
 Prisoners of war received Red Cross food parcels from the Red Cross . Red Cross parcels were sent to prisoners of war . Prisoners were given food parcels by Red Cross during the war .
 Teller mine had a fuse activated by the pressure of tank tracks . The mine mine was a German mine that was activated by tank tracks in Germany .
 Germans believed messages encrypted by Enigma were secure . Allied codebreakers cracked the code with the help of an early electromechanical computer . Blackout poster calls on German citizens to observe blackout regulations .
 The Long Range Desert Group was initially formed by New Zealanders . It was set up by the British, originally from New Zealand .
 Marines are : live to see the defeat of Germany Yalta in the Crimea . President Roosevelt did not the last time at a conference at the conference at . The U.S. Marines were in attendance at the event at the time .
 Japanese fire on to hold democratic elections in hear ertne : on April 12 came as a shock Poland—a promise he did not intend to keep . Poland will hold its first democratic elections since independence .
 The liberation of the death camps exposed Nazi crimes . There was little pity for the Germans, as the liberation exposed Nazi war crimes .
 The major extermination centers, including Auschwitz, were liberated by the Soviet Red Army . Auschwitz was one of the largest extermination centers in Nazi Germany .
 A formally dressed Japanese delegation prepares to sign the surrender papers on the American battleship USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay on September 2 . L ', f ‘, f’, f A formally-dressed Japanese delegation . Signing of surrender papers is a formality .
 On July 16, the New Mexican desert was lit up by the world’s first atomic explosion . The explosion took place in the New Mexico desert .
 This was the culmination of the top-secret Manhattan Project, a feat of science and engineering that had cost America $2 billion, spent on presidential authority without Congressional approval . The Manhattan Project was the creation of the Manhattan Project . It was spent on President Eisenhower's authority without congressional approval .
 The explosion produced temperatures higher than those at the core of the sun . The explosion is believed to have been caused by the explosion of the solar system .
 Preparations for dropping atom ' bombs on Japanese cities were well advanced even before the ' first atomic test .
 Soviet invasion of Manchuria was a further shock to Japan . At least 35,000 people were killed in the invasion of China .
 Enola Gay took off from Tinian Island in the Marianas at 2:45 on the morning of August 6 carrying an atom bomb . A pocket watch retrieved from the body of a citizen of Hiroshima records the exact time of death .
 On August 15 : Hirohito told his people the war had developed ‘not necessarily to ' Japan's advantage,’ and that he : was making peace . Although Truman refused to offer . any such assurance, on August 15 .
 Jewish refugees make their way to Palestine . Jewish refugees were forced to flee to Palestine in 1948 .
 Thousands attempted this journey before Britain stopped allowing illegal entry into Palestine . Thousands attempted to make it to Palestine before it was stopped by Britain .
 Its aims were to provide a forum for the nations of the world and uphold peace and security . Its aims are to provide an international forum for nations to be a forum .
 Winston Churchill, British politician, March 5 1946 : India would gain independence ' after the war . Winston Churchill: India would become a nation after World War II .
 Jinnah demanded a 2 separate Muslim state, while : Hindus opposed this idea . Jinnah wanted a state of two separate Muslim states . Hindus opposed the idea .
 Jinnah declared a : Direct Action Day, a mass protest : against British proposals for an © all-India government . August 16, Jinnah was a . direct action day, a . mass protest against British plans for an all-Indian government .
 Kwame Nkrumah, from Ghana, : as president of Argentina on & M GREECE : and Jomo Kenyatta, from Kenya, from . Kenya . The two presidents of Argentina and Kenya were both presidents of the Soviet Union .
 First practical electronic digital digital <a : was reached. Into Palestine, but no agreement was reached . Into Palestine .
 Juan Peron: Fiercely nationalistic, anti-US, and pee oY . Peron pledged a . 1,800sqft (167sqm) occupied Germany, while the Soviet Union controlled East Germany .
 The General Assembly is the only part of the UN where all members have equal representation . All members of the General Assembly are represented in equal proportion .
 LORD LOUIS MOUNTBATTEN was appointed to oversee the end of British imperial rule in India . He was the last person in charge of India to oversee its end of imperial rule .
 He believed that the only way forward for the country was to partition it, dividing it in two parts based on the religion of those areas . He said that partitioning the country would be the best way forward .
 In July, the British passed the Indian Independence Act, dividing the Raj into India (Hindu and Sikh) and Pakistan (Muslim) The Act left Kashmir to determine its own fate, leaving Kashmir to decide its fate .
 Pakistan was split into East and West Pakistan, with India separating the two areas . Pakistan was then divided into West Pakistan and East Pakistan . India was then partitioned into Pakistan and India .
 Muhammad Ali Jinnah became the first governor-general of Pakistan . Jinnah was the country's first governor general . Pakistan gained independence in 1947 .
 The rulers of Kashmir were left with a momentous decision: to ' become independent, or join India or Pakistan' The rulers were faced with a decision to become independent or join Pakistan .
 A plan was devised to partition the area into separate | Jewish and Arab states . A plan to partitioned the area was devised by the Nazis in the 1930s and 1940s .
 UN General Assembly agreed to : this resolution on November 29, ' but it was unpopular with Arabs . UN general assembly agreed to this resolution, but it is unpopular with Arab nations .
 Mohandas Gandhi was assassinated by a Hindu fanatic who blamed him for the partition of India . Gandhi was the prime prime minister of India during the 1930s .
 He based his policy on a system : UN PARTITION : the independent states of : the National Health Service of MOHANDAS GANDHI on July 5. was realized when India won : and enforced a racial hierarchy proposed : pledged to fight communism .
 The news of Gandhi's assassination had a profound effect throughout the world, and a state of mourning was declared in India . The news was a profound moment of mourning in India and India .
 Marie Provaznikova refused to return home to Czechoslovakian gymnastics team . The first defection was from the communist East to : the West .
 On October 12, the Soviet Union declared Kim's ' regime the only lawful government' on the peninsula . Kim's regime was declared the "only lawful government" on October 12 .
 UN General Assembly proposed : to split Palestine into Jewish and : Arab states, with Jerusalem under : international administration . Plan for Palestine was proposed by the UN . Palestine split between Jewish and Arab states .
 Jordan, Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, and Iraq immediately invaded the 'new Jewish state' but were repulsed . The new Jewish state was created in 1948 .
 Aneurin Bevan presented a plan to provide free healthcare to all for the first time in 1945 . Labour's election victory in 1945 was a result of the Bevan's plan .
 The founder of the state of Israel was born in Poland and immigrated to Palestine in 1906 . Bevan formally launched David Ben-Gurion's government in 1948 .
 He became an active supporter of the struggle for an independent Jewish state . He was expelled from Palestine in 1915 due to his nationalist activities . He became a prominent figure in the Jewish community .
 A TRUCE was reached in the ARAB-ISRAELI War, bringing an end to eight months of hostilities . The U.S. joined the NATO alliance in 1949 .
 Egypt was the first to sign on February 24, followed by Lebanon, Jordan, and Syria . Syria, Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and Syria are the other countries to sign .
 The agreement established a line between Israel and the Jordanian-held West Bank, which became known as the Green Line . The Green Line was established in the 1950s .
 This map illustrates the 12 nations that originally signed up to NATO in 1949 . This map shows the 12 countries that were originally part of NATO . NATO was founded in 1949 and is now based in Afghanistan .
 The U.S. exploded its first atomic ' bomb, on August 29, at a remote ' test site in Kazakhstan .
 Ireland had officially broken free of allegiance to the British crown . Six northern Irish counties had shown a majority in favour of remaining British in the Northern Ireland General . election held on February 19 .
 With its format of one song per side, the ‘single’ was perfect for rock ‘n’ roll . It went on to revolutionize the pop music business . The “Single’s’ format was perfect .
 propaganda posters showed a smiling Chairman Mao Zedong encouraging his people to build a new, prosperous country . People’s Republic of China was proclaimed in 1949 .
 In June, a new crisis divided India became a republic on January 26 . BRITISH RULE, emblem, was emblem taken in June .
 USSR—invaded the south. the official cutting of The US. The US, determined not to appease all ties. USSR. determined to avoid all ties . USSR. invaded the south .
 Rajendra Prasad (1884-1963) took the oath of office and a new constitution came into force . In a formal the Russians, provided the main — ceremony .
 Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan faced problems arising from its disputed status, weak economy, and artificial frontiers . Since it was first created as Transjordan after World War I, it faced problems including a disputed status .
 On April 24, King Abdullah of Jordan annexed Arab Palestine to create an expanded kingdom, to the fury of his Arab neighbors . King Abdullah's annexation of Arab Palestine has angered his neighbors . Jordan's annexation is a response to Arab neighbors' anger .
 Police ' opened fire in Alexandra ' Township, killing 18 people and wounding 30 . 18 people were killed and 30 wounded in the shooting .
 Despite having less than half the population of South Korea in 1950, : North Korea's army was superior : in size and much better equipped . North Korea was superior to the South Korean population in size in 1950 .
 Fears of a worldwide communist conspiracy resulted in a campaign against people suspected of communist leanings . Fears were raised that the world was facing a worldwide conspiracy against communism .
 The first human organ : transplant took place on June : 17 at the Little Company of Mary Hospital in Illinois .
 Alan Shepard had become the first American in space in the previous year . Alan Shepard became the first person in space to carry out a mission .
 The first artificial satellite, launched ahead of the U.S. version, contained a radio transmitter . Sputnik 1 1957 e USSR .
 What had begun as a ices search for long-range missiles became a battle for international prestige, which neither wanted to lose . What began as a search for ices . became a . battle for . international prestige .
 In 1957, the Soviet Union stunned the U.S. when it launched Sputnik 1 into orbit . The launch was the first of its kind in orbit .
 In 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human lane as to orbit the Earth . Then, in 1961, he was the first person in the world to orbit Earth .
 Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin stepped onto the lunar surface on July 21, 1969, marking the beginning of a new era in space exploration . The rock resembled volcanic lava found on Earth, suggesting that the Moon was once molten .
 The crew of Apollo 11 took special tools and containers with them to collect rocks, soil, and dust from the lunar surface to return to Earth . The Apollo 11 crew collected samples from the surface of the moon .
 Images from the Apollo 8 mission appeared on the front cover of Life magazine . Life magazine January 20, 1969 e us e us .
 An eagle carrying an olive branch perches on the lunar surface in the Apollo 11 patch, which was designed by the crew . The eagle carries a branch of the olive branch on the surface of the moon .
 This is the official mission patch for the Russian Space Station Mir program . Mir patch was created by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Special tools were designed to help astronauts collect specimens . Seal Space tools were developed in the 1970s .
 During the space race, astronauts from many communist countries, such as Cuba, went into Space as crew members on Soviet spacecraft . Cuban newspaper 1980 © Cuba .
 EGYPT RENOUNCED its 1936 TREATY THAT GRANTED BRITAIN a lease on the Suez base, In October . In October, the British government was granted a lease of the base in Suez, Egypt .
 Britain refused to withdraw and a guerilla war began in the Suez Canal Zone . The British government refused to pull out and the war began .
 In March, Iran nationalized its oil industry, which had been dominated by the AngloIranian Oil Company . The Iranian government nationalized the oil industry in March .
 Julius and Ethel Rosenberg accused of stealing information from the U.S. for the Soviets . Fears about the spread of communism deepened as the Rosenbergs were accused of espionage .
 British Foreign Office officials Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean disappeared on 28 May . It was later found out that they had defected to the Soviet Union . Burgess and Maclean were found to have defected .
 In April, the French launched a big push to smash the Viet Minh resistance northwest of Saigon . The French are now in the midst of a major offensive in Vietnam .
 A peace treaty that Japan had signed in San Fransisco, US, in 1951 went into effect on April 28 . It made the country an independent state again . The treaty was signed in 1951 .
 His daughter, Elizabeth, was officially proclaimed queen two days later . Queen Elizabeth was officially crowned Queen of England .
 By the end of the year the British had declared a state of emergency . They began raiding white-settler farms, and by the end the year it had been declared .
 Thousands of suspected Mau Mau activists in Kenya were arrested following the arrest of thousands of suspected activists . Evita Peron played a crucial role in helping her husband, Juan Peron, become Argentinian president . The number of African Americans who died in the Mau Mau UPRISING was
 She was idolized by the poor, and began many programs of social welfare and reform . She began social welfare programs and reform programs .
 At the end of 1952, he told his Politburo that all Jews were sympathetic to America . He said all Jews are sympathetic to the U.S. at the time .
 On January 13, nine doctors were arrested for conspiring to murder prominent figures in the Soviet armed forces . The doctors were accused of conspiring to kill prominent figures .
 Beria was charged with treason and then shot in the back of a truck, in what seems to have been a summary assassination . Beria is believed to have died in a car crash in 2009 .
 A scientific breakthrough was made In 1953, when the blueprint of life, DNA, was mapped out by James Watson and Frances Crick . DNA was the first to identify the origin of DNA .
 DNA is the hereditary material that contains the coded information needed to build and maintain all living organisms . DNA is a hereditary material which contains the code needed to maintain all organisms . It contains the genetic material needed to make and maintain organisms .
 The Indochinese conflict lasted eight years, ending in 1954 . It explained heredity and led to the development of an entire biotechnology industry . The conflict was the first to explain heredicities in the world .
 Laos and Cambodia became independent, while Vietnam was divided into North Vietnam, with a communist government, and South Vietnam . Vietnam was then divided into South Vietnam and North Vietnam . Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam became independent .
 In all three noncommunist states, communist guerrilla movements sprang up . Communist guerrilla movements sprung up in all three states .
 He set his sights on the U.S. army and made unsubstantiated allegations against them . He set . sights . on the United States army . He also set . targets on the US army .
 A vaccine for polio was tested in a huge field trial in the US in April . Vaccine for polio has already been successfully tested in the United States .
 Anti-apartheid organization responded with a day of prayer . The African National Congress responded with prayer .
 The Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance Treaty, known as the Warsaw Pact, was signed on May 14 . The Warsaw Pact was signed by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 The treaty set up a military alliance of communist states to counter NATO in the West . The treaty was signed by communist states in 1949 .
 Rosa Parks made history when she refused to give up her seat on a bus for a white man . Rosa Parks was a pioneer of African-American civil rights .
 Her arrest mobilized a boycott of the bus system, which ended segregation on Montgomery's buses . Her arrest led to the end of segregation in Montgomery, Alabama .
 The boycott also brought international attention to the civil rights cause . The boycott was the first of its kind in Africa .
 Parks was a symbol of the struggle for civil rights until her death in 2005, aged 92 . Parks remained committed to her cause, and was committed to the cause of civil rights .
 The Austrian State Treaty was signed on May 15, reestablishing Austria as an independent sovereign state . Austria is now officially an independent state of Austria .
 The Soviets began the “Race for Space” with the launch of the world’s first satellites, Sputnik II . The Soviets launched the world's first satellites on February 25, 1956, in a bid to launch the first satellite .
 Khrushchev’s “de-Stalinization’ of the USSR prompted a thaw in the Cold War . Khrushchev's "de-stalinization" of the Soviet Union prompted a warm-weather shift .
 White community members attacked AfricanAmericans . The activities of the Ku Klux Klan, an organization of white supremacists, increased . The Klan's activities increased .
 March 2, although Spain retained : control of Ceuta and Melilla on : the coast . Spain retained control of the region, but still retained control .
 The 1256 Chewy was just what the : American public wanted—it was : fast, big, and affordable . Chevrolet Bel Air Convertible : The 12-speed Bel Air . Convertible was the 1256 Chevy Chewy .
 Ghana became the first black African country to gain its independence from colonial rule on March 6 .
 Britain realized that this situation could not be resolved by military means, and made constitutional advances that culminated in the independence of the Malayan ' Federation on August 31 .
 Indonesia has struggled to maintain a parliamentary democracy since independence in 1945 . Indonesia had struggled to : maintain parliamentary democracy .
 On March 14, he decided to dispense with parliament and impose martial law . The president has imposed martial law since the end of March .
 Sputnik 2 carried a dog : called Laika . It was followed by a month later by Sputsnik 2, which carried a puppy .
 The Suez Canal was a vital trading route from the Mediterranean to the Red Sea . October, led to the formation of the European Economic Community . United States pressured Israel to withdraw, liberal government and Imre and provided for the countries Sarina .
 UN forces were stationed ' along the Egyptian-Israeli ' border . It was especially important 2 and UN forces stationed 'along the Egyptian border .
 It also gave former colonies free trade with the EEC, and made them eligible for aid . The former colonies were also eligible for free trade and aid .
 Map shows the composition of the EEC at its inception in 1957, when six countries signed the . for the shipment of oil .
 MAO ZEDONG, founder of the People’s Republic of China, initiated a program of reform In 1958 that would ultimately kill millions .
 The “Great Leap Forward’ was intended to rapidly industrialize China’s rural economy . The ‘Great Leap forward’ aims to quickly industrialize the rural economy. China's rural economy was the focus of the Great Leap Forward .
 Mao's scheme plunged the country into one of the worst famines in history . Mao was responsible for one of China's worst ever famines . The scheme plunged China into a state of famine in 1959 .
 35 million people were worked, starved, or beaten to death in the following four years . At least 35 million died in that period alone .
 Free Officers led by Brigadier ' Abdul Karim Qasim captured ' power in Baghdad in a savage military coup . The coup was a savage coup by the Free Officers .
 He was elected president in 1945, resigned in 1946, returning to power in 1958 to solve the Algerian War crisis . Elected president in 1946 and returned in 1958 . He was Algerian President of Algeria between 1945 and 1958 .
 He resigned again in 1969 after being defeated in a referendum on constitutional reform . In 1969 he resigned again after he was defeated by a referendum in the same referendum . He resigned from the post in 1969 .
 JJ Fidel Castro was prime minister of Cuba from 1959-76 . He was the first Cuban prime minister to head of the Cuban government in the 1960s . Castro was the leader of Cuba during the Cold War .
 On January 2, the Soviets launched the first spacecraft to escape Earth's orbit and reach the Moon, Luna 1 . Luna 1 was launched by the Soviet Union on January 2 . It was the first mission to the Moon that left Earth in orbit .
 The U.S. also had its first successful mission this year, when the Juno 2 rocket sent the Pioneer 4 probe toward the Moon . The Juno 2 mission is the first of its kind in 2014 .
 Pictures taken by Luna 3 gave mankind its first look at the far side of the Moon . Luna 2 was launched on September 12, and Luna 3 was launched October 7 .
 A group of revolutionaries led by law student Fidel Castro took up arms and set up a base in the Sierra Maestra mountains, provoking Batista to indiscriminate repression . Fidel Castro was a law student at the time of the revolution in Cuba .
 Castro was sworn in as prime minister on February 16, 1959 . Batista’s regime collapsed, and Castro took over .
 A ‘honeymoon’ period with the U.S. soon ended as Cuba became a totally socialist state . Cuba's relationship with the United States soon ended . Cuba is now a completely socialist state with a socialist economy .
 In Vietnam, northern guerrillas under Ho Chi Minh attacked the southern army in March . The southern army was attacked in March by the northern army .
 Fidel Castro was jailed for his revolutionary activities in Cuba in 1953 . Thousands of thousands of Cubans were killed or imprisoned in Cuba . Castro was imprisoned in 1953 for his anti-Castroism .
 He was Cuban prime minister from 1959-76 . He was the first communist head of state in the Americas . He is Cuban president of the Cuban republic .
 His relations with the U.S. were originally good, but speedily deteriorated . Relations with the United States was originally good .
 Harold Macmillan visited the South African parliament in February 1960, he made a speech highlighting the “wind of change” : which he believed would bring ' independence for black Africans . MacMillan believed that the wind of change would bring independence .
 The Beetle survived the war and decorated Beetles became a symbol of peace around the world . Produced by the German company Volkswagen, the Beetle survived .
 The Soviets were alarmed with China's ‘Great Leap Forward’ The Soviets reneged on their earlier commitment to help China develop nuclear weapons, and were seen as too conciliatory to the West .
 At a meeting in November, the Chinese delegation clashed with the Soviets again, but eventually a compromise was reached, preventing a formal split . In November, China's delegation clashed again with the Soviet Union again .
 Belgian Congo became independent on June 30, ushering in a period of turmoil . The Belgian Congo has a history of instability .
 It was renamed the Federal Republic of Congo, with Joseph Kasavubu as president, and Patrice Lumumba —a socialist — as prime minister .
 In September, Kasavubu dismissed Lumumba as prime minister, and in December he was arrested . In September he was dismissed, and was arrested in December, and has since been arrested .
 He narrowly defeated the ' Republican candidate Richard ' Nixon after some fiercely contested television debates . Nixon narrowly defeated Nixon in the 1972 presidential election .
 Nixon and Kennedy ran for the White House in 1968 . Nixon was very close in the presidential race . Kennedy and Nixon were the only two men to win the presidency .
 The Portuguese luxury yacht was hijacked in January while sailing in West Indian waters . The yacht was carrying a passenger on board when it was hijacked .
 The hijackers were Iberian leftists who opposed the Portuguese government and the fascist regime in Spain . They hijacked the plane from Portugal and Spain .
 One of John F Kennedy’s first proposals as U.S. president was the establishment of a Peace Corps to help in developing nations . The Peace Corps was one of the first proposals to establish the organisation .
 Aim was for young people to take one or two years working abroad as teachers, healthcare workers, or advisors in Africa, Asia, and South America .
 Nelson Mandela headed : the ANC’s new military wing, and ' launched a sabotage campaign' Nelson Mandela [b.18] headed : . the ANC's new . military wing and 'launched a sabotaged campaign'
 August 13, as troops in East : Germany closed the border ' between East and West Berlin . Barbed wire fences up to 6ft : high were erected . August 13: Germany closed border between East Berlin and West .
 The Berlin Wall enclosed the three sectors of West Berlin, separating it from East Berlin and East A Germany . Dividing wall enclosed three sectors, separating West Berlin from East .
 The United States came close to confrontation with the Soviet Union over the establishment of Soviet nuclear installations on Cuba . The U.S. came to an end with the Soviets' nuclear installations in Cuba .
 It ' brought an end to eight years of civil unrest and guerrilla warfare', says President Obama . It 'brought the end to 8 years of guerrilla warfare'
 Telstar, the world’s first communication satellite, was launched on July 10 from Cape Canaveral . Telstar was launched from the world's first satellite, launched in July .
 In the early hours of July 11, live transatlantic television pictures in the United States to Goonhilly In Cornwall, England, were broadcast . Live transatlantic TV pictures were sent to the U.S. in the early morning hours .
 Marilyn Monroe was a huge star who had appeared in 29 movies at the time of her death . The screen idol was found dead in her Los Angeles home .
 Fechter, an 18-year-old German bricklayer, became one of the first In Britain, Liverpool-based : rock band The Beatles . The Beatles finally signed with record company : EMI on June 4 .
 Their aims were to promote African solidarity, end colonialism, and to coordinate economic, political, health, scientific, defence, and cultural policies of the members of the group .
 The conference, hosted by Haile Selassie of Ethiopia, also planned to support African freedom fighters by supplying arms, training, and military bases . The conference was hosted by Ethiopia's president, who was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kenya, an early member of the OAU, became the 34th African nation to achieve independence . Kenya became the first nation to become independent from the African Union .
 Jomo Kenyatta (1894-1978) was elected leader of the Kenya African National Union after nine years in prison, and won the national election in May . He was jailed for nine years before the election .
 Kenyatta became prime minister and led Kenya from self-government to full independence on December 12 . He became Kenya's first prime minister after independence .
 U.S. president John F Kennedy made a morale-boosting speech in Berlin on June 26 . Kennedy made the speech in the wake of the 9/11 attacks in the United States .
 In it he offered solidarity to the citizens of West Germany, who were alarmed at the construction of the Bertin Wall . In it it offered solidarity .
 The ‘first wave’ of feminism addressed legal obstacles, such as votes for women, while the second focused on sexuality and family . Thousands gathered in The 'first wave' of feminism focused on legal obstacles and sexuality .
 Simone de Beauvoir’s Le Deuxieme Sexe defined the woman's movement and exploded the myth that women were second class citizens . The book was published in Paris in 1950s .
 Soviets, Kennedy described West : Berlin as a symbol of freedom . His speech dashed any hopes held by Moscow that the allies 2 would abandon West Berlin .
 It was ratified by the United States Senate on September 24 and came into force on October 11 . It ' was ratified in September 24 .
 Lincoln Memorial for a mass “March on Washington’s” for jobs ' and freedom . Lincoln Memorial . The march will be held at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C.
 Lyndon B Johnson was sworn 'inas the 36th United States president . Kennedy's funeral took place on November 25 . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Oswald, a former marine, was ' being transferred from police headquarters to jail' Oswald was being transferred to jail . Oswald was a former Marine and was transferred to police headquarters .
 The largest foreign-held territories were in Africa, a product of the “Scramble for Africa” in the 19th “|-) United Kingdom and possessions century .
 France and Britain were the Pane endineaseceire leading colonial powers . Overseas territories are countries that often often have autonomy .
 Wvorild (ilar (I lout severel on then va oeied nakelerana tare me) oy eLey-Jiarelam-lalemedar-1ac-vare(-m com inal ol-Vat-l
 Some overseas territories, for all that is left of the European empires is a sprinkling of islands, are too small and lack the resources to survive as viable independent countries .
 By 1945 the empires of Italy, Germany, and Japan had collapsed . Others, such as French Guiana in the had collapsed. France was the last throw of the imperial dice for France .
 The British Empire emerged from and Britain came with the Suez crisis in 1956 . Britain emerged from the British Empire in the early 1950s .
 Britain was trying to put down rebellions in economic importance to the states that change was slow . However, while Britain was . trying to . put down rebellion, it was slow to change in economic terms .
 Nelson Mandela was among eight men sentenced to life imprisonment during the Rivonia Trial . They left the court with their fists raised in defiance during the trial .
 The year began with increased tension between Greek and Turkish Cypriots . The year started with an increase in tensions between the two sides .
 In March, the UN sent 7,000 troops into Cyprus to try to keep the peace . The UN has been trying to keep peace between Cyprus and Cyprus since April .
 Jawaharlal Nehru was the first prime minister of an independent India, and regarded by many as the founder of modern India . Nehru died on May 27, aged 74 .
 250,000 men, women, and children filed past his body to pay their respects . Crowds gathered in mile-long lines to pay tribute to the fallen man .
 Nelson Mandela, a prominent figure of the anti-apartheid struggle, was jailed for life on June 12 . Nelson Mandela was jailed in South Africa for life in 1994 .
 Mandela and other members of the African National Congress (ANC) admitted trying to bring down the government . During the trial, Mandela and others of the ANC (ANC), see 1994, admitted to trying to topple the government.
 Beatles took the U.S. by storm in 1964 . Beatlemania begins in the United States . Beatles were the first group to take the country to a new level .
 Their faces were splashed across newspapers and magazines as their tour of 23 cities sold out . The tour of the band's 23 cities has sold out.
 Civil Rights Bill became law on 2 July 2 . Race equality in the U.S. took a positive turn when it became law .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. was the symbolic leader ' of the worldwide struggle for civil ' rights . Dr. King was the leader of the civil rights movement in America .
 In Vietnam, the U.S. was adamant that South Vietnam should not fall to the communists . Nobel Peace Prize for his work .
 U.S. president Johnson ' received approval from Congress ' to “take all necessary action” : against the communist regime in ' North Vietnam . August 7, Johnson ‘ received approval . from Congress to ‘take all . necessary action against North Vietnam’ August 7
 It asserted that 2 there had been no conspiracy, and ' concluded that gunman Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone'
 The United States army was technologically superior in Vietnam, but struggled with unfamiliar terrain such as the swamp that these marines are wading through . Ho Chi Minh was president of North Vietnam during the war .
 Some blame the heat wave, while others point the finger at police brutality . Some blame police brutality, others blame heat wave .
 Dawda Kairaba Jawara became the first prime minister of Jawara . Jawara was knighted the following year after becoming the first Prime Minister .
 Southern Rhodesia, led by prime minister lan Smith, announced a Unilateral Declaration of Independence on November 11 . By contrast, the Rhodesia government announced an unilateral declaration of independence in November .
 Commander of the army’s strategic reserve, emerged the 'victor in the power struggle' Commander of army” emerged the ‘victor’ in a power struggle .
 Operation Crimp, to capture the Viet Cong’s Saigon area headquarters, was the U.S. largest offensive launched in 1966 . The United States launched its largest offensive against the Viet. Cong against the South Korean government .
 By the end of 1966, the number of U.S. troops in Vietnam had reached 385,000, amid increased public protests about the war .
 Pakistani and Indian leaders met more peacefully in January at Tashkent in Uzbekistan to sign a declaration agreeing to resolve their dispute [see 1965] by peaceful means .
 Lal Bahadur Ahastri, the prime minister of India, died of a heart attack shortly after Mao's death . Heer afterward, heer afterward he died .
 In August, Chinese communist anniversaries of the Battle of the Somme and Easter Rising were symbolic dates for Protestants and Catholics respectively . Mao Zedong launched the . Somme .
 The murder of two Catholics by a ‘loyalist’ terror group called the Ulster Volunteer Force sparked riots in May and June . Two Catholics were killed by the group, which is a loyalist group .
 The UVF was banned, but the cycle of sectarian killings, known as the Troubles, had begun . UVF had been banned in Northern Ireland, but it was never banned again .
 Hendrik Verwoerd was prime minister of South Africa and the architect of apartheid . His assassination raised questions about the future of the country in South Africa .
 Cultural Revolution aims to purge the country of ‘impure’ elements . Cultural Revolution, aiming to : purge the . country of 'impure' elements .
 Donald CAMPBELL was killed on January 4 at Coniston Water in the Lake District, England, while attempting to break his own water speed record . The year began with the death of Donald Campbell, who was killed in January .
 Tensions running high in the Middle East after Egypt asked for UN forces in Sinai to be removed . Tensions were running high after the decision to remove UN forces from Sinai .
 The Israelis responded with a pre-emptive attack, which ended after six days with Israel in control of Sinai, Gaza, the West Bank, the Golan Heights, and Jerusalem . Israel responded with an attack on Gaza, Sinai and the West .
 Ernesto “Che” Guevara was captured and shot dead, on the Bolivian president's orders, on 9 June . Meanwhile, in Bolivia, Ernesto "Che" was captured, shot dead in June .
 Ernesto Che” Guevara was born in Argentina in 1928, and became Involved in the opposition to Juan Peron . Arab losses, however, were high .
 He traveled extensively through Latin America, where he saw poverty and social injustice that helped forge his radical political views .
 Che became an associate of Fidel Castro, and played a role in the fight for Cuba . Che became a member of the Castro family and became a friend of the Cuban leader .
 He left Cuba to help revolutionaries abroad, and was executed in Bolivia . He was killed in Bolivia and left Cuba .
 During the first manned mission to the Moon, the three astronauts on board Apollo 8 beamed back images of Earth as a planet in space . The images were captured by the astronauts on the Apollo 8 mission in 1969 .
 MY LAI MASSACRE IN VIETNAM SENT SHOCK WAVES through the U.S. political establishment . The My LAI massacre in Vietnam sent shock waves through the United States .
 My Lai lies in the South Vietnamese district of Son My, an area where the Viet Cong were deeply entrenched . The Viet Cong had been deeply entrenched in the area .
 The massacre helped to turn public opinion against the Vietnam War, although the story was not made public until the following year .
 Vietnam War was costing the U.S. $66 million a day . By 1968, the Vietnam War had cost the United States $66m a day. By 1968 the war was costing $66million a day to fight .
 Protests against the war escalated as people questioned the U.S. role in the conflict . Protests in Iraq and Afghanistan escalated as the war intensified in 2011 .
 10,000 antiwar protesters gathered during the Democratic national convention in Chicago . They were confronted by 26,000 police and national guardsmen at the convention .
 A Chinese compass, a map case, and: a map with enemy bases marked on, : formed the basic kit for Vietcong : militia during the Vietnam War .
 King’s death sparked widespread race riots across the U.S. that cost dozens of lives and led to millions of dollars in damage . King's death led to widespread death tolls of dozens of people .
 Martin Luther ' King, Jr. was assassinated in the southern United States ' city of Memphis, Tennessee . Earl Ray, a petty criminal, was convicted of King’s murder and sentenced to life in prison .
 King, Jr., made 1968 one of the : most volatile and traumatic, : years in U.S. history . 1968 was a turbulent and traumatic year for King .
 On November 6, Republican ' Richard Nixon ' emerged victorious in the United States ' presidential election . Richard Nixon won the U.S. presidential election in 1972 .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. rose to prominence in 1955 when he led a boycott of buses in Alabama . He led a protest against the state's transport segregation laws in Montgomery, Alabama .
 Dwight D Eisenhower was Eisenhower's vice' president and lost the presidential ' race to John F Kennedy in 1960 . He was the vice president of the Eisenhower administration .
 British right-wing politician, : made a hugely controversial ' speech on April 20, in which he warned the government against 'opening the ‘floodgates’ to : black immigrants .
 When French strikers took to the : streets in May, the country was on : the verge of revolution . The country was in the throes of a revolution .
 Gaulle won the election, the Paris : riots were regarded as a cultural and social revolution . Gaulle's victory in the election was seen as a social revolution in France .
 Troops from five Warsaw Pact ' countries stormed into Czechoslovakia on August 20 ' to seize control and restore / communism to the country . The invasion was part of an attempt to restore communism .
 Frank Borman, James Lovell, and William Anders, returned on : December 27 as national heroes . They returned as heroes .
 Miss America : Pageant, in Atlanta, was outnumbered three to one by ' the protestors .
 DNA carries genetic information and has provided insight into the basis of life itself . Now, it has been revealed that DNA carries information about the origin of life .
 Ancient Greek Hippocrates proposed that elements from all of the body became concentrated in semen, which then made a human in the womb containing the characteristics of both parents .
 It was not until the 19th century that the basic rules of heredity were discovered by the Austrian monk Gregor Mendel .
 In the early 20th century, American biologist Thomas Hunt Morgan's experiments with fruit flies confirmed genes reside on chromosomes .
 Protein, not DNA, was thought to be the substance that transmits inherited traits . It was still thought that protein was not DNA . DNA is thought to transmit inherited traits through protein .
 DNA is the hereditary molecule in most organisms and Is the chemical basis of genetic information . Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty discovered DNA in the 1940s .
 Each codon corresponds to a particular amino acid . These are arranged into “words” of three letters, arranged into three letters .
 In a cell, a gene's codon sequence is translated into a sequence of specific amino acids, making the specific protein coded for by that gene . In the cell, the codon sequences are translated into amino acids making the protein code .
 Robert Hooke coins the term ‘cell’ to describe microscopic units he observed while examining a section of cork with an early compound microscope . Charles Darwin publishes Jhe Origin of Species, in which he — puts forward his theory that the fittest organisms survive and pass on their
 Swiss scientist Friedrich Miescher discovers a substance he calls ‘nuclein’ in the nuclei of white blood cells .
 Meiosis, the process of cell division that produces gametes (sex cells), is described in the early 1880s . Later ae called nucleic acid, nuclein is now known as DNA .
 Its significance for inheritance was elucidated in the 1890s by German biologist August Weismann . Its significance was also elucidated by Weisman .
 German anatomist Heinrich Waldeyer notices that the central part of the cell (the nucleus) sometimes contains threadlike bodies, for which he coins the term “chromosomes”
 DNA is a double-helix | polymer, shaped like a twisted ladder . This structure allows for replication of genetic material, scientists say . DNA was a 'twisted ladder' structure .
 The Human Genome Organization maps the human DNA sequence and discovers it contains only about 20,000 to 25,000 genes . Streptococcus pneumoniae 1989-present human Genome Project . The DNA sequence was mapped by the HumanGenome Organization .
 West Germany on October 21, : becoming the first Socialist . politician to lead a German government since 1930 . West Germany .
 Eagle returns Apollo 11's lunar module Eagle, holding astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin, back to command module . Eagle returns to the command module after a mission to the moon .
 A child suffers the effects of hunger : and malnutrition during the Biafran : blockade .
 Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal, : where the song Give Peace a : Chance was recorded, was recorded in May .
 Millions marched across the U.S. on October 15 to protest against the Vietnam War . Millions marched against the war in the United States . Millions of people marched against Vietnam War in October .
 The head of state was overthrown by General Lon Nol in a coup, on March 18, 2009 .
 In April, President Richard Nixon ordered United States troops and B-52 bombers into Cambodia to destroy North Vietnamese and Vietcong sanctuaries and supplies . President Nixon ordered U.S. troops and bombers in April, 1968 .
 In early September, Palestinian militants forced two planes to fly to the Jordanian desert, where the hijackers blew up the aircraft . Most of the hostages were released after most of them were released .
 The remaining hostages were freed in exchange for seven Palestinian prisoners . After 24 days of talks, the remaining hostages are freed . The deal was made with the release of 7 Palestinian prisoners, seven of whom were released .
 On September 16, fighting broke out between Jordanian troops and PLO guerrillas . Jordanian troops were attacked by the PLO .
 Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser (b.18) brokered a settlement on September 27 . Egypt's president brokered the settlement in Cairo, Egypt .
 He had become the most powerful figure in the Middle East while attempting to unify Arab nations . He had tried to become one of the world's most powerful figures .
 The Beatles, the most famous music band in the world, split when Paul McCartney (b.42) ' announced his decision to leave ' in April .
 Sierra Leone, in West Africa, and Qatar, in the Middle East, formally achieved independence from Britain in this year . Sierra Leone and Qatar have also achieved independence .
 Indian troops entered East Pakistan in December following a surprise attack on Indian airfields . In December, Indian forces entered the Pakistani territory following an airfield attack .
 Indian troops crush Pakistani forces in the east . In a campaign lasting only 13 days, Indian troops crushed Pakistani forces . The campaign lasted just 13 days .
 In August, the Northern Ireland government introduced internment without trial to stop the growing violence . Northern Ireland has been experiencing violence in the past year .
 A small team of activists set sail from Vancouver, Canada, on the ship Phyllis Cormack to protest against U.S. nuclear tests in Alaska .
 The Walt Disney World resort officially opened near Orlando, Florida, on October 1 . The resort is the largest in the world, with more than 1,800,000 people a year .
 After seizing power in 1971, he ruled by terror—an estimated 300,000 people died during his reign . He ruled by power in the 1970s .
 Idi Amin’s rule ended in 1979 after he was ousted by troops from neighboring Tanzania . Amin was forced to flee the country after being ousted by neighboring Tanzania then forced to leave .
 Richard Nixon sent national security adviser, Henry Kissinger, to China for secret talks . Richard Nixon © , sent his national : security adviser to China . Henry Kissinger | (b.23), Henry Kissinger .
 BRITISH MINERS WALKED OUT on January 9 after refusing a government pay offer .
 On February 19, they agreed to a new pay deal and returned to work on February 25 . They agreed to the deal on February 19 . On February 25, they returned to the job .
 On January 30, British troops opened fire on demonstrators in Londonderry, Northern Ireland, killing 13 people and injuring 14 . British troops killed 13 people, injured 14, in the shooting .
 The marchers were protesting against the policy of internment without trial . They were demonstrating against the internment policy .
 IRA bombed the 16th Parachute Brigade headquarters at Aldershot, Hampshire, on February 22, killing seven civilians . In the largest attack on mainland Britain since ‘The Troubles’ (see 1966), the IRA bombed 16th .
 President Nixon flew to China in February and met Mao Zedong . Nixon's visit marked a new cordiality in US-China relations . President Nixon's trip marked a change in US relations .
 In May, Nixon paid a state visit to Moscow to sign 10 agreements, the most important of which were the nuclear arms limitation treaties known as SALT I . On June 8, South Vietnamese planes dropped a napalm bomb on Trang Bang .
 Images of burned civilians were shown around the world and increased pressure on the U.S. to withdraw from Vietnam . Images of burning civilians led to increased pressure for the United.
 Leading artists made 35 posters for the Munich Olympics, including : the one shown below .
 President Nixon, who had just been reelected, continually denied any connection between Watergate and the White House . President Nixon was just reelected in 1972 .
 The Washington Post was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for their work on the “Watergate scandal . Their work helped by crucial information from the mysterious informant, Deep Throat,’s .
 Chilean president's sweeping nationalization and reforms resulted in costly welfare schemes and economic chaos in the country . Allende’s reforms were a costly welfare scheme that led to economic chaos .
 The White House, the official residence of the United States President, was rocked by the Watergate scandal and the subsequent resignation of President Nixon . JJ Richard Nixon, United States president, in a TV speech .
 It was the first ' enlargement of the organization . since its inception in 1957 .
 There were bombs in : Manchester city center and at : Victoria station, London . September 8, there were bombs at Victoria station in Victoria, London, Manchester .
 Salvador Allende was + killed in a coup led by his trusted ally General Augusto Pinochet . Pinochet killed 3,000 supporters of the Allende regime, shut the : Chilean Parliament, and banned : all political activity .
 OPEC shut off oil supplies to the western nations that had supported Israel, it sent prices shooting up . Heavy fighting broke out between : Arab and Israeli forces in what : came to be known as the Yom : Kippur War, in October .
 The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries switched off supply at a time when the market was already starting to suffer shortages . The market is starting to be hit by shortages .
 Arab oil-producing countries ' imposed an oil embargo on all : the countries that had supported | Israel . The embargo was imposed on all of the countries who had supported . Israel .
 The 1973 oil embargo led to a long-term recession in the developed world . The oil embargo in 1973 had a devastating impact on the world's economy .
 In Portugal, General Antonio de Spinola led a bloodless military coup, ending 90 years of dictatorship . In Portugal he led a bloody coup to end a 90-year-old dictatorship .
 Known as the Carnation Revolution, this event ushered in a new era of democracy in the country . Known as 'Carnation Revolution', this event was known as 'the Carnation revolution' Known as a revolution, it ushered in an era of democratic rule .
 In Britain, the IRA attacked the Houses of Parliament on June 17, the Tower of London in July, and a Guildford pub in October . The IRA has also attacked several pubs across the country in recent months .
 In July, Turkish troops invaded northern Cyprus following a coup in which President Archbishop Makarios, a Greek Cypriot, was deposed . Turkish forces invaded north Cyprus following the coup in July .
 The island was split in two parts, with Greek-Cypriots fleeing to the south and the Turkish community, to the north . The island is now home to a Turkish community .
 Emperor Haile Selassie (1892-1975) was overthrown in a coup on September 12 . After years of war and famine in Ethiopia, he was ousted from power in 1975 . He was forced to step down from power .
 In the US, the Watergate breakin [see 1973] was traced to a Nixon support group . In the U.S., the break-up of Watergate broke out in 1973, traced to Nixon support groups .
 Punk rock emerged during the mid-70's as an angry expression of contempt for politics and society . Punk rock was an expression of anger at society and the government .
 In the Middle East, Saudi Arabia's King Faisal was asSassinated by his nephew, Prince Ibu Musaed . Saudi Arabia’s king was assassinated by Prince Iba Musaed, a nephew of the prince .
 Prince Juan Carlos sworn in as King of Spain two days after dictator General Francisco Franco died . Juan Carlos was sworn in in Spain on November 20 .
 In April, the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, fell to the radical communist movement, the Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot . The capital, the capital, was the site of the uprising against Pol Pot's regime .
 All inhabitants of cities were expelled to work in agricultural communes . All inhabitants were expelled from cities to work as agricultural workers .
 Moluccan terrorists took over : the Indonesian Embassy in : Amsterdam, the Netherlands . Left-wing group seized the German Embassy in Stockholm, Sweden, and Moluccans took over the Indonesian embassy in Amsterdam, Netherlands .
 The new Angola People’s Republic was recognized in February . Angola People's Republic was officially recognized in March .
 Anti-apartheid protests in Soweto, South Africa, turned violent on June 16 .
 Mao Zedong (b.93) died of a heart attack on September 9 . Mao was the founder of the People’s Republic of China . Mao died of heart attack .
 In December, after more than 50 ceasefires had been violated, uneasy peace prevailed . Peace prevailed after ceasefires were repeatedly violated .
 The Seychelles gained independence from Britain on June 29 . James Mancham is president and France Rene is prime minister of the coalition .
 Steven Biko, a prominent black rights leader in South Africa, died in prison on September 12 . Biko was a prominent leader in the country's black South African community .
 An inquest cleared the police of any wrongdoing in the death of the father-of-one . His death caused international outrage but an inquest cleared any wrongdoing by the police .
 This prompted Army Chief General Mohammed Zia ul-Hag to depose Bhutto in a military coup on July 4 . The coup prompted the army chief general general to take control of the country .
 The right-wing Menachem Begin had a surprise win at the Israeli elections in May . The Israeli elections ended 29 years of Labor rule .
 The distinctive logo, a rainbow-colored apple with a bite taken out, symbolized knowledge . The distinctive apple symbol symbolizes knowledge .
 The government banned him in 1973, but he continued to spread his word . He was banned by the government in 1973 but continued to speak out .
 On August 18, 1977, the police seized Biko, held him for 24 days, and tortured him to death . Biko was tortured by the police and killed by police in 1977 .
 ISRAELI soldiers crossed the border on March 14 in Operation Litani . The operation is part of the ongoing conflict between Israel and Syria .
 Israel claimed Palestinian fighters were using southern Lebanon to mount attacks against civilian and military targets in Israel . Israel claimed the attacks were carried out by Palestinian fighters in southern Lebanon . Israel said the attacks are aimed at civilian targets .
 The challenge stunned the Shah and his generals, and rioters were attacked . Rioters attacked the Shah's palace in Shah-era-era Tehran .
 Egyptian President Anwar Sadat arrived in Washington in February . Sadat was the first Egyptian president to arrive in the U.S. in the United States . Carter visited Sadat in Cairo, Egypt, in 1979 .
 His visit represents a change in Egyptian foreign policy which had previously sought favor from the Soviet Union . His visit represented a change from Egypt's previous foreign policy .
 Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin met President Carter shortly after . Shortly after, Israeli PM Begin met with President Carter .
 Initial talks paved the way for historic joint meetings at Camp David, Maryland, in September 5-17 . Joint meetings are scheduled for September 5 to 17 .
 Both sides signed the Camp David Peace Accord for peace in the Middle East . The agreement was signed by both sides of both sides .
 Devastating scenes of marine animals covered in oil and dying were broadcast around the world . Breton beaches were polluted by the oil spill .
 Under Pol Pot, Khmer Rouge : soldiers, often teenagers, controlled : Cambodia . Soldiers, often teens, controlled: Cambodia .
 For every Soviet soldier who was killed or wounded, 20 Afghan soldiers lost their lives . JF Ayatollah Khomeini lectures on Islamic Government RARRARAA RR AARAR .
 Khmer Rouge seized the Cambodian capital of Phnom Penh in January 1979 . They fled to the jungle in Thailand and began a guerrilla war against a succession of Cambodian governments .
 On April 2, Vietnamese forces discovered a mass grave in the northeast of Vietnam . This was the first of many mass graves from the Pol Pot era to be discovered .
 Between 1975 and 1979 Pol Pot was responsible for the slaughter of more than 1 million people . Pol Pot is believed to have killed more than a million people in the 1970s .
 Image taken by NASA's Voyager 2 spacecraft shows Jupiter's ring system, never seen before, being bombarded by tiny meteorites .
 China viewed the Vietnamese attack on Cambodia as a serious provocation . On February 17, Chinese forces invaded Vietnam . OE owt .
 Casualties on both sides were high, and each side claimed to have won the upper hand . Casualties were high in the first half of the match .
 In the countryside, revolt grew ' against repressive government initiatives, and the Afghan army faced total collapse . The Afghan army was faced with total collapse, says Afghan army .
 Ruhollah Khomeini returned © from 15 years of exile to jubilant : crowds, and the Islamic Republic ' of Iran was proclaimed on : April 1 .
 Young supporters of Iranian women holding posters of Ayatollah Khomeini show support for the Islamic Revolution . Young supporters have been protesting against the government of Iran .
 Afghanistan on December 24. : In doing so, they were confident : of military superiority . Afghanistan on Dec. 24. Afghanistan .
 America’s long support of the : Shah, took control of the U.S. embassy in Tehran . The Shah was the prime minister of Iran, who was assassinated by the Shah .
 Sandinistas established a ' revolutionary government on : July 20, led by Daniel and : Humberto Ortega . Sandinista established a revolutionary government in Nicaragua .
 The AK-47 became an iconic weapon : during the Soviet war in Afghanistan . Used by both sides, Kalashnikovs : were cheap and readily available this year .
 Northern Ireland secretary Airey : Neave was killed by an INLA car : bomb . Neave died by a car bomb in Belfast .
 Mountbatten (a member of the British royal family) was killed by an IRA bomb blast . The British Royal family was killed in the blast in Belfast .
 Amin escaped to Libya, leaving behind a country with its economy in tatters . Amin's country was devastated by the fall of the Soviet-era Soviet Union in 1991 .
 The first Walkman featured a cassette player and the world’s first lightweight headphones .
 ROBERT MUGABE became prime minister of Rhodesia on March 4, 1964 . He became Rhodesia's first black president .
 The famine in Uganda is regarded as one of the worst in history . 21 percent of the population died in the famine in the country .
 Smallpox was declared extinct on May 8 by the World Health Organization . 21 years after the global eradication program had begun .
 London became involved in a dramatic siege on April 30, when 70% / SURVIVIVED — : Smallpox eradication i A global vaccination campaign led to : WHO declaring smallpox eradicated : in 1980 .
 Nineteen hostages were set free, but one died and two were injured in the cross-fire . One of the hostages was set free but one was killed in the shootout .
 On September 22, Iraq invaded | Iran sparking a bitter eight-year ' war, which destabilized the whole ' region . Iraq invaded Iran sparking an 8-year war that destabilized Iran and the region .
 By the end of October, Khorramshahr, the largest port in Iran, fell to Iraqi forces . The port is now the largest city in Iran .
 Yugoslavia had achieved ' internal peace' under Tito's grip . Under Tito’s grip (see ' 1943), Yugoslavia achieved internal peace . Yugoslavia achieved 'internal peace' in 1943 .
 May 4, combined with the decline of communist ideology, led to : the weakening of Yugoslavia’s : unifying factors . May 4 was combined with . the decline . of communist . ideology, which led to . the demise of Yugoslavia's . communist ideology .
 President Obama won the U.S. presidential election on November 4, beating Jimmy Carter in a landslide victory . Jimmy Carter was elected president of the United States in 1977 .
 President survived assassination attempt by John Hinckley, who was obsessed with actress Jodie Foster . John believed an assassination of the president would impress her, according to the president .
 Pope John Paul Il survived being shot four times on May 13 as he travlled through crowds in his ‘popemobile’ in St. Peter the Apostle . Pope was shot in the head four times as he walked through crowds .
 Mehmet Ali Hagca, a Turkish citizen, was sentenced to life imprisonment in July . Hagca was arrested in July after he was found guilty of attempted murder in a Turkish prison .
 A state of emergency was declared in Egypt after President Sadat was assassinated at a military parade . State of emergency declared after Sadat's assassination at military parade in Egypt .
 A group calling itself the Independent Organization for the Liberation of Egypt said it carried out the attack . A group called the group says it killed Mubarak Mubarak .
 Vice-President Hosni Mubarak succeeded President Sadat as head of state . Mubarak succeeded Sadat in Egypt's first posthumous war .
 The Mujahidin, ' a group of muslim fighters, mounted waves of bombings and assassinations . The group was founded by Americans in Afghanistan .
 In October, Ali Khamenei was elected president in a landslide victory after an attempted right wing coup, led by Lieutenant Colonel Antonio Tejero Molina Molina . Molina was elected President in October .
 HIV virus discovered in May 1983 by doctors at the Pasteur Institute in France . HIV virus was discovered by doctors in France in 1983 . HIV was the first virus to be discovered in the world's first pandemic .
 The isolation of the HIV virus made it possible to develop drugs that could dramatically extend the life expectancy of those with AIDS, but no vaccine has yet been found .
 At least 28 million people worldwide have died from the disease . Africa has been the worst affected area . At least 29 million people have died worldwide from the virus .
 HMS Antelope exploded on May 23, during the Falklands War . The frigate exploded during the war .
 Argentina invaded the British territory of the Falkland Islands in the South Atlantic on April 2 . The Falklands Islands are located in the Falklands archipelago of the British Channel Islands .
 British prime minister Margaret Thatcher sent a naval task force to liberate the islands . Margaret Thatcher was the prime minister of the British government in the 1980s .
 The subsequent conflict cost the lives of hundreds of Argentine and British servicemen . Many of them were through missile attacks on navy warships .
 This marked a major turning point, and Iran forced the Iraqis to retreat, says CNN's John Sutter . Iran forced Iraq to retreat from Iraq, he says .
 Ariel Sharon resigned after an inquiry stated he had failed : to act to prevent the massacre . Sharon resigned following an inquiry into the massacre in Israel . Israeli inquiry said he failed to act on the massacre to prevent it .
 Michael Jackson released the album Thriller in 7982. Michael Jackson was the dominant pop star of the 80s . Michael Jackson's Thriller album was released in 1998 .
 Solidarity (see 1981], the Polish Trade Union Movement, was banned by the Polish government on October 8, 1981 . Solidarity was the Polish trade union movement that led to the end of Solidarity .
 Brezhnev pushed for better relations with the West, and increased Soviet military and industrial strength, but living standards remained poor . Living standards were poor in the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The world's first test tube twins were born in Manchester, England, on April 28 . They were born on the same day as twins born in London .
 The United States embassy in Beirut was hit by a suicide bomber on April 19 . The U.S. Embassy in Beirut is located in the Lebanese capital . A suicide bomber attacked the embassy on the same day .
 The United States government believed the attack was carried out by Hezbollah, a militant Islamic group . The U.S. government believed Hezbollah carried out the attack .
 Later in the year, terrorists killed peacekeeping headquarters in Beirut, with extensive loss of life .
 In the Iraq-Iran War, Irag had begun using chemical weapons . The blister agent mustard gas was deployed as Iraq fought back against attacks from the “human waves of Iranian troops”
 The Ethiopian famine was the worst of the famine in the country's history . Thousands of children died during the famine .
 Tamil Tigers killed 13 Sri Lankan soldiers in a deadly ambush by Tamil Tigers . These followed a deadly ' ambush' by the Tamil Tigers which killed 13 soldiers .
 The Soviets were accused of shooting down a Korean airliner on September 1 . The plane was believed to have been shot down by the Soviets .
 They claimed the ' airliner flew into their airspace and | did not respond to communication' They said the plane did not comply with their request to contact them .
 BRITISH COAL MINERS WENT ON STRIKE from March 12 over pay : and mine closures : .
 On December 19, 1997, China and Britain “ oS get British colony, to Chinese rule in 1997 . China and the U.S. " oS. got British colony" on December 19 .
 The Bhopal gas tragedy injured many : thousands and killed 3,000 people : within weeks . The tragedy happened within weeks of a deadly gas blast in Bhopala .
 U.S. astronaut Bruce McCandless floats free in space . The astronaut floats free from space .
 Indira Gandhi (b.17], the prime minister of India, was ' assassinated on October 31. 17], was assassinated . Indira was assassinated in the wake of her assassination .
 Bhopal, India, became one of the worst industrial accidents in history . Bhopala, India's largest industrial accident in history, was one of India's worst .
 Reagan declared withdrawal of peacekeeping troops from the Lebanese capital of Beirut, on February 7, following : increased terrorist attacks . Reagan declared the withdrawal of troops from Beirut, following . increased terrorist . attacks .
 TANCREDO NEVES was elected president of Brazil on 15 January . After 21 years of military rule, he was elected after 21 years .
 Israel held a 12 mile(19km-] wide security zone in the south of Lebanon . Prime minister Shimon Peres withdrew Israeli troops from Lebanon .
 Major General Mohammed militants hijacked an Italian cruise liner, the Achille Lauro . They are demanding the release of 50 Palestinian prisoners held in Israel .
 Graph shows the average size of the hole in the ozone layer in each year from 1985-95 . The crisis ended after they 30 20 20 SIZE T7385 1990 lg 75 hole was the size of a hole .
 The Siege of Gibraltar ended after 16 years, when the Spanish government opened the border, on February 4, 2014 .
 The findings, published in the May issue of Nature, rallied environmentalists . Their findings were published in Nature magazine Nature .
 Iran launched a surprise assault and captured the abandoned Iraqi oil port of Faw in February . Iran and Iraq are engaged in a six-year war that has lasted six years .
 Iraq was accused of using mustard gas In its efforts to hold off the attack in Iraq . Iraq was said to have used mustard gas in an attempt to stop the attack .
 The Russian space station Mir provides a home for visiting astronauts . The Reagan administration was in charge of the Mir space station .
 Reagan survived, but his chief of staff, Donald Regan, and national security adviser, John Poindexter, resigned . Reagan survived . Regan survived, and Regan died .
 United States planes bombed military targets in Tripoli, Libya, on April 15 . U.S. planes bombed Libya's capital, Tripoli, in April .
 Days earlier, United States soldiers died in a bomb attack at the La Belle disco in West Berlin . The attack is believed to have been ordered by Libya . The bombing was believed to be the work of Libya .
 On January 28, the American space shuttle Challenger broke apart 72 : seconds after take off, causing the : death of all seven crew members . Challenger badge: Challenger .
 It released a high . ; ' ' level of radioactive contamination, | which spread to Europe . It . released a . high ; 'level of radioactive . contamination, . which spread . to Europe, . It released . a high; ' 'Levels of . radioactive contamination'
 Mir, the Soviet space station, was launched on February 20, as part of a space city to house ' cosmonauts . Mir was launched from the Soviet Union's Mir space station . Mir is a Russian space station that was launched in February 2010 .
 Nearly 50,000 students gathered in Shanghai's People’s Square on 21 December, urging for more social freedom . Students gathered in China's People's Square to demand for more freedom .
 As prime minister he initiated major reforms and was an avid supporter of women’s rights, healthcare, and welfare standards . He was also a strong supporter of the women's rights and healthcare standards .
 Students all across China held demonstrations in major cities demanding democratic reforms . Demonstrations were held across the country . Students demanded democratic reforms in China .
 BEFORE Communist regimes could be found across the world at the high point of communist influence . Communist regimes were found in the 1930s and 1940s at the height of communist control .
 After Soviet triumph in World War II, one-third of the world’s population embraced communism . The Soviet Union was embraced by one third of the population in 1945 .
 Fear that it would spread further dominated the conduct of the Cold War . The Cold War was dominated by the fear that it might spread further .
 China remains one of the most prominent communist countries in the world . Laos, Vietnam, North Korea, and North Korea also have communist regimes .
 In March 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev became leader of a stagnating Soviet Union . In March 1987, Mikhail Putin became president of the Soviet Union in Moscow . The Soviet Union collapsed in March 1985 .
 Mikhail Gorbachev was a popular choice for leader. He realized that the Soviet Bloc needed radical reforms, and tried to +¥ Mikhail Gorcachev was the leader .
 It was supposed to offer ordinary people freedom from want and oppression, and united Western critics of the capitalist system . It united the Western world, but it united critics of capitalism .
 The great experiment began with the seizure of the Winter Palace In Petrograd in 1917 . It ended in 1989-91 as the Berlin Wall was torn down and the empire of the USSR came apart .
 In July 1989, Gorbachev announced that countries within the Warsaw Pact could determine their own futures in openly contested elections . The Warsaw Pact countries were able to choose their own future through elections . In November 1989, the first openly contested election in the Soviet Union was held in Moscow .
 The result was the total disintegration of the USSR, al Keda dar Tal-jael mantle . To outsiders, Gorbachev was a hero .
 At home, living standards fell and he wrestled with deep economic problems . But at home, he struggled to find a way to cope with these problems .
 Boris Yeltsin was elected president of Russia in July 1991 . He emerged as a champion of reform when he saved Gorbachev from a coup by hard-line opponents in August 1991 .
 The Soviet Union faced oblivion when Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus secretly planned to form a new union . Ukraine, Belarus, Ukraine and Russia planned to create a union in the 1980s .
 On Christmas Day 1991, Mikhail Gorbachev resigned as Soviet president . On December 11, 1991, he resigned from his post in the Soviet Union .
 Territory that once belonged to the Soviet Union now forms a number of new states . Soviet dissolution is the result of the dissolution of the Union .
 This was double what it was in 1950, and a billion higher than in 1974 . The world's biggest oil reserves were oil reserves in the 1970s .
 The population of the world was growing at a rate of 220,000 people a day . The population was growing in the 1970s and 1980s . The world population is now at a growth rate of more than 220 million people .
 Much of the growth was seen in parts of the world least able to sustain it . Much of it is seen in areas of the country least likely to be affected by it .
 New Zealand as compensation ' and for returning its agents to : French jurisdiction . New Zealand . France .
 France paid New Zealand $6.6. million to return agents . France also paid NZ$6.5 million in compensation to return its agents .
 IRA was planning to detonate a bomb during a change of guard” ceremony in the British territory . IRA was also planning an attack on a British military base in Northern Ireland .
 The event was to be attended by the 1st Battalion Royal Anglian Regiment, following a tour of Northern Ireland . The 1st battalion was due to attend the event in Northern Ireland this week .
 This year saw the first documented use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq war . Lraq dropped bombs containing mustard gas and nerve agents on the Kurdish city of Halabja .
 Between 3,000 and 9,000 civilians died, and many more suffered long-term health problems . Many of the deaths were caused by the conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Lasting eight years, the war resulted in more than 1 million casualties . Lasting 8 years, more than a million casualties were recorded in Afghanistan .
 Throughout 1988, Palestinian Arabs of the Gaza Strip and West Bank continued a mass uprising against Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories . During 1988, Palestinians of Gaza Strip, West Bank and Gaza Strip continued mass uprising .
 'Intifada' took the form of general strikes, boycott of Israeli products, demonstrations, and use of petrol bombs . Known as ‘intifada’, it was known as 'general strikes, boycotts, and demonstrations .
 The resumption of shuttle flights, in 1988, meant that NASA's Hubble Space Telescope programme was back on track . On 14 November, the Palestine Horsehead nebula was seen in the sky .
 In a dramatic speech to ' the UN, on 7 December, Gorbachev ' announced unilateral arms and ' troop reductions, and withdrawal of forces from Eastern Europe . In the same speech, he announced unilateral disarmament and troop reductions .
 She returned to Pakistan in 1986 and served as prime minister from 1988-90 and 1993-96 . She served as Pakistan's prime minister between 1988 and 1996 . She was prime minister in Pakistan for three decades .
 Benazir was exiled in 1999 on corruption charges, but returned in 2007 for fresh elections . He was exiled from the country in 1999 but returned to the polls in 2007 .
 South Africa’s border war with Namibia, Namibia and Angola had been ongoing since 1966 . South Africa had been involved in the war with Angola and Namibia .
 They agreed to do this, but only if Cuba removed its troops from : Angola . Cuba agreed to remove troops from Angola, but said it would only if it removed troops .
 The most ' popular science book ever, it was ' translated into 40 languages and sold more than 10 million copies .
 De Klerk was more willing than his predecessors to modernize the political system . However, he was willing to be more willing to modernise the country's political system.
 Ayatollah Khomeini (1902-89], the spiritual leader of Iran, issued a fatwa, or decree, calling for the death of author Salman Rushdie (b.47) and publishers of his book, The Satanic Verses . Rushdie's publishers of The
 Eight people were killed in the stampede and hundreds more injured . Hundreds more Injured while approaching the body to pay obeisance . Hundreds of people were injured in the incident .
 Tiananmen Square massacre: The Chinese Army shot dead nearly . 3,000 of the 100,000 demonstrators . who protested in Tiananman Square Square in Beijing .
 Intelligence gathered by electronic devices, satellites, and spies was used for military information and technology . It was used to gather intelligence for the military .
 Czechoslovak communist regime surrendered : to the people . November 28, Czechoslovakia surrendered to the public . The Czech Republic was founded in 1968 .
 Vaclav Havel became President ' of the Czechoslovak Republic in ' the nonviolent Velvet Revolution' A month later, Vaclav was President of Czechoslovakia . The Velvet Revolution was the result of a nonviolent uprising .
 Following the election of Solidarity : in Poland, Hungary's rulers : published a plan for independence .
 Erich Honecker was leader of the countries of the Eastern Bloc and the rest of Europe . He led the country in the 1970s and '80s . He was one of the most prominent figures in the world's history .
 On December 3, the United States and the . USSR met in Malta and declared : the end of the Cold War . Named after astronomer Galilei i : bringing the wall down. : probe j :
 South Africa was lifted by President De Klerk on February 2 . National congresses in South Africa were lifted by the president .
 Nelson Mandela | (b.18) walked free after spending 27 years in jail . Nine days later, Nelson Mandela was released from jail . Mandela was the leader of the ANC, and the ANC .
 Neighboring Namibia became the 47th African country to gain independence after 25 years of struggle against South African rule . Namibia was the last African nation to be ruled by South African government .
 In Central America, free elections were held in Nicaragua on February 25 . Free elections are held in Central America's most populous country .
 National Opposition Union, a coalition of political parties backed by U.S. funding, defeated the left-wing Sandinistas . National opposition Union backed by United States funding .
 Nelson Mandela and his wife Winnie punch the air in victory salute after his release from Victor Verster prison . Violeta Chamorro E * Li q A | Nelson Mandela was released from prison in December .
 One of the founding members of Poland’s Solidarity trade union movement, Lech Walesa was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1983 . The LECH WALESA (1943-) is one of Poland's most famous unions .
 Gulf Vario el : as the first chancellor of the ae Becowait Cit oil-rich Arab nation, . — : reunified nation . Gulf . Vario is the first Chancellor of the the oil rich Arab nation .
 On January 13, Russia sent troops into the country to suppress dissident nationalists . On Jan. 13, Russian troops were deployed in order to suppress dissidents .
 Mikhail Gorbachev announced he ' was resigning as Soviet president . TV station after broadcast called for people to defend government buildings from Soviet troops .
 It was the first time in over ' 40 years that Israel had sat down ' with all its Arab neighbours to discuss peace . Israel sat down with Arab neighbours for first time since '40 years .
 Terry Waite, and Americans Terry : Anderson and Tom Sutherland ' were also freed . Terry Waites, Tom Sutherland and Terry Anderson ' were freed .
 Leaders of 12 European countries signed the treaty on European Union and the Maastricht Final Act on February 7 .
 It heralds common citizenship, and common economic and defence policies . It heralded common citizenship and common national security .
 The break up of Yugoslavia continued as Bosnia and Herzegovina declared independence on March 3 . The break-up of Yugoslavia ended as Bosnia declared independence from Yugoslavia on March 4 .
 The United Nations Peacekeeping emerged out of World War II as a way to place military personnel between warring countries or communities to stop fighting . Peacekeeping was a way of placing military personnel with warring nations or communities .
 UN forces were first used as an observer to monitor the armistice between Israel and the Arab states in 1948 . UN forces first used to monitor Israel and its Arab states .
 Salvation Front, a fundamentalist : party, whom many believed was ‘THE NUMBER OF BOSNIANS AND CROATS HELD in OMARSKA ‘DEATH CAMP ' Yugoslav army under Slobodan ' Milosevic attacked the Muslim population of Bosnia .
 Somalia was stricken by famine, but extortion and looting prevented foreign aid from getting through . The US-led operation aimed to ' hold Mogadishu’s airport to : enable supplies to be airlifted to starving locals .
 The Single Market Market came into force across European Union countries in January . The market is the largest single market in the EU .
 The EU gave greater freedom to citizens of member states to live and work in other EU countries . It paved the way for the single currency, the Euro, to become a single currency .
 On January 1, Czechoslovakia was Split into Slovakia and the Czech Republic, dissolving the 74-year-old federation . The federation was dissolved on January 1 .
 Accords in Washington, DC in : the presence of the United States president Bill Clinton in September . The United States President Bill Clinton attended the summit .
 ZULUS and African National Congress supporters clashed on March 28 in South Africa . More than 18 people were killed in the clash .
 Zulus are responding to calls by their leaders to boycott the forthcoming national elections . The Zulus were responding to their leaders' calls by calling for a boycott of the elections .
 Nelson Mandela became South Africa’s first black president after more than three centuries of white rule . The elections went ahead, and on May 10, Nelson Mandela was elected president of South Africa . Nelson Mandela is the country's first black leader .
 Juvenal Habyarimana (b.37], a Hutu, was killed when his plane was shot down above Kigali airport on April 6 . He was the president of Rwanda .
 Between April and June, about 800,000 Rwandans were killed, most of them Tutsis killed by Hutus . Most of them were killed by the Hutus, who were Tutsi . Rwanda is now Rwanda's most troubled country .
 PLO chairman Yasser Arafat returned to the Gaza Strip after 27 years in exile . Arafat was in exile for 27 years before returning to Gaza in July .
 Israel and Jordan signed a historic peace deal on October 26, ending 46 years of war . The Israeli-Jordan peace deal was signed in 2006 .
 Bill Clinton witnessed the treaty between Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin and King Hussein at a ceremony in Wadi Araba, on the IsraelJordan border . The treaty was signed by Rabin at the time of the treaty .
 Albert Reynolds asked loyalist paramilitaries to toe the same line . Albert Reynolds, asked loyalists to toe same line. Albert Reynolds .
 The high-speed rail service, Eurostar, made its maiden voyage in 1994 . Tunnel, linking England and France, was believed to have been carried out by Serbians .
 Brazil's Samba Boys win the FIFA World Cup . Marcio Santos of Brazil holds the FIFA trophy to celebrate victory . Brazil beat Argentina 1-0 in their opening game .
 ' bring the military junta to an end : and restore democracy under ' President Aristide, exiled three | ' years earlier . Boys, beat Italy in the final . ‘ bring the junta . end : . and restore . democracy under . President Aristides .
 Ayrton Senna plowed off the track at the San Marino Grand Prix on May 1, in a fatal crash . A state funeral was held in his home city of Sao Paulo, Brazil .
 Founded in 1912 with the aim of increasing the rights of black South Africans . African National Congress came to power in 1994, when Nelson Mandela was elected president of South Africa . Founded by 1912, the party was founded by Nelson Mandela .
 Richard Holbrooke, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State, on the Bosnian crisis . The city of KOBe in Japan was devastated by an earthquake on January 17 .
 Measuring 7.7. on the Richter scale, it resulted in hundreds of deaths and over 13,000 injuries . Hundreds of people were killed in the 7.5-hour earthquake .
 Nick Leeson risked huge amounts of money on the Nikkei, the Japanese stock market index . Barings, a British investment bank, was declared bankrupt after an employee risked huge sums of money .
 On March 20, Turkey launched a major military offensive, involving 35,000 troops, against the Kurds in northern Iraq . The offensive was launched by Turkey, which has been fighting Kurdish rebels in Iraq .
 This was an attempt to pursue rebel Turkish Kurds who had fled into the region and prevent them from setting up permanent bases there . This was a move to stop them setting up bases in the region .
 Croatia signed the Dayton Peace : Accord in Paris, bringing three : years of war in Bosnia to an end . Croatia signed a peace treaty with the United States in 1993 .
 It had applied to join in 1975, after the restoration of its democracy . The country had applied in 1975 to join the European Union .
 The Single European Act was signed in 1987, aiming to create a single European market . It was signed to create the Single European Union in 1987 .
 Six European countries joined in economic union in 1957 . The union was born of a desire to make another European war unthinkable .
 The modern age of the European Union began in work, travel, and do business with other member members . The EU has become the largest economy in OF COUNTRIES Europe further and create a ‘single market” for trade .
 European citizenship and the introduction burden of supporting poorer countries, have made it easier to bureaucracy needed to run the organization . The introduction of the euro, acommon currency, has led to the creation of a huge bureaucracy .
 The EU has over half a billion people, which is 7.7 percent of the world's population . The EU is home to over half the world’s population .
 Only around 45 percent of Africa's population lives in cities, compared to 45 percent who live in urban areas .
 Bulgaria and Romania join the EU, bringing the total membership up to 27 . Bulgaria joins the 27-member EU, with Romania and Bulgaria joining the EU in 2015 .
 A ceasefire was signed between Russia and Chechnya (see 1994) on August 31 . The two countries signed a ceasefire in 1994 .
 Romanian elections were won by the Romanian Democratic Convention, bringing 48 years of communist rule to an end . The Romanian Democratic convention was won by Romania's first election in 1946 .
 Taliban rebels seized Kabul on September 27, forcing hundreds to flee the war-torn city . Civil war began in Afghanistan, when Taliban rebels took control of Kabul .
 US-led troops seized a city inside the Kurdish “safe haven’t been protected by 1/7 . The Kurdish city was protected by the US government . The city was declared a "safe haven" by the U.S. government .
 Operation Desert Strike fired missiles at Iraqi military targets in response to U.S. strike on Iraq . In response, America fired missiles into Iraq's military targets . The Iraqi government responded by firing missiles at the targets .
 Bovine spongiform encephalopathy, : or ‘mad-cow disease”, caused a major health scare in Europe . Bivine spontiform encephalopathy caused a : major health scares in Europe.
 United States president Bill Clinton won another term in office on November 6 . Bill Clinton was elected president of the United States in 1992 .
 December 12, Madeleine 2 Albright became the first female American Secretary of State . Albright was the first woman to hold the post in Washington, D.C. Albright .
 In April, rebel soldiers, mainly Tutsis, sealed off camps in eastern Zaire, where refugees were trapped in appalling conditions . The camps were sealed off by rebel soldiers in April, mostly Tutsi .
 Albania was consumed by anarchy during March and April, as law and order collapsed . Law and order collapse in the country's capital, Albania, during the chaos .
 Academy Awards . Academy Awards will be broadcast on Sunday night at 8pm ET .
 In January, President Clinton became the center of a scandal involving his relationship with a former White House intern, Monica Lewinsky . President Clinton was accused of having an affair with Lewinsky in 1998 .
 Clinton was already implicated in a sexual harassment case and was being investigated by independent counsel Kenneth Starr . Clinton was involved in a sex harassment case when he was investigated .
 In December, President Obama became only the second president in U.S. history to 6.5 years old .
 Rouge had deposed him as : leader and sentenced him to life : imprisonment in 1997 . Rouge had arrested him as a rebel leader . He was sentenced to life imprisonment .
 Q ~~ ee ie C Oo a x 1 y y 5 oe KO ne O 0 ° Xe"" A eo N go & PF oe ao™ one WF od od soe yw x & AF oO eee Oo WY og
 Saddam Hussein ' wrote an open letter to the UN ' Security Council threatening “grave ' consequences” if sanctions against ' Iraq were not lifted . Saddam Hussein threatened ‘grave ‘ consequences’ if sanctions . against ‘ Iraq were . not lifted, he wrote .
 The international community accused President Slobodan Milosevic of ‘ethnic cleansing’ when 45 ethnic Albanians were found dead, apparently executed by Serbs . The death toll from the killings was 45 people, mostly Serbs, according to reports .
 Kosovo peace talks ended without agreement on February 23 . NATO forces announced they would escalate their bombardment of Yugoslavia a week later . NATO said it would escalate its bombardment a week after peace talks broke out .
 The purging of Albanians by Serbian troops increased, and half a million fled Kosovo . Half a million Albanians fled Kosovo in the 1990s .
 Milosevic agreed to withdraw his troops on June 9, in response to unrelenting NATO bombing . NATO bombing has been a source of tension between Serbia and the West . Milosevi agreed to pull troops from Serbia in June after NATO bombing campaign .
 Thabo Mbeki won the South African presidential elections on June 2, succeeding Nelson Mandela . Mbeki succeeded Nelson Mandela, succeeding him as president . Thabo won the election in 2008 .
 East Timor, in Southeast Asia, asked for intervention from international troops after a breakdown in law and order in September . The country is in the midst of a crisis in the country's capital, Dharan .
 This followed a referendum on independence from Indonesia, which voted for independence from the country .
 Anti-independence Timorese rebels, supported by the Indonesian military, killed an estimated 1,400 Timoresse . 300,000 people fled to neighboring West Timor, killing an estimated 800 .
 ‘45% i Wiis | , a George W Bush was elected president of the United States in 2001 . The Nasdaq never fully recovered from the crash .
 Opposition supporters from Serbia stormed the Yugoslav parliament building in Belgrade on October 5 using a bulldozer . They declared Vojislav Kostunica as the new Yugoslav president after discrepancies in September elections caused outrage .
 September during meetings between the World Bank and the : International Monetary Fund . September . September meeting between the world bank and the IMF will take place .
 Israel announced its withdrawal from South Lebanon in May, 22 years after occupying it . Israel has been occupying the region since 1982 .
 Ugandan cult known as Restoration of the Ten . Commandments of God died in : their churches in March . The cult is a Ugandan religious group .
 First crew of ISS to visit the Republic of Albania on the brink of war in March . Ethnic Albanian rebels demanding equal rights clashed with government forces .
 NATO announced It would send a peacekeeping force to this former Yugoslavian republic in August . NATO announced in August that it would send peacekeepers to the former Yugoslavia .
 The United States experienced an unprecedented day of terror on September 11, when 19 al-Qaeda terrorists hijacked four passenger | airlines . The U.S. experienced a day of terrorism on 9/11 when 19 terrorists hijacked four airlines .
 Two flew into the twin towers of the World Trade Center, another into the Pentagon . Two flew in the twin tower of the Twin Twin Towers, another in the Pentagon. Another flew in to the Pentagon on 9/11 .
 These events left America, and the world, in a profound state of shock, says CNN's John Sutter . The world is in a state of profound shock, he says .
 NATO met the day after the attacks, offering full support and Invoking a Cold War-era treaty clause that stated when one member Is attacked; all members are attacked . NATO met to offer full support for the attacks .
 Only a week after 9/11, anthrax letters containing anthrax spores were mailed to several news offices and two Democratic United States Senators .
 In October, the U.S. and Britain ' launched attacks on targets in ' Afghanistan, where Osama Bin Laden was believed to be hiding .
 Freedom’ aimed to remove the Taliban regime and replace it with a democratic government . The Taliban regime was overthrown by the Taliban in 2001 .
 Another attempted terrorist ' attack occurred toward the end of ' the year . Another attempt to carry out a terrorist attack was also attempted .
 By the end of the ' year, it held more than 20,000 ' articles in 18 languages .
 Qe 0% 00 JKCHNUSHE BS — a standoff with Russian troops in Moscow, Russia .
 Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, went on trial on February 12, charged with crimes against humanity . The former Yugoslavia's former president is accused of war crimes .
 He chose to defend himself, and the trial faced many delays due to his ill-health . He chose not to give evidence in court . The trial was delayed due to the defendant's ill health .
 President George W Bush of America and President Vladimir Putin of Russia agreed to cut numbers of nuclear warheads by two-thirds each in the Treaty of Moscow, signed on May 24 .
 Russian special forces ' pumped gas into the building ' before engaging the rebels in a gun battle .118 people were killed in the gun battle with Russian forces .
 Members of a violent Islamist group, Jemaah Istamiyah, were convicted | of the attack . Members of the group were convicted of the crime .
 United States millionaire Steve Fossett became the first person to fly a : balloon solo nonstop around the : world .
 The U.S. space shuttle Columbia disintegrated as it reentered the Earth's atmosphere . Columbia was the first space shuttle to disintegrate in space shuttle disaster .
 An investigation confirmed that a heat shield had malfunctioned on takeoff, causing it to break up upon reentry . The heat shield broke up on reentry, causing the plane to crash into the ocean .
 The last commercial flight of Concorde, the supersonic aircraft, was made in October . Concorde was made a commercial flight on October 31 .
 Concorde given emotional farewell at Heathrow airport in London . Concorde was given an emotional farewell to Heathrow Airport in England .
 It had flown for 27 years but spiraling costs and dwindling ticket sales led to its demise . It was the last of 27 years of flying .
 Yugoslavia voted to end its existence in February, becoming Serbia and Montenegro . Yugoslavia voted in February to become Serbia-Montenegro, then Serbia-Serbia .
 The Yugoslavian Federation had existed for 74 years, but had lost its other four republics in Speedy exit . The supersonic airliner Concorde retired in 2002 .
 Arnold Schwarzenegger, former ; : movie star, ran for governor of California in 2003 . Arnold Schwarzenegger was elected to office in 2003 after a series of bloody conflicts throughout the 1990s .
 European Union treaties with a : simplified single text, and would create an EU president and : foreign minister . EU treaties would create a president and foreign minister, according to the EU .
 March 20 when US-led troops : invaded and toppled Saddam Hussein's government . March 20 was the date of the invasion of Iraq .
 UNESCO list of World Heritage : Sites, the city was more than : 2,000 years old . UNESCO list includes UNESCO World Heritage: Sites . City was over two thousand years old and more than two million years older .
 Civil war erupted in the western region of Darfur, Sudan, as rebels rose up against the government, claiming the region was being neglected by the capital, Khartoum . The United States offer of aid helped improve the situation .
 A statue of Saddam Hussein in Baghdad, Iraq, toppled from its plinth by Iraqi civilians, aided : by United States marines . Iraqi civilians toppled the statue from the plinth .
 NEW AFGHAN CONSTITITATION was signed in the capital Kabul on January 26 .
 Hamid Karzai was officially declared the winner of Afghanistan's presidential election on November 3 . Karzai is the leader 2 of the transitional government . He is the current president of Afghanistan .
 The result of the election had been delayed due to an investigation into voting irregularities . The result was due to be announced after an investigation was launched .
 Bush was reelected for a second term as United States president on November 2 . Bush won the U.S. presidential election in 2008 .
 U.S. and Iraqi forces stormed into 2 western areas of Fallujah, Iraq, early on November 8 . Fallujah is a 'arebel stronghold' in the Iraqi city . The Iraqi city is a major Iraqi city in the northern Iraq region .
 Trouble continued in Chechnya when separatists stormed a school in Beslan, North Ossetia, » on September 1 . The school was attacked by separatists on September 4 .
 An earthquake under the Indian Ocean near the Indonesian island : of Sumatra on December 26 unleashed a series of killer waves, : tsunami, that sped across the sea .
 Tsunami waves traveled 1,000 miles (1,600 km) across the Indian Ocean in only 90 minutes . Wave of destruction traveled more than a kilometre across the ocean in 90 seconds .
 Sorin erees Oy \S %§ YO Comme aes Rem Cree & “ o 2 aa CS \ Pp AN ©) & Q x 2 e \y S \ Se 9a 6 Reo ON DEI eH FEM aT F™
 YASSIR ARAFAT DIED in 2004, and the leader of the Palestine Liberation Army, Rawhi Fattouh, became interim president of the Palestinian Authority . YASSir ARAfat died in 2004 .
 Under Palestinian law he held the post for 60 days until elections were held . He held the position until the election was held in November .
 Abbas and the Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon, announced a ceasefire on February 8 . Abbas and Sharon agreed to a ceasefire last month .
 The former Lebanese prime minister Rafik Hariri was killed by a suicide bomb in west Beirut on February 14 . The former prime minister was killed in a suicide bombing in Beirut in February .
 He had called on Syria to cease its involvement in Lebanese affairs . Syria denied any involvement in his death .
 EXTREME WEATHER: Weather became increasingly wild in the 2000s . The assassination put further severe weather warnings on the rise . Weather in the U.S. has become increasingly unpredictable .
 Saddam Hussein went on trial in October, nearly two years after his capture, for atrocities he ' carried out during his rule . Former leader of Iraq, Saddam Hussein, has been on trial since his capture in 2011 .
 He ' refused to acknowledge the authority of the court trying him, and claimed that he was not guilty'
 Other weather gf) phenomena included record levels of rainfall, melting icecaps, and severe drought, all contributing to increased concerns about the prospect of global warming .
 The forecast is for more extreme weather, disrupting lifestyles, making animal species extinct, and threatening human lives . The forecast for extreme weather will disrupt lifestyles, disrupt lifestyles and kill animals .
 Coordinated terrorist attacks struck three underground trains and a double-decker bus, killing 02 people, and injuring several hundred more . Several hundred more were injured .
 Provisional IRA announced it was ceasing its armed campaign on July 28 . The provisional IRA is the paramilitary wing of the Irish Republican Army . The IRA was formed from the Republican Party in Northern Ireland .
 Independent arms decommissioning body said IRA had put all its weapons beyond use . Two months later there was a verification statement from the body . IRA's weapons had been put beyond use by decommissioned body .
 The world’s top polluter, the US, did not sign up, as the protocol was not thought to be in the best interest of the U.S. economy . The US, the world's top polluters, said it did not want to sign up .
 Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans in the US, on August 29, causing unprecedented damage . Hurricane Katrina was the first major hurricane to hit the city in New Orleans .
 The hurricane also battered large swathes of the Louisiana and Mississippi coastlines . It left two oil rigs adrift in the Gulf of Mexico and caused destruction estimated at $26 billion .
 ETA declared a permanent ceasefire on March 22 . Benazir Bhutto was the prime minister of Pakistan . ETA was formed from the Pakistani Taliban .
 The Basque region is seeking independence through a democratic process . They aimed to pursue independence for the Basques region through a democracy .
 iPhone is a new type of multimedia phone, the ' iPhone connects to the ' internet via a touch » screen . They took the membership of the group from 29 to 27 member iPhone .
 Seven bombs exploded on the over Northern of President Musharraf . end of the former Union of Serbia suburban railway of Mumbai, Ireland by Within weeks he was and Montenegro, created only : India, on July 11 .
 Iran insisted this was for generating nuclear power, but the West was concerned that Iran was making a nuclear bomb . Iran insisted it was only for power, not for nuclear power . It insisted the move was to generate electricity, not to make a bomb .
 The sailors were accused of entering lranian waters and were held prisoner for 11 days . They were held in captivity by the Lranian people for 11 years . The sailors are accused of trying to enter the waters of Lrania .
 It was grown from human bone marrow samples in a laboratory in Newcastle, England . The product was grown in a lab in a New York laboratory .
 On Monday, January 21, the London Stock Exchange experienced a dramatic fall in overall value . The fall in value was due to a drop in the overall value of the London stock market .
 Lehman Brothers declared bankruptcy on Monday, September 15 . The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 4.5 percent of its value . Lehman's bankruptcy was the largest bankruptcy in the U.S. investment firm .
 Born in Hawaii, he is the first African-American to hold the office of the presidency . He gained admirers for his relaxed charm and stirring oratory .
 His first year met with fierce opposition as he attempted to change the American healthcare system, tackle climate change, and reach new agreements on nuclear disarmament . However, his first year in office was met with opposition .
 Kevin Rudd made an : official apology for years of mistreatment inflicted on the country’s Aboriginal people on : February 13 . Rudd made the apology on February 13 at a press conference in Brisbane .
 Musharraf bowed to intense pressure and resigned on : August 18 ahead of impeachment proceedings . Musharra resigned from the post on August 18 .
 Israel claimed it was in an attempt to stop Hamas, the main Islamic resistance movement, from firing rockets into Israel . Israel said the move was in a bid to prevent Hamas firing rockets .
 Israeli troops withdraw from Gaza by the end of January . A ceasefire was declared and Israeli troops withdrew from Gaza in January .
 American car giants General Motors and Chrysler both filed for bankruptcy in 2009 . The ongoing financial crisis took its toll on industries around the world .
 Zimbabwe's opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai was sworn in as prime minister in a unity government with President Robert Mugabe on February 11 . President Mugabe has been in power for more than a year .
 This power-sharing deal was designed to put an end to the ongoing political violence in Zimbabwe . Zimbabwe's power-share deal is designed to end the ongoing violence in the country .
 Five nations, including China and the US, agreed to attempt to limit global temperature rises . Five nations including China, the US and China agreed to try and limit global warming .
 Some critics were disappointed, as they thought that the agreement did not go far enough . Some critics thought that it was not enough .
 BP workers lay an oil absorbent boom near a wildlife refuge off the Gulf of Mexico to stop the spread of oil from the Deepwater Horizon platform disaster .
 The constantly shifting high-altitude cloud of volcanic ash from Eyjafjallajokull, Iceland, caused is Moscow P Istanbul # Pn Fes Athens @ KEY 19th April 0000 GMT 19th . April 19th. April 0600 GMT travel chaos as European airspace
 An Icelandic volcano, dormant for two hundred years, erupted near the Eyjafjallajokull glacier on April 14 . It erupted near a glacier in Iceland . The volcano is dormant for more than two centuries .
 Clouds of ash sent clouds of ash soaring as high as 36,000 ft . disrupting air traffic in Europe, and delaying millions of air passengers across the world .
 The United States experienced an environmental disaster in April when the BP-owned Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded and sank . The U.S. experienced a similar environmental disaster when it happened .
 Around four million barrels of oil were pumped into the Gulf of Mexico and 11 men were killed . 11 men died in the Gulf after the Gulf oil spill .
 European Union for a rescue : finance package on November 21, : ~ : after seven days of denying it ' needed a bailout for its banking : system . After seven days, the EU denied it 'needed a bailout' for the banking system .
 Burmese opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi spent most of the previous 20 years under house arrest . She spent her 20 years in house arrest, due to her efforts to bring democracy to Burma .
 Her tireless determination to stand for nonviolent resistance in the face of a brutal military regime inspired the world . Her determination to fight for a peaceful democracy in Syria inspired her to inspire the world.
 A man in Tunisia burned himself to death in December 2010 in protest at his treatment by police . He set himself alight in a protest at police treatment by the government .
 This led to pro-democracy rebellions across the Middle East, which erupted across the region . Pro-democracy revolts erupted in the 1980s and 1990s, leading to the death of Saddam Hussein .
 Tunisian president Zine el Abidine Ben Ali promises more jobs while vowing to punish rioters . After days of protests, Ben Ali promised more jobs . Ben Ali has vowed to take action against rioters, vows to punish them .
 A man burned himself to death in an apparent echo of events in Tunisia that sent new shockwaves across North Africa . The man's death is the latest in a series of incidents in North Africa that have shocked the region .
 Antigovernment activists announced a “day of anger’ in Egypt, and there were calls for President Mubarak to resign . President Mubarak was elected to the presidency in 2007 .
 Mubarak shut down cellphone and internet networks and appointed his first-ever vice president in an attempt to calm things down . In response to the protests, he shut down internet and cellphone networks . Mubarak then appointed a vice president to calm down the situation .
 After 18 solid days of mass protest, Mubarak surrendered power to the army on February 11 and flew out of Cairo . Mubarak was forced to step down after 18 days of protest .
 The uprising in Egypt led to an upsurge of violent protests against repressive regimes in Yemen, Jordan, Morocco, Oman, and Iran . The uprising led to a violent up-and-down in Egypt .
 On February 16, protests erupted in Benghazi, Libya's second largest city, Benghazi, following the arrest of a human rights campaigner . The protests were sparked by the arrests of human rights campaigners .
 Colonel Muammar Gaddafi : (b.42) developed into an armed ' conflict pitting rebels against ' government forces' developed into a 'conflict' Gaddafi's government forces .
 Sudanese voted in a referendum : to split the country between north : and south and form a new state . Sudanese vote to split north and south .
 Australia resembled a muddy : lake in January following : catastrophic flooding, with : debris from houses and : rubble from houses . A family walks past cars upturned by : the tsunami in Japan .
 The future of the single currency looked uncertain . One of the Hollywood greats, : British-born American actress . The future is uncertain .
 Silvio Berlusconi faced new charges in February of ' having sex with an underage girl' Berlusconconi had shown a knack for surviving corruption charges .
 The earthquake in Japan was the fifth : largest since records began—this : graph shows the magnitude of the 10 : biggest earthquakes in history . The earthquake is the fifth largest in the world's history .
 Elizabeth Taylor died on March 23 . Great War passed from living : memory into the history books . Elizabeth Taylor was born in 1945 .
 Wars continue to be fought, and even developed nations can be devastated by natural disasters . Natural disasters can be devastating in developed nations .
 There are currently almost 7 billion people living on the planet, .. . three times the population of 1900 . Almost seven billion people live in the world, three times that of 1900.
 Many high-income countries are in the northern hemisphere, with the world’s poorest in sub-Saharan Africa . High-income nations are in northern hemisphere .
 The six wealthiest countries account for more than half the world’s Gross Domestic Product . Half the world's population live on less than $2.50 a day . The world's six wealthiest nations account for over half of the world GDP .
 Western Europe and North America have well-established business sectors, with multinational corporations selling products globally . The countries of Western Europe, North America and Europe have well established business sectors .
 When a country’s wealth is divided by the number of people who live in it, Qatar emerges as the richest nation in the world . Liechtenstein, Bermuda, Norway, Singapore Jersey, Kuwait and Brunei are among the countries with the highest GDP per capita .
 The poorest countries in the world are all in sub-Saharan Africa . Sub-Saharan African countries make up the poorest of the world's poorest .
 The fastestgrowing economies are mainly in developing countries . Fastest growing economies in the world are mostly in developing nations .
 Well-established agriculture, mining, and service sectors have helped create a healthy economy . Brazil is also rich in natural resources, including agriculture and mining .
 The world's largest Male union of East and West ) country, Russia, has seen Germany by becoming huge changes since the fall of the Soviet Union . It has vast natural and the fifth wealthiest resources, such as oll in the world by GDP. and gas, and is the Germany
 Factories and mines produce ' most of China's wealth, but in the future this EUROPE may be slowed by an aging population . China's aging population may be slowing in Europe .
 India's economy will grow faster than any other country's over the next two decades . It is estimated that b coro ; ee . ee ere India's economic growth will be the fastest in the world for the next 20 years .
 It has a young and growing workforce, has opened up foreign trade, and hosts millions of entrepreneurs . Millions of entrepreneurs running small, but successful, businesses .
 South Africa has Male Xe} 3 Female one ofthe largest economies on the yVigleclameeyalelalcyale /Xej5 Female but poverty is AUSTRALIA widespread .
 Australia's economy stands out because is infected with HIV/AIDS, high crime and land it survived the global downturn without going into recession . One in seven people live in Australia, one in seven Australians are HIV-infected .
 Natural gas and unemployment deposits are evenly spread throughout Is high. Unemployment rates are high. Natural gas, unemployment rates are low.
 Great leaders have been the salvation of their people, while weak leaders have brought mighty empires to their knees . Weak leaders have also been responsible for bringing mighty empires down . Great leaders are responsible for the downfall of empires, writes David Cameron .
 A large number of dynasties ruled Egypt from the 1st Dynasty to the 26th Dynasty (672-525 BCE], which ended with Egypt’s conquest by the Persian ruler Cambyses . Within these time periods, a large number .
 From then on, emperors took the honorific title Augustus for the duration of their reign . The title was changed from Augustus to Augustus in the middle of his reign .
 Until 286, this was normally a title unique to one person, but there were periods of joint rule, usually when the succession was disputed or the nominated heir was too young to rule alone . This was the first joint rule to be held by a single person since 286 .
 This persisted until 395, when the eastern and western portions of the empire split from each other . This persisted (with some variations) until 395-395, when they split from the empire .
 The Franks, led by the Merovingian ruler Childeric, emerged victorious, uniting France under Childeric’s son Clovis . The Franks were led by Childeric and the son of Childeric .
 Pepin, the first of the Carolingians, was anointed king of all the Franks by Pope Zachary in 751 . On Clovis’s death, his kingdom was partitioned between his four sons and their descendants until Pepin . Pepin was the first
 In 1469, Isabella of Castile and Ferdinand of Aragon united their domains to form the kingdom of Spain . Isabella and Ferdinand succeeded each other in 1469 and ruled the Spanish kingdom .
 The collapse of the Han Dynasty in 220CE was followed by three centuries of disunity during which the country was sometimes split into as many as 17 kingdoms . However, the collapse of China's Han Dynasty has been followed by disunity .
 The Song reunited China in 960, but they lost control of the north of the country in 1126 . The Song united China but lost control in the north in the 1126 year of the Song dynasty .
 The Mauryan Empire encompassed almost all of South Asia . The Gupta Empire formed a wide band across northern India . The Chola Empire stretched across Southeast Asia .
 At their heights, the Muslim Delhi Sultanate and Mughal Empire controlled virtually all of modern India and Pakistan . At their height, the Delhi Sultanates controlled virtually .
 Dr. Awul Abdul Kalam Pratibha Patil was the first president of the country . He was assassinated in the early 1900s .
 The greatest cities of the ancient world still had comparatively small populations . Baghdad 7 Xian 400,000 people . Baghdad was the most populous city in ancient times .
 Disputes over territory, religion, and governance have escalated into war throughout history . While the stories of great battles and great commanders make compelling reading, the tragic consequences of war should never be forgotten .
 We admire the imagination and tenacity of those who risked their lives journeying into territory unknown to them . Yet we can still admire the courage of those brave explorers .
 Voyaged to Russia via the North Cape reached the Grand Canyon in 1540 . Attempted, unsuccessfully, to found a colony in Virginia . Circumnavigated the globe . Explored Greenland, discovered the Davis Strait while searching for the Northwest Passage .
 Basic human needs have produced tens of thousands of inventions and discoveries . The need to survive, the urge to obtain knowledge has led to the creation of many inventions .
 These have transformed the way we function and think, and have made us distinct from the rest of the animal kingdom . They have transformed both the way .
 Since their time, Western philosophers have journeyed to the outer limits of thought and understanding, posing questions that challenge our most fundamental beliefs . The philosopher's work challenges our most basic beliefs .
 The world’s great faiths are as diverse as its cultures . Originating from almost every corner of the globe, they are diverse as cultures .
 The 20th century saw the emergence of several new religions that have attracted followers in their millions . Some have their origin in prehistoric times, yet some have their origins in prehistoric . Some of these new religions have attracted millions of followers worldwide .
 Polymath interested in esoteric knowledge (that he made available to only a few initiates) and mystical power of numbers .
 A pupil of Socrates, Socrates argued that everything we perceive is a mere shadow of its abstract, ideal Form . Socrates was Socrates' pupil and philosopher .
 Wide-ranging philosopher with a special interest in logical classification . In logical classification, he is a philosopher who specializes in logic .
 F Hegel Karl Marx Arthur Schopenhauer Sgren Kierkegaard Friedrich Nietzsche Bertrand Russell Ludwig Wittgenstein Jean-Paul Sartre LIVED 1225-74 1469-1527 1561-1626 1588-1679 1596-1650 16
 Argued that the state should promote the common good, irrespective of any moral evaluation of its acts . Argued state should be promoted to promote common good rather than the moral evaluation .
 Father of English political philosophy, the study of how societies are organized . Father of . English political . philosophy . Study of how society is organized .
 One of the most important 17th-century Rationalists, arguing that knowledge of the world can be gained through reason .
 Proponents of empiricism, the view that all knowledge of anything that actually exists must be derived from experience . Proponent of empirical theory .
 Great empiricist who developed an idealist metaphysical system . Maintained that reality ultimately consists of something nonmaterial .
 Leading sceptic of metaphysics, philosophy concerned with the ultimate nature of what exists . Leading sceptic of metaphysics and philosopher .
 Espoused transcendental idealism, the belief that human experience of things consists of how they appear to us . Spoke about how they appeared to us and how we perceived them .
 A forerunner of Existentialism, stressing the individual's unique position as a self-determining agent . Pre-emphasized individualism, stressed individual's position as self determining agent .
 Leader of the Existentialist movement, which focused on the totality of human freedom, died at the age of 65 .
 In Europe, from the 11th century on other continents, many of the talents of many people were nurtured in the universities that sprang up as conduits for the transmission of learning . In the succeeding centuries, the talent of many of these people was nurtured .
 Literature gives us a Special insight into the past . J. P. J. R. A. C. E. T. D. A., A. L. LESS .
 The plots of novels and plays may be invented, but the characters speak and behave in ways that reflect the preoccupations, social mores, and artistic conventions of their time . In many works, a fictional chain of events plays out against a rich background of verifiable historical happenings
 It Is only later, around the 9th century CE, that we begin to know the names of some of these artists . The names of the artists are not known until around 9th Century CE .
 In almost all societies, religious scenes were an important part of the output, as well as portraits that flattered the rulers and the aristocracy .
 Landscapes and rural scenes have delighted artistic patrons through the ages . Landscaped landscapes have delighted art patrons in the past and present .
 In the modern era, artists, free of patronage, have pursued their own, often shocking, agendas . Artworks, free from patronage, are pursuing their own agendas .
 Disasters such as the eruption of Pompeii, the Antioch earthquake of 526ce, and the Black Death caused huge losses of life . Modern societies are no less vulnerable, as evidenced by the loss of life in the 2004 Indian Ocean and 2011 Japanese tsunamis .
 The term agrarianism relates to political movements aimed at promoting the interests of agriculture and rural life . Agrarianist is a political movement aiming to promote rural life in rural areas .
 In World War | and World War Il, the Allies or Allied forces were the countries fighting against Germany . In its original meaning, absence of government; also used for a condition of public disorder .
 Politically, anarchism is a movement or ideology that believes in the abolition of government as an ideal for society . anticlericalism is opposition to the influence of churches and other religious organizations .
 The word autocrat is often applied to a powerful king or emperor . Unlike the similar term dictator, it is often used to refer to powerful kings or emulates them .
 Axis The alliance between Germany and Italy before and during World War II . Axis forces or Axis domination . Bilateral Involving two governments [or other organizations]
 Originally a member of the French middle classes, now often used disparagingly for a supporter of the capitalist system . Compare multilateral bloc A group of countries that act together in matters of international relations .
 In Marxist theory, the bourgeoisie are the class of capitalists . buffer state is a smaller country lying between two more powerful rival countries . buffer states are a buffer state .
 The presence of a buffer state is considered useful in decreasing tension between the rival countries . The presence has been seen as a useful tool to decrease tensions between the two countries .
 Byzantine Empire lasted for around 1,000 years, until its conquest by the Ottoman Turks in 1453 . The mainly Greek-speaking Christian Empire was a continuation of the eastern Roman Empire .
 In Islamic culture this is a political/religious institution in which a chosen individual, the caliph, is regarded as a successor to the Prophet Muhammad, and thus able to confer political legitimacy on individual rulers across the Islamic world . Caliphate in Islamic culture is a choice individual, a chosen
 Once powerful rulers themselves, caliphs later became mainly figureheads, although the Ottoman rulers of Turkey continued to claim the title until the 20th century .
 Calvinism is a strict form of Protestantism named after the 16th-century religious reformer John Calvin . Calvinism was named after John Calvin, a strict Protestantism .
 These businesses generate employment, while also providing profits for the capitalists . Businesses generate employment and provide profits for many of the world's richest people .
 Catholic originally meant inclusive or all-embracing, so that the Catholic Church originally meant the whole of the Christian Church .
 After various splits over the centuries, the Catholic Church ts now the organization of churches that owes its allegiance to the pope in Rome . A written grant of rights or similar legal document is a self-governing, independent city . The Roman Catholic Church is also known as the Roman Roman Catholic
 The term classical can also be applied to the high point of any civilization or culture . Client state is dependent on another larger country for trade, protection, etc. coalition is a formal arrangement in which two or more different groups agree to act together .
 Commonwealth refers either to the government of Britain in the years following the execution of Charles I, or to the Commonwealth of Nations . The association was set up to maintain links between countries of the former British Empire .
 A commune is a community of people who aim at sharing everything in common . The word also occurs in the full official names of several countries and United States states .
 Short for coup detat, the sudden illegal seizing of power by a small group . Counter-Reformation period of revival in the Catholic Church following the Protestant Reformation .
 Crusades military expeditions organized by the papacy in the Medieval period . Initially with the goal of gaining control of the ‘Holy Land” (Palestine) from Islamic powers . czar The title of the former emperors of Russia .
 Danegeld was a tax raised in Anglo-Saxon England to pay off and defend against Danish invaders . A tax was raised to pay for the defense of Denmark .
 The principle of organization of Genghis Khan's Mongol army, with a hierarchy of military units that contained between 10 and 10,000 men . A politician whose power base relies on stirring up emotions of the people of a country through charismatic speeches .
 Direct democracy, which operated in ancient Athens, allowed citizens to decide policy by direct votes . Direct democracy was a form of direct democracy in ancient Greek culture .
 Most democracy is representative democracy, with the people electing politicians to represent them, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . Most democracy involves representative democracy .
 Democracy has often been popular with groups excluded from voting, such as women and non-property owners . A body of religious believers sharing a common faith and organization and having a recognized name .
 An enlightened despot is one who is seen as ruling for the benefit of the people rather than for him/herself . An enlightened leader is seen to be seen as ruler for the better of his people .
 Also refers to the exercise of power itself by the ruler . Used especially for the time when tension was decreasing between the U.S. and former USSR .
 Originally an official in ancient Rome who was given sweeping powers for a short period during a time of national emergency . It was originally used with reference to the Jews .
 Now used for any person who rules a country alone and with no effective restrictions on their individual power . Used to be used for people who rule alone and without any effective restrictions .
 The word is not normally applied to hereditary kings or emperors, unlike the similar terms autocrat and despot . In general, this means the process of dissolving or separating into constituent parts .
 The Dissolution of Parliament is the official end of a parliament before a general election is held to elect new representatives . General elections will be held in the UK in 2015 .
 The Dissolution of the Monasteries was the disbanding of monasteries and other religious institutions in 16th-century England during the reign of Henry VIII . The right to govern or control or control was abolished by Henry VIII's reign .
 A term formerly used, especially the plural , for the larger self-governing territories within the British Empire, especially Canada and Australia . dynasty is a royal family that rules over a country for several generations .
 Fascist doctrines were authoritarian, antidemocratic (see democracy), and anticommunist (see communism) doctrines . They emphasized subjection of the individual to the state . They tended to glorify war and nationalism .
 Each level of society was entitled to claim rights from, but also obliged to undertake duties to, those “above” and “below” in the hierarchy . Lands held on condition of service offered to a superior lord under the feudal system . Free trade between countries without restrictions
 The systematic extermination of a racial or ethnic group is genocide . The process by which improved communications and international links have resulted in ideas, cultures, labor markets, and ways of life becoming increasingly widespread .
 Gnosticism was widespread in early Christianity, but came to be regarded as heretical by the Church . Gnosticism was widely considered a heresy in the early Christian church .
 Gothic Relating to the Goths, a Germanic tribe that invaded the Roman Empire in the 3rd and 4th centuries . A style of European architecture that flourished from the 13th to 16th centuries, and was characterized by distinctive pointed windows and other features .
 The Greek Church is a branch of the Christian Church associated with the Byzantine Empire . Church services were conducted in Greek during the Byzantine period .
 In small irregular units, often without uniforms or an official army structure . Guild guild guild A Medieval mutual-aid association .
 Craftsmen and merchants in towns were often organized into guilds . People were only allowed to practise their trade if they belonged to the guild of that particular trade .
 Holy Roman Empire was set up in Western Europe in Medieval times . Its territory was centred on modern-day Germany . It was also known as the Holy Roman empire .
 Both connected to and forming a rival to the papacy, it increasingly took the form of a loose collection of states . It increasingly became a loose group of states in the Middle Ages . The papacy was weakened in the mid-Middle Ages .
 The emperor of the Holy Roman Empire held little power by the time it was formally abolished by Napoleon in 1806 . A hominin is a member of the biological group that includes humans and their extinct ancestors .
 Huguenots historical term for French Protestants [see Protestantism] Humanist A Latin or Greek scholar, especially of the Renaissance period . Huguennots Historical term for Huguens .
 Renaissance humanists rediscovered classical texts and their human-centered values, as opposed to the emphasis on God and theology of the Medieval period . The work of Renaissance humanist involved the rediscovery of classical texts, as well as the focus on God .
 A person who advocates an ethical approach to human life that does not involve belief in a god or gods . imperialism originally the system of government or rule inan empire .
 The attitudes of mind that supported the acquisition of distant territories by 19th-century Western powers . Now, more particularly, more . particularly, the attitudes of . mind supported the . acquisition of remote territories by . 19th . century Western powers.
 Iron Curtain Term for barrier between the USSRdominated communist countries (see communism] of Eastern Europe and the capitalist West during the Cold War . Term for the barrier between communist countries and capitalist West .
 Islam established in the 7th century ce in Arabia by the Prophet Muhammad . Islam is a monotheistic (single-god) religion established by Muhammad .
 The two main branches of Islam, Sunni and Shi'ite, differ in the authority and legitimacy they ascribe to different members of the Prophet's family after his death . Sunni and Shiite Muslims differ in how to ascribe legitimacy to different family members after death .
 Islamism aims to establish Islamic law and values in societies worldwide . isolationism is a policy of isolating a country from international disputes, especially by not taking part in alliances .
 The term is particularly associated with certain periods of Chinese, Japanese, and U.S. history . It is also associated with periods in China, Japan and the United States .
 Jacobin was a member of the extreme revolutionary group during the French Revolution . He was a revolutionary member of a revolutionary group .
 In British history, a supporter of the claims of the Stuart monarchs to regain the throne after James II (Jacobus in Latin) was forced to flee and abdicate the British throne in 1689 .
 In the US, liberal often implies a left-wing stance that supports increased governmental intervention and spending on social welfare . mandate mandate is a legal command or commission, especially a commission authorized by the former League of Nations to govern a particular territory in the interests of its inhabitants .
 manifesto is a written declaration of policy and goals issued by a political party or movement . See also trusteeship .
 Marxist Term applied to a variety of doctrines that trace their origin to the German-born philosopher and social thinker Karl Marx . Marxist Term used to be used to refer to Karl Marx's doctrines .
 Marx himself believed that he had discovered laws of history that proved that eventually capitalism would collapse and be replaced by communism . Marx believed that capitalism had to be replaced with communism .
 The belief that Jesus Christ has only one nature (with his divine nature absorbing his human nature), rather than having two separate natures . Monophysitism .
 A minority view in the Christian Church, it is upheld mainly by the Coptic Church and other churches with their roots in the ancient Near East . multilateral Involves three or more governments .
 A people defined by shared historical, cultural, and linguistic ties . nationalism A political attitude of strong support for the interests and future of one’s nation . nationalization The taking of private property into public ownership by the state, especially on a large scale .
 NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization is an international military alliance of Western powers . NATO was established in 1949 and is now a major military alliance in the world .
 Nazism The doctrines of the National Socialist party, in power in Germany under Adolf Hitler 1933-45 . Hitler's National Socialist Party was in power under Hitler's regime .
 Nazism was similar to fascism, but in addition was racist . It believed in the supremacy of a supposed “Aryan” race of which the German people were allegedly the purest” representatives .
 Any cultural movement in which styles or ideals of aclassical period are revived . See also totalitarianism .
 A political system where a few powerful, and often rich, individuals combine to rule a country . neocolonialism is seen as similar to aspects of actual colonialism . An 18th-century movement inspired by renewed interest in the values of ancient Greek and Roman art .
 In the Christian Church, a body of people adhering to a particular rule or way of life that is often set down by an individual founder . Many former communist countries were also effectively oligarchies, with communist party officials monopolizing power .
 The phrase "in orders" means occupying a clerical position, such as priest or bishop . The phrase in orders’s phrase means “in orders”
 Orthodox Church is a major group of Christian Churches that descend from a split with the Western Church that occurred in 1054 ce. The Orthodox Church was founded by the Eastern Christians in the 10th century .
 Eastern and southeastern Europe has several different national Churches . Prominent in Eastern Europe, it includes several different traditions .
 It is often implied that a populist simply tells people what they want to hear . But it is often said that populist tells what he wants to hear. It is not easy to say what you want to say .
 A high administrative office in the Roman Republic and Empire, deriving originally from the headship of the state bodyguards, the Praetorian Guard . Relating to the cultures of the Americas before their contact with European explorers .
 Any of the forms of Christianity resulting from the Reformation of the 16th century and afterward, in which allegiance Is no longer offered to the pope in Rome . puppet state A country that, though nominally independent, is actually under the control of another country .
 The term was later applied to religious groups with similar views outside the Church of England . It was later used to refer to any way of thinking that was seen as disapproving of pleasure and indulgence .
 Arecession is often defined as having occurred when economic output has declined for two successive three-month periods . Arecession Is often defined by having occurred during economic output declines .
 The Christian reform movement of the 16th century saw many churches and individuals break from the Western Church headed by the pope in Rome . The Reformation was a major reform movement in which many churches broke from the Catholic Church .
 Renaissance a cultural phase of European history, centered on Italy in the 15th and early 16th centuries . Renaissance involved the rediscovery of the cultural achievements of ancient Greece and Rome . Renaissance was a period of cultural upheaval centered around Italy .
 A term that came into use after World War . for payments made by the defeated countries to the victors . regarded as being in recompense for their aggression . This in turn became the inspiration for new ideas in literature .
 republic is a country not headed by a hereditary king, prince, or emperor . An older term for the same thing is indemnity . republic is an older term .
 Modern republics are usually headed by presidents . They range from democratic regimes to dictatorships . republicanism is the preferred form of government .
 In British history, the Restoration refers to the return of the British monarchy in 1660 . In 1660, after the English Civil War and Commonwealth, and the years following this .
 The Western branch of the Christian Church developed under the leadership of the pope in Rome . Church services are, or were, conducted in Latin . Roman Church is the name of the Roman Catholic Church .
 Romantic Movement A many-sided cultural and artistic movement in Europe that reached its peak in the early 19th century . Romantic Movement was a cultural and art movement in the late 1800s .
 It included an increased appreciation of nature and an emphasis on feelings and emotions in contrast to reason . A religious group or organization that holds distinctive or nonstandard beliefs .
 The term is often used to imply that the views held are doubtful or even heretical . Displaying hostile attitudes to people from a different social grouping, especially those adhering to a different denomination of the same religion .
 A peasant living in a condition of semislavery, with no right to leave the land of the landowner for whom he or she works . A shogun is a hereditary commander-in-chief in Japan .
 For various periods in Japanese history, shoguns, rather than the emperor, held the real power . Formerly another term for socialism or communism. social democracy .
 In modern usage it refers to a moderate form of socialism that is compatible with democracy and liberalism . Term used for a variety of left-wing ideologies and movements that involve some government intervention in society and the economy .
 Speculation is an economic term for the buying and selling of shares or other tradeable assets for the purpose of making a profit if the price rises or falls in the way that the speculator predicts . An independent state is an independent country .
 A country's stock exchange allows trading in shares of companies, government bonds, and other financial assets . suffrage suffrage is the right to vote, especially in a public election .
 The supremacy of one state over a less powerful one is also seen in the U.S. synod is a church council or assembly . A technocrat is a member of a technical elite .
 A tribune of the people was one of two officials appointed to protect the rights of the common people against the nobility . The tribune was created in 17th century to protect common people's rights .
 A military tribune was an officer attached to a legion . An official victory procession in ancient Rome was an official victory parade .
 To seize power from another in a manner regarded as wrongful. usurp . To usurp usurp is to seize power . See also mandate usurp.
 The name, meaning nowhere,” comes from the title of a book by Sir Thomas More, published in 1516 . The name means nowhere, or nowhere .
 The word Utopian has come to be applied to any impracticably idealistic plan . In the feudal system [see feudalism], a person holding land from a superior, in return for offering them allegiance .
 The Viet Cong carried out guerrilla warfare and other activities during the Vietnam War . The political and military organization was formed from the Viet Cong .
 A supporter of the creation of an independent state for the Jewish people . Zionist A supporter .
 Israel is a strong supporter of Israel’s continued existence as a Jewish state . Also, following the creation of Israel in 1948, Israel has been a strong backer of the state .
 Page numbers in bold indicate main treatments of a topic; numbers in /talic refer to illustrations . Page numbers are shown in bold to indicate main treatment of topics .
 DK India would like to thank Dharini, Sreshtha Bhattacharya, Archana Ramachandran, Anita Kakar, and Vineetha Mokkil for editorial assistance .
 Victoria & Albert Museum, London 198bl; Wallace Collection, London 214bl; Courtesy of the Warden and Scholars of New College, Oxford 131b; © Trustees of the Watts Gallery, Compton, Surrey 301tr.
 Take steel as the key link for a leap forward in all fields, Tianjin People’s Fine Arts Publishing House, 1958; offset, 53 x 77 cms, inv. nr. 1958 .
 Martin Bond 275crb; Jean-Loup Charmet 282bc; Eye of Science 429bc; John Greim 283bl; NASA 436clb; Science Source 208tr. Martin Bond 279crb .
 Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, Imperial Japanese ~SPOrMRG~ Navy, Official portrait, by Shugaku Homma, 1943 [inv NH 79462-KN) 393cb. 393CB. Yamamoto . Official portrait of Admiral Yamamoto was by Sh