 When they nearly blew us up, we were in danger of being blown up . Dr. David Frum says he was in danger when he was blown up in the air .
 October 30, 1962, was October 31, 1962 . It was the first anniversary of the first World War II . The first month of the second World War I was born .
 The last presidential debate for 2012 just happens to be on foreign policy, and is scheduled for Oct.nd . 50 years to the day since President Kennedy’s dramatic television address to the nation led to heightened anxiety .
 It is hoped candidates Obama and Romney will be asked to weigh in on the lessons learned from 1962 .
 The crisis developed out of the conflict over the Cuban revolution of 1959 . The crisis was the result of a conflict between the government and the Cuban government .
 Kennedy administration pulled out all the stops in an effort to bring down the new Castro regime . The Kennedy administration tried all the tricks in a bid to topple the new regime .
 Trade sanctions, sabotage, assassinations and the Bay of Pigs invasion were launched in an effort to roll back Castro’s revolutionary government . Castro then took a sharp turn to the left and turned to the Soviet Union for support .
 Nikita Khrushchev approved sending military aid, troops and nuclear weapons to Cuba . U.S. nuclear Jupiter missiles based close to Soviet territory in Turkey were based near Soviet territory .
 Khrushchev’s goals were to protect his new Cuban allies and to achieve nuclear deterrence vis a vis the U.S. on the cheap . The U.N. would not be able to use its own nuclear weapons to protect its Cuban allies .
 A U.S. spy plane discovered missile sites under construction in October . The crisis rapidly escalated after the discovery . The United States says the missile sites are under construction .
 When Kennedy spoke to the nation, he demanded that the missiles be removed, and imposed a naval blockade of the island . Kennedy imposed a military blockade of Cuba .
 We know now that the crisis was a classic example of misperception and misunderstanding — the fog of war in action . The crisis was an example of mistaking and misunderstanding, writes CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Both sides thought, incorrectly, that they understood the situation as well as the motives of the other side . Both sides were wrong to think they understood each other's motives .
 It seems clear in retrospect that the president was poorly served by his top military advisers . The president was well served by the military, but his advisers were poorly served .
 Secret White House tapes made during the crisis reveal that Joint Chiefs of Staff were unanimous in pressing for war, and hurled charges of “appeasement” in an effort to intimidate President Kennedy into launching an attack on Cuba . Joint Chiefs' tapes show that the Joint Chiefs were unanimous
 At one point, after the president left the room, the chiefs can be heard mocking him . The chiefs can also be heard laughing at the president .
 It later emerged that both sides had grossly misunderstood the situation, and nuclear war had been averted more by accident than competent statesmanship .
 Robert McNamara, Kennedy’s secretary of defense, later became one of many former nuclear warriors who worked to abolish those weapons worldwide .
 Both U.S. and Soviet leaders behaved as if the addition of nuclear weapons to the mix had little impact on their handling of the crisis . What is perhaps most alarming about the crisis is that both leaders behaved like they didn't see nuclear weapons as a problem .
 In a mind-boggling display of hubris, they allowed a dispute over a transient tactical advantage to put at risk the fate of the entire planet, both the natural world and human generations yet unborn . In a state of war, they allow a dispute .
 On 50th anniversary of being more lucky than good, let us make a commitment to rid the earth of nuclear weapons . So on this, our 50th . anniversary, we should be making a commitment .
 He is now in Eureka helping Veterans for Peace restore the Golden Rule, the very first anti-nuclear sailing vessel . The Golden Rule was built in the 1970s and is now being restored by veterans .
 Arnold Oliver: "I'm not going to let it slide down" Arnold Oliver is retiring from his job in Washington state . Arnold Oliver says he's not sure if he'll be able to keep his job .