 Many factors led to the confrontation . More was involved than simple Soviet belligerence .
 None of us knew if the world was going to come to a fiery nuclear end . We knew enough weapons existed to make that feasible .
 In any case, we were told it was all the fault of a belligerent Soviet Union intent on planting nuclear bases close enough to annihilate the U.S. population . We were told that the bases were close to annihilating the United States .
 During the harrowing days the world came closer to the brink of nuclear war than it has ever since . During those harrowing days, the world was closer to nuclear war .
 The genesis of the crisis was the introduction of Soviet ICBMs into Fidei Castro's Cuba . The missiles were capable of striking all major U.S. cities except on the West Coast .
 Soviets had never before transferred any power after overthrowing dictator Fulof Fulof their small missile force from their own gencio Batista in 1959, he turned the territory to any of the Warsaw Pact allies, let alone Cuba .
 Historians believe President Eisenhower began taking steps to topple Castro . Decades later, many historians believe that the Cuban Missile President Eisenhower started taking steps .
 Crisis is at least as rooted in U.S. election politics as in any nuEisenhower, an invasion seemed in order . Crisis is rooted in United States election politics, as well as U.N. politics . Crisis seems to be rooted in election politics .
 Nikita Khrushchev was the pointman for the 13-day crisis . Richard Nixon was then running for president in 1962 . Nixon ran for president against John F Kennedy .
 NDCON PLANNED a covert operation headed by troops as well as naval vessels, staging them off the Florida the CIA, to coincide with the closing days of the 1960 campaign . The U.S. took forceful military steps for a potential invasion .
 The United States Navy put a quarantine into effect that would quarantine Soviet ships heading to Cuba from delivering their backed invasion . This proved impractical at the time, however, and the exilestop was pushed back until after the Novemmilitary cargos .
 By the time Kennedy became president, Cuban exiles had construction of their missile bases . Overhead, American U-2 photoreconnaissance aircraft kept a close watch as the Soviets went ahead with the project .
 The crisis simmered, then begun training at a secret base in Guatemala called Camp Trax, came to a dangerous head when a Soviet anti-aircraft battery shot down a U-2 .
 Despite heavy pressure from his military established to broadcast propaganda into Cuba, Cuba's government established a network of propaganda advisers . The Cuban government established the propaganda network in Cuba .
 The operation was scheduled for late March 1961 a retaliatory strike against the offending Soviet bat . President John F Kennedy did not order the operation .
 Kennedy resorted to behind-thescenes dealing with certain trusted Russian interPigs, settling the coast . Instead of dealing with the Russians, Kennedy settled the coast.
 The site was canceled, and a new and now infamous landing point called the Bay of mediaries was chosen instead . However, the new landing point was instead chosen by the U.S. government .
 It was thought that when the exiles landed in Cuba, a spontaneous revolt moved . The Cuban exiles were thought to have led to a spontaneous uprising .
 Khrushchev decided to end the Bohby Kennedy's among the mass of the population would take crisis and took the missiles out of Cuba . Premier Khrushche decided .
 As part of place, resulting in Castro's downfall, the unwritten deal with the Soviets, the United States. The United personal baby . The United States is now the world's most powerful state of power .
 The invasion force left its base at Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, on April 17, 1961 . U.S. removed from Turkey its Jupiter missiles from Nicaragua .
 Shortly before the which had been targeted against the Soviet heartlanding took place, a numberof bombers, based in land . Shortly before . The which had targeted . the . which had taken place, . had a number of bombers based in . land .
 Under American naval and aerial supervision, missiles Nicaragua and llown by exiles, attacked the small Cuban air were crated aboard Soviet cargo ships and taken back to Russia . force .
 The raid failed to take out all of Castro's planes, but the remaining aircraft created havoc at the landing site, killing hundreds of exiles and sinking their supply ships offshore . Unknown to the American public at the time of the crisis, the U.S. government was told . Unknown
 The CIA asked Kennedy to call in an airstrike from American ships war to take down Fidel Castro by any means possible . The Kennedy administration was conducting a secret CIA operation to take Castro down .
 Operation Mongoose was a secret war from 1961-1963 . More than 1,000 men were captured and imprisoned for almost a year before being ran out .
 CIA-Mafia plot to kill Castro began during the last invasion at Miami's Orange Bowi . Operation Mongoose 1962 was a secondary part of Operation Mangoose 1962 . President Kennedy promised days of President Eisenhower's administration .
 The Bay of Pigs defeat to kill Castro that led the was the first major drubCuban leader to ask the bing for the young Kennedy Soviet Union for protecadministration . Still, that their flag would someday fly in a free Havana .
 Kennedy set imminent invasion of Cuba in motion operations to by the United States. Kennedy set . U.S. operations to . by the U.K. to by Cuba in . operations to Cuba .
 The oust Castro, including the story of how the Cuban use of the mob and the Missile Crisis began had its CIA's covert/overt plans in roots in Operation Mon.Operation Mongoose .
 Pres. Kennedy ordered an investigation into what went wrong . In goose—part theater, part the fallout from the . gled Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Operation Mongoose sified a number of years was the ill-fated Bay of Pigs . Cuban leader Fidel Castro, lower right, observes counter-invasion . The invasion of Cuba took place in April 1961 .
 When Castro came to invasion by some 1,500 Cuban exiles on April 17,1961, of the operation, from be32 MILITARV HISTORY NOVEMBER 2006 ginning to end .
 CIA officer George McManus blocked by U.S. Customs Service agents from sailing their small ship, Sally . A recently declassified memo, written by large amounts of guns and ammunition, makes it stiikingly clear that . litical motivations drove the attempts to take out Castro
 The political stigma of the Bay of Pigs folly drove Attorney General Attorney General Robert Kennedy made it clear that OperaRobert Kennedy and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara carried top priority in the United States government .
 McManus' memo lays out in stark detail why operation had many different components and units . The Kennedy administration wanted to get back at Castro—lo arm, fast-moving boats owned or leased by the CIA, storefront .
 The official CIA plan for the removal of Castro was run by Gibraltar Steam Ship Corporation, which was actually out of the White House . One of the main dummy coiporations was THE OFFICIAL CIA PLAN .
 As a clandestine CIA project, agency's parent for all its seagoing operations . Agency is parent for most of its seagraphic operations .
 The 'kinsman' was to be a plausibly deniable concept, one that could be of the agency's fast fleet of ships . Ace Cartography was discarded and denied in case something went wrong .
 Operation Mongoose began in the spring of 1961 to the late summer and an underwater component, in which Cubans and Americans eaiiy were trained as frogmen to infiltrate Cuban harbors and attack Robert Kennedy . In the fall of 1963, the operation became a full-scale U.
 UDT operation. squads went by the fictitious name of Marine Engineering . A special group, or SGA, was created to oversee Training the project and met almost daily basis .
 The Cuban bers of the SGA were Robert Kennedy; McNamara; . Robert Kennedy, McNamara, Robert Kennedy and McNamara . General intelligence service was buzzing with activity . Among the mems of the CIA was Robert Kennedy .
 Castro had itifilMaxweU Taylor; presidential advisers McGeoi^e Bundy, Roswell trated hundreds of agents-in-place . Hundreds of Cuban exiles who had fled Havana after he took power .
 The man in charge of Operation Mongoose was Brig. Brig. John Defterios of the Castro regime .
 Gen. Gen. Edward Lansdale was a veteran of antiguerrilla campaigns in and the Keys . Lansdale picked up vital information from the Philippines and Vietnam in anti-Castro activities .
 Graham Greene modeled the main character in the American government in his novel The Quiet American after something . Greene's flamboyant style attracted Castro's intelligence people .
 Thousands of Castro oppoLansdale operatives teamed up with Bill nents to get all phases of Operation monplace . At the same time, thousands of Castro opponents were rounded up by the CIA .
 Harvey tration was laying down the law on wanted to use traditional CIA methods Mongoose. Harvey trated wanted to have traditional CIA .
 Hundreds of agents set up shop there, including dozens of dummy or fi ont organizations . U.S. military intervention will require decisive, United States military intervention.""
 By the latter part of 1962, there was no CIAs headquarters was dubbed Zenith Technical Services Inc. military success in toppling Castro .
 Small-scale raids had been in realit>' it was the jumping-off point for raids into Cuba . A fleet of high-powered boats operated out of the Florida tere .
 That spring the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps had gone Cuban military installations . That spring, the United States Navy and . Marine Corps . went Cuban military bases .
 The Miami Herald reported the arrest of 10 tactics they would need in a real assault on Cuba . For example, a stoty in the December force landed off the beaches at Vieques Island, using the same 5, 1962, edition of the Miami Herald .
 By this time, American mercenaries operating out of Sombrero and Castro knew that the United States, by means of these covert Marathon keys, was behind the attack . The U.S. knew that Castro and Castro were behind the attacks .
 U-2s provided photographic evidence of Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . U.S. aircraft operating out of Key West provided the most detail of the Soviet missile program . Cuban sailors killed two sailors near Santa Clara de Norte .
 CIA reports said that Castro expected an AmericanCuba invasion . Khmshchev met with his top military advisers in April led invasion of Cuba during the summer of 1962 .
 Ameriinvasion after September; it said any danger of an American can Jupiter missiles were operational just across the border in attack on Cuba would be over by then . The U.S. would be able to launch a strike on Cuba in September .
 Khrushchev had talked his top military and political advisers . The United States prepared miliinto taking the unprecedented step of sending their most powtary options for an attack while Cuban exiles were raiding harerful intermediate missiles to Cuba .
 CIA-backed exile number of Russian freighters arriving in Cuba, including Omsk . Raids into Cuba grew in scope and intensity . Meanwhile CIA was monitoring the arrival of a large number of large .
 On August 24, 1962, which docked at the port of Casilda on September 8. 1962 .
 French intelligence officer Philippe de Harbor moved close to Hotel Icar in Miramar province . Exiles aboard two small boats slipped into Havana .
 Voskjoli told CIA Director John McCone that his agency had reintelligence reports said that Castro had often frequented the ceived reports of the anival of Soviet hotel .
 Castro, who was inside, managed to of Russian soldiers to man those missiles . He also reported the deployment of thousands rounds hit the hotel, but he survived the attack .
 Two days later, another exile attack took place Kennedy decided to make a full-court press . Two days after the attack he decided to launch a full court press against the Taliban .
 Three months before, members of Operation Mongoose took center stage in an October 16, 2006 meeting chaired by Robert Kennedy . The exile group Alpha 66 attacked a Cuban Coast Guard cutter in October .
 Operenvisioned as a part of Northwoods was to destroy an Ameriation Mongoose . One action pj-essing the general dissatisfaction of the President with the President . The President destroyed the Mongoose as a result .
 He pointed out that the operation had been can warship in Guantanamo Bay and blame it on the Cubans . The operation was launched on a warship at Guantanamo Bay .
 A under way for a year, that the results were discouraging, tbat Washington-initiated wave of ten or was supposed to sweep there had been no acts of sabotage, and that even the one which had been attempted had failed twice .
 These crimes would be blamed on had been noticeable improvement during the year in the colCuba .
 Other despicable actions allegedly considered included lection of intelligence but that other . actions had failed to influthe deliberate sinking of boatloads of Cuban refugees .
 The CIA wanted to Cuban MiGs had destroyed a number of American American aircraft . What both Robert Kennedy and his brother did was aircraft operating in international waters .
 President Kennedy was shown the blueprints for the Soviet Union began secretly to send secretly to Cuba . President Kennedy turned it down . Operation Northwoods was a response .
 U.S. intelligence had been keeping a close watch on the steady stream of those heavily loaded Soviet missiles . It now can clearly be stated that the 1962 missile crisis was Castro shot .
 At the height of Operation Mongoose, the CIA said no. missile deployments, as well as the presence of and the military devised numerous clandestine opthousands of Russian technicians . Reports from the CIAs . agents inside Cuba came back of large-scale Soviet . missile deployments .
 Even prior to the Soviets erecting their misthroughout the Cuban population and economy, Cuba was under the shadow of the Soviet Union .
 Operation Bingo was the CIA's audacious plan against the Soviets in 1962 . The U-2 returned with proof that the plan had little chance of succeeding . The CIA's plan was never successful .
 The concept was to cause an insent long-range missiles to Cuba capable of hitting the U.S. that looked like a States. That looked like the United States, the concept was designed to create an image of Cuba .
 During the 13-day crisis that followed, the United States attack, if genuine, would give the U.S. reason to retalplaced a naval quarantine around Cuba, threatened to sink iate against Cuba . Such an attack would have given the United .
 The blueprint for this operation would be a Soviet ships that crossed the quarantine line, and brought thoulive firefight right outside the base during which, upon hearing sands of troops streaming into Florida for a possible invasion, the troops inside Guantanamo would think a real attack had begun .
 The United States would had in place a number of tactical nuclear weapons which could then make a counterattack upon the phony Cuban forces, thus creating a pretext for going to war against the Castro government . The U.S. would then go to war .
 The plan was to convince the Castro government that American naval forces, then in the Caribbean for the landing of the Mercuiy space capsule canying an American astronaut, were only a cover . The real purpose was an invasion of Cuba .
 Operation Free-Ride, which was meant to create unrest and dissension among the Cuban people, was created by the Cuban government . The operation was intended to create dissension and create unrest in Cuba .
 Pan American Airways tickets to destinations such as Mexico, Venezuela and other parts of South America to be dioped to Cuban people . The program was to be implemented by the Cuban government .
 U.S. ambassador to U.N. Adiai Stevenson challenges Soviet ambassador Valerian Zorin to admit the Soviets had placed missiles in Cuba . During a certain period, any Cuban who wanted to leave the country would supposedly be able to do so .
 Removal of the Soviet missiles vi/as monitored every step of the way, from the leveling of the sites to the shipboard loading onto freighters . be used in the event of an American invasion .
 JFK's sonal emissary was meeting with Castro in Havana, Cuba, on November 22, 1963 . Thousands of Americans soldiers would be killed in Dallas, Texas, when JFK was killed in were employed .
 During the height of the crisis, the CIA landed an unauthoday a Cuban agent working for the CIA, Rolando Cubela, was rized team of agents in Cuba h^om a two-man sub .
 The inspector general's report describes the final meeting of the CIA-Mafia links . Munications were issued from Washington to the team inside . Given what we now know, the placement of Russian missiles Cuba.
 No harm was done, however, and the team members eventuaUy as by the news media and official U.S. government sources . Unfortunately, the CIA men could nol be easily retrieved from Cuba .
 The crisis ended when Premier Khrushchev decided to remove the missiles in exchange for a secret pledge by the from office by whatever means possible . Kennedy brothers' secret war against Castro to preserve John .
 Yet the popular myth persists of evil Russians armed and at the scale hit-and-run raids continued into the fall of 1963 . No apdoorstep in 1962, bent on attacking America with nuclear preciable damage to the Cuban state took place .
 After the erisis, JFK decided to reduce tensions with the Soviet Union . Peter Kross is the author of The Encyclopedia of World War II Soviet Union.
 The following fall, the administration received tentative feel of the Cuban Missile Crisis . Castro wanted to know if Kennedy would be willing to go on the missile program .