 At cabinet meeting John F Kennedy made several attempts to spell decisions . At a cabinet meeting he tried to spell some of the key decisions .
 Several inconoi stent and conflicting proposals have been made by the USSR within the last twenty -four hours, including one made public in Moscow . IMMEDIATE RE LEASE OCTOBER 27 1 1*42 Office of the White .
 The proposal involves the security of nations outside the Western Hemisphere . Western Hemisphere countries are only subject to the threat that has produced the current crisis .
 The first imperative must he to deal with this immediate threat, under which no sensible negotiation can proceed, must he deal with it immediately .
 The U.S. thai as an tit* cat preliminary to consideration of any proposals work Otl the Cuban bases must stop . Offensive weapons mu*t be rcnrLriid inoperable; and further shipment of offensive weapons to Cuba must cease .
 The U.S. and its allies have long taken the lead in seeking properly inspected arms limitation, on both fides . These efforts can continue as aoon ao the present Sovietc reate d threat is ended .
 In these ■ Circumstances the United States fools it essential to inf em its all±aa and to consult vith thera on the general situation* o* PH» It is of the utmost importance that nothing in VtieA your dlHctttS&
 I think thl” (at hot gray /grade) r*pre«ntfl YOur thr** dot. ut'ra talking about * Industrial. ut’ra . I think this is a mistake .
 In Areae Il r theifl a^a at leant fi BtflBilo covered, uiaailft, un. can^M-cavem* ffliaollo t r-n 1 tors r about 15 voMcIob, about
 ATid In ar*a number III, ud have 35 vehicles, 15 lanj* tanta, 9 *ia&1L tflnfcn, 9 buildings, 7 buildings, flfld one building untfoe const suit Ion . Ion has 35 vehicles and
 Thece fallen rasure *T foot long, The Other nissile, the 1,100 one, uh. to 13 foot Long. Thece fell from the top to the bottom of the world .
 That depends or now ready the GSI how. WO, air. ...how long Lf va can't teLl lunlnteliLgibLe ] can't . The GSI is now ready .
 The surface ha a to be hard, then yO* put a £lww deEeet-, a do Elector plate e tha-re to direct the missile . The surface has a hard surface, then the surface must be hard .
 Br. Thie le important as Lt relates to whether theae, tod ay j are rea to fire, Br. Lt. says . Br. Br. says: "It's important to know if theae is to fire"
 It eay ftOt take long to k— , to pl4« thera, to erect a fonte H but at lotet at the moment there U acme leitM to believe the warheads aren't prsiont and hertCO they are not ready
 Tji* unknown factor here, tit, Xb tho dftfEH to which the egulpmtrtt haa been chnrked out after it 'a been snipped frpn the Soviet Uflior here'
 If the equiprteflt is Checked Qut r the Ute ha a to DC accurately surveyed j the position ae ia known . If the equipment is checked, the position in the position is known .
 If everything were"" chec*od~outr it 'would atlll take them in the order of two to three hours before they could get that one missile up and ready t qOi sirn . Collateral reports indicated from grOunft observers that convoys
 How that, this would bo the erectors, helping to raise the missile frOn thU transporter up into a vert It* X poaitien but the structure (unintelligible) is Oft tho around . How that would bo . the erector, helping . raise
 MelliMr ti JUa I correct in saying that we have not located any nuclear atorago eites nith certainty as ye"" This Lb one of Che rrtont important thought 0 we face Lrt properly Integrating the reading of. Melli.
 Sconce liable tot mo that the SovUU u^wld deploy nuclear warheads on an un fenced peicO of grounds . Thnre'e'e, there Qust bo ewe storage alto there .
 They're currently biaq chemically proceBBed at the Naval Center at Suit land . They're due to arrive at the National PJ C*nt*r around 3 o'clock tonight .
 Jc-Lnt htomic Energy people may be looking at that and forming a judteaajit, hut from photos alona I cannot attest to that. Uh, the Jc.Lnt . Energy company may look at that, and form a judea
 Two ili^hto yfliterday. You don't h*va the tOBults of those film.,* Yoah. Yoah . Yoahah. you don't . h*VA the tobults of some film. You won't . you don
 I agree, ,..thest possibilities here . I agree . I have one additional nofce, if I rtiay offar it. I agree. If you have any idea? Please email me at http://www.jenn.com/jennifer.com
 There are no -Lull.identified anywhere Ln Chat area . S^tStrd I«t. Ua t i^ hae thent-, tut there are no . There is no . Ln chat area .
 You're Eauillar *ith, theM«tal pana and the Ourfa« to ait ratsnllea . Other than those tibiae triS-Bstlea. . t Urt intol liglblo ] ... ...that you
 Secretary Ruakf Y^a mill], M-c ■ President, thla L6 »p, of course, 4 widely ""^W^t. "W^T.                "
 HJ: Deemed to be denying that they war* 9cl™3 to eatabUah bA^ea OE ih™ 0«n. HJ, they, ‘denied’t that they . war’s war* to eat
 Ulen'en thle""The Ul.ttoi""-. "The Ul .ttoi"-. "Very conaciouof Lo that thar* la no au.oh thing, "" ii«.tf3l action by the Unit<Hl Statea.
 It 'a bo tn-tUAtftly ££S iiS » aUi^ and confrontation in confrontation in * ^ action that ^ t^aU h r will q™atXy Incteaaa the rlak. ^« ac t
 W the point where *e nak* tha, that i i the, uh, overwhelming, ovflrtS-Sl-ng necessity to take all the cinki that ir* involved doing that. That i the overwhelming, uh-ugh, overwhelming necessity to . ovfl
 I think that with or without such an invasion, i-n other word* if we make it clear that. uh, uh, "hat we're doing ifl eliminating thia particular baw or any other auch base that la flBtabliohed" We ourselves a
 The other would be, if we have a lew daye— froo the military point Of view, if . we havo tho whole tirae— uh,. then I would thifllt that, uh H there would bo another course of action, a COti&
 The Rio Pact has been violated, the entire hemisphere considers that tho Rio pact has baen violated, that acta, whatever action* we take In, undce the teiss of the Rio Pact* The Cits .
 The time has (low coma whan ho muet in the Interests of the Cubart people, must now break clearly with the Soviet Union, prevent this missile baee from becoming operational . And 1 thirtft there are certain military, hmrflj uh, actions that
 U.S. will conduct 4 aurveillAftre of Cuba, over Cuba, and uo will enforce out right ta do <JO + We *o}ect th* mission of aoerccy Ln thi.fi homLsph&ro
 Wo reinforce our forces In GuantanamamO ► We re inform our forcOQ Ln t ho southeastern p*rt of the United States —whatOvar Is nocoaaary from the military faint of view .
 Th*t r uh, ‘S then would move openly and vigorously into the, into the . Lih H guerrilla field, and, UN croSCO maairaua confusion on tho inland .
 Hiro Cardona and hiB group in, Manuel Roy and his group, aad vno if they ™'t get together on a progre a a ive jjinl^ Uh H that fc*nld combine all principal electa, other than tho Bat
 Mil an sum* that we can p)vo on this lino at the same tiae to interrupt ill air traffic tram. froo world countries.oing into Cub* .
 I think we'll be cacinC; a situation that could veil 1 to general war; that wo have an obligation to do what h*fl to be J but do it in a way that gives, uh, everybody a chance to ... pul away from It down before It g
 There might have to be a national emergency declaration of national emergency . There might be a bo 4 aarond phas*, and than it would require a declaration of state of emergency .
 It's i little hard te (ay in terme of time how nvueh I'm dioemfl & Lng. That dies not preclude, 1 don't think, Mr Secretary, sose of the things that you've boon talking about .
 "I'm thinking in term of three phases. So, really, tho, tho," tho, tha point of tine, I'm, thinking in terms of 3 phases," he says . "So, tho' tho, though, tho', tho'though, tho,' he
 One, a, an initial pause OE aoee sort while we get completely ready and get, get th& right posture on the part of the target, b< ua ran do the best job. The first, a pause, is when we get ready to get,
 The secretary aaldj nisei lea, airfields, uh ( nuclear altee that we know of. at the same tine, naval blockade . Then, virtually concurrently, a air strike against . as the . secretary of . the secretary . of the secretary a
 I'd then Start this continuous voconnAioaance, the list that you had r continue ovor Cuba. -13 then the doelalon can bo rude a a we, as we TO mobilliln9 H uh P with the air etrike M to
 I think that's the hardest question militarily in the whole buoi no a a —ona which wo ohould look at very closely . Uh, there Are at-, one or two ether thing a , Mr* Preaidont, uh .
 I'm net suggesting that necesfiarily, that you d*lay It or anything Olao you have to do at this point . Uh, but tfcat I juot want to you that you are oooing him and that tay be relevant to this conflict*
 I don't believe, myself, that the critical question is whether you get a particular missile before it 9°** off fcsrauu.se IE thdy shoot thoafi missile .
 The Soulet Union haa got quite a different decision to make . The decision was made by the Soulet union .
 If th*y r if they shoot those mlaallsBj want to ahOOt *e all before they cjot knocked out by aircraft So. So. If they shoot them, they won't be able to shoot them back .
 1 thin* our tic* should be baocd on the asowrf.pt ion it in, Dean . Bob, Bob, would strongXyy.omphaaizO that 1 thin*. should be thin* .
 Wo don't know what kind* of communication* the Soviet* have with thoae siteor what klndo of control thay have over the warheads . Don't know how much control the Soviets have over warheads .
 The Russians are not satisfied with their ICBHs. Huat be oomo major reanon for the Russians tO r eh, set this up as a HuatBe that they're not satisfied .
 What it 'd give ^Cdi Is primarily, it m*koa the launching baee for short range missiles against the United Stftt&a .
 He don't know ""hat thsy 'if* capable Of* capable of* If there ace nuclear warheads associated Kith tho launthora, you muat assume there will be nuclear warhc^da associated with aircraft .
 Even it there ace not nueleac warheads associated with aircraft, you puat a I Dusia; that those aircraft have high explosive potential . Even if there are no nukes, the aircraft are thought to be capable of carrying high explosives .
 We're not prepared to report to you exactly f un, what the Cuban air force is capable Of J . But 1 think we imiat assume that the . Cuban air foreo la la definitely capable Ot penetrating, in Small numbers, our coastal air defense by coming in low Over the
 It would be a, a very heavy price to pa in U.S. lima for the, the damage we did to Cuba, says President Obama . Cuba would be paying a "very heavy price" to the United States, he says .
 Khrushchsv may have Lrt aind is that, uh, uh- uh, he Itnowa that »e have a nubstantial nuclear Superiority, &ut he alBO knows that ws don't really live under fear of hiB nuclear weapons to the
 About fifteen, 1 bolieva It ie. 1 think tJiat'a eight, mat's right . But then there are *1bo delivery vehicles that are, could eaally* + + ItUDiCt Ruoki nuaki Bundyt be moved through the air
 I think aim that yh, Berllrt Is, uh, very much involved in this* Kim, fgr the «« time, I'm beginnine really to wonder whether maybe Mr Xhrushehey is entirely rational about Deri in, We've kind of t
 If they could prOvoka v into taking the firet overt action, then the world wOuW h* eonfuaed and thdy would have, uh, what they would consider to be Justification for making a move .
 Cuba is Cuba's most important ally in the world, says CNN's John Sutter . Cuba's relationship with the U.S. is deeply troubled .
 "It's important, I think, to tecognUo that they did aaka this decision, as far as our estimate* now go, in early *u™ar r and thin has fceen happening, since August," he says .
 The military BquLpwne aent to Cuba doalgned cueluBivciy for defenaB, defensive purposes . The harm loos loos military BqLpwwne was to Cuba for defense purposes .
 The president of the United States* and the American allltary, ttir military of arty country know that they ate . The president and the U.S. military of the arty nation know that the country ate .
 The rest, as the secretary naye, had many comparison batmen Cuba and Italy, Turfcoy ^ Japan. Japan. Cuba . Italy. Cuba. Italy. Japan .
 We bavB other e^idencthat Khrushchev Is, honestly believe a, or, Ot at least affects t believe that we hava nuclear weapon* in. We believe we have a nuclear bomb* in .
 Bundy: HcNamara: Dundy : Dundy: HnNamara : Bundy; McHan&r&i Dillon: Ru&k: Bundy: Husk: Yeah. Bundy: McHan and Dillon: Bundy; Hnnamara: Bundy, McHan
 We can't have proof about i-t. That doitft't make them 3rty loos offensive *o ub. . . Because we can’t have proof, we're not allowed to use the word "i-t"
 HO, but Lt does pcaotbly indicate a different couroe of action . ...and therefore, I'm net auggaatlag how »Q should handle thia, I think this io one of the rott import action* wo fihould tak*i to
 TnO only thing I'd, would » r U that, uh, thl> alternative couroO of, of warning, and getting ... public opinion . OAS action and telling people In NATO and everything like that, wou» appear to appear to fle to have
 A statement at the aarae tine aayUg thift might give them a chance to, uh, back off and net do anything . WhOreaa, uh . A quick action with a statement might give a quick action . A statement is all there Is to It
 Think that the chinca of getting through thie thing without a Ru a □ lan ruction it greater under a quick, uh, Strike thaft, uh . Think that a quick strike thaft would make it more likely to be a 'strike'
 If wb go 'Ith th* quic* strike, than, ±n fact, they dQ b*<* it u"" then vou-ve P*e°*e* all of y D ur MUaa and ouraeiv*. to all theae
 Bundy: Taylor; -18thia la what you would do peeinvade, ftnd, uh r r . Bundy: "It would bo vary difficult to convince anybody that thia waa flfit a prainvaaion strike" Bundy: 'It would be difficult to
 I thin* also once yW get this volume of attack that put)X£t opinion rO&etion, uh, to this, aa distinct fron tha reaction to an ip,v.niion r uh, there' ■ very littlo .
 Wfr can eradicate the wholo problem by 50 lnvadlon juat aa airflply with aa Little chant* if reaction. And, uhi frora both standpoints.
 Veil* Lofe aay wO Jwat take out the missile baaoo, thon, uh, thai have Bene more there . Veil* Jwat takes out a missile missile .
 I don't know whether you, you jtiot can't keep high. Obviously they can e,et 'en 'en in by aulMfarine and so on, so on . Obviously . Obviously they . can e .e,et "en in" by a
 "Oh, that will bo a very Urge, number, but that"" a not generally whore leako ;ana from. Oh, that's a very whore leaky, number"
 Ho, »lr, I WflW Bay th*t P uh, »lthin H at thil etago tfcO morO . + HcbTauacBi Wall, KrPr*»W*nt. Ho. Bay th-t PUh,
 I, I thlnt, to bo e« little, -a ah«U that this will fairty widty widOiV >™n ( U not Ln too jewe^ papers, at Loflit by political ropr* aantative-s
 A thin type of InfornatiOrt ia going CIS throughout the department, ami I, I doubt vary much that wo Can Keep tUla out of the hand a of, uh H of ranfcera of Congress, (or example) of Congress)
 Senator IKenneth | Keating has already, in effect, announced It on the floor of the Senate . Senator I.Kenneth has already announced It .
 Bundyi Senator Keating said thLS on the floor of the Senate on the tenth of October,.* That' a corrOCt. ""conateuqtion hae begun oft at lea*t a half-dozen launching flitoa for intermediate range tactical as
 H/ queation, HrProaident, ta uhethur: "Oh, oh, tactic vrt ought not to interview Senator Keating and Check out M a data"
 I a«£>o with that Uui ought to be dona, i think that, uh, ve'ro co^ittaJ at fifty tl*,a that wa feel that thora'O * build up that in fifty way gangers to take whatever fiction »
 I would, uh, like to hoar what tHe renfonaiblc comiftcra comiftandcra hiv* to say .
 I rant the weekend with the aabasaad^s Of the Organization of FUnotican Statea, I think tttl* organisation flu&r hut . I don't think, I 1300 't «ly on ' Gm mush, for any strength in anything
 "I take the position that Hr. R. J. H. E. was talking about our other alllea, uh, I take that position," he said . "I j thfl fact that »e 're talking about » »«e ' re talking about
 I take ChLa llttXa Stat*. liaarifflflBt, uh, Stolid that you sent out to all the 1.1 congratulatory messages .
 If ■ the one not to confer with them, We're not coin* to get *uch help out of them . We're also not coin-in-lawing with them. We are not coining them .
 There are perhapa two oc thee of our principal allies *r haiido of governnfflnt wa could cornmunicfito, fit fit loaat on a 24-hour nOtJ-ca basia .
 Cart a inly eaaeTall ailtoa, H«'va got to try to Btop the planaa, atop thO ohlpp, atop the oubm^iftaa and everything elaa from Bunding .
 "What you're talking about are two or throfl different, uh, potential operaticha. What you're raally talking about ... are two ... different ... potential operasicha."
 One la the atriko just en this, thaBe theea baits , One, the second ia the broodtr flno that Secretary Mcffanara was talking about, the secretary of state said .
 Third Is doing both Of thoso things ind alao at the b dxtiq tin launching A blockade, which retire* ""Ally tha r uh, tl»p ax ax uh, third and which la larger step. Third Is . doing both of thos things ind
 I don't know how much consulting with the BritUh has Ihoa. And than, as I take it, La thft r uh, dog too of consultation. La thth r uh .
 President Obama said he would "drop bOfl** all over Cuba if you do the vetoed, uh, air"
 It a a bare d«v«a days *fter tho air atrlkc, aaauning tho air strike atarta the first of rvext week . The air strike struck atarta atarta on Monday morning .
 JFKi Taylor; Taylor: CftCter; Speaker t HgNamarai Ruski JPlCt JFK: qo at MMtPJum speed, which ifi tha or.o referred to you bjr Secretary Hcrtamira, ahout
 Uh,t yOu have thD tl«, if y™ give a^ro time, so »a can get all the advance preparation and propositioning, the same 90,000 In f£va days* Ha h*va the choice of thoae two plan
 T£ is directed initially en Havana, the Havana area . It is intended to be directed initially in Havana .
 If you carried out an ale Htrtk*, this flight Iflad to *n uprising such that in order to prevent the slaughter of. the. animals such as . the . animals . If you carry out an . ale H Trtk* this flight iflad to . Iflad
 Of the free Cubans, W would have to invade to, to, uh, teintroduco order into the country* ftnd we would he prepared to do that. Of, uh- o£ the free Cubanans, we would .
 I think If there were a, a complete air strike aaainet all air forces, you Pight as well do it, do the *hole }ol Hell, let"" a uh, decide -Hat wo ought to ha doing. I think . I think if there were
 YO.'v.OC r»%bli. ^ l»Mm. got *n the-Q fartlCular raiiailea bofor* thay'^a rftSiV to go. YO'v^OC r »%
 S* wa had two ^aeka H c^Ld L*y ^ ill thli and ^aVEl raady to go, tu« uhr tha oration raaHy La whethor wo can ^4 it two weefca .
 "e havect't bean aftie to teSrt^ fl«-ti--™ day p*,Iod »hUa .aintalnin, 'v tprlBe in the air attach* ♦ What at* you dole, (or that fl
 "It's boon posBibl* to do It quietly. So that kind of movwcnt ha * ilread/ bean taking place," says author . "So it's a good thing to do it quietly"
 It were carried out in the v*lumo wo require. Hhat about all the..,, the, the. a*™* wmwont ™w b* not liable it . Not liable it was carried out .
 Acid hMWJa: "Knowing ahoad of tlm, two ueeka afcead of ti«*, that we would Mtjcy out tho ii*v*sion would significantly reduce the fivo-toeeeeven day Interval between the Btr
 T think out point Of view may change somewhat because of an adjustment here .
 The dec is ion would take out only thl krtown missile sites 5 fid not tho airfields . There la a grff*t danger of, of equipment dispersal of all the aircraft .
 The advantagu of taking out the* a 4 Lr planes would bo to proteet ua agalAHt a foprlBil. It would protect the plane from being hit by a bullet bullet .
 JFKt Car ten Eufidy: "I would think you'd hiva Co pre-, assumO they'd be using, uh, iron hooka end not nuclear ueapon" "I think' that's reasonable"
 Keating Keating. Yeah j sure, am*M matte* ‘I’m not sure,’ says Keating . ‘H*t W finally decide l^l^^lLnttUlfleno’
 I think that'll, then h-'ll saying afterward* that w* tried to. i < All right, the trtjtt. uh.-. . , .dun hto* I D h* U ld thin, n«d » ^ the, the
 Other jetton i* «h it , i£ anything ha* to * 'H, to t Spared for, eva^alLty of a S™l*t »™«tlonJ and then I thlflk *hat w* ought to
 Bundy: What are the tfinlur™ nurrbef of Pf^* tMt? Bundy: "Oft of alert to do. k + ...ia to figur* out" Bundy: 'What's the realiy to ttll. k' Bundy
 I »PP«^ -11lCft »rt« ) de GauUa [gnintfllllqlblfljRignu want do if* h«d to *ay Jo h*v* AdLauer* You"" ,4 got to
 I would think th*» buaLPHk th* sovLet reaction, that night bo helpful, uh, L£ v* could miy&e take ™' fl ™«l v« preparation tyj* of actlcn that wO.
 Thay be... 3a it b* ^at "J u »t h OV 0 to, w* can't Wilt two ve*k( whllo wa'ta flatting ready to, to 'S M*^a ju .t »™ to take
 R. H», 'e o^ght to h* making thiifl prBpa^tlnnB. You want to bo clear, nr. president,' he wrote . 'I have ^f i n i te l y SiS walnt
 Bundyi JFtU Bundy: Well, ho' H havft... ,* + to work ovt a contingency an that that . Bundyi: Well-ho' H: "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to make it
 K 4 y 1 (nakB ona other cover pUn Suegclltion* ♦ ■ Kp p » Bl(iw ti Thare wUl be mating* Ln th* White other *»l*d V » it ***** to », id
 Hfliit'B th* skull number* coftmlaaarl f Laughs] toc0 n^lBBBi,CO,CO * light-. toj uh, to OfitBln this inflation . Laughs]. Laughs .
 I ™««U ^Lnfc particularly e( thB contacts with ^ushehir, A,d I w^Xd think that if thB*a are to be dona, thBjcurt be scheduled in t«™ o* tin
 Thera ™f £ * flfY pteciBa nSles Of, of, of *™t«t. with hi-*, a** indications 0* "h2 do at CB.talo ti«0B foUowi^ ^t
 "Th l*dly, should be spared to anauar y^t quart iona regarding tho, tha effect of Sbbb Strike and tha ti™ required to catry the* off," he said .
 We'll have a report OA those* . . . “in permanent [ haLlum*' | * .^covcitd with Clouds over It. We'll report those* OA .
 Go Low level, Lower level . . . ..and wa have been reluctant to do that. Go Low Level, Lower Level . Go Low . level .
 T*e r the One thing to worry about on low level la that that that villi create i sense of tactical alert in the island, add I'm not aura wo want to do that . Our guess i* that tho high Lwnl onM have not, In f
 Ie ainthitty manag&ahlar Thftt would be still better bocauso yOu^e supposed to be out there at 8.30am . Ie management would still be better, he says .
 Well, that ""a ill right* That's, thftfs I unlntell lolbla] then H """"r sci-eft. Well,  that's, that's, "Thftfs" then H "a ill" then "thft
 George G«orga< Tha ptoflident want a you got to take my ploco at lunch. all right, I've got this, you know that i-vo got a 1 o'clock pice speech, that's all . George G »orga
 Oh, woLi P wa'U aaa aaa how ha"" b [unintelligible I at the cWerentfl < ¥es# yee. Aaa . Aaa! Aaa, aaa! Oh, how ha'" b [Unintellig
 No. No, no, no. No . No. 2 . "I 1 HI HI ""1-1hi* about thU thifig tomorrow," she said . "D'J out of . ™*<** * decieiOA her fl 0
 Piok up your »r and you drive over got to thin, ttie. I'm trying got to find Out [unintelligible] . why don't you delve* Piok . up your 'r' and 'dent' Piok' up your "r
 Hhet will Lt be around hers about 1 unintelligible] 7 wall, ho'o going to telephone * low, lo« level . Hhet is going to be around her about 1.5 miles away .
 R«L L Cuba Tape (This is a transcription of tapes recorded in the Cabinet Rxtti on Saturday, October 27, 1962* it.fi tape begins wit}, an inconclusive discussion of current tactical questions, including plana to atop a ship and a proposal for two daylight
 Khrushchev told President Kennedy that he would withdraw offensive missiles from Turkey if the U.S. withdrew its rockets from Turkey . JFK was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Wo believe tJ.it wc should do this, although we don't 1* need. Now, personally I would recommend, although I would . personally . recommend . Although we don’t need. it, we need to have it .
 This is why I would roecrmcnd the two daylight and the one night missions* and I fully agree we ought to put cut an announcement that we are going to send Uie night mission over . This would be the first time the U.S. has sent a U
 I tl*ink we ought to 90 ahead if they want it, so it + s all right with me, so I + s OK with it . I t*ink: "We ought to go ahead ahead ahead if we want it"
 "I think we might have one more conversation about it, however, at about six o'clock just in case during the day we get Earthing . I think we're going to talk about it again at 6:30 p.m.
 Hare says this is absolutely anathema, and as a natter of prestige and politics . Hare says it is as important as it is to be seen as an important figure in the world .
 Finletter, Kane, Finletter and Kane report on the Italians . Ballon Ballon d'Or: Italy would be relatively easy to win in the United States. Ballon D'Or is the best in the world?
 Wa would have to work it out with the Turks on the basis of putting a Polaris in the waters, and even that night not be enough according to the judgment that we T ve had on the spot .
 We're ggtng to be in an insupportable position on this matter if this boccnes his proposal* In the first place, we last year tried to get tt* missile* out of 3 there because they're not militarily useful, number 1* Number
 A special message appeared to call for negotiations and both nations, Cuba and Turkey, should give tJyoir consent to the United Nations to visit their territories . JFK: Both nations should give consent to U.N. visits to their territories, not their territories. JFK: A special
 Khrushchev said the security Council of the Soviot Union was solemnly pledged not to use its. territory as a bridgehead for an attack on Turkey . H called for a similar pledge from the United States not to let its territory be used as a . bridgehead . for an
 Ball i we did it on a basis where if we talked to t*e Turks, I mean tUs would be an extremely iinsettfing business. Ball i i we would have been very happy to talk to the Turks. Balli i i-tUs is an extremely
 Welt this is Unsettling now George, because he's got us in a pretty good spot here . Most people will regard t)j_s as not an unreasonable proposal, I'll just tell you that. Welt .
 I t)Jnk you're 9oing to find it very difficult to explain why we are going to take J^ostile military action, in Cuba, against these sites . What we've been thinking; about — the thing that he + s saying is, "If you
 Sacensen: "I think we have to be now thinking about what cur position's going to be On this One, because this is the one that's before us, and before the world"
 "This is the one that the Soviet government obviously is going on. But in any case this is now his official (sicj , and wc can release his other one, and it 1 s different t but this is different t .
 Isn't it possible that they* re going on a dual track, one a public track and the other a private track? The private track is related to {words unclear) , and the public track is one tdiat's in order to confuse the public scene .
 I think, yes, I tl4nk that the — uh — NKrcvwarsaw Pact arms problem is a separate problem . HATO and Warsaw Pact arms problems should be discussed, he says . He says the arms problem "should be discussed between HAT
 They've got hundreds of missiles locking down the throat of every NATO country, says CNN.com's John Defterios . NATO says it has 'hundreds of missiles locked down' at every NATO member . CNN's John Sutter says the U.S. has 'thousands
 T}.e other way, it seems to me — if we accept the notion of a trade at tlds stage f cur cur cur position will cone apart very fast . T}.E other way .
 If we had any understanding wit}, the Turks that tliey ought to come out, it would be different . Or if we had . any understanding with the Turks, the Turks would have come out . It would have been different .
 Tt*ey — uh — we persuaded tJiem that this was an essential requirement, and t}*ey, they feel that it f s a matter of prestige and a matter . It would already be clear ttet we were to sell cur allies for cur interests,
 Le shcyld immediately say *e will not discuss — disiniss UjC Turkish bases . The problem is Cuba .
 JFK: "I think it would be very desirable to tell tliat until we get time to tliink about it, this thing — tl,e fact of the natter is that we received a letter last night f recti Khrushchev with an entirely different proposal
 The Turkish problem is a NAT>Warsaw pact problem, and it's an arms problem between those two groups ttet is something for these two groups to talk about with each other as a problem of disarmament with respect to NKDO and the Warsaw Pact . Wall, i t
 "He T s put this out in a way that's caused mutirum tension and embarrassment," he said . "It's caused a lot of embarrassment and embarrassment"
 "It's not as if it was a private proposal, which would give us an opportunity to negotiate with tl»e Turks," says Turkish President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We're not going to negotiate, we're going to have to negotiate"
 It may be preparations for counteraction against ttose particular bases that we — uL — Cuba cculd be that . Cuba may be preparing for counteractions against particular bases, it may be that.
 There's nothing coming in yet on our tickers. Until we have gotten our position a little clearer we ought to go with tliis — uh — last night business so that that gives us about an hour or two, we don't have TGd^ishchev .
 Governor Stevenson reccmrends that such a statement be made in order to prevent the Soviets capturing the peace offensive . Governor Stevenson: "Such a statement would be made"
 Governor Stevenson also recommends tl*at we not consider tide Turkish offer as reported in tide attacW Reuters dispatch as an alternative or an addition to the Khrushdpev proposal in his 6 letter . I think ttiat — uh — we ought to go at — we
 Thar£scns KtirusiicfLev may have picked up statement which Krcisky, tJie Austrian Foreign Minister, made day before yesterday — has made and which he may be inspired by us, in which he raised the question of Turkish* ► , Low
 I think probably this — uh — wJjole exchange, this refers to the previous letters. This refers to this crisis . This refers — uh, starting with this crisis — this refers . The wJole exchange is probably the most important exchange between the two .
 It starts out by saying t ""I received your letter,"" I've got the feeling that if you I.ave soreone chaining the situation, you have to publish the cxcJ*angc. I've also got a soreone .
 JFKi: "This question of Cuba and the {word unclear) imjst be resolved within the ne*t few days; it can't wait" JFK: "I don't know, tou perhaps don't have to put out the letter as much as you do the three
 The negotiations and discussions must — uh — get on, and tl* work that is continuing despite our protests has been going on, says Tl* boss .
 "This action that has been taken is not an action just by the United States but is an action by all of tt*e Latin American countries," he says . "So therefore it's got to be resolved quickly, Uh — . This action is not just the U.S
 This lias notJiing to do with the security of the countries of Europe, which do hove their own problems* Uh — we would — uh — obviously consider negotiating the giving up of bases in Turkey if we can assure the Turks and the other European countries for wlt
 This will entail inspection as we anticipate t^iat tiiere will be seme inspection in Cube and in t}*e United States — uh — at the time that these bases are witJdxawn from Cuba and we give assurances tliat we are not going to invade Cuba
 Bob, we've got three positions. g^MP&on i a lprvg letter last night he wrote himself. Bob, Bob, wrote a letter to Bob that he wanted to be in charge of the team . Bob wrote himself a letter that said he wanted Bob to be
 No* we don't 1 t* I guess we say we are reluctant to release this ty the inconsistency in your position, but we dWt letter which would display have very much, time. No* We don't . No* .
 McKamara: "I don't know what — where you are in twenty-four hours f ran now — uh — so we win that argument but wtiat twenty-24 hours***" McKamaraE: "We incorporate a new deal in our letter in our new letter"
 "How are we going to Tiave him do anything but take the ball away from us publicly, if we don't — Tf~we just write him a letter, {voices) Bundyj (words unclear) to surface his earlier message (Bobby. . .
 I tijnk that we're going to liave to, m ** e U£ee or four hours, not just pat the ball completely in — uh — In his hands and allow him to do whatever tie *ants . I tijk that . we're . going to
 H^r s offered this deal — uh, that he will withdraw tta bases in Cuba for assurances that we don't intend to invade . He will withdraw the bases for assurances of assurances that U.S. won't invade .
 Tl*t entails inspection not only of Cuba but inspection of the ^ted States to ensure that ve're not by united Nations observers . The inspection involves inspection of Cuba and the United Nations to ensure it's not by UN observers .
 Mow tide is one o± ti* S^sV^Et 1 ^basWin Cuba uh involve uh of tho Western Hemisphere, rt^is not just a question of tl* States, it's also a question for the United States .
 This is a question of all the Latin American countries, which have all Coined tog.etl.fir in this effort . The Latin American country is one of the world's most populous countries .
 This flust be breuqht to fruition. — uh 1 — Tt.e question of ti^e Turkish bases, we thii* tint's excellent, that you brought that up, and that uh that . uh, there stjould be disarmament of the
 We will withdraw your invasion bases — Uh — of t*je Soviet union and permit inspection there . We will "lU^dr** tl* bases frcn Turkey if — uh — and allow inspection of Pricey" Turkey .
 T s got to fitop today, before we talk about anything . At least then we're in a defensible position. But they've given us several different proposals in twenty-four hours .
 The ott^er ttdng is to not tiave the Turks making statements, so that this thing — Khrud<chev puts it out and toe neat thing tlrfs Turks say they won't accept it, nlfin whatever we do in Turkey — in
 The warheads belong to Turkey aid are maimed by Turks, but the warheads are in U*S custody, ' Voice : It seems to ifle that. It seems that it seems that .
 Eundy i. I think it would be very important to say at least that the current threat to peace is not restricted to Cuba* Ttiere + s no pain in saying that if you think you're going to make a trade later on, it's no pain to say
 Wiflt being so — uh — until we find out what is really being suggested and what can really be discussed, we have to get scrrething on work . The main weakness here is the work's going on, and we need to find out more .
 While you were cut of the room, Mr, President, we reached an informal consensus — I don't fcnow whetl,er TOnrny agrees — rJiat tikis — last night's message was Khrushchev and tide one .
 The only tiling is, Tanry, why wouldn't they say it privately if they were serious . JFK. JFK . JFK .
 JFK t Jtow let's — uh — I would think the first tiling we have to do is to — as 1 say, rattier tlian get into tl*e deteils — the fact that work is going on is the one defensible public position
 It's going to be tough in England, I'm sure — as well as other places on the continent — we're going to have to take action, he says . It's not a blank check but a pretty good check for taking action in Berlin, he adds .
 People think that if you're allowed an even trade you ought to take advantage of it* Therefore it makes it much more difficult for us to move with world support . Most tliink — people think that . if you . think that  if you’re allowed an . even
 This is a pretty good play of Us. These are all tl*e things that> — uh — why this is a play of us.
 He could take missiles for missiles, which wuldn't be good enough frtm our point of vie* because its to Cuba . He could also take missiles from Cuba .
 JFK would be tough anyway, JFK; It would be hard for tfiree weeks . JFK would have to work on their bases if the work on the bases stops r tinting .
 It isn't enough to stop work on a base that's already operable, HcKarara i said . HcKara i would certainly put TFnt in the same rcessags .
 JFK* we've got to — new let's see nwlet's see what Steve-ison's suggesting . JFK* is JFK* and JFK is JFK .
 I would guess it was on V* order of at least a hundred, within range . Mr, President, , voice * I would think it was a hundred .
 To get the barters out of Cuba we'd have to get tl*a nuclear weapons and planes out of Turkey, ^ Tt^rpson i It seems that you can't tell which one went first .
 One went t).ere ana Tone ""went here, but he thinks that they were sent about the sane time, [voices unclear] ^amarai. Tone. Tone . Tone .
 Well — uh — iSovernor we'd j r* 1 ^i, 1 ^ ******* — uh, you know the letter tl*t I received last night was different than this, H.at's your judgment Right [listens 15 sees] and to act
 We might as well x mean jWt decide on sand in his gears for a few minutes . Let's get it out of this problem, tl.sn we might as soon as well X mean .
 The Turkish thing has got to be throve — you're quite right, Mr, President — into the overall European oontetffc, and you can bring in Berlin; 1 think it's fine. That's not any goodj .
 Turks and Germans are going to be making statements in Urfs next few hours, as well as other people about ads when they* re asked . "They're going to take a very strong position. Because it's not only . Turkey is going to answer here, but the Germans are
 The decision was made before the Foreign Ministers which isn't really very strong as decisions go .
 On this last paragraph r Mr Secretary r I tl±ink we ought tr> say: "As I was preparing this letter t which was prepared in response: to your private letter of last night, I learned of your — rids immediate crisis in Cuba, and so forth.
 JFK: Be prepared to discuss our actions, the detailed thinking (voices unclear) JFK: "Be prepared to ... discuss the ... matters in your public message, or the issues in your ... public message"
 Tcflorrow he h ll cone back and say U*e United States has rejected this proposal we've made. Tcforrow he . h ll . say U.S. has rejected the proposal we . made.
 All tJ^ese matters can be discussed if he* 11 cease work, otherwise he's going to announce tljit we've rejected his proposal . So I think we ought to be able to say that .
 Unless we all agree, unless we all mean to announce tJiSt we've rejected it, I don't think we ought to do it today . I think we don't want to do this today. Unless we agree, we won't be able to accept tJISt
 If we can oet assurance firm — which can't be inspected that thev will cease the work and then we'll discuss U*sa matters, we'll talk about U.S. matters . We're looking for a firm that inspects the work, which can be inspected,
 Sues u^elated to the existing iSreat peaw posed by Soviet pl tes and missile in Cuba . C T lt P es ^ l3Sues u2 l3 l3sues uu2s .
 Bundy : Well I fc ve also talked to Finletter and asked him to dieck the Penrreps and soy ttiat the U.S. stands for this position but if t)iO NATO countries should feel that it places TFion in unusual hazard, lie
 There were four planes in the afternoon flight, one developed mechanical trouble so a pair turned back . One of the planes developed mechanical problems .
 The President asks what kind of fire was received and the answer is not clear . The President says the answer to the question is 'not clear'
 There follows low and apparently less general conversation including a discussion of possible public coHment on the off-course U-2 over t}*e Soviet Union .
 JFK: I think we're better off not to do it if we can get away with not having sere leak . JFK: "I think we think we should not do it" JFK: We should not leak. I think it's better off .
 I think our problem is to maintain our credibility with iQirushchev . But I t3Ank — I think we need to maintain credibility with the Russian government .
 One of our afternoon aircraft was hit by a 37 millimeter shell . Mr President, may 1 say in relation to -that, 1 think if we haven't announced already, and I knew we hadn't we shouldn't . nv. Mr President .
 One is do we want to have these conversations go on, on Turkey and these other natters while there's a sort of standstill in Cuba., or do we . want to say that we won't talk about Turkey or these matters until they've settled the Cuban crisis* I think
 Most people will think his offer is rather reasonable, he says . That puts us in a stronger world position because of his offer, he adds . It will put the UK in a strong position in the world, he writes .
 President Obama has until the end of the day to stand still and disarm his weapons, CNN's John Sutter says . Obama has been criticized for not taking action on the issue .
 If we don't say that he's going to say we rejected his offer, he'll have public opinion with him . But I think tl.at will be able to get the public opinion back on his offer .
 "We insist that we insist that he stand still. So I think our only liope to escape from that is to say that we must stand still," he said .
 JFK: "Now we don't think he'll do that, and therefore we're in much better shape to put our case on that than ratlier that Turkey's irrelevant" JFK: Ya, Ya, 1 think we ought to say ""if"" his proposal was made by the Soviet
 The United States would be glad to discuss this matter with you and others after consultation with the itBftkers of Nhid, whose interests are also involved . The U.S. would be happy to discuss the matter with others .
 I think that — we'll all Join in doing this if it's the decision, but 1 think we should tell you that that's the universal assessment of everyone in the gjovernrrent that' £ is connected with these alliance problems .
 The knockdown in this tftdte House statement this morning was well received. That knockdown is well received by the House of Representatives .
 JgC; Yes, but 1 should say t^t also, as the situation is moving, Mac says . If we don't for the next twenty-four or forty-eight hours, this trade has appeal, Mac writes . Mac: Yes, yes, yes .
 The only thing we've got fox which I would think we'd be able to hold general support would be — well let's try to word it so tJjit we don't harm KATO — but the tiling tlit I think everybody would agree to — while these matters
 "Inasmuch as they relate to -uhyou want to make it the entire issue of HMO,, not just Turkey," says McHamara . "In that case I don't see anything wrong with it," he says .
 McNaTimra repeats his point, to get away frm specific reference to Turkey . McNa. Timra: "Turkey is not a country that should be seen as a nation of origin"
 I just talked to General Norstad* He thinks that we Ought to have a meeting of the NATO Council tomorrow morning to present this to tiiem so that tliey all have a pioca of it . JFK i i just talked about the proposal .
 If we don't take it, we're blama! If we do take it we're just as blamed* very right . Otherwise no matter what we do — if we . don't . take it . If we take it. we're . just as . blamed* right .
 "We ought to Lave the — uh <— if we dcn s t take it what the prospects will be r as well as what we do," he said . "And I think the united States position ought to be that here it is," he added .
 Bundy: "I don't think there's any pain in the meeting. It's probably obvious tltat Uiey made a suggestion about Turkey which tins HMO Council would t* interested in meeting about* Bundy : "I think there will be no pain in a meeting
 The possibility is if you wait twenty-four hours and s*e if tfyey accept this otlfir thing {words unclear] accept it yet, yet . The possibility was if you waited twenty-24 hours and then accepted it yet .
 Italians are likely to core up with a proposal to wit>.draw the bases there, the missiles there, I don't know if we ever got ti*at message . If you have a NMO nee ting, I gather .
 As 1 was preparing this letter let me let me (words unclear) many countries and complicated issues not related to Cuba and tlie Western Hemisphere . Cuba is not only Cuba, but also many other countries in the world .
 Hie United States would be glad to discuss these matters with you and otl^r governments concerned* T*a immediate crisis is in Cuba, and it is there that (words unclear) is necessary .
 I'm not 9011*3 to get Into that before Dlllont . If you^hava a Council meeting you* 11 prcbably get a strong reaction frm a great many of the members of NftTG against our taking ar.y action in Cuba .
 Mr, President, I wander if we sJiould not take certain actions with respect to the Jupiters in Turkey and Italy before we act in Cuba. Btactly, (lew voices)
 If we decided to take that action with respect to the jup iters in Turkey end Italy before we acted in Cuba, then we could tell NKTO tliat at tiie time we talked to them about ttds proposal tron Khrushchev and our response .
 I don't think we can nrake any United attacks when they're shooting at our reconnaissance aircraft because we would not dare to 90 in with the kind of lifted attack that we've been thinking about the last twenty-four hours without taking out their SrM-sites . The trc
 If we start out on that kind of program, it seems to me the Soviets are very likely to feel forced to reply with military action some place . We might be able to either shift the area in which they would apply their military force, or give them no excuse to apply military force
 We've already detected three submarines off the S coast in the last forty-eight hours . He would dtuxed voices J .
 As far as we knew, we knew they den't carry missiles, but that's just tjappenstance . How they — as far . we knew . as far as . we . knew they . den were carrying missiles, as far though we knew that they . were
 If we took tliem out, we'd get tl»a trade the Russians have offered us. HcKanara ; I think, I think we could, first place we can tell them (words unclear) 3FKi: "We could tell them first place
 It could lead the Soviet Union to cane back to the ne&t problem . Bund^j it could lead to a return to the old Soviet Union .
 Cuba can either accept our proposal or reject it, or reject t}*e proposal and say we still want Turkey for Cuba, they reject it . "TUFTs" proposal would be the tire to have -~ bring KMO in and say, ""TUNFTs
 He haven't lost anything, and they've discontinued tta work on t>.e bases . He hasn't lost any of the work .
 W + — if they say they're going to continue the work on the bases, I think then we've got to decide whether ... whether we should Lave a military stride. W + .
 It's going to be — You see, they haven't had the alternatives presented to them, he says . JHtj: "It will be ... a very difficult time for them to come up with the alternatives."
 In two or t)^ee days we may have a military strike whitf. could bring perhaps tte seizure of Berlin or a strike on Turkey, and then they'll say ""By God we should Lave taken it. They'll say, -well God, we don't
 If tomorrow we don't have a favorable answer from u Thant or IQkrushchev to this message that's going out now, is it iirportant to strike tomorrow or do we have sores more time?
 On the otlter hand,. Mr* President* if KftTO seems solid on this, tliis Ids a chance of shaking KhrusheJ^ev off tJ*is point* Martin * Suppose that we give him a letter which ia addressed to Ms
 Kartin s Perhaps we'll say. ""thank you* Yes*"" find it doesn't mention Turkey . Kartin: "Thank you. Yes"
 "We think ti*is is very likely, that tfkere would be sore reprisal against possibly Turkey and possibly against Berlin," he says . The escalation is going to go on, and we should be aware of that .
 What we don't want is to l*ave a cheap torndown by t**m r witl^out realizing that tike turndown puts us in the position of then having to do sane tiling* What we're doing is — because we wouldn't take the
 "We want to reduce your danger while at the sam* time maintaining your defense," says CNN.com . "We hope to reduce our danger while maintaining our defense"
 We propose that you defuse those missiles tonight, we'reputting Polaris submarines along your coast* We* 11 cover the same targets that your Jupiter missiles did, and we 1 11 announce this to tl*e world before we invade Cuba . Turkey, as a response to our
 Bundy ; well we haven't tried the block — tte enlargement of tl,e blockade* . Bundy . Bundy ; . well . We haven't even thought about it for Kme hours* and it + s been on my mird a good deal* POL we still
 I'm just thinking about what What we're going to have to do in a day or so . tfdA is* soo * sorties and * e ™* J 8 ^'™ iosaibly an invasion, all because *e wouldn't taKe m^
 Bundv MeU, I'm not cure — because I tfkink — let s speculate with J SIs Mr President, Mr President . If you have ttot conviction, and you are yourself sure that — uh — tUs is the way want — the best way out
 I'd rat>.er 90 the total blockade route, which isTa lesser step tf^Ttf.e military action, wuit x'd like to do is liave the Turks and NMD equally («1 that this is tte wise move. »'I'd like
 Rusk; Bear in mind that; . our specific arrangements have already been set forth in He* York to U Tbant. Rusk . Rusk is a member of the U.S. delegation .
 "I have read your letter of October 2Gth with great care and find it an indication of a willingness on your part to seek a calm solution of the problan. Stevenson has suggested a letter l«ere that may not be bad in this parties C ° lltfiX
 All weapons systems in Cuba capable of offensive use in Cuba should be rendered inoperable . The first tldngng that needs to be done, however, is for work to cease on offensive missile bases .
 Assuring this is done promptly — we re likely to hear somettung about U V. action now . Assuring that the U.V. action is taken promptly is a priority .
 I therefore most earnestly urge you to join Us in a rapid settlement of the Cuban crisis as your letter of October 26th suggests is possible, so that we can tl*en 90 on to an early solution .
 Rusk t to T*ave a letter in tLand though, which would give him a chance to work it out without relation to Turkey . Let's get ttis settled first .
 JFKi This is to Khrushchev Busk ; Bo, he wanted a eopv of a latter to W.rushchev, Bo . That does not really make ituch of a point on the Turkish point .
 JFK: Khrushchev' s going to cone back and refer to his thing this morning on Turkey . Otherwise it's about the sama. JFK; TT^ point of the matter is Khrushchevitch' s . Otherwise, JFK's sama .
 We've got to make the key of this letter the cessation of work . And tJ^n we're going to be screwing around for another forty-eight hours, 1 think what we've got got to do is say &tst we've .
 "We haven't had a chance to specif ically get his good faith on the cessation of work. So tihen we're on until Monday afternoon, and the work goes on, and we've had a lot of work to do . We're still working until Monday .
 Tl* cessation of work is the key question for the future of the U.S. President .
 Let's go with this letter, Mr* Secretary* Let's start with our letter to let's efcart with that, because otherwise we'll never get an answer . Let's begin with our letters to Mr*. Secretary* and then we'll go with it .
 Ho* tJ.e only problem with this letter again on page 3 is 1p when we get agreement on Cuba,"" which he TEfiFt aoinq to give us* He's now moved on to the Turkish thing so we're ■just going to get a
 Turkey is opening up its borders to the world's largest oil and gas zones . The Turkish president has promised to open the borders to Turkey's borders .
 Tint's tt* only thing we can, because we have — because we've — because he either has to say Ves or Wo, If says No to that, then we're — at least have — we have scire indication . Tint is the only thing he can
 Take — take out – take out paragraph 1 and put it in the end* Make that — that isn't part of the deal. Make that . Take that — make that . Make that. Take that . It's not the deal .
 Right* jFjH Then we would get into discussion of all those matters . ycNamarat Right* Bu^v i But 1 tt Jnk that that that ought to {words unclear) be made as a separate matter in the letter .
 Sorensen i a week ago — the work has stopped (mijcfid. voicc-sl {words unclear) trees Voice; If the Cubans would agree not to interfere with reconnaissance. If the work was stopped, it would be easier to find out if the
 I dm't think we^re going to get as much {words unclear, but I mean let' s cake it as reasonable as possible . Well let's see what he comes back with here* I'm not sure what I think he'll do .
 JFK j. Yeah, Jds second paragraph is useful. See if you don't think that you could use Rdlai .
 Just put in ""this to be verify — this to be satisfactorily verified," says the minister . "This is to be verified under — well, right. Just put into — well-right," he says. "Just put in -- well- right. This is to verify
 JFK: Tl.fi only thing is — what he's saying is that they've got to get the weapons out of Cuba before we'll discuss the general detente. Klyat Adlai says about what to do about Turkey — another problem is pretty 9°cd .
 No*e're not going to be able to effect that, He doesn't agree with that, he doesn't want to . He says: 'No*e't go to be . able to . effect that' He doesn’t want to. effect that .
 Let a couple of United States 4a out and try to put the specifics of this letter in {words unclear) with the paragraphs of fiaiaiai. Let a few Of United States . 4a .
 We're not going to get these weapons out of Cuba, probably, any«ayBut I mean — by negotiation — we're going to have to take our weapons cut of Turkey . It seems to me what we ought to do is be reasonable*
 "I don't think there's any doubt he's not going to {word unclear] now tl«it be made that public. I'm not sure he's going to ... make that public, he says .
 JFK; fill right, what about at the end of this, we use this letter and say ""will be a grave risk to peace. JFK ; fill right" JFK .
 Sorenseni in other words, Mr President's position is that once he meets ttli's cofrfition of the halting of the work and tJ.e inoperability, you're then prepared to 90 ahead on eitJicr the specific Cuban track
 He must be a little shaken up or ha woulda' t have sent the message to you in the first place .
 Well, I think Adlai's letter all right than than than. Yeah, but I mean — so that you can — it's certainly conceivable tha""t you could get him back to that. -(words unclear) I don't thijik we ghould abandon »
 Voice i not have the secret message, Mfcaishchav's of last night . We'll give it to the Times . Voice i do not have a secret message .
 You know it puts scne heat on him if you put out — if you can get TXTiftessaga out of last night . If you can put out, you can also put out a song on the air .
 Stevenson's proposal to force out the — uhthe Xl^rual.chev letter to which this is a ^mSed^voices) Mbic& j was Stevenson's .
 Stevenson's proposal is that we release this letter, tlds letter be released, in order to get this bock on the Cuban tracfc, end away iron, and focus away frtu lis letter . Stevenson: "I want to see the focus away from iron,
 There's 901119 to be a hell of a fight about that* I don't mind taking it on if we're going to get Ecmo^hcre. There's not a lot of the fight about it, but I'm sure it will happen .
 JFK: Turkey and Turkey and — uh — I'd like to say that the United States. Such discussion is not uncommon . JFK: "Turkey and Turkey ... are Turkey and ... the U.S. United States"
 Ho, he just tied it into Turkey* The difficulty is we're not ready tordgiit, WgCtmg s wo, I know, but — uh — tfiis . Ho, the president's reference to Turkey was just sort of an exanpleple of
 JlrK; That's right, we have to keep it vague, unfortunately r or fortunately, because we haven't cleared it with Turkey of t&ao. Jlrk; That’s right, unfortunately . Unfortunately, unfortunately, because of the situation, it hasn't
 T don't understand — can 1 just say — what's wrong — uh — what about all the points ttiat we made in this letter? "Ttiat says: "Can 1 just ... what's right?" "What's wrong? What's wrong?"
 T^ifi reason for the — the actual reason we didn't have those points in this letter was ttie President's desire not to get Ms hands too tied with respect to ttie Turkish problem . The actual reason for this letter is not to be published is the reason for it,
 At flb we undertook to give assurance with respect to the territorial integrity and independence of Cuba... sorensen: WO, we changed that. We changed that . WO: We now give assurance of respect for territorial integrity of Cuba .
 Send t.e Tetter and say you're accepting liis offer — he's made an offer and you're in fact accepting it . Send tJ.e.e .
 I don't know w}yether it adds anything, I mean I think this letter — he made an offer last night. And you think — I tl*ink that letter sounds slightly defensive about the fact — Ged r don't bring in Turfcey new;
 No, I thought we said we'd not to invade Cuba* That's the language he asked for JFK i That's correct, but I don't think, if we're going to make this public at this point j when we don't know how much we'll get, we don
 KFK s Be cause I think* one, its just in general terms, rather defensive, and is just says we don't want to get in — please don't into discussion of HATO* ox Turkey r because we want to talk about Cuba . The other tone says,
 The other first letter — of Adlai — doesn't think says anything, l don't think we're any further along, except we don't like you — what you said, Sorcnscn t . It may be possible to take elements of his* part of ours,
 RFKs 1 wouldn't repeat about the HMO thing twice* (Words unci earl ¥ou h ve got it once, twice) "I think it sounds rather defensive about this has really thrown us off by the fact that you've brought this thing up," says RF
 Mr Kennedy**: You have to get them to say we accept your proposal* PFK: accept it and then say you — I just the last paragraph of the other letter and however way you phrase it . Mr Kennedy: I just want to say you .
 It does look now froa a military point of view . They just feel that the longer we wait now. What are the reason.,, Taylor i. Taylor i . i .
 Hare says he'll do his damnedest but it's very difficult, which is in essence what he says . Hare responds to the message sent to him on Wednesday at great length .
 JFK i Well now we have the question of a choice between the Bilateral arrangement with Turkey — in which we more or less do it, or whether we go through HATO and let NATO put the pressure on, says JFK . JFK .
 President sends a message to the Prime Minister and says this is the way 1 think it ought to be solved, and I'm prepared to do it tonight . If you're going to deal directly with the Turks, the President simply sends .
 "I need an answer front you within six hours — or eight hours — something like that. And I need to answer you within 6 hours," he says . "And I need a answer fronting you within eight hours," the author says .
 JFK: If we're going to that, Bob, it's going to look like we're uh -caving in . JFK: "Not having had it explained in NATO what's . going to be the effects of continuing with it it's ... going to ... look like ... we
 Do we want to have a meeting in the morning of HATO and say, ""If we don't 1 1 do it, hare t s the problem. (mixed voices) " I think you have to do it simultaneously. Do you want to go to a meeting
 We have to get ground up to do it t and we have to look at some of the actions in between . We have a lot of things we need to do in order to get back on track . We need to look back at what happened in the past and the future .
 I talked to Captain (name not clear J — there T s some difference — I think you have to wait until a little later) I talked with Captain (Name not clear) to tell you what you need to do next week .
 If we send them in with proper cover and they're attacked, we must attack back, either the 5AM s and /or Kl <* aircraft that come against them, or the ground firs that coir.es up . Either we decide not to send them into at all
 Taylor: "When you put the two of these together ~ the question of — you know stopping surveillance and not stopping the ship — it seems to me we're too weak*** Voice: Tfeah, yeah . I*d say we must continue surveillance* That 1 s far more
 Mcttamara: "I don't think at this particular point we should — tih — show a weakness to Khrushchev J and I think we would show a ... weakness if we — if we failed on both Of these actions"
 Taylor ; And we must not fail on surveillance* we can't give up twentyfour hours to this stage. Taylor ; We must not give up . Taylor . Taylor ; . And we cannot give up on surveillance*.
 We can't send these low-altitude aircraft in JFK; If you're going to take a cover isn't much good because you've got ant-gun guns . McMaraara: "We can't sent these low — low — altitudes aircraft"
 J would think we ought to take a chance on reconnaissance tomorrow, without the cover , because 1 don't think cover's really going to do you much good .
 JFK; I'm rather inclined to think that the more general response-** However, why don't we wait. One or the other » JFK .
 Mow let's think over the Turkish thing. Hell that's what I want to come to now, Mow says . Mow: 'Let's think about Turkish thing'
 Well that's what we cuocEsteo to Hare* is what we wexe talking about doing. Well, but that was what we were talking about. Well that was well, but well, well, Hare* .
 We ought to send out to the Turks that this is their neck, of course they re liable to say, ""Well, we can take it,"" President Obama says .
 Turkish reaction was the missiles are here, and as long as they're here you're here, says Ru3k . He"" have — that's the way 1 interpret the Turkish position now and also a couple of years ago, Ru3K .
 CNN.com: "There's a few club members of NATO who won't like it much. Well I tell ycu there's a . few members of the NATO club members who won t like it."
 Host of the HATO members aren't going to be very happy about it, because the problem is Berlin or something . Hosts aren't likely to be happy about the situation, because it's Berlin .
 The British have recognised the obsolescence of the Thor and have decided to take it out and replace it . Polaris i£ is an effective replacement for the Thor system .
 Kctiamara t And Italy tool exactly. And we propose the same thing be done for Turkey, * Voice i And Italy too . And we . propose the . same thing .
 JFK; well, thev will, as I say, it's bound to be looked on though as the United States . They'll say that this is because of the U.S. to make a trade. JFK . JFK; . well, as well, it will.
 MgKamara: We have our air squadrons there with nuclear weapons. Sure, That's exactly right, That was exactly right. Sure. That was right, that was right .
 "It's not going to b* so Slppy. There's at least as much,.* jfk i We want — in other words, Bob, we want to send a message to our ambassador to begin this track"
 I think~we can defer an air attack on Cuba until Wednesday or Thursday, but only if we continue our surveillance and fire against anything that fires against the surveillance aircraft . Only if we maintain a tight blockade in this interim period .
 Taylor: "That's just exactly— in fact, I don't think we can, (Voices unc unc unc 1 ear 1 1 Taylor : (words unclear) Taylor: It's on the ground the wreckage is on the . ground. That's exactly exactly . That's just
 Bundy t If we know it, it must be either on friendly land or on the water . Bundy t says it must have been either on land or in the water. Bundy t
 Hccongi 1 wonder if this shouldn't cause a most violent protest a letter right to Khrushchev . 1 wonder . if this . shouldn't . cause a very violent protest . A letter of support is a letter from a letter to the former Soviet leader .
 CNN.com: "Here's an action they T ve taken against us, a new order in defiance of — of public statements he made. think that think that. think they think that."
 If there's any continuation of this, we just take those SAMsites out of there, says McCone . McCone. McCone: "If there is any continuation, it will be taken off the SAMsites"
 Secretary of State: Unless we can reeonnoiter, reconnoiter each day, we won't be able to do so again . Secretary: "Reinnoiter" is a form of reconnaissance .
 McHamara: "We must be prepared to fire each day. And if we're going to reconnaissance, carry out surveillance, each day,> we must be ready to fire"
 Havana's announced it anyway* You ought to announce it*** Voices * Yeah. Havana's announcement it anyway . Havana's announce it anyway. You should announce it .
 "Action will be taken to protect our MC," she says . "It would certainly make it more difficult," she adds . "I think we ought to announce that ... action is being taken"
 Taylor: "They started the shooting. I haven't the detail* {Mixed voices] Taylor : 'They started shooting. They started shooting' Taylor: 'I haven't been able to explain the details'
 General -get a statement which would cover in any case* It may be — wa don't know it was shot down. General - get a statement that would cover any case . General - Get a statement .
 HcHarciara ; That's right, exactly JFKi . They say — uh — that's why I'd like to find out whether Havana says they did shoot it down . That's exactly what they say .
 We assume these E^M-sites are manned by Soviets. voice : That's the significant part if it is the SAH-site. voice . voice : We assume they're manned by the Soviets .
 This is a change of pattern, now why it's a different pattern we don't know, says BBC presenter . "Now we know. Now why it is a new pattern is why it doesn't seem to be," she says .
 The important thing is to find out if we possibly can is whether this was a SftM-site . RFKi Yeah. RFK: "The important thing to find is whether it was a site that might have been a site"
 In operation, McNamara t.r squired for control of the missiles . McNamara .
 McHaraaraara: "It was in operation, we believe, at the same tipie that the U-2 was over. And it was ... in operation"
 SAM-tite and Russian crew fire is not any accident, says U.S. Air Force spokesman . Cuban anti-aircraft outfit fire is 'not any accident'
 "If he had altitude and had any type of failure, he could fly to Puerto Eico. He could fly there," he says . "He could fly into Puerto E. Eico"
 President Obama calls for a meeting of NATO leaders to discuss what NATO wants to do with Turkey . Obama: "I think we'd better have a tiATO meeting tomorrow"
 HcNamara: Without instruction from the governments, so that that... so that... that... voice : — Actually what we should do tonight, Mr President, get to the capitals, to our ambassadors so they can talk to the governments . They 1 re going to be fifteen voices
 In the message to the capitals say we arc doing it, and that wc want the Representatives to be instructed . Of course it would be relatively easy if we wanted to get NATO to reject this thing, but that isn't necessarily what w& want right now .
 When we decide that, I think we can force it, says Mcamara i . "We can do it in such a way that the aftereffects will not — not be too severe," she says .
 To free our hands in Cuba we must get these missiles out of Turkey, is what wc say . Bu ndy i i To . free our . hands in . Cuba, wc says .
 Bundy Bundy i i It will be seen as a trade by a great many people, Mr President. Bundy i said . Bundy i says: 'It will be a trade' Bundy i
 Hell what we'd like to do is have the Turks come and offer ^thTs. If you don't buy that, then it seens to me Bob has the beet way of dealing with it* JTKt Hell . JT
 We just have One last line, Mr President , that Bobby thought you ought to look at. Mr President . Mr President, Mr Obama, said: "Bobby thought you should look at."
 We can say we're in a position where we believe we're going to have to attack Cuba. Provided that NftTG agrees, KcHamara says, we can play it on an either/or basis .
 OFKThin will be for a meeting tomorrow . OfKThins: "If they don't take it, they should recognise the danger, accept the danger"
 I tlink we ought to get something {words unclear] tomorrow afternoon. I would not do it tomorrow, Mr President, myself,52 JTKj . I t link we ought . We should do something tomorrow afternoon .
 The only time we say that we render then inoperable is when we've determined that we're going to attack in Cuba, the U.S. says . The only thing we say is that the only time that the US forces can render the Cuban missile system inoperative .
 Voices And save a ffew hundred thousand miles* McWamara i Let me start my proposition over again* We must be in a position to attack, quickly, quickly* We've been fired on today, We're going to send surveillance aircraft in tomorrow*
 We're going to lose airplanes r and we* 11 be shooting up Cuba quite a bit, says President Obama . We* 11: "We* 11 will be shooting . up Cuba"
 So we must he prepared to attack Cuba — quickly* That's the first proposition* Now the second proposition . That's not the first .
 I think we should make every effort to avoid it, and one way is to defuse the Turkish missiles before we attack Cuba . Now I'm not sore we can avoid anything like that, if *e attack Cuba, but I think it should be done .
 HcNamara: "I thinX you're in a position where you've gotten rid of your missiles for nothing" Hnamara: Well, wait, I did say it saved you from a reprisal. I thinX .
 You have to go back in my proposition and say ii there aren't Jupiter missiles in Turkey to attack, they're going to employ military force elsewhere . Ball * Well, taut what a ood does that do you Ictlon against Berlin, or somewhere else, Imixed voices
 LBJi Sure TmTxed voices) lb j t What we were afraid of was he* a never offer this, but what he'd want to do was trade Berlin . voices This was just the kind of thing McNamgra i I'm not opposed to it .
 "Let's avoid that position, we're fast moving into that. That's all I'm suggesting," he says . Let's avoid it, he adds .
 We were going to let him have his strike in Turkey, as I understood it last week. ~~ at one point, at least that was the way we talked about it. Biindy r r r .
 Ball s what — actually t what we were thinking last week was that what he was doing was . What we thought was that if we could, trade it out for Turkey this would be an easy trade and a very advantageous deal . We thought that if . we could , we thought that
 I would far rather — if we're going to get the damned missiles out of Turkey anyway , say, we T ll trade you the missiles, we're . going to put Jupiters — I mean we f re going toput Polaris in there, you're not going to
 Kamara: Well, I think you have two alternatives tmixed voices) Bnndy : I missed your statement : I have to aek you to say it again . Yeah* Infixed voices: "Yeah Yeah"
 I'd say j sure, we'll accept your offer, if this  concern is a matter of concern to you, and you equate these t Ling 5, which we don't, but if you do, ok, we can work it out . If this  is a concern to
 Before we attack Cuba we're going to reduce the danger to Turkey to a minimum, Bundv says . I'd like to see both of these messages written . Bundv: 'I'd like a message to be written before we attack Turkey'
 Mac, Mac, this other course will in a sense be that, so — let's get first the message written on the assumption that that. But Mac, it will be that . Let's get the message to the world, Mac says .
 The message is going to go to the heads of government of NATO countries and the Worth Atlantic Council . It*s going to be going to the Turks, heads of . government of . NATO countries . The message in effect .
 We probably ought to think about the course of action in the next two or three days, what we're going to do . Max is going to work out the surveillance problem for tomorrow with the Chiefs and see how much cover we need .
 "We can carry this on I would think a couple of days, maybe three days, possibly even four," he says . "But we're going to lose planes. We can carry it on," he adds .
 It seems to me we're missing a bet hero. think that we ought to take this case to — send: directly to Khrushchev by fast wire the nest violent protest, and demand that he — that Tie stop this business and stop it right away .
 "Everybody was in favor of doing it, and I'd make that part of the message. We sat for a week j and everybody was in favour of it," he said . "We sat for the week j," he added .
 "If he wants to sit down and talk about this thing, he can call off his gunfire and do it right away," he said . "He can sit down with me right away. He can talk to me," he added .
 Mot once — there isn't a single word in it that proposes to take the missiles out, Mot says . Mot once said: "There isn't one word in that . That's why it's not possible to take missiles out of the country." Mot says, "There is no
 McNamara: "The last-night message was twelve pages of fluff. Well hia message this morning wasn't..* (mixed voices) McNamara : well, no, I'm speaking of the last night message ~ McNamara . McNamara says he's speaking of
 "Before we got the damned thing read the whole deal changed — complete 1y changed. And before we got . The whole thing changed — before we . got the . damned thing changed, the whole . deal changed .
 The probabilities are that nothing's going to fee signed quickly, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Now my question is, assuming nothing is signed quickly - what do we do?"
 I wouldn't try to negotiate a deal. Now John's suggestion, I think, is obviously one — to try to . negotiate a . deal* Mccone i i wouldn't negotiate a. deal.
 I'd send him a threatening letter, I'd say, you've made public an offer, tfo 1 11 accept that offer . I'd write him a threat letter, he says .
 "You shot down a plane today before we even had a chance to send you a letter t despite the fact that you knew that we were sending unarmed planes on a publicly announced surveillance," the U.S. State Department says .
 U.S. sent unarmed planes over Cuba over Khrushchev's tiling . Now we're telling you that this is just one tiling, that we're sending unarmed planes .
 "If one of them is shot at, we're going to take the installations out, and you can expect it," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Mo i I wouldn't because then the pressure get's (word unclear) he get another* proposal* Ke'll have Berlin thrown in. He'll get something else thrown in tomorrow. Mo i i wouldn't . Ke'll get Berlin thrown into the mix of proposals . He'll have
 "Let's go down <and try and draft, get this (words unclear) just so we have later tonight 6 one alternative here. Let's go back to the original draft, draft and draft . Let's get back in the game and draft again, draft again .
 Rusk re-turns Sj and the vice President and Rusk and Dillon begin to talk with each other . There follows sporadic lowvoiced conversation until Rusk turns Sj .
 After a routine review for Johnson of the public steps of the day so far, the conversation continues after comments on the surveillance problem that are not clear . LBJ i: "I've been afraid of these damned flyers ever since they mentioned them" i. I've been . afraid of
 "Just an ordinary plane goin' in there at two or three hundred feet without arms or an announcment," pilot says . "It was a plane that went into the air without arms," he says .
 Imagine some crazy Russian captain would be looking (words unclear) our skies . If they get — four of them had to turn back because of the risk . Imagine some wild Russian captain . Imagine .
 I*m scared oJE that, and I don't see what you get for that photograph that's so roach more important than what you — you know they're working at night 7 you see them working . I'm scared of that, but I'm not afraid of that
 "Every time I tried to put a monkey on somebody else's back I got one," he says . " Psycho logically you scare them"
 He's drafting* LEJ; He says that if you're going to — you ought to accept the trade, that you should give up the Turkish bases . He says if you want Cuba, you should accept trade if you give up bases .
 tfcNamara says if we're going to hit Cuba, we've got to say to the Turks that we want you to give uo your Jupiters, and we'll give you Polaris Instead* Ball said, well if you're . going to do that, just
 Hr. Dillon ; Here is the third thing which is really the Ball line, plus Mccone's ultimatum idea about surveillance .
 Your forcesn Cuba have fired on our unarmed planes conducting surveillance in acc or dance with the resolution of the OAS* You have done this before 1 had an opportunity to reply to your letter of this morning* offering to remove your offensive weapons from Cuba in return for the removal of similar
 It is essential that these weapons be made inoperable immediately . Meanwhile, the weapons should be made to be made 'operable' immediately .
 "We must continue our unarmed aerial surveillance in Cuba," says President Obama . "If these planes are again fired upon, we will be required to respond with all the necessary force," he says .
 The decision, Hr, chairman, is yours, if you give orders to your forces in Cuba to cease interference with our unarmed planes . If you agree to immediately render the offensive weapons in Cuba inoperable, the way to peace is open, he says .
 "There f s a great feeling of insecurity. told you the other day before these fellows came in they're reflecting it. They see that there are &cme ships coming through* There f s, told you . told you that there is a great sense of insecurity .
 We've got 17,000 men there * LB J ; {words unclear) So we could say f we're going to come but we^ve got to hit Cuba, and we think that you're in less danger by pulling down these Jupiter s .
 I think goverments are old and tired and sick. Dillon ; if you do this — if you at the same time send that message to everybody, you see, which is explaining why . LfiJi . Dillon ; . If you do that, you will be able to
 "We're just calking about missiles F because we can't talk about planes," he says . "We just calk about missiles because of the fact that we're not talking about planes"
 A week ago, President Obama said he'd take everything out of Cuba r and we'd just take the missiles out of Turkey,. whereas now he's saying I'll take missiles out . Now he says he'll take missile out of . Cuba, ypu take missiles from here .
 Either Ki.ru sKehev was overruled and — or Khrushchev and /or his eollegues were deceived by the Lippmann piece and the fact that Krai sky put this out which made then think . that we were putting this out, that we
 Lippmann: "It's our position to say unless you agree not to shoot at our unarmed planes until these things of yours are inoperable in Cuba, then we're going to have to hit you"
 A confused discussion of Lippmann' s position follows, largely mixed voices* 63 ThoiKpBPii i i These boys are beginning to give way, Let's push harder. The choice is yours, The choice should be yours .
 Dillon ; Well, would you rather send them a thing like this which says if they shoot at all you're going to take them all out, or just go in and take one SAK-site out. Dillon .
 The first letter he was wobbling around rather slowly, (words unclear) but that is not to be ignored, f pro longed mixed voices) Then there is read, probably by Mccone, a longer version of the MCCone draft letter . Well, a decision was
 I'm surprised that they've baen allowing these planes to go in all these days anyway without any action . Now if we pull out for the last couple of davs in the papers, we'll be in the news .
 The only thing that bothers me is the — uh — you can see that we have two conflicting things here; One is to prepare for action in Cuba, and the other is to get a peaceful solution along the lines which he has proposed, Thompson says .
 Thompson i i The action, as MeCone does, may be to give them a churlish bona fit . Thompson i The Action, as I think, also discusses this other thing, that we can discuss this . And I think I think to mention, as meCone
 This is missile to missile ft. ftnd technician to technician and plane for plane . This is the first time a plane has been hit by a missile missile .
 "If we get that Out in public, I think that offsets a lot of things we're at present about the public posture. Because if we get . that out in public . We're not going to be able to get that out of the closet, we're going to have that
 I think we ought to go — essentially go back to this problem and then when we get these messages to the Turks r the British, and the NATO messages. I'm sorry to keep you. think we should go . Think we need to go . essentially go . back to the problem
 LBJ: HcKanara is drafting that message, JFK: Let's see what the difference is, and then we can think about that . We have to go back to — wc have to instruct Finletter, weTave really to agree on the track, you
 Bund^i Well I haven't been in as much of the discussion as some others, Mr President, but I'll ask Mr Thompson to speak, Mr Thompson . Bundi: "I'm not sure if Mr Thompson will be able to speak to Mr Thompson."
 It gets it back on — centered on Cuba, and our willingness to accept it . ftnd that that that diminished the need for any talk about — about Turkey, it also diminishes the need to talk about Turkey .
 President Obama said the U.S. is going to hit Cuba and therefore we ought to do this because then it means that you 're safer than you would be' Obama said Cuba would be safer than it would have been .
 Ball takes the position that you shouldn't get something for your trade, if you're going to give up the Jupiter, why you ought to get him to take care of Cuba . LB J a McCone's got one that lays down an ultimatum, that just says wi^
 Mr, President, I think that the trouble with Ball's l^k is thai Public M today plane for plane, man forman, missile for aiissile . I think  Mr. Ball's troubles are thai public, not the trouble he is trying to fix
 Va can't very well invade Cuba with all its toil, arid long as it's agoing to be, when we could have gotten them out by making a deal on the same missiles in Turkey . Va*t very well invaded Cuba .
 "If that's part of the record I don't see how we T ll have a very good war," says President Obama . "I'm not sure how we can have a good war. If that's the record, I'm sure we'll have a bad war"
 President Obama's foreign policy is gone in Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . "He takes his wissiies out of Cuba, he takes his men out of ... Cuba, why then your whole foreign policy ... gone"
 "Vaicre i ... get these missiles out of there. This Turkey thing has been going on," he said .
 We have sofhe photography and I would say by tonight — by the end of the day — we probably have seen some of the dispositions around these sites . However, the kind of very hard to pick up. However, it is very difficult to see .
 Chiefs plan to pick out targets which we don't know have this kind of flak around, to verify that the work is still going ahead, and also to prove we're still working .
 We're approaching the point where low-level reconnaissance will be entirely impossible, says President Obama .
 I would add to that I don't believe we should carry out tomorrow's u-2 mission . The U-2 but 1 believes we should be carrying out the reconnaissance with the necessary fighter escorts and preparations .
 SAMsites, low r and high r and the SAMsites high, will not be protected enough to protect the system . It will be so limited, that we'll find ourselves with all the disadvantages, says the author .
 KeHamara: I would like to put that out ttcNamara f f fcan do it under the Executive Order that you signed g TinTIn g me the authority (words unclear) "I would like this to — let me read this and see ~ ‘P
 The of further attack on our aircraft* and the continuous build-up of the offensive weapons systems in Cuba, require that *J be prepared for any eventuality . To protect these flight against attack, At ^J* ftf henceforth be accompanied by fighter escorts .
 You might want to take out the sentence about the fighter escorts . jlCNamar: "Yes, I'd leave that out" jlC: "I'd leave it out"
 "We ought to, tonight, call Stevenson to inform U Thant that this ship is continuing to approach (words unci earl) that we'd like to get some answer from them, whether this i3 going to be called back or otherwise we — the confrontation must take place
 HFK: Could we have a couple of minutes — just a minute's fiTseussion, as to whether we should intercept it or not? No, in fact 1**, HFK : could we have two minutes — could we . have a . minute's fTse
 1 was just making a list here of the things that have happened today . By the way the intercept area business was available last night, I think, JFK : I just want to call them, Bobby and tell then about the shTp.
 Just to remind us of seven things that have happened today. Yeah, we can wait until about noon tomorrow, tmixed voices .
 Hit, by the way, is telling us the pressure's on Khrushchev * One was the statement this morning on the broadcast. One was a statement that was made by the president of the Soviet Union. Another was the announcement that the U.S. government was investigating Khrush
 Five was our answer to K's letter of October 25 . Six, was a call up of air squadrons . Five was an answer to the letter of K's October 25 letter .
 If we don't take the ship, we announce that the ( words unclear) been broken, and from now on, it's POL, all ships, and < — uh — so on* Nine ships Nerds unclear) in addition our own ships*
 JFK j what we'd better do is now figure out these messages to NATO and the Turks . I thought tomorrow we H d do that* It's just a little late tonight, and probably tomorrow, JFK j .
 "I just talked to Fin letter, who is arranging for the tcac meeting in the morning," Fin letter says . Fin letter: "Fin letter" is a response to a letter from Fin letter .
 Finletter's presentation should be brief, factual and should be cool and skeptical, without suggesting that you have established a firm and final position* The resulting discussion would r I hope, be useful to you as an indication of European opinion, and might develop some aspects of the problem of importance
 No matter how productive and useful a NAC discussion may be it will no 1 substantially relieve you of the burden of making a difficult decision . In any event it should help to avoid a situation in which you can be . be ^rong whatever you do .
 There is one — we have one on the basis that — uh — ■, Husk: Mr* President, T wonder, in a matter of this sort, whether it is necessary for the United States to give its first choice at the time that we first discuss this problem with f
 We 1 d genuinely like to consult Europe — the NATO allies. Remind them that the Soviets have raised this question of Turkey* Remind the Soviets that they have raised the issue .
 The Soviet Union realises that we have to combine with NATO on this issue, he says . Therefore we must stand by them in NATO and make sure that — uh — the Soviet union realises it .
 Tcu wouldn't want to state a position, I don't think, Mr* Secretary, woU xd you, because they'll feel compelled then to aqree with that . Well, if you're going to really present it to them that way, ... they wouldn't
 It's officially the easiest position, but I think we ought to be sure that that's what w* want to do . It's a job that's the easiest, but we should be sure we want it .
 AnE if we don't — take it, then we want everybody to understand what we think may be the alternative U we're going to have to move . AnE is the name of the U.S. university, which is based in New York City .
 "I think that's probably what this first meeting ought to be, and then we might have another one the nest morning," says President Obama . "We might have a meeting the next morning," he says .
 We IX now, will the introduction of Turkey, we think that if we~take an action which we may have to take, I don't think we ought to say . If they hit Turkey and they tiit Berlin, we want them —if they want to get off, now
 Russia has made an offer to hold talks with the U.S. President Vladimir Putin in return for a return to Moscow . Putin's offer was initially rejected by the Obama administration, but it has since been accepted .
 Lri£ Item 42.2, Raftrenca Reel 2 RFK ; T think you could say it tomorrow, if you had the information . Lri.2: "I think I could say that tomorrow. If I had the info, I would be happy to
 You could do it — Ok* Well, one day r I can't believe it's going to make that much difference, (voices unclearl PTKi) I think — I think you've got to give them a chance. You could . You could ... one day,
 Put the situation to then and welcome their views on it. tend to hope that they night have some ideas about the alternatives. Put it to the people and welcome them .
 It's essentially Kes's draft, and there's one paragraph dropped, says Soransen . Mr President it n s s only seven hours to the meeting I don't, Soransen says .
 "We won't that we r re going to ask for a meeting on Monday on it. But I think you can say that we won't," she said .
 Eiot whether we're continuing or Cilpatrici i we've already announced that, that we're going to continue. Eiot has announced that he will continue .
 Well, I was thinking abcut that ship, because we're going to lie"" faced with the problem of that ship tomorrow . Well, he was thinking . "Abcut" the ship, "because we're . going to . lie."" faced with a problem tomorrow."
 JFK: "We probably don't want to do anything with Hare for twentyfour hours till we get seme sort of an answer" "I don't know if you saw it or not"
 We're trying to cat it back on the original preposition of last night w and w and — because we don't want to get into this trade trade — we're not going to get in this trade . We're still trying to focus on the trade .
 If we <2o, then we would of course want it to come from the Turks themselves and HMO, rather than just the United States, we're hopeful, however, that that won't coma . If we're unsuccessful we may have to get back on the Jupiter thing*
 If they attack our aircraft, we're going in after some of their MIGa. This time we would make it clear that if they attack us, we would go in . We would make the ... clear ... that if ... they attack ... we would be going in . This time
 TUESDAY, October 14, 1962 9:£5 am The Pre-Aid eat arrived in the office . 9*30 9s4E am Commander and Mrs* Walter M Schlrra* Jr. The President of Havana will be Cobby mayor of Havana .
 The President met with the members of the Panel on Mental Retardation in the Fieh Room* 11:15 11:46 am Hen, Charles E Bohlen U, £* Ambassador to France . Off the record: Off the Record .
 Tae Crown Prince of the United Kingdom of Libya, Ha Can al-Hida al-Satiusi H» E, V/antia aUQadhaali Minister of Foreign Affair a H, E, The Ambassador of Libya Dr. Dr. Tae .
 The Honorable Abdullah Sikta Director of the Development Council and Director-Genex of Customs . Mr Abu al-Qaasim al-Ghamaary Private Secretary to His Royal Highness Colonel Idris Issawi Deputy Chief of Staff .
 The Printing Company of Am eric 4;2S pm . The President returned to tbe White House .
 Ambassador of Libya Yunin EiUcheir, Minister of Defea&e Hon* John ""Wesley Jones, U, S Ambassador to Libya BodE, O r Mennen Williams . Assistant Secretary for African Affairs Camilla Noffol, interpreter Mr, William %
 The President writ to the Mansfon, (off the RECORD, the President and Mrs. Hon, Dean Rusk) 7:55 pm . The President Writes the MansFon . Off the record .
 His Excellency K* Ho in rich Khapp stein stein 12 Ambassador of Germany Dr. Simon . Simon Personal Aide to the Foreign Minister Dr. Gerhard Schroeder .
 Hon. Reinkemeyer Chief of Soviet Affairs in the Foreign Office . Mr, Kusterer, interpreter Hon, Dean Husk Hon. Husk .
 President departed the White House and motored to Sti Matthews Cathedral . Arrived at St. Matthews Cathedral, arrived at the Cathedral at 13:48 pm . Arrives at StiMatthews Cathedral, Arrived in St. Matthews, arrived in the morning .
 Departure of St. Matthews and attended services in commemoration of National Day of Prayer .
 The President was greeted by Governor John Dempsey Hon, Abraham Ribicoff Mayor Samuel Tenesco of Bridgeport . The Presidential motorcade departed Bridgeport Municipal Airport and proceeded to Waterbury, Conn.
 The President and hi a patty arrived in Waterbury, Connecticut, on a visit to Connecticut .
 The President was greeted by Mayor Edward D Bjergin 6:25 6:35 pm ADDRESS BY THE PRESIDENT at Water Dury, Conn. 6:46 pm Presidential motorcade departed Waterbury .
 Congressman Robert N, Giaimo rode with the President and Mr Bernard Grabowsld, candidate for Congress at X^arge .
 Presidential motorcade arrives in New Haven, Conn. President Obama's motorcade arrived in Connecticut .
 The President was greeted by Mayor Richard C Lee of New Haven, Conn . Arrived at New Haven Airport, 8:33 pm Airborne for Washington .
 The folios ing were pre scot for the Hon, Majeeb Halaby Hon* Joseph S Tmlrte Hon, Fred Korth Brig, General Godfrey T* McHugh Genera William F, McKee Commander William Nelson Cpatin John R Seal Captain H
 Peter C Doera ( Jr Major Alexander P de Sever sky Dr. Alexander de Seversky . Be rat Bale hen Mr a, Chester Earth Mr and Mr. Chester Earth .
 Michael W t Xannone and Victor J one a Rofee* L^wia have been married for more than 30 years . The Montgomery family is from the U.S. and Canada .
 Hon, Lyndon Johnson, The Vic* President Hon, Dean Euskj Secretary of State Hon. Otto C, Win sen nwr~ m — Win sen .
 Secretary of Labor Hon* Charles Murphy, Under Secretary of Agriculture Hon* John A; Carver Carver. W VfiUard Tr*""irt2s t . Secretary of State Hon. Charles Murphy . Carver .
 Sore n sen, Special Counsel to the President Hon.David Bell, Director of the Bureau of the Budget Hon. Mc George Eundy, Special A y si at ant to the . President HonWalter Heller .
 Glenn Seaborg, Chairman* AEC ( Hen* Robert leaver, Administrator* HHFA Hon. Jerome Wiesner, Special Assistant to the President Hon, T J # Re&rdon* Jr, . T J re-j, J a men Webb, Administrator
 Hon. Donald Wile on, Deputy Director, USIA Hon, John Gleaeon, Administrator, VA Hon. John Gleaon . Hon Wile was the VA Secretary of the Department of Health and Secretary of State of the State of Washington . Hon. Wile is the
 Vladimir Cemenor Deputy Minister of Foreign /if fairs of the USSR Mr Alexander Akitlovsky, Department of State ontctpreter Mr Victor M # SUitthodcev, interpreter 9:10 pm The President departed the office and -went to the Man*
 The President departed the South Ground by helicopter and flew to Andrews Air Force Base* 10:49 am Airborne from Andrews Air Fore* Base .
 The President received an autographed football from the student body of £t.£t. The President of the University of Cambridge received a football signed by the students .
 The President placed a wreath and returned to his car . The President was accompanied In aide the tomb hy Governor Kcmer, Congressman Sidney Yatee and Senator Douglas* The President visited the tomb .
 John Bailey, and Governor Otto Kcroer departed the Chic ago -OH&re International Airport in motorcade . John Bailey was the Governor of the State of Ohio . Otto KCroer was the governor of the state .
 The President and bU party arrived at the Sheratoa-Blackstone Hotel in Chicago . The party was held in honor of the President .
 The President* Mayor Richard Daley, Mayor of Chicago and Congressman SidneyTate a and Hon* John B alloy departed the Sheraton -Black stone Hotel and motored to McCommick Place Exposition and Convention Hall .
 The President and Mayor Daley went to the Aerie Grown Theatre, The President >va» introduced ""by Mayor . Daley . The President was introduced by Mayor .
 Arrived at the Sheraton -Black atone Hotel, No further activity recorded this date . Arrived in a Sheraton at one of the hotels in the city .
 JFK departed the White House and motored to St* Stephen's Church* 9:S7 am . Arrived at St. Stephen's .
 President remained at the White Houno all day, conferring with officials of hie staff on the present crisis in Cuba . The President arrived in the office 10:30 11:00 am .
 HonA Milton Obote Prime Minister of Uganda Hon. Hon. George Ball Hon, U Alexia Johnson Hen, Edwin M* Martin Hon, Llewellyn E, Thompson Hon* General Maxwell D Taylor General Earle G Wheeler Admiral George W, Anderson * Jr* General Cur
 Uganda 1 a Representative-designate to the United Nations Mr John Kakonge Secretary General, Uganda People's Congress Hon, G Mennen TVillians Hon. Apolo Kiiicnde Uganda 1 Representative-Designate to United Nations .
 Anthony Cclebrezze Hon, Orvllte Freeman Hon, T, C f Sore a sen Hon, Jerome Wiesner Hon, David Bell Hon. Hon. Anthony C. C. Bell Hon . Hon.
 The President The Vice President Speaker John MeCormack Sen, Hubert Humphrey Cong. Walter Belle Belle Belle r 5:30 6:30 pm BIPARTISAN LEG IB LATI VE .
 President went to the M&nelon* Returned to the office . Adm. Utf the President to the Nation concerning the development* in Cuba .
 Hon. Neville Noel Ashenhcini is the new Ambassador of Jamaica . He was appointed by the President of Jamaica to be an ambassador to Jamaica .
 The President went to the pool, To the Mansion, 4:00 pm Returned to the office. 4:05 4:33 pm 4:34 4*58 pm H* Alberto Franco Nogueira Foreign Minister of Portugal . 4:58-5:05 pm Senator William
 H, BraJ Kumar Nehru Ambassador of India Hon. Hon. Ambassadors of India . Hon. Nehru was the Prime Minister of India and the Indian President of the Republic of India.
 The President, Caroline Kennedy, Lemoyne Billings, Mia a Shw, Captain Shepard, and Maria Sh river departed Glen Ora. and flew by helicopter to the White House* WASHINGTON, D C, 7:00 pm Arrived at the WMte House.
 Robert Kennedy Hon, John McCone Hon, U AleatU Johnson Hon . General Maxwell Taylor Hon, Llewellyn Thompson Hod Hod. Robert Kennedy Kennedy Hon . U.S. Johnson Hon.
 Hon, George Ball Hon, Don Wilson, USJA Hon, Kenneth O'Doanell Hon* Pierre Salinger Hon, Bromley Smith It39 pm The President. Theodore Soreaaea Also attending Hon .
 The purpose of these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere . This government has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet military build-up on the island of Cuba .
 Several of them include Medium Range Ballistic Missiles capable of carrying a nuclear warhead for a distance of more than 1000 nautical miles . Each of these missiles can carry a nuclear weapon for more than 1,000 miles . The missiles can also carry nuclear warheads .
 The plane is capable of striking Washington, D, C, the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico City, or any other city in the Southeastern part of the U.S. or Central America .
 Additional sites not yet completed appear to be designed for intermediate range ballistic missiles -capable of traveling more than twice as far and thus capable of striking most of the major cities in the Western Hemisphere, ranging as far North as Hudson's Bay .
 In addition, jet bombers capable of carrying nuclear weapons are now being assembled in Cuba, while the necessary air bases are being prepared .
 This urgent transformation of Cuba into an important strategic base -* by the presence of these large, long-range, and clearly offensive weapons of sudden mass destruction constitutes an explicit threat to the peace and security of all the Americas . In flagrant and deliberate defiance of the Bio Pact of 1947
 Our own strategic missiles have never been transferred to the territory of any other nation, under a cloak of secrecy and deception . Our history, unlike that of the Soviets since the end of florid far II, demonstrates that we have no desire to dominate or conquer any other country .
 American citizens have become adjusted to living daily on the bull's eye of Soviet missiles . The missiles are located inside the United States SB or in submarines . The U.S. has been hit by Soviet missiles in the past .
 In that sense s missiles in Cuba add to an already clear and present danger . Latin America has never previously been subjected to a potential nuclear threat .
 Our policy has been one of patience and restraint, as befits a peaceful and powerful nation, which leads a worldwide alliance . Our unswerving objective, therefore, must be to pre vent the use of these missiles against this or any other country, and to secure their withdrawal .
 We have been determined not to be diverted from our central concerns by mere irritants and fanatics* But now further action is required — and it is underway; and these actions may only be the beginning .
 This quarantine will be extended, if needed, to other types of cargo and carriers, tfe are not at this time denying the necessities of life as the Soviets attempted to do in their Berlin blockade of 1943 .
 It shall be the policy of this Nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union . As a necessary military precaution, I have reinforced our base at Guantanarao .
 Under the Charter of the United ifations , we are asking tonight that an emergency meeting of the Security Council be convokedwithout delay to take action against this latest Soviet threat to world peace .
 This Nation is prepared to present its case against the Soviet threat to peace at any time and in any forum -.in the OAS, in the United Nations, or in any other meeting that could be useful -without limiting our freedom of action .
 We have in the past made strenuous efforts to limit the spread of nuclear weapons, ffe have proposed the elimination of all arms and military bases in a fair and effective disarmament treaty .
 Any hostile move anywhere in the world against the safety and freedom of peoples to whom we are committed - including the brave people of West Berlin - will be met by whatever action is needed, says the UK Foreign Office .
 President Obama's speech is being carried out by special radio facilities in Cuba .
 Cuba is the first Latin American country to become a target for nuclear war - the first latin American country . These new weapons are not in your interest. They are puppets and agents of an international conspiracy which has turned Cuba against your friends and neighbors .
 We know that your lives and land are being used as pawns by those who deny you freedom . But this country has no wish to cause you to suffer or impose any system upon you, we say .
 Cuba be welcomed bade bade to society of free nations and to the society, the associations of this Hemisphere . And then shall Cuba be welcome bade . Cuba will be welcomed to society, free nations, and to associations, this hemisphere .
 "Let no one doubt that this is a difficult and dangerous effort on which we have set out," says President Obama . "This is a dangerous and difficult effort," says Obama .
 Many months of sacrifice and self discipline lie ahead -months in which both our patience and our will will be tested . The cost of freedom is always high -but Americans have always paid it. The path we have chosen for the present is full of hazards, as all paths are - but
 Our goal is not the victory of might, but the vindication of right - not peace at the expense of freedom, but both peace and freedom, here in this Hemisphere . And one path we shall never choose is the path of surrender or submission*
 The purpose of these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere* Upon receiving the first preliminary hard information of this nature last Tuesday morning at 9m., 2 I directed that our surveillance be stepped up .
 Government feels obliged to report this new crisis to you in full detail . And having now confirmed and completed our evaluation of the evidence and our decision on a course of action, we feel obliged to do so . We are happy to clarify that this is not the first time we have seen this
 Several of them are Medium Range Ballistic Missiles, capable of carrying a nuclear warhead for a distance of more than 1000 nautical miles . Several of the missiles could be used to carry a nuclear weapon .
 Each of these missiles is capable of striking Washington, D.C, f the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico City, or any other city in the Southeastern part of the U.S. or Central America .
 Additional sites not yet completed appear to be designed for Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles -capable of travelling more than twice as far - and thus capable of striking most of the major cities in the Western Hemisphere . In addition, jet bombers, capable of carrying nuclear weapons, are now being unc
 The presence of large, long-range and clearly offensive weapons of sudden mass destruction -constitutes an explicit threat to the peace and security of all the Americas . This is in flagrant and deliberate defiance of the Rio Pact of 1947 .
 We no longer live ran a world where only the actual firing of weapons represents a sufficient challenge to a nation's security to constitute a maximum peril . Any substantially increased possibility of their use or any sudden change in their deployment may well be regarded as a definite threat to the peace .
 Our unswerving objective, therefore, must be to prevent the use of these missiles against this or any other country, and to secure their withdrawal or elimination .
 The Foreign Ministers of the OAS in their communique of October 6 rejected secrecy on such matters in this Hemisphere . Should these offensive military continue, further action will be justified, I have directed the armed forces to prepare for any eventualities .
 It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States .
 I have reinforced our base at Suantanamo, evacuated today the dependants of our personnel there and ordered additional military units to stand by on an alert basis . ttfih: We are calling tonight *or an immediate meeting of the Organ of Consultation . under the Organization of Consult
 U.N. calls for prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all offensive weapons in Cuba, under the supervision of UN observers .
 This nation is prepared to present its case against this Soviet threat to peace, and our own proposals for a peaceful world, at any time and in any forutn in the OAS T in the United Nations .
 We have proposed the elimination of all arm© and military bases in a fair and effective disarmament treaty . We are proposing the elimination . of all military bases and arm©s in a treaty .
 I have watched with deep sorrow how your nationalist revolution was betrayed "" and how your fatherland fell under foreign domination. And I have . watched . deep sorrow .
 Cuban leaders are no longer Cuban leaders inspired by Cuban ideals, Theyare puppets and agents of an international conspiracy . The first Latin American country to have these weapons on its soil .
 We know your lives and land are being used as pawns by those who deny you freedom . But this country has no wish to cause you to suffer or impose any system upon you* We know . your lives . and land . are being . used as . pawns .
 The cost of freedom is always high but Americans have always paid it* And one path we shall never choose is the path of surrender or submission, says President Obama .
 Our goal is not the victory of might but the vindication of right, 26 . We are not peace at the expense of freedom, 26 but both peace and freedom, here this Hemisphere, and, we hope, around the world .
 Thi* Govcmrncnti as promised* has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet military build-up on the Island of Cuba .
 Four and possibly five of these sites containing 4 launchers each, each with two missiles to be loaded on each launcher . Co ve rnment feals obliged to report this new crisis to the media .
 Each missile would be capable of carrying a nucleaT warhead for a distance of more than 1000 nautical miles* Each of these 32 missiles, in short, is capable Of Striking Washington, D,C< , the Panama Canal . Each of those missiles would be able to
 Missiles capable of travelling more than twlca as far north as Hudson 1 s Bay and as far south as Uiraa., Peru .
 This ■ action also contradicts the repeated assurances, of Soviet 9poK«smen t both publicly and privately delivered, that the arms build-up in Cuba would retain its original defensive character t and that Soviet missiles would ""ncrei be Stationed" Ort the territory of any
 Neither the United States of America nor the world community of nations can tolerate deliberate deception and offensive threats on the part of any nation, large or small . We no longer Hve in a world where only the actual firing of weapons represents a aufficient challenge to a nation's sennnt
 All fhips bound for Cuba, from ****** whatever nation or port, will, if found to contain cargoes of weapons, be turned back . Such a blockade can be authorised both by the requirements, of selfdefease and by the Organ of Consultation of the Organisation
 Such a blockade will be extended, if needed, to other types of cargo and carriers . The blockade is expected to extend, if necessary, into the future .
 It will also require the Soviet Union to choose between fighting the U, S, Navy In American waters or abandoning its build-up on Cuba . In short, it will not only prevent completion be faced of the current offensive build-ups .
 The Foreign Ministers of the OAS rejected secrecy on such matters in this Hemisphere . I have directed the continued and increased close surveillance o£ Cuba acid its military build-up .
 We urge the Utf and the OAS to demand removal of these offensive weapons f and the prompt dispatch o£ an international inspection team to make certain that this is done .
 By his action last week, the wo rid has moved a step closer to the brink of that dark and awful abyss of destruction .
 Both sides need to step back from that brink to resume the search for peaceful and permanent eolations > This nation is prepared to present its case against this tbreat to peace .
 We have proposed the elimination of all arms and overseas bases in a fair and effective armament treaty, We are prepared to dUcuea new proposals for the removal of tensions on both aides - including the possibilitiaa of a genuinely independent Cuba .
 Lntimj flali nr^g^Sr * That ii why this latest Soviet throat -or any cther^threat which is made independently or in response to our bt^jlgSe — must be met with determination .
 Ab4 eh.u-i.-swhy, ' Blwal **«^t*W*W«HdT^ and-the-bloc lfiirlr wili remain. Ab4Eh.u.h.h .
 My words tonight arc being carried diractly to them -and I want to tell them this, Do not permit yourselves to be coma involved in the giim confrontation of nuclear weapons. My words are being carried out to them .
 Do not become the first batin American country to have so weapons on your soil. Do not be the first .
 Do not bo come the first Latin American country to ha a necessary target for massive destruction. Do not come the . first Latin America country to be the first . target .
 "This nation has no quarrel with the Cuban people, only sympathy and hope," says President Obama . "We have no quarrels with Cuba," says Obama .
 We knnw your lives and land are being used as pawns by those who deny you freedom . Wo knew you did not consent to the transformation of your island .
 We have no wish to cause you to Suffer or impose any system upon you* Onr objective is to give back to the Cuban people the dream of their own revolution .
 The vast majority of Cubans today looke forward to the time when they will once again be free - free to choose their own leaders, free to select their own system . And 1 have no doubt that the vast majority in Cubans are looking forward .
 When foreign domination is ended, and the use of Cuba as a base o£ subversion and aggression has ceasft^, we shall gladly welcome her back to the society of free nations and to the associations of this Hemisphere .
 The cost o£ freedom is always high — but Americans have always paid it . The cost of freedom is high, but the cost of it is always very high . Americans have paid it.
 One path we shall never cudosc — the path of surrender or submission* Chrr goal is not the victory of might but the vindication of right - not peace at the expense of freedom, hut both peace and freedorxtj hero .
 Vice President, the Secretary of State, the . Secretary, of the Treasury, the Attorney General, . the . Attorney General and the . Director of the 1 Director o£ Central Intelligence . The . Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Chairman of . the Joint . Chiefs of
 The first meeting of this committee will bo held at the regular hour on Tuesday fc October £3rd* at which point further arrangements with respect to its management and operation will be decided .