 The Center is specialized in historical research in the Cold War era, focusing on the former Soviet Bloc . The Center specializes in Cold War history .
 From the outset the Center has been contributing to the flourishing of the ""new Cold War history"" aimed at transforming the previous one-sided approach based primarily on Western sources . The Center is exploring the once top secret documents found in the archives in the former Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc
 All this was made possible by the internship project of the Center which was started in 2009 .
 Since 2010, the Center has also organized an annual two-day English language international student conference on the history of the Cold War .
 Our Center proudly presents these excellent research results by motivated students and young would be scholars .
 The Institute of World Economy and Politics has reconstructed its role within the Soviet State . Andrea BORELLI reconstructs the Institute's role in Soviet foreign policy . The Institute has reconstructed the role of the State .
 Analysts have recreated relations between Stalin’s power system and the Institute through analysis of its members . The Institute was formed during cooperation between the Soviet Union and the Western democracies in which pro-Western positions emerged in Soviet Union .
 This paper is of significance because these documents are not yet available to the international scientific community . Furthermore, this paper is important because it's of significance as it is not yet known to the scientific community.
 The research is based on the methodological guidelines suggested by Anna Di Biagio . The research was carried out in accordance with the guidelines of the author of the study .
 Silvio Pons' works regarding the relationship between ideology and ideology 1 G Duda, Jenö Varga and die Geschichte des Instituts für Weltwirtschaft und Weltpolitik in Moskau 19211970. Moreover, the works of
 O Eran, Mezhdunarodniki an assessment of professional expertise in the making of Soviet foreign policy, Turtle Dove Press, Tel Aviv, 1979 . Zu den Möglichkeiten und Grenzen wissenschaftlicher Auslandsanaly
 Realpolitik during the Stalin era have been central for my research . L’Istituto di economia e politica mondiale e la politica estera sovietica, Aracne, Roma, Roma. 2 and Realpolitika during the
 In regards to the years of 1928 to 1948, I have shared the thesis on the ""specificity"" of Stalinism4 and the idea that Stalin's regime represented a driving force for the modernization of Russia . I have also shared a thesis on Stalinism .
 In the last three years, I looked in greater depth at the cultural norms and values of Stalinist leadership . I looked at those cultural norms, a contradictory but effective mix of nationalism and socialist internationalism, he says .
 The study of the Soviet political culture and the relationship between the intellectual world and the leadership in the Soviet Union has been useful, he says .
 The Kremlin has a policy of cooperation or isolation toward the Western countries, author says . The relationship has determined, in the past as well as today, the Kremlin’s choice between cooperation and isolation, he says .
 The history of the Institute of World Economy and Politics helps to show that the Soviet political culture combined with the perception of external threats played a decisive role in the elaboration and legitimization of the foreign policy of the Kremlin .
 The Institute of World Economy and Politics was born as a center for studies of international relations to help the Kremlin in 1924 . The Institute was founded in 1924 and is based in Moscow .
 Rothstein was a member of the People's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs, Narkomindel, and was the head of a bureau that studied international relations . Rothstein also was head of the bureau studying international relations in Russia .
 Originally it’s written in Russian as    ‘Izvestija’, 19 December 1924 3 in 1924 . Originally it was written as  Institutionut Mirovogo Chozjaistva i Mirovoj Politiki’
 Trotsky wrote the first article published by the Institute’s journal . For example, Trotsky wrote about the Institute's journal .
 During the Stalinist power consolidation, after the defeat of the opposition in the party, the function and role of the Institute changed . The Institute was founded by Stalinists in the 1930s .
 Eugene Varga was named Director of the Institute at the end of 1927 . Members close to Trotsky were expelled from the Institute .
 In the 1930s, the Institute played a crucial role in the ideological justification of foreign policy . The Institute was crucial to foreign policy and collecting information about the capitalist world .
 His personal relationship with Stalin allowed the survival of the Institute . For example, during the Great Terror, during Stalin's Great Depression, he said .
 Stalin intervened directly to protect Varga and his colleagues and allowed the spread of the miroviki’s non-dogmatic interpretation of the world political and economic system . The goal of justifying his foreign policy was to justify his choices in foreign policy .
 Most of the works on Varga tend to describe him either as a loyal advisor of Stalin or as a non-dogmatic thinker . Varga was an advisor to Stalin or a thinker who was not a follower of the Communist Party .
 Varga was never accused of treason, but between 1947 and 1948 he was persecuted because he was Jewish . Varga died in 1948 after his death .
 Varga was considered as a non-dogmatic thinker because he showed also, his opposition to the Stalin's foreign policy . Varga's opposition to Stalin's policy was also shown as an opposition to his foreign policy.
 This article will aim to go beyond these two views, framing Varga's contributions in the wider debate about the formation of the Soviet foreign policy during Stalin's regime . Varga is the author of a new book, "Varga"
 Eugene Varga was born in Budapest, Hungary, in 1879 in a Jewish family . Varga studied in Budapest and died at the age of 50 .
 During the shortlived Hungarian Soviet Republic, he became 9 Aran, Fond 354, Opis 1, Delo 22 . He was a member of the Hungarian Council of Soviet Communism .
 Varga’s work is published in A Masoero e A Venturi (a cura di), Il pensiero sociale sociale russo. Varga is an Italian born in Russia .
 The Information Bureau was renamed as ‘Bureau Varga’, demonstrating the prestige achieved by the economist during the 1920s . The Bureau Varga is the name of the economist who helped develop the country's economy .
 The Institute of World Economy and Politics is Varga's most important achievement for his career . Varga was awarded a Nobel Peace Prize for his work at the Institute of Economic and Politics .
 Varga found a proper environment to discuss his thesis with a team of highly specialized colleagues . Varga's thesis was discussed by a group of experts at the University of Columbia .
 In 1931 Rothstein and many of his colleagues were expelled from the Institute . Varga led the Institute, led by Varga, lost its connection with the Narkomindel . In 1931, Varga and Rothstein were expelled .
 The Institute’s members became the miroviki , a group of scholars highly specialized in the study of capitalist economy, politics and ideological propaganda . The Institute's members became members of the Institute's .
 In 1936, the Institute entered the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union, which was established that same year . The Institute was the first to be admitted to the Academy in 1936 .
 The miroviki and Varga shared a multicultural background, the knowledge of various foreign languages, and an open-minded attitude towards capitalist dynamics . Varga is the first of a pair to be awarded the title of the award-winning film, "Varga"
 During Stalin's regime, they represented an important part of the Russian intellectual world quite different from the nineteenth-century intelligentsia . They represented a different kind of intellectual world during the Stalin regime .
 The miroviki were not just strongly influenced by the political regime, as occurred in the past, but also they played an organic role in the new state . They played a significant role in helping the creation of the state, writes David Cameron .
 This status as both scholars and members of the Soviet bureaucratic pyramid made them less independent than most Western intellectuals . This status made them more independent than many Western intellectuals, they say .
 They cannot be considered an independent political group in the traditional sense, and they could not criticize or directly influence the foreign policy of the regime . For this reasons, they cannot be . considered an . independent political . group in Syria .
 In several ways, they contributed to a deeper and nondogmatic understanding of the development of capitalism and over the international relations .
 During the 1930s, the Institute organized a three-year course about these topics . The Institute organized the course about topics such as these topics during the course .
 Many graduates worked at the Institute or at other Soviet academies and state institutions . Graduates worked for the Institute .
 The miroviki were the first official think tank on international relations in the Soviet Union . The think tank was the first think tank of international relations .
 In contrast to most of the Soviet political elite, Varga and the miroviki maintained a more positive attitude towards Western Europe during the Stalin era . Varga faced the consequences of these sympathies with the rise of the Cold War .
 When Stalin consolidated his dictatorship in 1927 and 1928, the catastrophic interpretation became the official one . The catastrophic interpretation was the official interpretation of Stalin's regime .
 During the first half of the 1930s, scholars of the capitalist world adopted a more dogmatic view of international relations . Under the pressure of Stalin's regime, under the pressure, they adopted a dogmatical view .
 In 1934, Varga and his colleagues could again advocate pro-Western positions . However, in 1934, with the rise of the ""collective security"" campaign and Popular Fronts against Fascism, they could again . Varga was a member of the Popular Front Against Fascism .
 In these ways, they legitimatized collaboration between the Soviet Union and ""bourgeois democracies"" against Hitler’s Germany . The Soviets were able to work together against the Nazis in the war .
 After the agreement with Nazi Germany, the Institute reworked the previous analysis and played a propagandist role against the Western democracies . But this situation changed with the outbreak of the Great Patriotic War, when Varga and his colleagues proposed again a pro-Western position .
 These pro-Western opinions were not only a response to the new international situation, but also the natural development of the positions that the miroviki had already proposed during their career . The pro-West opinions were also a response .
 The Kremlin was convinced that the integration of the USSR into the PostWar international system would be the natural and better choice for the Kremlin . They were convinced that it would be a good choice for them .
 In 1946, Varga published his most famous work, Changes in the Economy of Capitalism as a result of the Second World War, a collection of essays from the journal of the Institute . Varga's work was published in 1946 .
 The analysis was based on the concrete observation of the ongoing economic changes that occurred during the War in the global scenario .
 According to Varga, the analogies between Soviet and Western models were growing . Varga: "The analogies are progressively growing" Varga says Russia's relationship with the West is growing .
 The emerging role of the state in the capitalist economies looked like the crucial element shared between the two systems . In particular, the state is seen as a crucial element in the two economic systems .
 First, it would facilitate the transformation of the capitalist economic model into a socialist one . Second, it will facilitate the creation of a socialist state of socialism . Third and fourth would be the end of capitalism .
 Second, the USSR would be integrated into the new world system, contributing, for example, to the creation of a new international organization for global security . The USSR would also be integrated in the new system, writes David Frum .
 This transition would reflect also national peculiarities and respect political pluralism without being forced into the Soviet model . The transition would also reflect also the national peculiarity of the country, he says .
 Varga and his colleague’s analysis implied a peaceful evolution of capitalism, which contradicted Lenin's notion of the ""inevitability of the war" under capitalism . Lenin's idea of the 'inevitable' war was contradicted by the idea of Lenin's view of capitalism .
 The miroviki suggested that not just peaceful coexistence would be possible, but also cooperation and integration between socialist and capitalist states . It was suggested that socialism and capitalism could be co-existing peacefully .
 1946 was a chaotic year for the Soviet relationship with Western countries which was marked by ""insecurity"" across the entire decision-making process in foreign policy . In 1946, it was remarkable that those ideas were not censored .
 7 dogmatic project oriented Stalin's foreign policy and even a possible collaboration with the Western countries was seriously considered by the regime . Varga, Izmeniia v ekonomike kapitalizma v itoge vtoroy mirovoy voyny, Gosud
 It is in this context that the non-dogmatic positions of miroviki can be framed . It is not the only way to frame the views of the miroviya .
 In 1946, theories could still provide ideological basis for possible cooperation between West and Soviet Union . Those theories could circulate because in 1946, they still provide an ideological basis of possible cooperation .
 This kind of relationship between the Institute and Stalin implied that miroviki analysis began to be inconvenient as soon as the international and domestic situation changed at the beginning of the Cold War . The Institute's relationship between Stalin and the Institute of Soviet Russia implied that .
 A public discussion of Varga’s book was organized for 7, 14 and 21 May 1947 . Konstantin Ostrovitianov, a dogmatic soviet economist, criticized Varga and his colleagues for asserting that the struggle between socialist and capitalist countries had been halted
 The Institute was an anti-Soviet centre of capitalist propaganda . In other words, the Institute was a centre of Soviet propaganda .
 Varga defends himself and the miroviki from the accusation of being reformist . Varga: "I regret very much if the comrades who have expressed criticism are of the opinion that I have insufficiently recognised my mistakes"
 This meeting reflected the confusion and confrontation within the Soviet Union in the first months of 1947 . The Soviet Union was in turmoil in the early months of the year .
 In 1947, the Marshall Plan and the foundation of Cominform changed the international situation . The Marshall Plan changed the world's situation in 1947, writes David Frum .
 Varga asked in vain for Stalin's help, but this did not change the destiny of the institute . Varga died in 1953 at the hands of Soviet dictator Vladimir Putin .
 Stalin may have reserved preferential treatment to Varga due to his reputation . Varga may have been given preferential treatment due to reputation .
 Most of the miroviki were deported to the Siberian Gulag . Varga was not arrested and he was allowed to work and live in Moscow . While most were deported, most were allowed to live and work in Russia .
 Varga ‘Izmenenija v ekonomike kapitalizma v itoge vtoroj mirovoj vojny’, in Mirovaja Chozjajstva, Nº 11, 1947 . 8 dismissed and
 Institute of World Economy and Politics was closed and re-organized under the umbrella of the new Institute of Economy . Institute of Economics and Politics is re-organised into a new institute of Economy. Institute of Economic and Politics will be closed .
 There were no reasons to justify the work of the miroviki and tolerate further ideological pluralism, says the author of the book .
 The works of Varga and his colleagues continued to be debated and harshly criticized by central authorities . As shown by the statements from meetings held in Octorber of 1948 in the new institute, Varga's works were debated and criticized .
 This point of view was incompatible with the Cold War, says Varga . Varga's former colleagues attacked Varga for his views, including former colleagues .
 During the discussion, the miroviki rejected their own analysis and admitted to being “reformist” and anti-Marxist . Furthermore, during the discussion they rejected their . own analysis, and admitted . that they were ‘reformsist’
 At last, Varga repented publicly on 15 March 1949, when he published a letter to the editor in Pravda17.17.19 . Varga was a member of the Soviet Union, which was founded in 1918 .
 The introduction of the Marshall Plan changed the state of international affairs . The Marshall Plan was introduced in 1945 .
 Stalin re-adopted a more dogmatic interpretation of relations between the USSR and the Western countries, based on the idea that no collaboration could persist to justify the 15 ‘Ob Institute ekonomiki i Institute mirovogo chozjajstva i mirovo
 Voprosy Ekonomičeskie, Nº 8, 1948. Esakov, Moskovskyev, Moskva, Rosspen, 2000, p.1 16 . Esakov: Moskova: "I'm a Russian economist. I'm a Putin
 It must also be added that during the Second World War, the propaganda of the regime promoted feelings of patriotism, the need for national unity .
 Soviet identity became more and more flattered by Russian nationalism . The Soviet identity was more than flattered than that of Soviet nationalism .
 Zhdanov’s propaganda, approved by the dictator, orchestrated in 1946 against some segments of the intelligentsia accused of admiring Western countries during the Second World War .
 As known, Zhdanov combined anti-cosmopolitan and anti-Semitic feelings . Zhdanova combined anti, anti-Jewish feelings . He was arrested in 2010 in connection with the murder of a Jewish woman .
 Stalin began to manage his power in even more paranoid and authoritarian ways than in the past . Stalin began managing power in more paranoid ways in the second half of the 1940s .
 He eliminated most of his closest allies such as Molotov, Mikojan and Vorošilov . He eliminated many of his most close allies such a Molotsov and Mikojan . The former Soviet leader was forced to step down from power .
 In this context, Varga's point of view was naturally no longer necessary to the regime . Varga was a key figure in the regime's decision to keep him in power .
 Varga and the Institute of World Economy and Politics provide fresh insights to the debate about the role of ideology in Soviet political strategies and the origin of the Cold War .
 The ideology played a crucial role at the beginning of the Cold War, but it was not monolithic . The ideology was crucial to the success of the U.S. in the early Cold War .
 The experience of Institute clearly shows that intellectual efforts to facilitate cooperation with the Western countries existed in the 1940s . The repression against Varga and his colleagues showed why pro-Western position remained marginal and couldn’t halt the advent of Cold War .
 In the 1930s and 1940s Stalin was interested in the miroviki’s nondogmatic analysis, he later condemned them when his strategic goals changed . In the 1940s and '60s, Stalin was in favor of the analysis .
 In these years, the regime began a propaganda campaign against the Jewish people accused of being pro-Western and of having anti-patriotic feelings . The regime began an anti-Semitic campaign against them, he says .
 The end of the Institute shows the transformation of the USSR and mentality of the establishment during Stalinism . The Institute was the brainchild of the Communist Party .
 After the end of the war, after twenty years of Stalin's regime, the nation was dominated by nationalistic feelings . At the end, after 20 years of the regime, after . the . war, the . nation was dominant in nationalistic feeling .
 Part of Soviet intelligentsia rejected those feelings and proposed a collaborative foreign policy with the European countries . However, part of Soviet intellectuals rejected that .
 Stalin condemned every interpretation of international relations that could weaken the balance of the bipolar order and the superiority of the Soviet system . At this time, Stalin condemned .
 Stalin was unfit to oversee dialogue with Western countries, says historian . Stalin's political culture justified collaboration with the West, but he was unfit for that, he says .
 Bettanin, F., Stalin e l’Europa la formazione dell’impero esterno sovietico , Carocci, Roma, 2010 . Stalin e the Europa e l.E. Stalin e . l.Europe la
 Bucharin e la rivoluzione bolscevica Biografia politica 1888\1938, Feltrinelli, Milano, 1975 . Bucharin and the rivolluzione of the French Revolution was first published in France in 1926 .
 Di Biagio, A Sozdanie Kominforma, in Svesshaniia Komin Forma, 1947.1948.1949.1947. Di Biaggio was published in the same year .
 Duda, G Jenö Varga and die Geschichte des Instituts für Weltwirtschaft und Weltpolitik in Moskau 1921-1970. Duda: Duda. Varga, G. Jenö . Varga . Duda
 Zu den Möglichkeiten und Grenzen wissenschaftlicher Auslandsanalyse in der Sowjetunion, Akademie Verlag, Berlin, 1994. Zu . Zu. zu den . Mösickeitis
 Eran, O Mezhdunarodniki an assessment of professional expertise in the making of Soviet foreign policy, Turtle Dove Press, Tel Aviv, 1979 . Eran .
 The fall of Zhdanov and the Defeat of Moderation, 1946-1953, Ithaca, Cornell UP, 1982, 1982. The fall and the defeat of moderation were the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Kyung Deok Roh, Rethinking the Varga Controversy, 1941-1953 in Europe-Asia Studies, Vol., Nº 5, July 2011 . Roh, in 2011, was the author of the book "Rethinking The Varga controversy
 Mezhdunarodnyj fond demokratiia Rossiia XX Vek , Stalin i kosmopolitizm 1945 1945 . Stalin and Stalin inked a peace pact with the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 Pons, S. La rivoluzione globale storia del comunismo internazionale 1917-1991, Einaudi, Torino, 2012. Pons: La rvoluzio globale global storia di comunismi 1917-
 Litvinov lost peace 1941-1946, in “Journal of Cold War Studies’, 2, 2002, . In “The Russian War of the Cold War’s Second World War,” Litvinkov wrote .
 Varga, E Izmeniia v ekonomike kapitalizma v itoge vtoroy mirovoy voyny, Gosudartvennoe izdatel'stvo politicheskoj literatury, Moskva, 1946
 There is a gossip that tells that when Kissinger chose this topic, his colleagues from the Department of Government were quite surprised and suggested him moving to the History Department .
 I would like to note that history was at that time considered out of fashion . I would also note that . history was . considered . out of . fashion . "History was considered out . of fashion," he said .
 In the post-war era, students and professors at most of the American Universities were mainly concerned with international relations, particularly between the Soviet Union and the United States . In the 1980s and 1990s, American students and faculty were concerned about international relations .
 Historical work focused on 19th century European policy seemed out-of-date . That is why historical work focused upon 19th Century European policy was out of-date, historian says .
 In this essay all the quotations will be taken from the London edittion. This essay will focus on the London edition of this year's edition of the World Series of Quotes .
 Kissinger chose historical background for his theory, but Kissinger says it could be applied to many other political situations . Kissinger: "I think that the general rules illustrated by the 19th century examples could be used in many other situations"
 Due to his German roots, he understood the mentality and the European way of conducting foreign policy, he said . He said: "Due to his roots, I understand the mentality of European diplomacy"
 Americans did not tolerate anything connected with the European way of foreign policy that minimized the development of nations and is based on the disagreement between countries . Since the League of Nations did not work on the European political stage, the Americans did .
 Kissinger wrote his text indicated that his purpose was not to provide the reader with specific events taking place in Europe in the period 1812-1822 . The way Kissinger wrote it indicated that he was not providing specific events in Europe . Kissinger's purpose was to give the reader an insight into
 Historical data was marginalized in favor of philosophical arguments about the nature of international relations and historical events as examples .
 Kissinger was also not overly interested in the biographies of Lord Castlereagh and Metternich . Kissinger was not interested in a biographer of the two men .
 He presented a fairly detailed picture of these politicians due to his individualistic view of the history . But more important for him was the problems these politicians confronted .
 He chose after the post-Napoleonic period because he believed it reflected his own times . Furthermore, he chose to do so because he thought it reflected himself .
 At first glance, it seems that contrary to A World Restored, the topic of Nuclear Weapons was more fitting to modern trends . At first, the subject of the film was more relevant to modern times than nuclear weapons .
 Stephen Graubard 31 wrote in the biography of Henry Kissinger that “few who read Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy were at all aware of Kissinger’s other interests; not many who read that book thought it necessary to look also at A World Restored .
 Kissinger made use of nuclear weapons volume of insights drawn from his early-nineteen-century researches . Kissinger's work was published in the 1970s and 1980s . Kissinger wrote a book about his work on nuclear weapons .
 They conducted together the Harvard International Seminar in its inaugural year . Also conducted together a Harvard International seminar in its first year .
 First sign of the direction was provided by Stalin in his speech, made on February 9, 1946 . Stalin's speech was made in a speech made in 1946 .
 He announced the policy based on the concept of permanent and inevitable conflict of interests between capitalism and communism . The policy was based on a concept of the conflict of interest between communism and capitalism .
 Stalin's speech explicitly determines the path of Soviet post-war policy . Stalin’s speech explicitly defines the path to post-WWII policy .
 Kennan was asked to write an interpretive analysis of Soviet Union policy, its motives and expectations of the Soviet behavior after implementation of their policy . Kennan wrote a book about the Soviet Union and its motives .
 His text was not only an analysis of Soviet policy, but also a presentation on the historical background and motives of Soviet government actions, information about Russian society .
 Stalin’s book contains suggestions for the U.S. on how they should respond to the Soviet policy . The book also contained suggestions for how the United States should respond .
 A Critical Appraisal of American National Security Policy during the Cold War], trans. A critical assessment of U.S. national security policy during. The Cold War]. trans. American national security Policy .
 Napoleon's theory on the world powers and rivalry among them as shown in Napoleonic France . First of all, I will focus on his theory on world powers .
 Kissinger took certain basic ideas for his book from Kennan’s telegram . Kissinger's book is based on Kennan's telegram from the telegram, according to the author .
 I believe that actually he was writing about the features of Soviet Union through the example of France ruled by Napoleon . I believe he was actually writing about Russia's features of the Soviet Union .
 The period of the French Revolution and Napoleonic era changed the European continent so drastically that a return to the old order was impossible . A world restored is impossible for the French and French Revolutionists .
 Europe was tired of wars and revolutions, which was why a return to a peaceful existence was the only way of conducting international policy . They knew also that Europe is tired of Europe being tired of revolutions, they said .
 At this moment Europe was ready for the first time in history to create an international order based on a balance of power . At this time Europe was at the heart of creating a new world of power, says Peter Travers .
 The main role of the Congress was the pursuit of the Iustum Equilibrum and legitimacy, as well as the fight against any manifestation of power . Therefore, the main role was the . Pursuit of the . Equilibum .
 Iustum Equilibrum means to stabilize the international arena with the balance of power, and its main proponent was the United Kingdom . The United Kingdom was the main proponent .
 Legitimacy means regarding the internal order and lawful validation of the monarch’s power . The monarch's power is considered to be a legitimate source of legitimacy .
 Kissinger’s analysis in A World Restored is key to understanding the Congress of Vienna . Kissinger's analysis is critical to understanding Kissinger's view of the events surrounding the Congress . Kissinger is the author of Kissinger's book, "World Restored"
 He presented a bipolar vision of the international relations between European powers . He presented his vision of international relations .
 Theory states a group gives up its freedom for universal sovereignty resulting in a single ‘social body’ with each member as an integral part . The theory states a social body is a single 'social body'
 This “social body” creates a certain framework which becomes the general law . This "social body" creates a social body which becomes a general law. This is the social body that creates a framework which become the law.
 Kissinger generalized this theory, replacing the unit with the state and society with the international community . Kissinger's theory is similar to that of the U.S. State and society .
 The rules that define international order became a general framework accepted by the individual states . The rules were accepted by each state's individual states, including Russia and China .
 If power undermines this international order, it was defined by Kissinger as revolutionary . Kissinger defined it as revolutionary if power undermines the international order .
 Kissinger: France in the Napoleonic era was a revolutionary power . Kissinger: The French were revolutionary during the French revolution . Kissinger says France was revolutionary in the French Revolution .
 Kissinger built the opposition of Napoleonic France and two kinds of legitimate powers, conservative and continental Austria and isolationist, insular Great Britain . There have been others, such as France over a century, where all issues have been basically revolutionary .
 I will not write about these powers because they need separate analysis . I will instead write about the powers of the government .
 Kissinger saw the two countries in opposition, for different reasons, but still contrasting with each other . Kissinger saw them in opposition . Kissinger: "It's very interesting that even between two legitimate powers, Kissinger saw [Russia] in opposition"
 Kissinger based all his concepts on duality and contrasts, Kissinger said . Kissinger's concepts were 'duality' and 'difference'
 Napoleon’s problem was not fighting, but stabilizing the external and internal field . Napoleon was a conservative, Continental Isolationist, Insular Austria and Great Britain . Napoleon's goal was to stabilize the internal and external field .
 After 1807, he already defeated Austria and Prussia and entered the alliance with Russia . He had already won over Prussia, Austria and Austria .
 "Now he had to create stability and maintain his power, which is when his problems started," he says . "Now now he has to create stable and maintain power," he adds .
 Stable order builds its internal structure on duty, which is followed by a notion of responsibility . Stable orders are built on duty and responsibility, rather than on duty . Order builds on duty to build on responsibility .
 It is not connected to the individual, current ruler but with the individual sense of responsibility for the state, it is said .
 On the contrary, loyalty is typical with revolutionary power, says the author .
 In the structure based on loyalty, it is not important that power is right or wrong or its rules are good or bad for the state, but its power . It is important that the power is not right, but it is good or wrong, or good to the state . In the
 In this system, transferring power from one individual to another is a mortal danger to the stability of the state . Transfering power from individual to individual is a danger to state stability, says the author .
 Internal order built on a sense of duty leads citizens to accept principles for the good of society . Internal order is built on the basis of an internal order built up on duty, the author says .
 In this case, transfer of power from one person to another, within the same model, does not threaten the stability of the state . Transfer of power is not a threat to stability of state, says the author of the book .
 Napoleon established his power based on loyalty, and thus with the first defeat, he could lose everything . Napoleon established himself . He established his . power based . upon loyalty, he said .
 In order to maintain his power, he always referred to the possibility of force . Therefore, in order to keep his power he always used force, he said .
 If he admitted this, it would mean that somebody was stronger in some aspect, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 For revolutionary power, showing the limits is the beginning of its collapse, says Lenin . Lenin: Showing the limits of revolutionary power is beginning to its collapse .
 Negotiations are part of the process of ‘finding own place’, says David Cameron . “The art of diplomacy and negotiations are necessary for every state,” he says .
 For revolutionary power, this again results in the sense of insecurity, and in consequence, the use of force, says Juan Carlos . "For revolutionary power ... for revolutionary power," he says .
 Acceptance of this selflimitation does not fit into the revolutionary rulers vision of the world as he knows that it would lead to the recognition of other powers in a certain area . Acceptance would lead him to accept the self-limitation, he says .
 A natural threat to the revolutionary power would arise, which creates a sense of insecurity and again of the necessity of using force . Hence, a situation in which there is a natural threat . would arise .
 Revolutionary power Legitimate power Does not accept the framework of the international order. Accepts the framework . international order . Revolutionary power does not accept a framework .
 It becomes legitimate by social acceptance, or by the major powers, or social acceptance . It becomes legitimized by the social acceptance of the world's major powers . It is a way to legitimize itself .
 It creates a situation where no country country country feels absolutely safe and others feels completely safe, but there is not one fully insecure, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 None of continuous revolution in the of the . of the members of the international dissatisfied countries . structure is unhappy enough to lead to a social explosion . None of . the . countries . are unhappy enough enough to . lead to an explosion .
 It achieves relative satisfaction through elimination of the enemy. balance. balance . Nothing can satisfy it besides complete. balance balance .
 It considers itself to be all-powerful and Conflicts are possible, but they have their not limited . Conflicts may be possible but they are not limited, says the author .
 War is conducted in the name of communication. preserving existing structures. preserving old structures . War was conducted to communicate with each other .
 The main form of communication with other countries are power, war or arms other countries is diplomacy . diplomacy is the only way to communicate with the other world .
 Napoleon came to the same point, a sense of insecurity, to a revolutionary state is resolved force . Napoleon came from a point of insecurity in both cases, says historian .
 Kissinger explains that the basic motive of using force is almost in any case insecurity . Kissinger: The basic motive is to use force in any way insecurity is insecurity .
 To be sure, the motivation of the revolutionary power may well be defensive . It may well well be sincere in its protestations of feeling threatened, he says .
 The distinguishing feature of a revolutionary power is not that it feels threatened, such feeling is inherent in the nature of international relations based on sovereign states, but that nothing can reassure it . Nothing can reassure the revolutionary power, says the author of the book .
 Only absolute security, the neutralization of the opponent, is considered a sufficient guarantee . The desire of one power for absolute security means absolute insecurity for all the others, says Putin .
 Revolutionary power will always use force as a remedy of all problems, says Zuma . But every problem will be based on and cause the sense of insecurity, he says . That is why revolutionary power will use force to remedy all problems .
 The only satisfaction for the revolutionary power would be total security, he says . "The only satisfaction is total security which is excluded in the international order," he adds .
 According to this philosophy, revolutionary government seeks to completely eliminate the enemy, because only this can ensure its security . The philosophy of revolutionary government is that it seeks to eliminate its enemies .
 Kissinger stated that legitimate powers cannot apply the tools of diplomacy as methods of contacting the revolutionary power . Kissinger: "legitimate powers can't apply the . tools of . diplomacy as well as diplomacy as a means of reaching out to the revolutionary . power .
 In this situation, diplomacy is replaced by war or an armaments race . Some tools of diplomacy merely have supporting positions . Diplomacy should not be replaced by arms race or armament race, says David Frum .
 Before the final part of my essay, I would like to summarize this section by a diagram . The diagram, presented below, is presented below .
 Kennan points out in his telegram a few main features of the Soviet Union . The sources of soviet conduct are shown by Kennan .
 The Soviets were building an internal order based on this antagonism by demonstrating to society an enemy could justify the need for a dictatorship . The Soviets built their internal order by demonstrating that an enemy justified the need to be a dictator .
 The Soviet Union was also opposed to the logic of reason, which was replaced by the . logic of force, says the Soviet Union . "The Soviet Union" was opposed to reason .
 "They did not want to help create the international order but instead wanted to defeat the enemies as the only method of defense," says Putin . Putin: "They didn't want to create an international order, they wanted to destroy the enemies"
 The author of the telegram raised the stability of power in the USSR, which was not yet validated . The author also raised the issue of the stability in the country .
 This issue is connected with the transfer of power from 52 X , The Sources of Soviet Conduct, 570. X . The sources of Soviet conduct, 570, is published by The Sources .
 If there was a change in the object of the loyalty, than it was not sure that this new person would be accepted . The new person may not be accepted by the loyalty of the loyalist, says the BBC .
 The loyalty of the Soviet society was based on the fact that nobody tried to officially undermine the authority of the government . This loyalty was based upon the fact nobody officially undermined the authority . Nobody tried to overthrow the government. Nobody ever tried to undermine the government's authority .
 "If anybody tried to undermine the authority, he would be defeated by force," he said. "He would defeat by force. He would be beaten by force"
 In any case, the United States should have supposed that the Soviets would use force, he says . The U.S. should have expected the Soviets to use force .
 "It was best for anyone who had contact with the revolutionary power to assume that the force would be used," says the former president .
 It was best to assume that the Soviet Union was able to use the force in any case . Similarly, it was also assumed that it was possible to use it in any way .
 "We get a picture of a bipolar world, in which one force is trying to eliminate the other, creating a constant struggle," says the author .
 His vision of the nineteenth-century France is often compared to that of the Soviet Union in the early Cold War period . Moreover, his vision of France is quite often compared .
 Kissinger's aim of Kissinger was to present that resemblance . We can suppose that he was trying to present a resemblance to Kissinger . Kissinger was assassinated in 1968 .
 While reading A World Restored, it seemed that the author made a comparison of the two superpowers in the reverse order . However, the author seemed to make the comparison in reverse order.
 In my essay, I wanted to demonstrate similarities between Kissinger's concept and Kennan’s analysis . In it, Kissinger wanted to show similarities between the two . In his essay, he said: “I wanted to prove that the concept is similar to that of Kennan .
 "He just presented it in a historical background and developed his ideas," he says of the book .
 The sense of insecurity, logic of force, loyalty in internal structure, central position of the authority, is also one more argument for my thesis . Aside from obvious similarities, there is also a more argument to my thesis, there are similarities between the two .
 In his bibliography, we can find many books about Metternich and Castlereagh, but none about Napoleon . Napoleon. Napoleon .
 The author of A World Restored declined reading the literature on the Vienna Congress, opting to read Metternich’s memoirs instead . The author declined to read some of the literature, opting instead to read the memoirs .
 As he began to write his work, he read some basic literature about the Congress, but these books did not make a good impression on him . Finally, as he . read some . books about the . Congress, he said, “These books did . not make an impression on
 Kissinger had a theoretical thesis and tried to prove it on the historical example, using this data that fit the concept, without developing superfluous details . While reading A World Restored, Kissinger appears to have tried to show it on historical example .
 Kissinger's A World Restored is a form of dialogue with himself conducted in order to understand contemporary politics through the lens of history . Kissinger's book is published by Kissinger in New York City, New York .
 He did not mention in the article his approach during his university studies at university .
 The question remains open whether Kissinger's vision stemmed only from the study of the Congress of Vienna or from the knowledge of the concepts of Kennan combined with the knowledge .
 Kissinger’s world was in almost every aspect bipolar, and thus it was intimately linked to the post-war period . Kissinger's world was almost bipolar, but it was linked to post-WWII . Kissinger was in a bipolar world, but his world was bipolar, he says
 It is characteristic of revolutionary power and thus makes international relations unstable . It is a sign of instability in international relations, says the author .
 The only remedy is stabilization achieved by the balance of powers and coexistence of legitimated powers . The balance of power must be achieved by balance, coexistence, says President Obama .
 The Soviet Union in early post-war times exactly suited the theoretical concept created by Kissinger . Kissinger: "The Soviet Union was exactly suited to Kissinger's theory of Soviet communism"
 In both diagrams presented in this essay, we could classify the Soviet Union as a revolutionary power since from an American point of view, it was a revolutionary power . The Soviet Union could be classified as an American power .
 In a world that has become a global village, there cannot exist a state that plays the role of a lonely island, and in this global village a revolutionary power is even more dangerous . In this global . village, a revolutionary . power is more dangerous than a single state .
 Bógdał-Brzezińska A. A. Brzezka A., Ewolucja doktryny i koncepcji polityki zagranicznej Stanów Zjednoczonych
 Kaplan R D. Kaplan, Kissinger, Metternich, and Realism, The Atlantic Monthly, Vol. Vol. 1, published in October 2013 .
 Metternich, Castlereagh, and the Problems of Peace 1812-1822, London, 1957, . Meternich and the problems of peace 1812 and 22 .
 Cold War was a basic condition of life for nations all around the globe from 1946 until 1990 . Museums Julia DANYLOW: The Cold War is a 'basic condition' for nations around the world .
 Scarcely anyone ever thought it was possible to overcome the ideological rift between East and West, originating from the different political positions on post-war reconstruction in Europe . The East-West split was created by the different positions on reconstruction in post-WWII reconstruction .
 When looking at historical museums, there seem to be different approaches to the topic of Cold War History . contrasting views from American, European and Asian nations exist, depending on their respective historical involvement and their coming to terms with the past .
 In this article I will analyze four different U.S. American institutions – some being government funded, others products of public-private partnerships or completely privately funded . In the article, we will analyze the four different institutions in the United States .
 Each institution represents one of the four characteristic aspects of historical culture – the academic, the aesthetical, the political and the economic dimensions . Each institution is represented by one characteristic aspect of history .
 German historian Jörn Rüsen developed the prototype of this classification in 1994 . The German historian developed the concept in 1994.
 In concluding the paper, I will discuss some challenges of Cold War representation in museums in general . In concluding this paper, we will discuss the challenges of the Cold War .
 Representing Identiy and diversity in a changing world 2. 33 illustrating social relations, identity and difference, knowledge and power, theory and representation .
 The task of historical museums is to provide orientation for their visitors in time and space, says historian . "Historical museums are important to their visitors," he says. "They are important places to learn from and learn from their experiences"
 Historical narratives are constructed and deconstructed to vividly picture times long gone . Historical narratives have been constructed, deconstructed, constructed and constructed in the past .
 Exhibitions create certain narratives of the past, such as those of today's past . That is to say that exhibitions themselves create narratives of past, and present . The exhibition is one of the world's most popular museums .
 In an analysis the exhibitions are evaluated as sources, regarding their way of dealing with Cold War history and of their date of origin . In my analysis, I evaluated the exhibitions as sources .
 Museums and exhibitions representing Cold War history have different purposes . Museums in the U.S. have different views on the Cold War era .
 Some are intended for the improvement of historical knowledge, others engage visitors emotionally . Some of the world's most famous museums are intended to educate visitors to the history of their art .
 Public history projects depend on economic preconditions as well as political decisions . At the same time, public history projects must depend on political decisions, says historian .
 The academic, the aesthetic, aesthetic, the political and the economic dimension are to be found in every exhibition – but their weighting differs . These four aspects, the academic, . aesthetic, and the . political and . economic dimensions are found in each exhibition .
 In the mid-1990s the exhibition team developed a narrative called ""From Competition to Cooperation"", comparing the American space program to the Soviet one . The exhibition team's narrative was developed by the team .
 In the end, it did not prove possible to consolidate the perceptions and beliefs of war participants with the post-war research evidence gathered by professional historians .
 The Space Race exhibition delivers a well-balanced display of American and Soviet space artifacts to illustrate the race to the moon and the effects of this technological competition on the military .
 Bulky cabinets, poor lighting and uniformity of explanatory texts refer to the early 1980s . The 1980s was a period of poor lighting, poor cabinets, and poor lighting .
 NASM chapter on the origins of the Space Race and the former Nazi-German V-2 weapon serve as an example of successful transgression of historical-political boundaries .
 The V-2 missile was intended by the Third Reich's leaders to demoralize the civilian population of the enemy . At first the rocket was entitled “captured German V-II missile as a prominent and persistent symbol of Space Age”
 Repainting the originally camouflaged V-2 in black and white, to present it as a space artifact, was thereby erasing its Nazi past . The original camouflaged plane was camouflaged in black, white .
 A Viking, a large liquid-fueled rocket and a WAC Corporal, the first American sounding record, were also included in the presentation .
 A new director and a little luck concerning the budget made an update of the V-2 representation in the Space Race gallery possible . The new director of the space race gallery has a new director .
 Using new research results, visitors are now informed as to how the weapon fell into the hands of the U.S. and about its role as the technological device . Visitors are also informed of the weapon’s role in the United States .
 Ross Perot 76 donated some objects reflecting the Russian perspective . American businessman donated objects reflecting Russia's perspective . Russian President Vladimir Putin is expected to visit the Kremlin in Moscow next week .
 The V-2 presentation, in its new form, features a great starting point for the topic of the Space Race . The presentation features a new version of the presentation .
 Space Race is a good example for a scientific-based understanding of historical culture, says author . Space Race has been a great example of a scientific, based understanding of history, he says . Space race is an example of how science-based history can be taught, he adds .
 The aesthetical dimension of historical culture – The Price of Freedom . The aesthetically dimension of . historical culture . The price of freedom is the price of history .
 The National Museum of American History 77 in Washington D.C. sees its task to survey major themes of American history and culture to the public .
 It was built within three years, thanks to an $80 million donation by real-estate developer Kenneth E Behring . The new museum was built in just three years .
 The Cold War has its own section in POF covering the period from 1945 to 1989, but focuses mainly on the Korean and Vietnam Wars . POF covers the period between 1945 and 1989 .
 These parts are presented with dramaturgical and scenographic elements . These parts of the play were presented by dramaturals and dramaticians .
 Illuminated images of war printed on canvas, enhanced by music and sounds of war, show up in a seven-minute loop to catch the visitors emotionally .
 As a continuous subtheme, POF operates with ‘War in media’ – an important topic referring to the Vietnam War as The Television War . POF refers to Vietnam as 'The Television War'
 One wall is covered with a pyramid of old TV sets playing a compilation of U.S. media 76 Gerald Posner, Citizen Perot . One wall covered with an old TV set playing a selection of United States media shows .
 The soundtrack was composed by multiple Academy Award Winner John Williams . John Williams composed the soundtrack for the film .
 The living room leads directly into a larger room that contextualizes both the Vietnam War and the Cold War in general . The Vietnam War is set up in the living room of the museum .
 There is a scenographic presentation of the largest object in the collection of the NMAH – a BellHuey helicopter . The largest object of the collection is the largest helicopter in the world .
 The helicopter is presented in a shaded room; loudspeakers deliver the sound of rotors . The helicopter was presented in the shaded area .
 Exhibition designers transformed the surrounding area with grass and sands into a Vietnamese paddy field . Exhibition designers turned the area into a paddy fields .
 Two display dummies dressed as American soldiers are lying in front of the helicopter on the ground . One holding the other one, who is wounded, in his arms .
 "This kind of scenic and emotional presentation has a disconcerting effect on European visitors," says the author of the book . "It's not the first time I've seen this book, but it's the first of its kind," she says .
 Only visitors with background knowledge and the power of endurance will discover contrasting views behind this emotionally loaded presentation . Only visitors to the presentation will discover the depth of the mind behind the presentation .
 Covered behind the helicopter are two display cases where the typical equipment of U.S. soldiers and Vietnamese Vietcong are presented . The display cases are displayed in the display cases .
 The comparison of an original Ho Chi Minh Trailwood bike and U.S. military equipment conveys that the Cold War was a real war, not merely a TV-event, with real victims and veterans on both sides .
 There are no reference to international media coverage and reactions on the conflict . Unfortunately, there are no references to international coverage of the conflict in Syria .
 There is no elaboration on the European dimension of the Cold War . Concerning the international dimension, there is one mandatory element, a segment of the Berlin Wall .
 The John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum 84 in Boston, MA is one of thirteen Presidential Libraries in the United States . It is administrated by the National Archives and is located in Boston .
 Third World Interventions and the Making of Our Times, Cambridge, 2007. Author: "The making of our Times is the making of the world's most powerful institutions"
 The associated museums are sponsored and maintained by both presidential families and private donors . The museums are maintained by the presidential families .
 This step is yet to be completed in the case of John F Kennedy, and is discussed in the following article . John Kennedy was assassinated by President Kennedy in 1963 .
 The concept behind the exhibition is that John F Kennedy himself tells the story of his life . The exhibition is based on the concept of the Kennedy presidency .
 Movies and sound files from the Audiovisual Collections87 of the Kennedy Library are used to illustrate his political decisions . The Kennedy Library is a collection of films and sound recordings .
 The visitor is to re-experience Kennedy’s extraordinary career, the challenges he faced and his political decisions . The visitor to Kennedy's memorial will be able to see Kennedy's extraordinary career . The Kennedy memorial is dedicated to the Kennedy family .
 Some negative but all too human aspects of his life, including illnesses and his womanizing, are not mentioned at all . Furthermore, some negative but very human aspects, such as illnesses, are also not mentioned .
 Pei,88,88 a white structure with many windows, promises openness and transparency for which visitors of the exhibition search in vain . Pei.88 is the largest exhibition of its kind in the world of art by the artist .
 The ethical guidelines of the National Council on Public History postulate that historians owe society the historical truth, insofar as it can be determined from the available sources . Historians owe society their historical truth only to be determined, the council says .
 Presidents and their Administrations in Presidential Museum Exhibits, in. The Public Historian, 28/4 , 118. Presidents and Administrators in Presidential. Exhibitions .
 He built other cultural institutions like the pyramid of the Louvre in Paris, the National Gallery of Art in Washington D.C. and the modern wing of the Germany Historical Museum in Berlin .
 The Harry S Truman Presidential Library seems to be a positive example for a more critical approach . The Truman Library is a good example of a positive approach to the Truman Library .
 The International Spy Museum92 is a private museum and part of the Malrite Company93 based in Cleveland, Ohio . Open to the public since 2002, the museum has been in existence since 2002 . The economical dimension of historical culture – The Economic dimension of Historical Culture .
 After having served as a Navy soldier in Korea, he worked for the National Security Agency . He worked for some years .
 He held on to his fascination for espionage, even after retiring to civil life . The spy held on his fascination even after he retired from military life .
 Brand name International Spy Museum was tested in public by an advertising agency before the museum was in business . The brand name was tested by a public ad agency before it was established .
 Spy Museum was the term with the highest attractiveness for potential visitors to the museum . Spy Museum is a museum that attracts people to the Spy Museum . Spy museum was a popular term used to describe a museum .
 This procedure demonstrates other possible motives behind a museum besides the sole desire to transfer knowledge about history and espionage, namely as in this case making money .
 The company employs about five hundred people, however only eight of them are working in the Exhibition and Programs Department of the museum .
 Conceptually the Spy Museum consists of two parts – the School of Spies and the exhibition space The Secret History of History . Conceptually it consists of a school of spies and a history exhibition space .
 The geographical focus clearly lies on the United States . Some excursions are made to the British, Soviet and East German intelligence institutions .
 The section on Cold War history starts with an animated wall about espionage and the construction of the atomic bomb . The children's version of the book is based on the Cold War .
 At the end of the story, there is a countdown to an audiovisual detonation of the atomic bomb . The story ends with a countdown of the bomb detonation .
 The rest of the area is limited, interestingly enough, to the city of Berlin as a center of the bloc confrontation . Berlin is a center for the bloc bloc confrontation.
 Alongside the following stairs are warning signs and propaganda posters for nuclear war . The stairs are located on the side of the stairs .
 The Berlin Wall has its place, as well as a black Trabant that was used to smuggle refugees across the inner German border . The Berlin wall has a place in Germany's inner German borders .
 Even a non-scale reconstruction of the spy tunnel of Rudow, the original version of which is shown in the Allied Museum in Berlin, can be seen by the visitor .
 The makers of the Spy Museum take advantage of the childlike curiosity that arouses even adults when confronted with the topic of espionage .
 After paying admission, visitors are told repeatedly things are not what they seem . Visitors to the museum are repeatedly told repeatedly that things are different .
 The Cold War can claim approximately one generation after the Soviet orbit has collapsed . Current political developments such as those in Korea show the actual importance of the Cold War, writes David Perry .
 NMAH, on the contrary, plays with scenographic presentations with a human factor . "NMAH" plays with the human factor, says director of the film .
 Hiring a stage designer to install an exhibition means that Cold War history can be emotionally experienced by exposure to representations of soldiers in a reproduced Vietnamese landscape .
 Music and the noises of a helicopter rotor dislocate the visitor in place and time . Music and noises of helicopter rotor can dislocate a visitor in time .
 The partly privately funded museum at the Kennedy Library does not yet take advantage of the fact that it has more money to spend on its presentation . The museum is at the library in Washington, D.C.
 It remains stuck in an old-fashioned and sometimes hagiographic style of historiography . It is stuck in a hagiography style of history, says historian .
 By choosing a bestseller topic like espionage, a lot of visitors are intrigued right from the beginning . A lot of people are intrigued by espionage, says CNN.com .
 It actually attracts the so-called ‘non-visitors’, a target group that every curator would love to see in his or her institution . It actually also attracts the non-visitor .
 Of course, there are more players in the U.S. museum landscape dealing with Cold War history .
 Francis Gary Powers Jr., for instance, decided as early as 1996 to found a Cold War Museum . Powers Jr. decided to found the museum as soon as 1996 .
 He aims to preserve Cold War history and honor Cold War veterans . His father was shot down on a reconnaissance mission over the Soviet Union in 1961 . He was later exchanged for the Soviet spy Rudolf Abel .
 From time to time there are announcements on the progress of the project at the permanent location in Vint Hill, Virginia .
 The legally protected title “Cold War Museum’s” mission statement promises a comprehensive discussion of the Cold War era . The museum's legal protected title and mission statement promise to be comprehensive discussion .
 The Cold War Museum is home to a museum in Washington, D.C. Museum of Cold War War memorabilia .
 Today, in times of scarce funding, it is more important than ever for a museum to find and occupy its own niche .
 Historical research on the Cold War era needs a global perspective to visualize the unique character of this unconventional war . The historical research on Cold War will need to be presented to the public .
 The scars of the Cold War have a strong impact on the exhibition agenda of public museums, but also on policymakers and investors . National master narratives, the scars of Cold War and actual conflicts resulting from Cold War, influence public museums and policymakers .
 It is not always sufficient to spend money on the latest exhibition techniques to present a topic in an aesthetically appealing way . Instead, the exhibition should be presented in a pleasing manner .
 There are plans to establish a Center of Cold War at Checkpoint Charlie in Berlin, Germany .
 In September 2012 a temporary exhibition pavilion of the Cold War Center, called Black Box, opened there, at Checkpoint Charlie . Black Box opened there in September 2012 .
 It is thought to have won new supporters for the project and given a first glimpse into how an exhibition of the Cold War could look .
 The project faces the obstacle of a political-ideological opposition against the foundation of a new museum . Unfortunately, the project faces an obstacle of political opposition against foundation of the museum .
 "As a matter of fact it is a question of money as well as a struggle for interpretive predominance," says CNN.com.com .
 One must await further political decisions, especially after the uncertain results of recent elections to the German Bundestag . One must wait for further political decision to take place .
 A museum for the history of the Global Cold War is nevertheless an important and necessary desideratum for the worldwide museum landscape . The museum is dedicated to the Cold War and its role as a museum .
 This exceptional conflict is longing for historicizing in a museum, which is open at the same time to both its global impacts and to private human fates . "This exceptional conflict" is longing to be historicized, the author says .
 The Plan for a Cold War Center at Checkpoint Charlie, Berlin, Berlin’s Museums in a Global Context’.
 Angela Merkel and the conservative CDU hold the majority but still have to decide on coalition partner . Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel holds the majority in the German parliament .
 Museums in a Global Context: Museums around the world in a global context . Museums are museums of choice in the Middle East .
 Füssmann, Klaus, Heinrich Theodor Grütter and Jörn Rüsen, Historische Faszination. The book was published in the book "Faszination" and "The Fuszination of the World's First World"
 Representing Identiy and diversity in a changing world, Cambridge, 2006, 2. 2. Representing Identity and Diversity in a Changing World, Cambridge University, 2006: 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 5 .
 The novelty of this work is the presentation of the perspectives of the immediate participants with an aim to reveal the existing differences, similarities and conclusions in view of newly released documents . This work is presented with the perspective of the participants .
 Scholars tend to focus disproportionately on one side’s vision, either Soviet or American . While performing this kind of comparison, scholars tend to .
 This work will show the tendencies and understanding of the Cuban side, which was paramount in the crucial October days of 1962 . The work will not only provide a reader with both, but also provide an insight into the Cuban team .
 A common belief is that as time goes by, it is harder to reinvent the wheel, especially in regard to such a well-known case as the Caribbean Crisis . The Caribbean Crisis is known as the 'Caribbean Crisis' and 'The Caribbean Crisis'
 There is no doubt the topic can be built on and valuable additions can be made . However, accounting for a number of new sources becoming open to the public each year, there are no doubt there can be more to be done .
 The aim of this work is not to present a new truth, but rather to show that there is no monopoly on truth . Truth is usually found somewhere at the crossroads of a wide variety of opinions and vantage points, the author says .
 The Caribbean Crisis period was the most tense and dangerous time during the Cold War . The Caribbean crisis period was a tense period of tension between the two countries .
 The world was at the brink of an apocalypse and if the two nuclear superpowers had not resolved their disagreements peacefully, our lives today would be very different, if they would be at all .
 The quote captures the fatality of the possible Third World War, which was so close in 1962 . The quote was a reference to the possible third World War .
 The state leaders’ fears and mood, wrong interpretations of orders, bad connection or any unfortunate coincidences and mismatches could have lead to a thermonuclear war . Indeed, the state leaders could have led to a nuclear war .
 In-depth and careful research 46 allows us to analyze and comprehend what led the people in power to turn from the cornerstones of national pride and prestige to the realization of human value, dignity and security .
 The work puts a particular emphasis on the psychological aspect of the decision-making and consequences evaluation .
 The paper captures not only the 13 days of the Caribbean Crisis, but also the period prior to it . It captures the period before and after the crisis .
 We will examine time following the crisis and the ‘détente’ in American-Soviet relations up to Kennedy’s assassination on the 22nd of November, 1963 . We will start with the victory of the Cuban revolution, which brought Fidel Castro to power .
 A range of literature has been analyzed for this work with a special focus on memoir sources and newly released documents . The work is based on memoirs, memoirs and documents .
 Secondary sources used can be conditionally divided into Russian and English language sources . The secondary sources used are Russian, English and Russian .
 Russian sources allowed us to understand the Soviet perspective of the crisis and the rationale behind crucial decisions . Russian sources provided us with information about the crisis in Russia .
 Khrushchev’s son wrote an especially revealing book on his interactions with his father in the days during the Cuban Crisis and afterwards . The book is published by the author's son .
 The Cuban perspective was significantly improved in Alekseev’s memoirs, in which he claims that the missile withdrawal has been a complete surprise for him as well as for the whole Cuban government .
 The limitations of the undertaken research are the ongoing time distortion of the events and deeds as well as the shortage of the relevant material . The limitations include the time distortion and the shortage .
 Worked with contemporaries’ memoirs and declassified files on the period help us to overcome inaccuracies and generalizations .
 In order to give an answer to the research question, the work is divided into three interrelated chapters . The work was divided into . chapters .
 First chapter will show the perspective of Soviet officials and modern Russian scholars on the events of 1962 . First chapter, “Soviet View’s” will show Soviet officials’ perspective on events of the year 1962 .
 Second chapter titled “American Side” will reveal the American approach and evaluations of the crisis . Third chapter called “Cuban Perspective’s rise to power and assessments and reactions to his leadership will be provided .
 This work will be concluded with some necessary evaluations and a response to the research question . The research question will be answered by the author of the book .
 The Soviet Union had been only strengthening its international position as a world power and carrier of Socialism . Socialist ideology pervading more and more states throughout the 20th century while receiving unambiguous approval by Western states .
 Khrushchev took such American steps seriously and viewed a possible Cuban defeat as his own . The Cuban leader viewed such steps seriously, and viewed such a possible defeat as own .
 He was sure this was a perfect time to show the authority and power of the Soviets, he said . He added that he was sure it was a good time for the Soviets .
 Khrushchev's 'inferiority complex' is of a particular interest for the understanding of the rationale behind missiles stationing . An assertion by one of Khrushvic's approximates regarding the existent “inferiorsity complex” of the Soviet leader is of
 Khrushchev was concerned that the USSR and the hardliner political elite was not given due respect . He wanted people around him to fear him as they feared Stalin . According to the assertion, he feared that the hardliners around him would fear him .
 While seemingly far-fetched, such thoughts by the closest advisors of the Soviet leader shed light on the psychological background of the fall of 1962 .
 It is imperative to say a few words about the head of the Soviet Union in those difficult times as he played a crucial role in the escalation and resolution of the crisis . The former Soviet Union leader played a key role in resolving the crisis in Moscow .
 Nikita Sergeevich Khrushchev was realistic, pragmatic, understanding and often respondent to the needs of Soviet people . He was realistic and pragmatic, and often responded to the people's needs .
 Adgubey said his best qualities were his humanity and compassion . The First Secretary was a compassionate and compassionate person .
 Braveness equally was an important quality to him, though this occasionally led to unnecessary risk and recklessness, notably during the Caribbean Crisis . Bravenness was also important to him .
 The crisis was caused by these qualities of the Soviet leader. Indeed, as we can judge post factum, the crisis was due to these qualities . Indeed, post-factum, as well as the crisis, it was caused .
 The given numbers do not account to more than mathematic calculations when it comes to their actual destructive power . While definitely pessimistic for the manifestation of Soviet power, the given numbers don't account for more than math calculations . The Soviet Union was founded in 1940s .
 A more important reason for Khrushchev’s psychological unrest was the U.S. naval bases in Turkey and Italy . The bases were the reason for the unrest, says historian John Avlon .
 American missiles could bomb Soviet cities in any moment, which, of course, was not reciprocated by the Soviet side . U.S. missiles were able to strike Soviet cities, which could not be ignored by the Soviets .
 Khrushchev is known to point to the other side of the sea when having foreign guests and ask them whether they could see the American base . Khrushvic is known for asking foreign guests whether they can see the U.S. base .
 Khrushchev claimed he could see the change of guard next to American missiles targeting Soviet cities . After a negative response, he pointed to their bad vision and said, “probably this summer house is put on the map too’.
 Khrushchev was constantly thinking about the ways Soviet Union could help a newly established ally . During his informal visit to Bulgaria, he was constantly looking at ways to help them .
 President Obama asked for advice on how to protect Cuba from the imminent invasion of Cuba .
 Khrushchev was contemplating several alternative strategies . In terms of how to help the allied state, he was contemplating options . The Soviet Union was in the midst of a crisis .
 Thoughts of mutual help and cooperation were considered useless and unproductive . Thoughts of cooperation and mutual help was considered useless . Thoughts on mutual help are considered useless, unproductive.
 Sending missiles is seen as the only way to drastically change the status quo . Sending missiles was seen as a way to change the way the U.S. viewed the world .
 Krushchev was the main decision-maker and risk-taker in 1962 . But he did not make this decision without assistance from his closest advisors .
 Soviet Commission, created for this end, came to a positive evaluation of the Cuban landscape’s appropriateness and its ability to mask all military preparations . The Soviet Commission said the landscape was appropriate and could mask military preparations.
 Despite a widespread misconception on the unilateral viewpoint of the Soviet commandership, the assessments and opinions were varied in regards to the plan . Despite a wide misconception, the assessment and opinions of the plan were varied .
 Khrushchev was absolutely satisfied with Biruzov’s assessment . However, people often focus on the facts and opinions that further credit their original views, and thus Khrushov was satisfied .
 In May 1962, the Soviet leader presented to the Central Committee Presidium the plan of Operation “Anadyr” The plan was a transatlantic transportation and secret stationing of Soviet troops and missiles on the Cuban territory .
 The question arises as to why the USSR did not inform the United States about missile stationing as the Americans had done regarding U.S. missiles in Turkey . The Soviets had a diplomatic advantage and validity it could have lended to the operation .
 Some experts believe Khrushchev was confidant Americans would do everything possible to prevent a public, openly proclaimed stationing . Some experts say Khrushchchev was confident Americans would not tolerate a public display of stationing.
 Khrushchev deprived himself of such an international tool and the whole operation acquired the flavor of dishonesty and diplomatic cheating in the eyes of the world . The whole operation became an international crime, the author says .
 He was sure the Americans would have to put up with the missiles once they were in Cuba . He said he was sure that the U.S. would put up to putting up with them .
 Monroe Doctrine, accepted in 1823, was cornerstone of American foreign policy worldview . The Monroe Doctrine was accepted by the U.S. government in the early 1800s . It was a cornerstone of America's worldview .
 The Doctrine prohibited anybody’s military presence in the Western hemisphere, which was incompatible with the presence of nuclear ballistic missiles 90 miles from its border . The Doctrine was . incompatible with . presence of . nuclear missile bases 90 miles away from the . border .
 A secret realization of such an operation was a powerful psychological factor that left the U.S. government with no alternative but to declare the USSR an aggressor and to implement the required measures .
 Castro realized the importance and significance an openly proclaimed stationing could bring to his state, as well as to the process of missiles transportation itself . Castro's state of Cuba is one of the most important states in the world .
 He suggested that Khrushchev make the operation public . Shortly after the beginning of the stationing, he suggested that the operation be public .
 Americans made it public before Soviet leadership could blink . U.S. made the announcement before it was made public in the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets had to maintain appearance and international pride after their plan was revealed by an American reconnaissance plane and Kennedy’s speech of October 22 . The Soviets were forced to maintain their appearance and national pride .
 The Soviet government instructed the captains of Soviet ships bound for Cuba to ignore the orders of American naval forces and use weapons in case of an attack . Therefore, the captain of the ships was instructed to ignore orders of U.S. forces .
 All other Soviet vessels were allowed into Cuban waters . Despite the quarantine, all other Soviet ships were let into Cuban water .
 Despite clear political character and motives both leaders were pursuing in this crisis, no one even entertained the idea of sacrificing millions of their citizens’ lives for the sake of a political and tactical victory .
 Khrushchev’s quote is best at illustrating the idea, “life is more precious than prestige” The Soviets had to recontemplate how it could benefit from the situation .
 Khrushchev was concerned with the proximity of U.S. missiles and naval bases to Soviet cities . The Soviet leader was concerned about the proximity to the American missiles and bases .
 These missiles could destroy Soviet cities at any moment, but the same positioning was being denied to the Soviet side in the Cuban crisis . The missiles could have destroyed Soviet cities, but were denied the same position in Cuba .
 Khrushchev wrote a new letter in which he offered a quid pro quo exchange to withdraw Soviet missiles if Americans did the same in Turkey . After a considerable time to weigh the alternatives and evaluate his position, he wrote the letter .
 The role of reporters and journalists should not be understated, such as Fomin and Scali in “Oxidental” or a report on the pending landing of U.S. troops in Cuba . The role is not understated .
 Dobrynin, where the same crucial question on Soviet and American missiles was raised, was also raised in Dobrynins' visit to Moscow . The Soviet-U.S. missile tests were held in the 1980s and 1990s at Dobryninsk .
 Robert Kennedy explained to his colleague that due to national pride and allied considerations in NATO, the U.S. could not withdraw Turkey-based missiles unilaterally as it would look like a weak concession to Soviet pressure . The American side was never short on diplomatic justifications .
 The U.S. has not announced the withdrawal of American missiles from NATO . The withdrawal of missiles is a 4-5 month at minimum time frame for withdrawal if approved . Another reason for not publically announcing the withdrawal was the perceived bureaucracy of NATO .
 R Kennedy gave confidential assurances on the secret removal of the missiles in the near future . Nevertheless, R Kennedy said the missiles will be removed from the site .
 There is no doubt the Soviet side put itself into a diplomatically disadvantageous position and missed out on the opportunities of the period . Interestingly, later it was written in his memoirs, “President Kennedy was going to remove them shortly anyway”
 Kennedy was ready to publicly announce withdrawal of U.S. missiles if situation spun out of control . As it became later known, Kennedy was prepared to make the announcement .
 After the Soviet leadership was notified of Dobrynin’s unofficial meeting with Robert Kennedy, Kruschev realized his letter was rushed . The Soviet leadership later realized that the letter had been rushed .
 Due to technical setbacks, the American side had not received the letter yet, so he decided to write a new one . He decided to include the quid pro quo request included the request .
 Khrushchev wanted to pretend the first letter did not exist, and the Kennedy brothers did the same to his second message . The Soviet leadership gathered in Novo-Ogarevo, Russia, on Sunday morning, October 28 .
 The ball was on the Soviet side and it was obvious that a decision had to be made as soon as possible . The decision was made by President Vladimir Putin .
 Khrushchev would have had to swallow it or fight back with nuclear weapons . In case the U.S. had undertaken a strike on Soviet installations in Cuba, it would have been a catastrophe .
 The Soviet side never even entertained the possibility of a nuclear strike, says U.S. sources . Nevertheless, American sources could have said, the . source said, whatever the American sources . could have . said, it was said .
 Khrushchev excluded war as a solution as he understood the consequences of war . He said: 'Khrrushchev included war as he knew the consequences' Khrrushchev was not willing to go to war .
 A recent uncoordinated shooting of an American reconnaissance plane by Soviet generals in Cuba was the last drop in the bucket . The shooting of a U.S. reconnaissance plane in Cuba is the latest in a series of Soviet shootings in Cuba .
 Khrushchev himself said that with the US’s sincere assurances on Cuban security, “the motives which prompted the Soviet side to help Cuba are no longer relevant”
 The American interpretation differs from the Soviet one and blames Soviet leader’s weakness as a failure in achieving a desired nuclear parity . Of course, the American interpretation .
 Kennedy was assassinated in November of 1963, Khrushchev was ousted from power in 1964, while Castro remained head of an independent and sovereign Cuban state until 2008 . Castro was head of Cuba until 2008, while Kennedy was ousted in 1964 .
 The USSR plan was pointless. Looking at the situation without prejudice, the USSR plan is pointless. The Soviet plan was a waste of time.
 The transportation of missiles cost millions of dollars and Khrushchev’s political.commission was a political. necessity . The transportation . of missiles was a major cost of the . transportation of missile transport . The transport of missiles is a major political. economic failure .
 Khrushchev’s decision to play with fire saved the Socialist regime in Cuba . Nevertheless, there is no doubt that there would have been no doubt about the collapse of the Cuban regime .
 Khrushchev avoided political catastrophe when he agreed to withdraw Soviet weaponry from Cuba . The hurried decision taken by the Soviet side was not coordinated with the Cuban government, resulting in grave consequences .
 Khrushchev, Birth of Superpower, 540. 56 message started before the ending was edited . Message started before it was edited.
 First Deputy Chairman was so devoted to his country that he promptly left for Cuba . Despite the moribund condition of his wife, he left for his country .
 Only the experience and diplomatic skills of the Soviet chairman turned Cuban frustration and rage into a genuine understanding . Fidel stated outrageously that the Cuban people did not understand how it was even possible to decide its destiny behind its back"
 Castro left for Moscow in April of 1963 after more than a month in Cuba . The direct consequences of the crisis for the Soviet Union were positive .
 For the first time, America acknowledged the power and validity of the USSR as a world superpower . The USSR became a superpower in the early 1980s .
 Only after the crisis of 1962 did Kennedy understand the importance of realism in world politics, he said . Only after that crisis, Kennedy understood the need for realism, he added .
 The Soviet Union caused a significant psychological change in the U.S. in the 1950s and '60s . The United States has never been hit by the Soviet Union .
 Both leaders understood that the nuclear race couldn’t be viewed as a power game as the whole of humanity lay on the other side of the scales . The nuclear race was not a power race, but a nuclear arms race was a battle for humanity .
 A sign of relief of the two leaders in the moment of agreement on withdrawal was a guarantee of a great change in the bilateral relations of the world superpowers . The two leaders agreed to withdraw from Syria on Sunday night .
 Victory in the Second World War brought money and importance to America . The victory in the war brought millions of dollars to America.
 The Western Hemisphere had been gained for good. America had not yet succeeded to spread its influence into every corner of the world, the Western Hemisphere .
 During periods as intense as the Cold War, this region gained increased importance for the U.S. as a superpower . During this period, the United States was a dominant superpower in the region .
 Kennedy’s new foreign policy strategy says the balance of power should not change to the disadvantage of the US151 . According to the new policy strategy, the US did not intend to lead defensive policies .
 The United States was eager to “help oppositions inside the communist regimes” and to pursue programs aimed at eroding the iron curtain . The U.S. also wanted to help “opposition” inside communist regimes, the U.N. said .
 The U.S. government could not allow the spread of Communism in its main sphere of influence . Obviously, in pursuit of such staunch anti-Communist foreign policy, the American government couldn't allow it .
 It is easy to imagine Kennedy’s amazement and disillusionment when an island, situated 90 miles away from the American coast, became Communist .
 He stated that the “communist forces should not be underestimated in Cuba or anywhere else’.153 After the failure in the Bay of Pigs, he famously stated that “the complacent, the selfindulgent, the soft societies are about to be swept away with
 America was fast to act upon Castro’s rise . Only the strong can possibly survive"".154 America was quick to act on Castro's rise .
 It brought together members of regional organizations in order to exclude Cuba and take collective measures . Cuba has been banned from Cuba for more than a decade .
 Secret CIA plans became known recently, ranging from cigar poisoning to spattering Castro’s shoes with poisonous chemicals . Apart from all the possible legal measures, secret CIA plans become known recently .
 There is no official reference of Kennedy’s orders to kill Castro, but the desire to “get rid” of him clearly became an imperative of American foreign policy at the time .
 Kennedy's personality played a crucial role in the Cuban crisis, in its escalation as well as its settlement . Kennedy’s personality was crucial to the crisis in Cuba, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Since early childhood, his father taught him always to be the first and to yield to no one . He taught him to always be first and not yield to anyone, he says .
 His failure to put up with the presence of Soviet missiles in such proximity to U.S. should not have been a surprise .
 Kennedy’s personality as well as political factors such as November mid-term elections led Kennedy to escalate the conflict to a qualitatively new level . Kennedy's personality and political factors contributed to the escalation .
 It is possible he was looking for an event to overshadow his Bay of Pigs failure . It's possible he wanted to overshadow the event .
 Robert McNamara and Roger Hillsman claimed that it was the American administration rather than the country itself that was in mortal danger . As we know ‘all politics is local’.157 Both claimed that the U.S. was at risk rather than its own .
 The Cuban government’s nationalization of American property at the island was a major reason for the deterioration of American-Cuban relations . The flexible response doctrine allowed the American government to find the necessary solutions to arising conflicts and, most importantly, to achieve a compromise .
 American companies previously present and dominant at the Cuban market lost their market leverage and profits . Numerous American companies were previously dominant in the market .
 The puppet regime of Batista was overthrown and America had to face the willful and ideological government of Castro . The U.S. was reluctant to tolerate Castro's ideological government, which the United States had to tolerate .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion was the first powerful indication of U.S. hatred towards a new Cuban regime . The invasion of Cuba in 1961 was a powerful sign of American hatred towards Cuba .
 The surprising negligence of American forces was the reason for its failure, which brought relentless criticism towards the American President and his advisors from all sides of political spectrum . The surprising failure was the result of the American forces' negligence .
 The immediate reaction of the United States was the exclusion of Cuba from the Organization of American States . The U.S. stopped buying Cuban sugar, their main export . The American actions pushed Cuba towards the Soviet Union, which provided Cuba with economic aid .
 Latin America, Nº 4 , Nº . 4 , p 90. 59 that easily after a recent military defeat. That easily after recent military . defeat. Latin America .
 A threshold moment in the history of the Cold War occured on October 14, 1962, when Mayor Richard Heyser took photographs of Cuban soil showing a drastic divergence from those taken a month before . The Americans became aware only after their agents started reporting nightly movements of huge machines full of
 American experts concluded that the masked objects in the photos contained medium-range ballistic missiles . American experts said they were likely to be medium range missiles . The missiles are believed to have been used in the images .
 "From the start, his goal was to get rid of these missiles by all means possible," he says .
 He was confident that if he did not act decisively, his cabinet would stop taking him seriously and the United States would lose the support of its NATO allies . “Last month I said we weren’t going to [permit Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba] and last month I
 The discussion was tense and sharp, with the conversation mainly concerning Cuba and the superpowers’ relations with the island . The conversation was mainly about Cuba and its relations with Cuba .
 missiles were not mentioned during this important dialogue . Nevertheless, missiles were mentioned during the important dialogue.
 Instead of looking to deescalate the situation, the United States used “crisis diplomacy” in order to demand an unconditional surrender from the opposite side . The Americans believed the Soviets would withdraw from a “hot” confrontation as the decision-making side bearing the responsibility
 Dean Rusk, the United States Secretary of State from 1961 to 1969, claimed that the fact the crisis had not become public in the first week gave President an opportunity to evaluate all pros and cons . Thomas Paterson argues that Kennedy has greatly overstated the Cuban threat and exacerbated the already
 The courage and wisdom of the American leader allowed America to become a perceived winner of a confrontation . The U.S. improved its world standing and authority after the confrontation, he says .
 Dean Rusk is known to remind American reporters that American and Soviets met eye eye to eye and the Soviets blinked first . Rusk: "American and Soviet met eye-to-eye and Soviets blink first"
 It is imperative to understand the American interpretation of Soviet motives for the crisis escalation, as well as the American evaluation of possible Soviet actions .
 The U.S. saw the Cuban affair as a Soviet attempt to change the status quo and achieve a nuclear parity . Importantly, the United States saw the Soviet attempt as a change the disadvantageous status quo .
 Some American experts go as far as to suggest that the Cuban Crisis was the “cry of despair” and the result of Soviet realization that they were losing the Cold War .
 Unlike the Soviet citizens, Americans were confident that if the Soviets had an opportunity to push the button, there were no reasons for them not to . Unlike the Soviets, Americans would be confident if they had a chance to push it .
 America experienced a great psychological crisis during the Cuban crisis and its leaders decided to remove the missiles from Cuban territory as quickly as possible . The rationale explains the psychological crisis America experienced during the crisis .
 Major figures in American politics gathered to achieve a consensus as to how to respond to the aggressive actions of the Soviet government . The crisis group was formed immediately after the spotting of missiles .
 This allowed members of Congress to speak openly without trying to please the President . This allowed the members of the House of Representatives to speak freely . This allows them to express their views on the issues of national security .
 Kennedy’s brother Robert played a crucial role in the meetings of the ExComm as well as in the crisis resolution in general . Robert Kennedy's brother was a key figure in the events of the 1960s .
 Arthur Schlesinger: Robert was irreplaceable partner who helped President resist strong pressure from the military to employ weapons . Robert was the President's partner, who helped him resist military pressure to use weapons, he says .
 Khrushchev said Dobrynin was the most important part of the political dialogue between the states and allowed a peaceful settlement . Dobrynins were most important parts of the negotiations between the two countries . They were the most significant part of a political dialogue .
 Robert Kennedy was one of the most consistently and recklessly hawkish advisers, pushing not for a blockade or air strikes against Cuba, but for a full-scale invasion . However, even the assessment of his role in the crisis is highly debatable .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara stated that there was no difference in the territorial stationing of the Soviet missiles . The balanced position of such a distinguished person was crucial to pushing back against the doomed “strike scenario”, advocated by higher military commandership .
 Robert Kennedy viewed everything through the lens of domestic politics and the President’s standing within the government . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 .
 Robert Kennedy and McNamara advocated for a blockade . As claimed by American historiography, it is claimed that the blockade was eventually led by Robert Kennedy .
 U.S. troops in Cuba under direct UN supervision, withdrawal of American ‘Jupiters’ from Turkey and Greece and territorial guarantees to Cuba . U.N. Security Council resolution would neutralize American forces in Cuba and withdraw troops from Cuba .
 The American higher command on the other side was confident that the Bay of Pigs failure was a direct consequence of American indecisiveness . They claimed that the Cuban crisis was a perfect moment to solve the problem of revolutionary . The U.S. higher command was confident .
 Dean Acheson, Paul Nitze and C Douglas Dillon were the most sophisticated and linked the Soviet missiles problem to the American leadership positions in the Western Hemisphere . They advocated immediate and decisive military actions such as a tactical strike . Among the notorious warmongers .
 Senator Richard Russell requested an immediate direct invasion of the island . Senator Russell requested a direct invasion . Senator Richard Russell requested immediate invasion of island .
 Eventually the “war party” found itself distanced from the decision-making process, which, while beneficial for world security and settlement of the conflict, was a cause of enduring political disagreements . Eventually the "war party" found itself out of the decision making process .
 The Americans were also trying to predict the reaction of international actors in view of various historical precedents . Evaluating the possible alternatives, the U.S. tried to predict how international actors would react .
 It was hard to overlook the parallel to Pearl Harbor when contemplating a massive air strike . The U.S. government is considering an air strike on Japan .
 Robert Kennedy sent his brother a note saying, “now I know what Tojo must have felt planning Pearl Harbor” To the Soviets would likely blockade Berlin in response, which was why this was not an option for an American government .
 McNamara’s assurances that the targeted strike would not be 100% effective was a last straw as remaining missiles could have been directed towards American cities, and the strike option was given up . McNamara: “The strike option is given up.”
 Kennedy declared an establishment of naval quarantine for offensive weapons in October . Kennedy declared the establishment of a naval quarantine .
 He stated that all vessels carrying weapons of mass destruction to Cuba would be stopped and returned to the ports they had left . He said all vessels with weapons of war will be stopped .
 The reaction of the world leaders to the U.S. decision varied greatly . The reaction to the decision varies greatly .
 Everyone understood the danger of the situation and the possible consequences of mutual miscommunication . Nevertheless, everyone understood that the situation was very serious . The situation was described as a 'serious mistake'
 If such a meeting took place, the American President could have been accused of cowardice and incoherence, and the political spectrum of the US could tilt to the Republicans .
 Kennedy took the only possible decision – to put negotiations on hold until the missiles were removed . Kennedy made the decision during October of 1962 .
 People built bomb shelters, bought provision for years to come and waited for the worst while hoping for the best . People build bomb shelters and buy provisions for years, hoping for best .
 Recently declassified sources show that the U.S. government was planning a full-scale military invasion in case a compromise was not reached . Sources say that the American government planned to invade the Soviet Union .
 Jacqueline Kennedy's refusal to evacuate helped smooth the belligerent attitude of her husband, according to some scholars . An important factor in such a tense atmosphere was Jacqueline's decision to not evacuate .
 The meeting between Aleksandr Fomin, the counselor of the Soviet Embassy, and John A Scali, an ABC reporter, was a decisive point in turning the American position to a more realistic approach .
 Schlesinger, A Thousand Days of John Kennedy in the White House, 546. 65 invited Scali for lunch at the old Occidental Restaurant, two blocks from White House .
 West Berlin was an important U.S. foreign policy success . It was located in the middle of Soviet East Germany, the Soviet threat was real .
 Scali was instructed by a concerned American government to transmit the newly formed suggestions on the removal of Soviet missiles in exchange for a guarantee of non-intervention on the United States side . Scali received the proposal from the American government .
 This was the final pronounced deal, apart from the secret assurances on the withdrawal of Turkish missiles . The deal was the last pronounced deal on the North Korean peninsula . This was also the final assurances on withdrawing Turkish missiles.
 American assessment of the events can be summarized as a unilateral account of American victory and a shameful backing of the Soviet leader . American assessment is that the U.S. victory was achieved by Soviet victory .
 Scholarship immediately following the crisis largely supported this harmful idea . Scholarship immediately after the crisis supported this idea .
 A false characterization of the events had the unfortunate adoption of a ‘resolve’ rather than an acceptable compromise as a main goal of the American Cold War policy . According to James Nathan, such a false characterization was unfortunate .
 Despite an apparent victory of the American side, an obvious change in the US attitude towards USSR-directed foreign policy warrants consideration .
 A degree of realism shown by Kennedy caused some violent assaults by U.S. reactionary powers . Kennedy's realism was shown by some of the world's most powerful powers .
 As a result of the stand-off, the parties were able to get to know each other and form their opinion on the representatives of the opposite camp .
 Looking only at the global side of the ideological contestation of two-world systems would be the same as playing basketball without a court . Looking only to the global . side would be same as . playing basketball . without a . court, it says .
 Fidel Castro's parents strived to give him the best education . Fidel's educational success was remarkable from early childhood to remarkable . Fidel was born in a humble upbringing .
 At age 13, he participated in the workers’ revolt at his father’s sugar plantation . He participated in his father's plantation revolt at 13 .
 Max Lestnik, Castro’s school friend said, ""he possessed unbelievable braveness. He possessed unbelievable courage," said a friend of Castro .
 Unaware of the pending turn in Cuban foreign policy, Senator Robert Kennedy joined in on the approval of a new Cuban government as an improvement to the “despotic’s dictatorship .
 The mistrust and lack of information on the other side precluded the Soviet Union and Cuba from any meaningful interaction until the Soviets examined Castro’s plans and ideological standing . The mistrust prevented the Soviets from interacting with Cuba .
 The Castro's regime would have a profound effect on the leftist movements in the other Latin American states and start a detrimental impact on American business . Rapid nationalization of American property could not go unnoticed by the Americans .
 Cuban agrarian reform led to the expropriation of American property amounting to 1 $ billion . American property was expropriated by Cuban government in the 1950s .
 An ostentatious neglect of the Cuban leader by the American President played a significant role in the decline of mutual relations . The American President's neglect of Cuba's leader played a major role in its decline .
 Eisenhower redirected Castro to his Vice-President, R Nixon, choosing to play golf over a scheduled high-level meeting . Nixon played golf instead of a scheduled meeting with Castro .
 Castro considered such an attitude towards the President of an independent and proud Cuban republic humiliating . The Cuban leader considered such a 'humiliating' attitude to the President .
 International Life Nº 5 , 58. 68 to believe that Washington did everything possible to push Cuba into the Soviet embrace . Washington tried everything possible, including the U.S. role in Cuba .
 The ceasation of sugar imports signified the end of previously blossoming bilateral trade and put Cuba on the brink of economic collapse . Cuba is now on the verge of an economic collapse.
 The United States broke all diplomatic relations with the republic . Soon afterwards the U.S. broke diplomatic ties with Russia .
 The alternative of a strong ally instead of waiting to be annihilated was a welcoming option . The alternative was the alternative of waiting for an annihilated war .
 The USSR was happy to support a friendly Communist regime in the sphere of American interests . It was also happy to back a friendly communist regime in America's interests .
 Castro announced turned Cuba into a socialist state in light of the Bay of Pigs invasion . Soon, the Soviet Union became Cuba’s lifeline .
 The Americans called Castro’s revolution treason and set out on the annihilation of Castro and his regime . Castro's revolution was called treason by the U.S.
 The 1963 failed plan, Mongoose, is the most well known though many plans existed before 1962 . Mongoose is one of the most famous of the world's most famous failed plans .
 One plan was to apply thallium salts to Castro’s shoes in order for his beard to fall off and destroy his charisma . Castro's shoes were also applied to his shoes to make his beard fall off .
 Another was to sprinkle Castro’s cigars with a chemical substance, causing temporary disorientation before he was to give a speech . Another one was to use a chemical to disorientate him before giving a speech, causing him disorientated .
 A plausible explanation for American reaction at the time of Castro’s rise to power as well as today might be an account of ontological security . The need to define itself in opposition to another might be the need to .
 The Monroe Doctrine and the perception of Cuba as a defiant power in American sphere of interests could not leave the Americans silent . The U.S. could not be silent .
 Military exercises called Filbrixlex-2214 involved 40,000 military personnel directed against an imagined dictator called Ortsac . The exercises were a powerful indication of American intentions to invade as well as a validation for the Soviet missile stationing .
 Cubans constantly felt existentially threatened by the threat of an invasion of Cuba . The island nation is constantly threatened by sophisticated plans to invade the island .
 Cuba persisted that its problem was not that the opposition of geopolitical West and East, but rather its pursuit of independence and sovereignty . After the Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro called Kennedy a “new Hitler”
 Nevertheless, it is important to note a sharp geopolitical contestat over the island . Nevertheless, the island is still under threat from Russia and China .
 At a time when the U.S. was planning yet another full-scale invasion, Soviet leadership was thinking of options to protect the Cuban Revolution . The Soviet Union was planning to protect Cuba .
 The drastically different standing towards the Cuban Revolution for the procurement of political objectives was the main reason for the Soviet success with an enduring Cuban government . The drastically . different standing . towards the . Cuban Revolution . for the . procurement of . political objectives . was the reason for Soviet success .
 One roll of a dice could restore Soviet international standing, frighten Americans, save Cubans, shut up Stalinists, frustrate the Chinese and gain a potential advantage .
 A Soviet delegation was sent to Cuba to explain the situation and reach an agreement for weapons stationing . The Soviet delegation met with Cuba to discuss the situation .
 Cubans were more than willing to accept murderous weapons . Surprisingly, Cubans are willing to take on the weapons .
 Raul Castro arrived in the USSR to prepare all the necessary documents . Despite being an extravagant character, his decision was motivated by an altruistic sacrifice in the name of socialism .
 The Cubans offered to make the stationing of missiles public . All materials were written by hand in a single copy . The Cuban government has offered to give the public the information .
 The agreement has gained Cuba greater importance in the international community . This not only heightened the prestige of the agreement but also gained Cuba's greater importance . The agreement was signed by the Cuban government in 1998 .
 Kennedy himself declared repeatedly that the Jupiter missiles were “the same” as the Soviet missile in Cuba in Cuba . Kennedy: Jupiter missiles are ‘the same,’s the same, as the .
 Only role they performed was to enhance nuclear deterrence by complicating America’s planning for a successful first strike . Thus, the only role they did was to . enhance nuclear . deterrence .
 The psychological factor of a secret stationing and a newly acquired U.S. awareness of the fact could not allow them to “sit back and let them do that to us,” as the US Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin put it .
 In his speech on October 22, Kennedy did not even try to hide an obviously hostile attitude towards Cuba . In his address, Kennedy said he had a hostile attitude toward the island nation .
 He did not even recognize Cuban attempts to protect itself and ensure its regime’s future . Obama did not recognize Cuba attempts to ensure its future .
 The State Department published a brochure, which called Castro a traitor to common American interests . State Department viewed Castro's Communist regime as a challenge to the stability of the Americas .
 The roots of Cuban crisis can be found in the American desire to ensure its monopoly on security while rejecting the right of other states to protect themselves . According to Gromyko, the roots of the American . desire to . ensure its . monopoly on . security can be traced to the American
 Americans refused to accept the validity of the Soviet rationale for stationing of the missiles . The Cuban government did not trust American guarantees of non-aggression .
 In such a situation, the third player was an additional burden on the decision-making and control of the decision . The decision was made by the team's decision-maker .
 Misl, 1985, 190. 72 come to terms and put themselves into each other’s shoes in order to reach a compromise . Misl came to terms with Misl in 1985, .
 To know what was going on in the heads of mysterious and irascible Cuban leaders was even harder . To know the truth was hard to do, it's hard to find out .
 The order of any Cuban general could cause a nuclear Armageddon in the Cold War . In these crucial days when Cold War tension reached its peak, the connection and information exchange with Cuba bore a prodigious importance .
 The shooting down of an American reconnaissance flight U-2 on October 27 has been called “Black Saturday” Even though the American public has been misinformed as to the responsibility of shooting down the plane, it is now known that a Soviet General made the decision without any prior consultation
 This was the turning point in the crisis, when the Soviet government realized the danger of the situation in Cuba . The Cuban crisis was the 'turning point' in the Soviet-controlled Cuba, Soviet leader Vladimir Putin says .
 The possibility of an unexpected situation was multiplied by the existence of a third decision-maker . Thus, the possibility of such a situation was increased by the presence of a decision-making .
 Castro ordered his soldiers to shoot down U.S. reconnaissance planes . He ordered his troops to shoot them down .
 He believed the Northern neighbor could be influenced by nothing but power . He said he believed the power of the North could not be ruled out of power .
 Cuban leader was leader of the Cuban Republic when American planes were flying over his territory . He was Cuban president of the time .
 Castro was urging Khrushchev to use missiles if Cuba was invaded, documents reveal . Castro was also urging the Soviet Union to use missile technology if it invaded Cuba .
 The Soviet decision to withdraw the missiles came out of the blue for the Cuban side . Cuban president was sure that if the Soviet Union struck first, it would end the arrogant Northern neighbors .
 Castro suggested launching a preventive nuclear strike on October 27 . This was likely the rationale for Castro’s message of October 27, in which he suggested a strike .
 Soviet government rejected such a scenario as one that had never been considered by the Soviets . The Soviet government, however, decisively rejected such an idea .
 Castro was not consulted when the final decision on missiles withdrawal was negotiated in the Soviet echelons . Castro not consulted on the decision to withdraw missiles from Soviet Union .
 Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos notified the Soviet ambassador in Cuba, Alekseev, on Sunday, October 28, around 7 AM .
 The cable addressed to the Cuban leader stressed a dangerous time shortage and informed Castro on the positive consequences of the crisis settlement . The cable was addressed to Castro .
 Khrushchev did not understand me or the translation was not correct since in the cable of 27 October I did not suggest to be the first in delivering a blow against the adversary territory during the crisis . In the case if there were an aggression against Cuba and Soviet people would be perishing
 The Soviet Union completely ignored Castro’s ideas on how to resolve crisis . Castro's famous 5 Points by the American government right before the settlement of the crisis . The perspective of the Cuban leaders that the Soviet Union ignored Castro's ideas is credible .
 The Cuban regime adopted a general suspiciousness and insular attitude for many years to follow, irritating America and causing the Cuban people to suffer . This led to a decline in relations with the Soviet Union and the Cuban regime .
 Conclusion: Drawing a conclusion from such a controversial and crucial period in human history is more than an ambitious task .
 The crisis became a turning point in the relations between the two superpowers . The crisis was a 'turn point' in relations between Russia and the U.S.
 The only rational way out in such a nuclear showdown would be through peaceful negotiations . It demonstrated how dangerous the possibility of nuclear showdown was and that the only way out of such a case would be peace .
 American and Soviet leaders understood the insurmountable danger of another similar misunderstanding and established a red line between the Kremlin and the White House . The U.S. and the Soviet Union understood the danger of a similar misunderstanding .
 The realization of mutual vulnerability showed the U.S. that the exercise of power is not limitless . The only acceptable way to regulate power in the nuclear age is by negotiation .
 The new concept of ‘peaceful coexistence’ was accepted in the aftermath of the war . It signified the beginning of détente and an understanding that despite a different ideology, the world superpowers do not have to exasperate those differences .
 The withdrawal of Turkey-based Jupiters seems to invalidate such a claim, the author says . Indeed, if we look at the situation from the position of public appearance and proclamations, there was an unambiguous American victory, he says .
 In terms of geopolitics, American victory could be questioned due to the fact that a hostile political regime acquired a strong footing in close proximity to the U.S. border .
 Clearly, these are the only explanations that could afford them to keep up appearances in the aftermath of withdrawal . The only explanations are that they could afford to keep appearances .
 Cuba indeed received the assurances of non-intervention and for good or bad, the Cuban regime lasted long . Cuba's regime was given the assurances it would not be invaded by the West .
 Cuban people were less than satisfactory due to a persisting, destructive, economic embargo . Despite such a positive outcome for the regime, the Cuban people are still suffering from a lack of economic freedom .
 Khrushchev’s strategy worked well as he got assurances of the withdrawal of Turkish missiles and then signed a nuclear test test ban treaty in 1963 .
 This work examined how the differences between American, Soviet and Cuban sides influenced the decisions of the participants of the conflict . These variations can help explain the differences in crisis assessment .
 There can be no universally correct account of the events, study finds . Politically motivated interpretations create a multitude of equally logical and explanatory motivations and assessments of events .
 The main goal of a researcher is to approach all these interpretations from an unbiased point of view and understand the situation in its complexity, says researcher .
 Due to recently released documents of the Soviet side, the account of the event became fuller, eliminating conventional stereotypes and a dominant American view . The account of this event has become fuller .
 Despite the smaller influence of Cuban decision-making, a similar addition of Cuban sources would greatly help to understand the psychology of the crisis and the leaders' decisions to engage in such risky behavior .
 As Mark Twain once said “History doesn't repeat itself, but it does rhyme.” ‘History doesn’t repeat itself.’
 Let our prudence and understanding trump over our ambition and self-assertion if we want to continue enjoy the world which we all now take for granted . And let's prudence trump over ambition over ambition, we should be careful .
 I will explore the possible reasons that led them to make defensive preparations . Additionally, I will also explore the possibility that they may have made defensive preparations for the game .
 Secret documents of the WP from the 1970s and the 1980s are increasingly available for historians . The secret documents from the 70s and 80s were increasingly available to historians .
 Russia's nuclear war plans shifted from a defensive position to an offensive war against NATO forces . This is clearly demonstrated in the nuclear war plan, according to the plans .
 Soviets led WP nations to conduct military exercises or Front Command Post exercises every year in some member states . The exercises involve military forces of the Soviet Union along with those of other WP members .
 Documents reveal that in the 1980s, the Soviet Union was prepared for an offensive war in which they would likely use nuclear weapons . Annually, with the approval of the Hungarian political leadership, they formulated and modified plans for waging a possible war .
 Recent research by military historian Miklós Horváth indicates there was no significant change to this strategy, even after the 1987 Berlin meeting of the WP Political Consultative Committee, in which they decided to strengthen the military doctrine .
 The purpose of RYAN was to collect intelligence on the presumed, but non-existent, plans of the Reagan administration to launch a nuclear first strike against the Soviet Union . The purpose was to gather intelligence on a possible first strike .
 We still do not have enough information about the function and role of this intelligence operation during the early 1980s, so this issue needs further research . The issue is still a mystery, and we need to find out more about the operation .
 The USA in favor of increasing its military power began the implementation of monumental armament programs . Among other aspects, they indicated that The USA . in favor . increasing its . military power .
 In May 1978, NATO adopted a new armament program for the next 15 years, including developing a neutron bomb . NATO adopted the new program in May 1978 .
 In 1980, the Wartime Statute of the Combined Armed Forces of the WP countries, drafted in 1978, was approved . Meanwhile, in 1980, a Wartimes Statute was also approved .
 If the Soviet Union disarmed all of their missiles in Europe and beyond the Ural Mountains, then NATO would stop enforcing the 1979 Double-Track Decision . The Soviet Union would disarmament all of its missiles would be disarmed if it disarmed .
 The U.S. deployed Pershing-II and Cruise Missiles to Greenham, England, Mutlangen, West Germany, and Comiso, Italy .
 As a countermove, the Soviets increased the number of the SS-20 missiles in East Germany and Czechoslovakia . The Soviet Union increased the numbers of the missiles in the two countries .
 NATO member states also practiced preparations for a nuclear war . In the military exercise, code-named ‘Able Archer’, NATO members practice preparations for war . The exercise was code-called ‘The Able Archer”
 Recently declassified secret documents reveal that even in the 1980s, the world was extremely close to a thermonuclear war . According to Richard Rhodes, this “made the Soviet leadership uneasy, so there was very little that prevented them from making the first nuclear strike”
 The approach assumed that the first nuclear strike would be carried out by the USA . Soviet leaders thought that the Soviet and Hungarian intelligence services had to join forces and make necessary preparations together .
 At the beginning of the war, before the first strike, we can read in the letter that despite all the secrecy “the enemy will be forced to make a series of actions in the political, economic, military and social spheres which would be directed to ensure the effectiveness of its nuclear
 They detailed the processes, activities and preparations for every area, political, military and economic and civil defense, which the initiator, the USA, would make before an unexpected nuclear attack . The USA would make such preparations before an attack .
 This action plan was not made prior to 1985, because they sent the proposal for it only at the end of the previous year . This proves that the Soviets did not inform their allies properly previously, and that prior to the 1980s, they did not prepare for defense against an unexpected nuclear
 Vladimir Kryuchkov, Deputy Chairman of Soviet Union KGB, sent documents regarding this action plan to János Bogye, a deputy leader in the Hungarian Home Office at that time .
 Top secret correspondence reveals that predicting an unexpected nuclear attack from NATO and the USA was a problem at this time . They emphasized the importance of early detection .
 Kryuchkov drew up the actions and signs related to the preparations for an unexpected attack in the political, military and economic areas and for civil defense . Kryuchov drew up a list of the actions, signs and procedures to prepare for an attack .
 The first half of the 1980s was a critical period in the relations between NATO and the Warsaw Pact countries, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: NATO relations between the two NATO allies were critical .
 Pastore suggested reconsideration of NATO commitments to Germany to emphasise U.S.'s stance on nonproliferation . Pastore insisted on nullification of the Agreement's nullification .
 The historical background of Brazil’s foreign relations in the late 1960s and early 1970s puts the controversy generated by the Agreement into perspective . It illustrates how politically promiscuous nuclear commerce had become by this time .
 The U.S. role as sole supplier of enriched uranium for many countries in the Third World ended in 1971 with the arrival of the Soviet Union in the nuclear marketplace .
 From the 1950s, the delivery of enriched uranium supplies from the United States for the operating lifetime of nuclear reactors was obtained through several bilateral agreements . The U.S. delivered enriched uranium from the U.K. to the Soviet Union in the 1960s and 1980s .
 The United States subsidised the prices of these supplies as an inducement for buyers to forego alternatives . The U.S. subsidised these supplies to encourage people to buy cheaper alternatives .
 Between 1969 and 1973 France, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Germany and Canada all expanded their investments in Brazil at a faster rate than the U.S. In the year following the world recession of 1973-1974, Brazil’s foreign debt exploded .
 Butterworths, 1980, 299. 92 was the principal borrower from the World Bank . Butterworth's is now the largest bank in the world, with $1.2 billion worth of interest .
 Brazil imported 75% of its, mostly crude oil, making it the developing world’s leading oil importer . Brazil is the world's leading oil-consuming nation .
 Following the October 1973 Yom Kippur War, the country experienced severe balance-of-payments difficulties . The country experienced a balance of-payment difficulties following the war .
 The technology and knowledge necessary for the complete nuclear fuel cycle would allow Brazil to earn foreign exchange and reduce the costs of its nuclear program . Amongst other benefits, acquisition of the technology and . knowledge necessary to the complete . fuel cycle . Brazil .
 The Agreement reflects these ambitions, specifying the development of a native nuclear industry to diversify Brazil’s power resources . In the long-term, the export of energy and technical services will also be part of the agreement .
 The capability to draw on diverse and copious energy sources would give it leverage in negotiations with energy suppliers, particularly the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries . The U.S. had long been a dominant force in Brazil's economy .
 Glenn Seaborg asserted that the U.S. would continue to provide nuclear fuel enrichment services for Brazil from the United States . John Redick, notes that when he visited Brazil in 1967 he asserted that . would continue ""unconditionally"" even if Brazil stuck to plans to develop
 The United States also provided Brazil with research and consultation on techniques for various uses of nuclear energy in the early 1970s . Brazil signed a new cooperative agreement with the U.S. in 1972 .
 Agreement for nuclear co-operation with France was announced in May 1967, less than two months prior to Seaborg's visit to the country . Agreement included details for joint development of research and power reactors and the acquisition of French equipment .
 Redick suggests that Brazil may have used this agreement as a means of inducing further technical assistance from the United States . Redick says the agreement may have been a reaction to U.S. non-proliferation initiatives .
 French-Brazilian agreement includes joint research on fabrication techniques of thorium fuel and the prospective construction of a thorium/heavy water power reactor . The agreement also includes the prospect of a more expensive process that results in large amounts of plutonium .
 The most important precedent for the Agreement was established during the negotiations and subsequent construction of the Atucha natural uranium power plant in Argentina, built by Siemens AG in 1968 .
 This involved the purchase by Argentina of a sensitive element of the nuclear fuel cycle, heavy water, from the AEC . The only U.S. sale of heavy water to a foreign power in that year was the only United States sale .
 According to David J Myers, Argentina's supply of plutonium from Atucha passed beyond the critical threshold for weapons production in the late 1970s . The Brazilian regime established an arrangement with West Germany for nuclear research in 1969 .
 The Brazilian CNEN created a working party of West German and Brazilian technicians to assess a proposal for the construction of a power plant in either Rio de Janeiro or Sao Paulo by 1976 .
 CNEN says the main goal of the Brazilian nuclear program was the development of all stages in the production of nuclear energy . CNEN: The main goal is to develop the infrastructure for the ""nuclearization"" of Brazil . The country's nuclear program is based on natural uranium .
 The contract to build the first nuclear power plants in Brazil with enriched uranium from the U.S. went to the United States firm Westinghouse renewing Brazil's dependence for enriched fuel on a single supplier . The Germans alleged several cases of United States interference in the nuclear reactor export market
 In 1973 KWU considered a sale to Yugoslavia closed when they were suddenly beaten to the punch by Westinghouse . In 1973 they considered a deal to Yugoslavia but were beaten to a close shave by West .
 There were also charges that the U.S. had threatened to withhold economic assistance from Argentina if it bought another German reactor . The company was negotiating to sell two reactors to Iran .
 Today, the United States and Germany are signatories to the Non-Proliferation Treaty . The treaty is the legal instrument setting out the terms underlying the regulation of trade in nuclear technology .
 The impetus that gave rise to the NPT was a renewed attempt by the superpowers to halt the international spread of nuclear weapons . The NPT is the first attempt to stop nuclear weapons being spread around the world .
 Germany's interpretation of Article IV of the Treaty allowed for access to nuclear energy by non-nuclear weapons states for peaceful purposes . Germany said it would allow nuclear energy to be used in peaceful uses . Germany was the only member of the UN to sign the agreement .
 President Gerald Ford and German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt did not discuss Agreement . Agreement was not discussed in a meeting that month between Ford and Schmidt .
 Former Brazilian Foreign Minister Araujo Castro described the NPT in 1971 as part of an effort by the superpowers to ""freeze"" the Cold War distribution of power .
 The wording of the Agreement made it dependent on safeguards agreed upon with the International Atomic Energy Agency . This view typified the Brazilian attitude throughout the 1970s .
 Germany and Brazil, 1975,” Orbis 2 : 293; ‘Querschüsse aus den USA,’ Die Zeit, 20 Juni, 1975. ‘Germany and Brazil’s relations with the U.S. have been at odds
 To Brazil from West Germany, 1975,” International Security, Nº 2 : 163. “To Brazil From West Germany” was published in 1975 . “Brazil’s first visit to West Germany was in 1975, and the first to Brazil from Germany in 1975
 France, Britain and the Soviet Union fulfilled Brazilian demands for arms unmet by the U.S., according to Alexandre Barros . By mid-1974 negotiations between Brazil and Germany to draft the Agreement were underway .
 Several German government officials visited Brazil in the middle of 1974 . Former Defense Minister Franz Josef Strauss and State Secretary of Foreign Affairs Hans George Sachs visited Brazil .
 The terms of the deal were agreed on February 12, 1975 . Following a visit by Brazilian Mines and Energy Minister Shigeaki Ueki to Bonn, Brazilians made the decision to outline a nuclear program .
 Foreign Policy of a Future World Power, Boulder, CO: Westview, 1976, 50. 97 journal Nucleonics Week .
 A four-man delegation from the State Department and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency was sent to Bonn to discuss the Agreement . The delegation apparently helped induce Germany to take a less lenient approach toward existing safeguards .
 German officials rebut critics of the Agreement by stressing that the treaty's safeguards exceeded those required by Canada for its exports of nuclear technology to India . Brazil had the capability of eventually developing a nuclear industry without foreign assistance .
 If this occurred, the Germans contended, there would be no international controls on the Brazilian nuclear industry . If this happened, the German government said, Brazil's nuclear industry would be exempt from international controls .
 Argentina was planning to construct a nuclear bomb and that plans were afoot for France to supply Argentina with a plant to produce plutonium, later denied by French sources . At this point anxiety over Brazil's rivalry with Argentina was on the rise .
 The German press had observed that France, which had not signed the NPT, was prepared to provide Brazil with a complete nuclear fuel cycle .
 Had Germany not agreed to assist Brazil, a far greater danger of nuclear proliferation would have been posed, so the Agreement's German supporters argued . Helmut Schmidt was consistently flexible and responsive in the face of political pressure on the question of the Agreement’s safeguards .
 Analysis of a question and answer session from a press conference at the West German government a day before the signing of the Agreement shows that the Chancellery solicited methods for enhancing IAEA controls over transfer of nuclear knowledge and material .
 Archiv der sozialen Demokratie: Helmut Schmidt Archiv. 98 until after the inauguration of President Carter . Schmidt was a member of the Communist Party in the 1970s .
 Memoranda from the German Foreign Ministry shows that Germany was sensitive to the objections from the U.S. and the Dutch government to the transfer of these blueprints .
 German ministerial officials also showed willingness to engage in intergovernmental consultations over the details to a point . They are certain of the legality of their position and determined not to undermine their contractual obligations under the Agreement by delaying the transfer .
 Vorschlag für ein Gesprch des Bundesministers mit dem Herrn Bundeskanzler am 9.12.1976”, Berlin: PA, B35, 005723-005724; “Betr.: Ausbau der Z
 The U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency was involved in the assassination of President George H.W. Bush in the early '70s .
 Brazil's attempt at acquiring the technological basis for the complete fuel-cycle by Brazil was not anticipated . However, in contrast with Argentina, the attempt to acquire the . technological basis of the fuel cycle by Brazil did not .
 The first was the AEC's notification that it could not guarantee the delivery of previously promised enriched uranium . The AEC notified the U.S. government that it had not been able to deliver the promised uranium .
 The political consequences of this were compounded by the U.S. refusal to sign contracts committing United States sources to investment in further enrichment capacity . The political fallout was compounded by this refusal of the United States .
 Westinghouse tried to persuade Brazil to participate in an enrichment plant to be built in the United States . Brazil insisted that the entire nuclear fuel cycle be under Brazilian control . Of equal importance to Brazil in 1974-1975 was the need to expand and diversify her resources of oil and other
 Western capital goods also added to the appeal of Soviet products and, particular Soviet technology . This, and the soaring cost of Western goods, added to their appeal .
 U.S. nonproliferation efforts in the 1970s were inconsistent . Brazil had attempted to promote greater exports of her semi-manufactures, such as shoes and textiles, and import more specialised items .
 The Agreement represents a challenge to U.S. hegemony by the primus inter pares of United States allies in Europe and South America . The Agreement represented a contraction of the United States superpower’s sphere of influence .
 Journal of International Affairs, Nº 37, 1984, 291. The United States and West Germany,’s U.S. and West German relations,” .
 Perry, William, William Perry, has published a book on Brazil's foreign policy . The International Strategy of an Emerging Power: Brazil's Foreign Policy . The book is published by William Perry and his colleagues .
 Helmut Schmidt, Jimmy Carter und die Krise der deutsch-amerikanischen Bezeigungen bezeigenschappenen .
 Operation Able Archer 83 and its precursors made the Soviet leaders feel particularly uneasy due to renewed overt antagonism between the two superpowers . Gábor VÖRÖS gives a look at the Cold War in Hungary .
 Operation Able Archer 83 was a seemingly routine yearly military exercise in the November of 1983 . The exercise took place in the month of November 1983 . It is now a scholarly topic of interest in military history .
 Over 1000 declassified pages have been released to the public by the National Security Archive . The existence of the exercise was known for a long time and some of the American and Soviet reactions are documented .
 The saying that it was the closest moment to World War III warrants legitimacy warrants legitimacy . By navigating through the articles characterized by sensationalism, I will try to analyze the event and whether the saying is true .
 Operation Able Archer 83 is a look at what the world looked like in the late 1970s and early 1980s . It will establish a clear picture of the events running up to the operation . It is the first time I have written about the events leading up to Able Archer 1983 .
 It was a particularly uneasy period in the Cold War which signaled the end of the détente that characterized the period from the late 1960s up until the late 1970s . The Cold War ended in the late 1980s and the late 70s .
 The balance of power at that time was in Europe and how the United States and the Soviet Union fared in the defensive aspects . Additionally, I will take a look at the military-strategic situation in Europe .
 Operation Able Archer 83 will be examined . Following the background history of the operation, the intricacies of the . Operation Able . Archer 83 is examined .
 I will try to uncover how serious the Soviet war scare was in reality . Then, I will attempt to uncover the truth about the Soviet scare .
 U.S.-Soviet relations deteriorated in the early 1980s . The Soviets interpreted the situation in the way they interpreted it in the Soviet Union . The US-Soviet relations have since deteriorated dramatically .
 In the midst of the Cold War, it was in a time that many thought are some of the darkest days of the rivalry between the two superpowers .
 Détente, that is the thawing of relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union characterizing the majority of the 1960s and 70s, was seen as faltering . The détente was seen to be faltering in the 60s and 1970s
 This is in a sharp contrast to what happened in the years starting with 1979 . This was in a stark contrast to the years beginning with 1979, when the first World War II was formed .
 Operation Able Archer 83 was actually a confluence of events that led to the severe deterioration of relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . What made the operation sound so dangerous to the Soviets was actually the result of a combination of events .
 I have found 7 overarching developments and 2 unfortunately timed events that could have led the Soviets to a belief that an American attack is imminent . I have also found 2 unfortunate timed events in which the Soviets may have thought an attack would be imminent .
 The first development that is said to signal the breakdown of the détente was the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . The invasion raised the suspicions of both sides .
 The intervention in itself was a surprise to the West, it was an accumulation of events that necessitated the foray of the Soviet Union . The intervention was a result of a series of events leading to the intervention .
 The Soviet Politburo decided to send 30 thousand troops into Afghanistan to shore up the government of its client state . After numerous requests for help by the Socialist oriented government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, the Socialist-oriented government requested help .
 The gains of the mujahideen, the local tribal fighting groups, were reversed . However, the situation went exactly the other way the Soviet leadership imagined . The gains were reversed, and the situation was reversed .
 This was one of the first occasions when a modern major power had to fight an insurgency with a military conceived for conventional warfare . This was the first time a major power has fought an insurgency against a major military that was designed to be conventional .
 The Soviet military machine was caught unprepared in this kind of warfare . In 1988, it had to withdraw its troops without a lasting solution for South Asian country .
 The United States had taken its time to respond to the unfolding events but covertly armed the mujahideen even in the late 1970s . The U.S. took its time, but the United States did not respond quickly .
 The Carter Doctrine stipulated that the United States will defend the Persian Gulf and use military force against any country which tries to destabilize or take control over the energy-rich region . Geostrategically, the U.S. responded with the Carter Doctrine which stipulated the United
 For the Soviet Union, the organization of the 1980 Summer Olympics was a prestige issue . No Eastern European country has ever organized a Summer Olympics game before . The Soviet Union organized the games for the first time .
 The United States reasoned that the invasion of Afghanistan was against the international norms, therefore it will not send any athletes to the Olympic Games . The U.S. believes the invasion was against international norms .
 The American public widely supported it and the United States also tried to rally other countries around its cause . Muhammad Ali sent Muhammad Ali to several African nations to gather support .
 The boycott included some Muslim countries which refused to participate due to the invasion of Afghanistan, a fellow Muslim nation, but did so not because of the call of the United States . This diplomatic step really hurt the Soviets’ image and elevated the Afghanistan issue to worldwide media level .
 The U.S. imposed a grain and high-tech embargo on the Soviets, in addition to suspending the SALT II ratification in the Congress and increasing the United States naval presence in the Indian Ocean region . The United States also imposed an embargo on Soviet grain and technology, and increased
 None of these measures could sway the Soviet Union to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan . It maintained troops there until 1988 .
 The Soviet Union and the United States were in the midst of a more confrontational period . But all of this was just the run-up to the Soviet-U.S. confrontation .
 The political life of the Cold War was heavily personalized, therefore a change in the détente can also have been contributed to personal changes . The Cold War can also be seen as a personal factor in changing the political life . Détente may have been a result of personal changes,
 In 1979 Margaret Thatcher was elected Prime Minister in the United Kingdom . Thatcher was the first Prime Minister to be elected in the UK .
 Ronald Reagan's election in 1980s changed the political landscape of the U.S. The election of Ronald Reagan in the United States changed the world's political landscape . Reagan's victory in the 1980s was one of the key moments in American politics .
 He ran on an anti-communist and confrontational platform . He won in a landslide against the then-incumbent Jimmy Carter .
 The people of the U.S. demanded a stronger president in the face of the Iranian hostage crisis and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . President George W. Bush was elected to the presidency in 1973 .
 This vision was based on the rollback strategy of John Foster Dulles and can be deemed quite aggressive in its aims . Dulles' vision is based on his strategy to rollback the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 What was later called the Reagan Doctrine was actually a strategy captured in the NSC National Security Decision Directives 75 . The NSC's decision to adopt the Reagan doctrine was captured in NSC decision-making directives .
 This will remain the primary focus of U.S. policy toward the USSR . But at the same time, it also stipulated that the United States should engage in negotiations with the Soviet Union .
 Reagan Doctrine stated that outreach must be made to anti-communist proxy forces, like the mujahideen in Afghanistan . While strides have been made in this military buildup, the target was never reached .
 Reagan Doctrine was the single most important strategic feature of the Reagan Doctrine . The Reagan Doctrine contributed enormously to the way the Soviets later perceived the Operation Able Archer 83 .
 Had it not been for this assertive rollback strategy, the Soviets would not have been in a mindset anticipating a first-strike from the U.S. at any given moment .
 The system would have used then-non-existing technologies, like space-based lasers for exoatmospheric interception and ground-based interceptors with kill vehicles . The system was developed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The whole concept struck apprehension into the hearts and minds of Soviet military and political leaders . The system would have broken down the pillars of mutually assured destruction and opened up the possibility of a U.S. first-strike without fear of retaliation .
 The breakdown of MAD would have been a disaster in itself for the Soviets . It signaled a huge technological discrepancy between the two states and forced the Soviet Union to play catch-up .
 The fifth development, and one of the most important, was the so-called Euromissile Crisis . This development – while still relatively new at the time of the Operation Archer 83 – influenced the Soviet calculus, since they weren’t sure what capabilities the United States already possesses
 It was a period of tit-for-tat missile deployment in Europe that lasted from 1979 up until the signing of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty in 1987 .
 The transporter-erector-launcher made it road-mobile whereas the previous ones had fixed position launchers . While the missile in itself was not a huge jump over the previously deployed SS-4s and SS-5s .
 NATO was forced to counter this by the so-called double-track decision . NATO has been criticized for the 'double-track' decision by NATO .
 Neither did change the military calculus by much but it forced the parties to enter brinkmanship . The U.S. and Russia entered the brinkmanship on the peninsula .
 These were operations specifically designed to make the Soviets feel uneasy and expose holes in their early warning systems . These operations were designed specifically to make Soviet forces feel uneasy .
 The U.S. conducted naval and air operations around the clock which were meant to gather intelligence about Soviet radar sites, early warning intelligence operations, troop movements and placements . Most importantly they were to strike a sense of uncertainty into the minds of the Soviets .
 Starting in 1981, U.S. bombers conducted surprise operations directly towards the Soviets border, then veered off course, and United States attack submarines practiced attacks on Soviet ballistic missile submarines under the North Pole . All of this was done irregularly and without any observable patterns .
 United States intelligence ships snooping for data and aircraft carriers practicing naval air operations were stationed near Soviet coasts .
 The United States conducted the FLEETEX 83 naval exercise in the Pacific . The exercise is described by some as one of the most powerful gathering of naval armada in history . It is described as a one-of-the-most powerful gathering .
 The SDI included 3 carrier battle groups with thousands of sailors . It happened few weeks after Reagan’s televised speech of the SDI .
 The exercise was aimed at antisubmarine and antiaircraft warfare . Aircrafts deliberately forced the Soviets to turn on their search radars to have a fix on their positions .
 The Soviets are devising a plan to counter Soviet strategic nuclear forces . The plan was not unusual and uncommon in and of itself .
 Operation RYaN was an unprecedented intelligence gathering operation about a potential surprise U.S. attack, which is our last, seventh, development . The Soviet Union, fearing a likely first-strike from the US, initiated the Operation YaN . The operation was a massive intelligence
 It is debated whether this was a reactionary measure to the American PSYOPs or to the worsening strategicpolitical situation . The U.S. has not responded to the situation in Syria .
 Operation RYaN was an intelligence alert that required each rezidentura and intelligence agency to swoop up as much intelligence as possible on US/NATO political and strategic developments, as well as on the nuclear balance .
 Starting in the 1970s, it was an intelligence data analysis model – a sort of precursor to today’s big data algorithmsthat weighed around 40000 data points regarding military, political and economic situation of the USSR vis a vis the United States .
 The model was based on the World War II logic that if the correlation of the forces was heavily skewed towards the United States then they would attempt a first-strike against the Soviet Union . The U.S. would then attempt to strike against Soviet Union in a first strike .
 The leaders of the project demanded huge intelligence data inflows so the RYaN model can present them with an accurate picture . The system had to be constantly updated with new data, and the leaders demanded huge data .
 If the score was above 70 (or even above 60, according to some officials), the Soviet Union was roughly on par with the United States and was considered safe from a first-strike . The score was roughly 70, or above 60 .
 As the international situation got more precarious, the score began to diminish, and subsequently, the intelligence officers demanded more and more precise data . The score was diminished as the situation in the Middle East got worse .
 The accuracy of the model is heavily debated and is considered imprecise but this did not stop the Soviet leadership to shudder in fear as they were weekly fed the information .
 The concoction of these overlapping strategic developments made this period particularly dangerous and with the militaries on a hair trigger, the two superpowers were often dead reckoning the unfolding situation . The concoctions of these overlings made it particularly dangerous .
 These strategic factors were accompanied by two unfortunately timed events . The U.S. government has been forced to withdraw from the U.K. as a result of the government's actions .
 The plane entered Soviet Airspace twice over the Kamchatka Peninsula in the Northern Pacific region but was shot down in international airspace . The plane had entered Soviet air space twice but was later shot down .
 The move sparked huge international backlash with the United States trying to rally likeminded nations against the Soviet Union to impose commercial boycotts and the denial of landing rights of Russian planes .
 The Soviet leadership was adamant in its position that the plane was spying as part of a Japanese-American reconnaissance mission . The plane was believed to have been part of the mission .
 After FLEETEX 83 exercise, Soviet air defenses of the region were put on alert, therefore, any overflight over Soviet territory could have been perilous . After the exercise, the Soviet air defense was put on .
 This event further exacerbated the tensions between the two rivals . This event provided the rationale for both sides to criticize the other . Both sides have been critical of each other .
 On September 26, 1983, the newly developed Soviet early warning satellite, called Oko, provided a false alarm about an American ICBM launch . Oko was the first Soviet satellite to provide an early warning of an ICBM .
 Around this time period, the precursor exercises to Operation Able Archer 83, the Atlantic Forge and Reforger were still ongoing . The Atlantic Forge was still ongoing at the time .
 The early warning satellite reported five Minuteman II ICBM launches from the United States homeland . It saw the launches due to their infrared signatures from the U.S. homeland . The satellite was able to detect the launches using infrared .
 Ground-based early warning radars could not have a trace on any missiles, Lt. Lt. Cevallos said . The ground-based radars were not able to detect missiles, he said .
 Colonel Petrov decided to act against all odds and called it a false alarm . Petrov: "I'm not afraid. I'm not scared" Petrov said .
 Later it turned out that he probably saved the world because of his gut instinct . Later it was later revealed that he saved it because he had a gut instinct to do so .
 The alleged heat signatures were actually reflections of sunlight from high-altitude clouds . The heat signatures are actually reflected by sunlight .
 An investigation into the Oko system found numerous flaws which were not exactly surprising since not even Lt. Lt. Cevallos said he was surprised by the system's flaws .
 The Soviet military leaders were apprehensive because their satellite-based early warning system was not functioning properly . The ground-based radars could only acquire ICBMs after they passed the horizon, thus limiting the time available for deliberating a counterstrike .
 Economically, the Soviet Union became stuck in a period of stagnation in which between 1981 and 1985 its GDP expanded only at an annualized 1,9 percent . The United States grew by 3,4 percent in the same time period . The Soviet Union's GDP grew by only 1,
 Soviet Union spent 20 percent of their GDP on military expenditures . Their agricultural sector was also in shambles, but it did not deter the Soviet Union .
 Both the air and naval legs of the Soviet nuclear triad were vulnerable . Air and naval arms were vulnerable to Soviet nuclear weapons .
 Soviet leadership would have had 3 minutes of warning while the Pershing II would be able to strike in 6 minutes, potentially making a decapitation strike feasible . The Soviet Union had a really crude early warning system in the late 1970 and early 1980s .
 While developments were ongoing, it was still considered only partially reliable, something a military leader does not want to hear when it comes to nuclear issues . While developments are ongoing, the situation is still not considered reliable .
 The USSR also lacked a ‘nuclear football’, a mobile nuclear control center in the form of a briefcase from which a nuclear strike could be authorized . The USSR did not have a nuclear football, a device that could be used to launch a strike .
 The Soviets were also seemingly unable to keep up with the U.S. in space . The Soviets also seemed to be too slow to keep pace with the United States .
 The Columbia Space Shuttle would theoretically be able to lob ordnance at the Soviet Union from the space . A prime example of this technological discrepancy was the Columbia space Shuttle .
 The blend of these seven overarching developments, the strategic inferiority of the USSR and two unfortunately timed events caused a sort of paranoia in the Politburo, thinking they are strategically insecure to an American surprise attack . The combination of these 7 overarching developments led to paranoia, the author says .
 There is a clash between opinions about this exercise, as many say it was the peak of the 1983 war scare and a nuclear faceoff was imminent between the superpowers . Many are saying that this was the height of the 'war scare'
 Before assessing the credibility of the claims here is a short description of the exercise . The claims were made in a bid to raise awareness of the project .
 NATO assessed their command, control and communications capabilities in the event of a nuclear war . It was an annual ten-day command post exercise in which NATO assesses their command and control capabilities .
 It was the culmination of a months-long exercise series which also included the Autumn Forge and the Reforger 83 . Tens of thousands of NATO troops were moved throughout Europe .
 Orange retaliates in the form of an invasion of Yugoslavia, Finland, and eventually Norway . Orange invades Yugoslavia and Finland, before invading Norway and Finland .
 Blue defends its allies and conventional war descends into chemical, and eventually nuclear war . Blue defends allies and goes on to defend allies against chemical warfare .
 This reduction is reportedly attributed to the U.S. National Security Advisor Robert McFarlane because it would have made the exercise too high-profile . The reduction is said to be a result of a decision by McFarlane .
 NATO simulated an elevation up until DEFCON 1 which would have meant that a nuclear war was imminent . The exercise was part of a NATO exercise to simulate a possible nuclear war .
 The exercise ended abruptly on November 11 after reaching DEFCON 1 . But, from the perspective of the Soviets, the exercise ended somewhat abruptly .
 Forces on both sides were winding down and the chance of war dropped considerably . The chance of a war between the two sides was dropped considerably in the 1980s .
 If exercise had continued even 24 hours ‘the West might have unwittingly stumbled into a nuclear holocaust’, former CIA officer says . But even if the Soviets were indeed alarming their forces for a possible nuclear exchange, some in Soviet perches say that they did not even know about
 The Autumn Forge and Reforger are the most dangerous military exercises in the world . They were deemed dangerous by the U.S. military, but knew about the precursors .
 It was one of the general tenets of the Soviet doctrines to keep a close eye on the adversaries military exercises . But it would have been very unusual if the Soviets did not know about any NATO exercise .
 The Soviet leadership was most probably frightened because of the military exercises . The United States Intelligence Community and NATO was not aware or did not want to make others aware of the gravity of the exercise in Soviet eyes .
 The 1984 Special National Intelligence Estimate concluded that while in their view there was a general paranoia and war scare in their perks, the Soviets did not anticipate an imminent attack on their homeland .
 The American population was also true of the American population as well, according to CNN.com .
 No wonder that at this time came out the famous movie about the aftermath of a nuclear war, The Day After . The film was released in 1945 .
 Even President Reagan was stunned when he saw it . Reagan was questioning whether the exercises could be interpreted wrongly by the Soviets .
 The PFIAB report cites the tilting balance of power in military-strategic terms as a reason for that . It cites the deterioration of relations between the two countries .
 Report concludes that the CIA’s 1984 SNIE report of the war scare underestimated the risks at the time of the exercise . This very same report also concludes that .
 Newly declassified documents show that the SNIE report was indeed understated . The report was ‘sanitized’ before handing it over to other NATO members .
 NATO and the USSR knew about each other’s war plans and could distinguish between a military exercise or preparations for a war . But even in the wake of these assessments, some are questioning the severity of the situation by saying that NATO and USSR knew each other's war plans .
 The U.S. leadership could not grasp the whole gravity because of two reasons . While, based on this information, it does seem that the war scare was indeed real in the Soviet leadership and they really did take some measures .
 The Soviets felt that they were falling behind the United States both in economic and military terms . Now, we know that was not the case . The U.S. was not behind the Soviet Union in economic terms .
 Operation Able Archer 83 itself could have been a catalyst for a nuclear exchange . There is a dispute about whether it was a catalyst to a nuclear attack .
 Operation RyaN is the most responsible for the war scare, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says it was the most successful operation in the world's history of war scare scare . Operation 'RyaN' is the 'most responsible' for the scare scare,
 It made the USSR realize that the U.S. will leave them behind in the long-run, that made them feel anxious . The USSR realized that the United States left them behind . That made them anxious .
 The exercise series would have been fairly routine if it had not been for the damaged relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States . The exercises were conducted in the Soviet-U.S. military exercise series in the 1980s .
 It was such a tense period because the Soviets could have thought that the strategic situation and the exercises themselves would have been a good ruse for a surprise attack . The Soviets may have thought it was a ruse that they would have thought the exercises were a good idea .
 It would have been a really short-sighted way of thinking from the U.S. to use the wargames as a cover for what would most likely have been the destruction of the Soviet Union but with US/NATO losses in the millions .
 If perceived weakness is seen in an adversary, it opens up the possibility for a decapitation strike . As a counterpoint one could say that, if a perceived weakness was seen, it could also be a possible target .
 U.S. has to bear the consequences for it, CNN's John Sutter says . "In this case, it was not worth it for the United States," he says . Sutter: "In each case, each case has to be dealt with the consequences"
 It is also possible that some in the military and intelligence brass did not interpret the U.S. position correctly or did not want to see it differently .
 While there are certain second-hand experiences in my work, these cannot be called purely unbiased, and the lack of true first-hand evidence does not make it possible to provide a real answer to this question .
 Documents that assume that the USSR had every right to fear an imminent attack but there are others which challenge it by saying that the Soviets knew that this was just an exercise but they did take steps to alert their troops nevertheless .
 The sheer range of different opinions on this issue keeps me from providing one answer to the question whether the Soviets were fearing and preparing for an immediate U.S. first-strike .
 The conclusion of the research paper will be based on my opinion on the 1983 Soviet war scare regardless of any first or second-hand account, and solely based on the events leading up to it, as well as on the strategic balance between the superpowers .
 The Soviet Union knew Operation Able Archer 83 and its precursors were just exercises . But nonetheless they did anticipate an American first-strike under the guise of the exercises . There are no conclusive evidence that the Soviet leadership was actively preparing for a preemptive or counterstrike .
 A few more documents will be declassified both on the American and Russian side, we can strengthen this conclusion or even arrive at a completely different one . Maybe if more documents are declassified, we might strengthen the conclusion, perhaps even more .
 With Japan’s role rapidly changing in the 21st century, I think it is important to know the peculiarities of their constitution, and how it is affecting regional and global politics . The constitution of Japan's constitution is an important part of the country's constitution .
 But to understand their constitution we must understand under what circumstances it was written . We need to understand under which circumstances it is written, he says .
 To see how this limitation on the army was slowly but surely circumvented over the years of the Cold War. Furthermore, to see how it was slowly slowly but slowly circumvented by the army .
 Finally, how the constitution is moving inevitably towards complete abandonment . How the constitution moves inevitably towards completely abandonment .
 My paper will focus on the military aspects of the Japanese disarmament and the legality of certain weapons . It will also examine the legality and legality of some weapons in Japan .
 The first Japanese constitution was the Meiji constitution enacted in 1890 . It was enacted in the wake of the Second World War II .
 It was based on the Prussian/German and British model because the United States’ was deemed too liberal and the French and Spanish were deemed too despotic . The United States was deemed to be too liberal because of the liberalism .
 The constitution gave considerable power to the Emperor . However, in theory, the Prime minister was the actual leader of the government .
 "The most important point of the constitution was Article 11. In the context of my paper, I think Article 11 is Article 11," he said .
 Allies met in Potsdam to discuss Japan in the waning days of World War II . The Allies met with the Allies to discuss the Japanese invasion of Japan .
 Truman, Churchill, and Chiang Kai-shek outlined the Japanese terms of surrender . Truman and Churchill outlined the surrender terms in a letter .
 After the US dropped two atomic bombs and the Soviets invaded Manchuria with 1. million soldiers, the Japanese were shocked sufficiently to surrender on August 15 . The Japanese surrendered after the invasion .
 The Allies occupied Japan, lead by the Supreme Commander of the Allies Forces Douglas MacArthur . Douglas MacArthur led the invasion of Japan .
 He was adamant that new constitution should be made with the Japanese and not forced upon them . He insisted new constitution was not made with Japanese and should not be forced .
 The Japanese were reluctant to rewrite the original Meiji constitution so they just made minor adjustments . The original constitution was published in Meiji, Japan .
 MacArthur rejected this and ordered his staff to write a new one from scratch . MacArthur rejected the idea and wrote a new version of the book . MacArthur's staff ordered a new book to be written from scratch.
 Authors took the old constitution into account and also took the advice of Minister Shidehara to add an article to prevent Japan from declaring war . Even though the authors were not Japanese they took into account .
 The new constitution was completed in less than a week on 13 February 1946 . It was the first constitution to be completed in under a week .
 It was enacted on 3 May 1947 as a continuation of the previous constitution, not as a new one . The constitution was enacted in 1947 as it was not a new constitution but a continuation .
 The Japanese people renounce war as a sovereign right of the nation . They renounce the threat or use of force as means of settling international disputes . Aspiring sincerely to an international peace based on justice and order, the Japanese people .
 In order to accomplish the aim of the preceding paragraph, land, sea, and air forces, as well as other war potential, will never be maintained . Land, sea and air force must be maintained in order to achieve the aim .
 The right of belligerency of the state will not be recognized . In effect, this article prevented Japan from raising an army, however, global politics steered things in a different direction .
 MacArthur ordered the creation of the National Police Reserve to maintain order . This left Japan defenseless and without armed protection, so he created the Reserve . MacArthur ordered it to maintain the order and maintain order in Japan .
 The Japan Self-Defense Forces started out as a force of 75,000 men armed with light infantry equipment . The Self-Defence Force is now the largest force in the world .
 Their main job was to maintain order in post-war Japan instead of the Allied troops . They were tasked with maintaining order in the country .
 There was some debate whether to allow a partial remilitarization of Japan, however, these ideas were dismissed by MacArthur .
 MacArthur insisted that the conflict in the neighboring country would resonate throughout the world so a strong police force was necessary . The police reserve was structured as an army, so even from the beginning there were some contradictions .
 MacArthur saw the defeat in Korea so he decided that the Japanese “police” would need something stronger than small arms to defeat the T34s . MacArthur decided that he would need a stronger armament .
 To avoid breaking the newly formed constitution they gave all military equipment civilian names, so tanks became special purpose vehicles . To avoid break the constitution, they gave them civilian names .
 The police force was transformed into a defense force with the primary goal of defending Japan from a perceived invasion . It was hard to explain why a police force needed tanks .
 As the reserve grew and more equipment was arriving, the need for experienced officers also grew . The reserve grew as more equipment and more experienced officers were arriving .
 The need for heavy equipment was dire because of the heavy motorization of communist forces, says the Soviet Union .
 There was considerable debate whether former military officers could be reinstated into the police force . But despite some opposition, the need for a well trained force was greater . There was also some opposition to reinstatement of ex-military officers .
 By 1952 the size of the NPR was more than 110,000 and was renamed National Safety Forces . By 1952 it had more than 100,000 troops .
 A separate branch was added as the coastguard units were within the NPR . Now they became separate as the Coastal Safety Force .
 Even from the beginning the lightly armed police force quickly became the last line of defense against perceived communist forces . We can see that even from the . beginning of the . start of the police force, even from . the . police force . quickly became a last line . of defense .
 Former military officers joined the police and because of the heavy weapons the militarization began . Both required the expertise of former military officers, which joined police .
 Since Japan cannot have an army, the police force had to defend the Islands . The police force defended the Islands with the help of an army .
 Since Japan cannot declare war it is impossible for the army to prosecute it . Since Japan can't declare war, the army cannot prosecute it. It is impossible to do so .
 The emphasis is on defense because others can declare war on Japan again . However, because of the possibility of a repeat of war, the emphasis is still on defense .
 "I will try to analyze certain aspects of the JSDF like funding, equipment, and personnel to determine whether it’s an army or not," he says . He says he will analyze funding and equipment to determine if it's an army .
 The JSDF has an active personnel count of 247k and a reserve of 56k . The budget is fixed at only 1% of the GDP, however, the government circumvents this by assigning certain equipment and tasks the JSDF does as civilian .
 The $41 billion budget however still makes Japan the world’s 7th largest military spender . However, considering the 1% limitation, it is the 17th in the world .
 It is widely regarded as one of the world’s best anti-submarine and minesweeper fleets . Recently they started to focus on antimissile warfare, adapting it in 2003 .
 The threat of nuclear submarines lessened the threat from North Korea and China Grew. The changes were due to adapting to post-cold war tactics .
 She has a full flight deck and is similar in every aspect to a traditional carrier . But it is classified on Lloyd’s Register as a helicopter carrier .
 Bush's complement of 90 jets is still enough to level most countries leadership in minutes . Bush’s complement of . 90 jets it is still . still still . enough to . level most . countries leadership .
 The approximate size of the ground forces is 150k active personnel and 30k reserve . There are 150,000 active personnel, 30,000 reserve personnel .
 During the Cold War, the primary strategic mission of the JGSDF was to hold off a possible Soviet invasion of Hokkaido . In recent times, the mission has changed to counter Chinese threats with a huge emphasis on areas that are disputed between the two countries .
 While it might not have the numbers to contend with neighboring countries’ armies, it is definitely an army . While it may not have a large army, the army is definitely a strong force .
 "The organizational structure, equipment, the doctrines all point toward it being an army," says President Obama . "The organization structure, the equipment and the doctrines ... all point to it being a army," he says .
 In a 1988 survey over 74% of the people were favorably impressed by the JSDF . 76% of those surveyed saw disaster relief as its primary role .
 First, the physical defense of the island itself, fighting anyone who wants to invade Japan . Second, the defense of Japan itself, against any invasion .
 Growing force of neighboring countries poses a threat to Japan and they need to defend themselves from any aggression . Japan needs to defend itself against any aggression from neighboring countries .
 International law can be used as a preemptive self-defense against a country posing an instant overwhelming threat, leaving no choice of means and no moment for deliberation . Thirdly, the imminent threat as described in international law can also be used in preemptive defense against an imminent threat .
 Japans interest in the world must be defended which in itself creates 2 versions of the world . Lastly, the world is at stake in the battle to defend .
 The first one being Japanese citizens anywhere in the world, the second one being Japans allies . The second one is the first being a Japanese citizen, and the second being an ally .
 The rhetoric behind the latter is that if Japans allies are attacked it would weaken Japan so it is self-defense . Japan has a right to defend itself if it is attacked by its allies .
 Shinzo Abe veering the country into a more active foreign policy, it is moving into the 4th Category . It started out as 1st then quickly turned into the 2nd and 3rd Category .
 The 3rd category is obviously off limits to Japan because there is no legal way to declare war . Japan is not allowed to use the third category because of the lack of a legal way of declaring war .
 As I described it before, the usage of offensive weapons is strictly forbidden . As I . described it . before, usage of . offensive weapons are strictly forbidden in the U.S.
 These weapons include ICBMs, nuclear weapons, aircraft carriers and/or bomber fleets . These weapons are used in the U.S. military .
 I will now describe the current situation of each of these weapons in Japan . Each of the weapons is considered to be a weapon of choice .
 Japan has a very developed and active commercial space program . Inter Continental Ballistic Missiles are forbidden, however, Japan has an active commercial program .
 If the solid fuel rockets were converted to ballistic missiles, they would be comparable to the LGM-118A Peacekeeper ICBMs used by the USA 2.2 .
 In 2012 Japan had enough plutonium to produce 1000 warheads and additional plutonium in Europe for a further 4000 warheads . In 2012 the country was able to produce enough plutonium for 1000 warheads .
 The previous point also explains that they could have the necessary delivery system . The delivery system could also be able to be used in the future .
 I have already explained the ambiguousness of the “helicopter destroyers” and in my opinion, they should be considered carriers . I have also explained that the ‘destroyers’ should not be considered ‘defenders’
 A major increase of Japans forces wouldn’t necessarily mean war potential because she is merely defending herself from a much larger force . Proponents argue that since some neighbors of Japan, specifically China, has a significantly larger army .
 We can see that almost anything short of changing the constitution has been done to create an army . The army is being used to create a stateless army, the government has said .
 After the war Japan was disillusioned and humiliated, the imperial and nationalistic tendencies were abandoned . The Constitution Pacifism was created after the war in Japan .
 The new government adopted pacifism to prevent the country from going to war again . New government wanted to prevent another disaster and adopt pacifism .
 The idea of pacifism since then has become a major part of the culture . There is a considerable backlash against every law that would suggest a more warlike state, even though that is prohibited still .
 The recent bill introduced in 2014 which I will discuss later is opposed by 54% of the population while only 29% supported it . Only 29% of those who supported it supported it. The bill was introduced in the 2014 which will be discussed later in this article .
 This brings up the question whether the population truly supports pacifism or just opposes the bill since Japan has an already well-developed army . The bill is expected to be signed by President Obama .
 We can see that the government is using every loophole it can find to expand the power of the army . Irrelevance is the government's use of every loophole to expand its power .
 Find alternative ways to finance the army to compensate for the 1% GDP limit . Classifying carriers as “helicopter destroyers” and attacking the very words of the constitution are just a few examples .
 International politics force countries to abandon values they might hold dear . But bending the law is much easier. Think about the USA PATRIOT Act and we can clearly see that abandoning certain points in the constitution is hard .
 Japan will likely not abandon clause 9, however, it will pass a series of laws that will inevitably damage the spirit of the clause itself . The general population’s deep-seated love and belief in pacifism we can see .
 This means that the JSDF would be able to come to the aid and defend allies in trouble, as opposed to the use of strict self-defense . This would be the first time that the military has been able to defend allies .
 Prime Minister said this would not mean that Japan would be involved in any land war, but would act as a deterrent . The prime minister said that this would be a deterrent to Japan .
 Japan would be able to help the U.S. or other allies directly (protecting shipping, convoys, bases) but still without deploying troops . Japan could help the United States or allies directly but not deploy troops .
 This reinterpretation uses the broadest meaning of self-defense to argue that if an ally is attacked Japan itself would weaken . This is the case of self defense .
 When the idea of pacifism must be defended with force we inevitably get into the quagmire violating said pacifism . The idea of defending pacifism with force is a violation of the pacifism, writes David Cameron .
 The leaders of a country must defend it from actual or perceived threats, the country's population may believe in peaceful coexistence but again, the reality is different . Leaders of a nation must defend their country from actual threats, says the author .
 Japan was diplomatically isolated from neighboring countries since the II World War; but this tendency has changed . Japan is now less isolated with neighboring countries .
 North Korea is looming over the whole region and it can explode like a powder keg . However, we can see also that the threat of North Korea looms over the region . The threat of the North Korea can also be seen as a threat to the region, says CNN's John De
 The vote to abandon article 9 and “remilitarizing” Japan will definitely change the East-Asian balance of power somewhat . But we also have to understand that not being able to use diplomatic means, that all neighboring countries can, is a severe hindrance .
 While we can argue about whether Japan has an army or not, we can certainly say that the abandonment of one is the special circumstance, not the reestablishment .
 If Japan chooses to create an official army again then it will only return to a normal state, where a country can have one, and not to a state of extreme militarism . Japan will not have an official military, but it will not be militaristic enough to have one .
 The neighbors perceive that they have a strategic advantage over Japan . Even if there is a de facto army they can out-produce it anytime, they can, say the neighbors .
 If Japan increases its military spending then Korea and China will have to do the same even if they want to avoid it . China and Korea will need to increase their military spending to avoid the problem .
 We can consider that the Article 9 at this point is a hindrance for Japan, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 This country has already a well-developed army, global presence, and diplomatic weight to influence global politics . It is already well-known for its military presence and influence on global politics.
 While it can be seen as a rearmament process, we interpret it just as a technicality, especially because of the already existing navy and army . We interpret it as simply as a Technicality .
 Although it is certain that U.S. supports Japan, Korea and China, it will definitely try to convince Japan to keep its pacifist policy . The U. S. supports Korea, Korea, China and China .
 On the long run, we can hypothesize that the restriction could be abandoned . However, it’s impredictable its effects especially having North Koreas as neighbor .
 It was one of the most delicate situations of the Cold War, one in which Cold War could have become an actual war . The Cold War was a delicate situation in which it could have been a war .
 Histiography mainly focused on the development of relations between the two blocs . When trying to interpret the crisis, historiography focused on relations between Russia and the West .
 In order to fully understand the significance of the crisis, we have to focus on relations within the Eastern bloc . Recently, however, it has been noted that, in . order to understand the . significance of this crisis, focus should be on Eastern bloc relations, it was noted .
 The aim of this work is, first of all, to effectuate an analysis of the main facts in the ‘traditional’ way of conflict between the two antagonist blocs .
 I would like to analyze the internal dynamics between the Eastern bloc in order to show how important they were during the evolution of crisis . Then, and this will constitute the core part of the paper, I would also analyze internal dynamics . The Eastern bloc was important during the development of crisis,
 In particular, it will be explored the ambiguous relationship between the Eastern Germany leadership and the Soviet Union leadership, which during the course of the crisis became at times tense .
 The construction of the wall -in retrospect and with the benefit of hindsight - was seen as an acceptable outcome for all parties involved in the crisis .
 Berlin had strategic importance during the Cold War years . The city of Berlin was strategic importance in the 1950s and 1960s . Berlin was a key ally of the Soviet Union in the Soviet-Russian alliance .
 Berlin's special status and responsibilities of the allied powers towards the city were never just a national question, but they were always connected with East-West relations . Because of this special status, the problems connected to Berlin were never national question . Berlin's problems were not just national question but they
 Western-dominated part of the city was considered the outpost of freedom and the showcase of the West . It soon became evident the superior appeal of Occidental democracy and free market economy .
 The cultural and ideal link with the West shaped the roots of the city's identity . Two different and antithetical systems had to cohabit in the same city, which was not to be found anywhere else .
 East Germany feared that in a not too far-off future the economy would collapse . East Germany's economy was feared to collapse in the 1980s .
 Table shows flow of people fleeing East Berlin from 1950 until the edification of the Berlin Wall . Table below shows the flow of refugees from East Berlin .
 After a peak in 1953, the massive emigration gained again momentum in 1960 . Emigrants began emigrating in the 1950s and 1960s . The emigrants began to emigrate in 1953 .
 The long-serving Secretary of the SED and deus ex machina of the GDR Walter Ulbricht became increasingly concerned with the massive emigration of people . The long .serving Secretary . of the . SED . became increasingly . concerned with . the massive . emigration
 In late 1957, he promoted a strong campaign against the Republikflucht . He was a strong opponent of the German government .
 The people who tried to escape from the GDR were threatened with up to three years in jail . They were threatened to be punished with a three year jail term .
 Even Khrushchev said that the situation “was not normal” and accused the Western Powers of exploiting West Berlin to organize subversive activities in the GDR . The Soviets were very concerned with the possible nuclear build-up of the Federal Republic .
 The Foreign Ministers of France, the United Kingdom and the United States reaffirmed their determination to maintain their position and their rights with respect to Berlin including the right of free access to Berlin .
 They found unacceptable a unilateral repudiation by the Soviet Government of its obligations to the Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the United States in relation to their presence in Berlin and the freedom of access .
 Khrushchev had begun the crisis without knowing where his bullish stance would lead and without clarifying which consequences a missed agreement with the Western Powers would have . It must be stressed that some say he began the crisis in 1953 without knowing what would happen .
 In March 1959, his lack of a clear vision caused him to retire the ultimatum he had handed the Western Powers a few months prior . The lack of clear vision led him to quit the Western World War II .
 The crisis would come back on the table of negotiations at the Conference of Foreign Ministries in Geneva in May-August 1959 .
 The two opposing parties decided to try to solve the question in Camp David in September 1959 . Despite some attempts, perhaps a little tentative, to solve it, no agreement was reached in Geneva .
 Eisenhower invited Khrushchev but even this meeting turned out to be inconclusive . Eisenhower invited the Soviet leader to meet with him in Washington, D.C.
 The Soviet leader promised that in the future he would avoid sending ultimatums . Nevertheless, he promised that he would not send an ultimatum .
 Khrushchev and Eisenhower enjoyed a good personal relationship, which was however brought to an end by the U2 accident . This contributed, for a while, to a decrease in tensions .
 It is not clear if the U2 accident contributed to the worsening of relations between US and USSR . Khrushchev sought a pretext to start the crisis over again, writes Peter Bergen .
 Khrushchev affirmed that he did not want to negotiate with Eisenhower any longer . Khrushchevitch said he wanted to end negotiations with Eisenhower . Eisenhower said he would not negotiate with him .
 The Republican President had almost arrived at the end of his second term . At the beginning of 1961, he was replaced by John F Kennedy .
 Eisenhower could not deny the plane intentions and Khrushchev, to further increase U.S. uneasiness, decided to publicly criticize the fact . Eisenhower was forced to admit that the plane had been carrying on .
 The Soviet leader handed Kennedy a memorandum, which more or less resembled the 1958 ultimatum . Kennedy handed the memorandum to the Soviet leader .
 Kennedy told Khrushchev that he would accept the USSR’s right to sign a separate peace with the GDR, but the U.S. did not want the Soviet Union to unilaterally modify West Berlin . The United States didn't want the USSR to unilaterally alter West Berlin�
 The Soviet leader, after the abortive invasion of Cuba by US-backed anti-communist exiles, was convinced that Kennedy was an inexperienced adversary . In turn, also the American President did not rule out that war was a possibility .
 For first time since the start of the crisis the two superpowers openly threatened a nuclear war . For the first time they have openly threatened nuclear war, they openly threatened to go to war . North Korea and the U.S. have been at odds for decades .
 The situation was especially risky because the two rivals did not define the casus belli . It remained unclear for both parties what was negotiable and what was not . What they could concede to the opponent and what instead could not be object .
 The original rights in the whole of Berlin were no longer considered of vital interest . He was even available to negotiate with East Germany .
 British Premier MacMillan would have been ‘available’ to “get closer” to the Soviet Union . France’s de Gaulle was rather content with the American attitude, but did not want to modify the four powers presence in Berlin .
 The flow of East Germans who went to West Berlin further increased . While the two superpowers faced each other and the Soviet frustration grew stronger because of the impossibility to modify the status quo .
 The sealing off proceeded in stages – at the beginning “with barbed wire and only later by the construction of a concrete wall, all on Sovietcontrolled territory . The sealing of the Soviet-controlled territory began in stages “at the beginning of the . beginning ‘with bar
 East German leadership was partially soothed as the outflow of people strongly decreased even though it did not come to a complete stop . However, the East German leaders were not able to stop the flow of people .
 The GDR government recognized the border between East and West as a state frontier between the two sides of the border . So they abandoned the claim for the entire Berlin as part of the territory of East Germany .
 The GDR de facto respected the three essentials and so military countermeasures were not taken into consideration . A few weeks after the division of Berlin, Soviets and Americans troops directly faced each other .
 The barrier that was erected – which de facto prevented access to the western sectors by East Germans - made it possible to solve the Berlin crisis in practice . The barrier prevented East Germans from entering the West, but allowed it to Westerners .
 The larger German problem could be solved only at the end of the cold war . However, the larger German . problem could not be . solved only .
 On July 25, 1963, after negotiating a moratorium on nuclear tests, the U.S. and the USSR reached a verbal agreement on the Berlin question . The agreement, de facto, brought a final end to the crisis . The United States and the Soviet Union agreed to a ban on
 The USSR made it clear that in the future they would recognize the status of West Berlin, including the presence of Western troops . The USSR would not discuss the three essential principles of the West Berlin policy . West Berlin was ruled by West Berlin in 1961 .
 After reviewing the crisis from the traditional East-West angle, it is important to concentrate on what happened within the Eastern bloc . The crisis is not just a crisis between the West and the East-East, but what happened in the East .
 In order to fully understand Khrushchev’s behavior, it is essential to focus on his ambiguous relation with Ulbricht and on Chinese pressure . The former Soviet Union leader's ambiguous relation to U.S. and his relationship with the Russian-born criminal gang .
 East Germany was very important for the USSR in general and for Khrushchev in particular . Ulbricht–Khrushchev relationship is ambiguous, says historian .
 In 1953, he accused Beria and Malenkov of wanting to betray socialism in East Germany . In 1953 he accused the two men of trying to betray the East German government .
 Ulbricht was aware of the importance of his country and cunningly used this leverage during the crisis . The East German leader had long pushed for Soviet leadership to close the border around West Berlin .
 Soviet representatives in the German Democratic Republic agreed with his view . Some Soviet representatives also agreed with him .
 The evidence from the newly opened archives also shows that the Soviet leader, Nikita S Khrushchev, was more interested in reaching a German settlement with the West than has been recognized . The evidence also shows the . Soviet leader was preoccupied with preventing East German leader Walter Ulbricht
 Documents confirm view of view that Soviet fear of West German acquisition of nuclear weapons was an important influence on Soviet Deutschlandpolitik (policy on Germany) in the crisis .
 We must proceed from the fact that the Berlin question can be resolved independently from resolving the entire German problem, by the gradual economic and political conquest of West Berlin . West Berlin can be solved independently from solving the German problem by taking over West Berlin, the author says .
 The Soviet leader resisted for a while, in order not to increase the tension against the Western governments . Regarding various types of administrative measures, we should turn to these only in the extreme circumstance of avoiding an undesired aggravation .
 He was still looking for a broader agreement with the Western Powers, which would have included not only the resolution of the Berlin question but also a peaceful settlement of the German question .
 Khrushchev wanted to show his internal opposition and the Chinese that he was tough enough . That motive should not be forgotten as it is as important as the other motives when analyzing the causes of the crisis .
 Ulbricht wanted to revise the status quo as soon as possible . In the following two years he pushed Khrushchev to action . The following year he pushed the government to take action .
 Soviet Brinkmanship Seen from Inside”, Cold War History, Vol., Nº 2, 2003, 64. “Brinkmanship’s seen from inside” was Cold War history, Vol. 2 .
 The SED’s Secretary was concerned by the fact that the Soviet Union had recognized West Germany in 1955, while the Western Powers refused to recognize East Germany .
 In September 1960, East German diplomats accredited to embassies in Bonn had to obtain permission from the East German Foreign Ministry to enter East Berlin . The Soviet Union thought that these provocations were useless or harmful .
 Ulbricht was uninterested in détente with the Western Powers . His main preoccupation was the annexation of West Berlin . The main problem was that there were deep differences between the Soviet and German views .
 Khrushchev, even if he did not accept the status quo, wanted the city to be neutral . The city would have been neutral, even though he wanted to remain neutral .
 Berlin was overall a tactical weapon to use against the Western Powers, says Khrushchev . Besides, the ongoing flow of young and skilled people from East Berlin was a problem of vital importance for Ulbricht .
 He needed it both as a geostrategic Achilles's heel of the Western security system and a Western Hong Kong, a trade link between the communist East and capitalist West Germany . The West needed it to be both as an economic and political link between East and West .
 He was prepared to negotiate with Americans, British and French over their presence in and access to West Berlin . West Berlin was a model for the West Berliners .
 Ulbricht did not hesitate to use the “Chinese card” to put pressure on Khrushchev, writes . He exploited differences between Moscow and Peking in order to get advantages as far as Berlin was concerned . The Chinese-Soviet schism did occur when the so-
 The Soviets did not know about the trip and only found out about it later . The Soviets only discovered the trip when they found out .
 Ulbricht’s requests to modify the status quo only for a few months . The request was made by the Soviet leader only for months, according to the U.S. leader .
 Ulbricht in the successive months of 1961 decided to use the Chinese card in another way . After criticizing the Soviet posture with Mao, Ulbrich decided to take a different approach .
 The East European Socialist leaders all emphasized that they had their own pressing economic issues . They said they lacked the capacity to grant significant aid to the German Democratic Republic .
 Khrushchev agreed to close the border around West Berlin to help the GDR . The economic situation in East Germany, strained by the massive emigration, was too difficult .
 In general Mao thought that the Soviet leader was too soft with Western Powers . Mao thought he was too hard with the Western Powers.
 When Tito was rehabilitated and during the management of the Berlin crisis the relations between the two countries collapsed . The relations between Yugoslavia and Serbia collapsed when Tito's rehabilitation was completed .
 At the end of the sixties there was even a short war because of unresolved border problems . At the same time there was a short border war due to unresolved border issues .
 Ennio di Nolfo, Dagli imperi militari agli impersi tecnologici, La politica internazionale nel XX secolo, 2002, 309. Nolfi: Dagli  militari giududan . Dagli
 Of course we had similar difficulties with the transition to agricultural cooperatives as in other People’s Democracies . Of course, we had . similar difficulties . as in . other countries .
 In all the other People's Democracies, in the context of their closed borders, such political–economic issues could be tackled differently than was possible under our political circumstances . Besides, Khrushchev did care about the standard of living of the GDR, as he feared that if the
 It is difficult to assess whether Ulbricht’s bleak portraits were completely accurate as he clearly intended to gain support among others Warsaw Pact states for the closure of the border . However, it is impossible to assess if the portraits were entirely accurate .
 The SED Secretary finally won over Khrushchev and could eventually proceed to seal off East Berlin . Anyhow, the SED secretary finally won .
 Popular Opinion and Social Change before and after the Border Closure of August 1961”, Journal of Contemporary History, Vol., 2004, 25 .
 The superpower is compelled by the logic of the system to protect the smaller allies even if the latter have an adventurist posture . The U.S. is compelled to protect smaller allies, even if they have a adventurist  posture .
 A loss for one side would mean a gain for the other side hence “de-alignment by the smaller states is ultimately illusory, since their protector will defend them” In sum, on the one hand, it is therefore likely that Ulbricht exaggerated the negativity
 The USSR would not have supported or even tolerated any unilateral attempt of East Germany against West Berlin to force the new status quo . In October he clearly stated that the USSR would have supported any unilateral . attempt to force West Berlin into a new West Berlin .
 The tension continued until 1962 when a diplomatic accident between East Germany and the USSR occurred . The incident was the first time the two countries had diplomatic relations .
 Ulbricht enigmatically told the Soviet ambassador Pervukhin that he would not feel responsible for further complications . In May, he told the ambassador that if tensions rise around the wall, he wouldn't feel responsible . The U.S. has not responded to the situation .
 The Soviet politburo ordered Pervukhin to warn Ulbricht that any action concerning West Berlin should have been previously decided with Moscow . The decision was made with Moscow, which had already decided with the West Berlin .
 Snyder's considerations mainly refer to the European arena . Snyder emphasizes that his considerations are mainly focused on Europe . Snyder: "Europe is the world's most important arena"
 No superpowers actually wanted to be involved in a conflict . Even if the two rival parts got very close to the outbreak of a war, which was due to the vagueness of the threats and the unclear aims of the Soviet leadership, no superpowers wanted to get involved .
 The Soviet leader Khrushchev was in the most uncomfortable position during the entire crisis, having to deal with opposing pressures from the Western Powers and East Germany . Ulbricht tenacity was underrated by the Soviet leader .
 The differences between Khrushchev and Ulbricht, which were never fully resolved, made the Berlin Crisis a Soviet-East German as well as an East-West crisis . Ulbrich behavior added to the intensity of the crisis, says historian .
 Genosse Mikojan in einem Gespräch mit dem Genossen Leuschner in kleinstem Kreis . äusserte,’ SAPMO-BArch ZPA, J IV 2/2/766, 1–3.
 The construction of the Berlin Wall was ultimately accepted by the Western Powers but also by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union feared that Ulbricht would try to annex West Berlin manu militari. However, the construction of Berlin Wall, a dramatic event for the German population .
 The Berlin Wall was a good solution to protect the GDR’s weak economy, without deeply involving the Soviet Union . Moreover, the Soviets thought that the Berlin Wall would protect the country's weak economy .
 In the words of Khrushchev they “achieved the maximum of what was possible” In retrospect, the apparently makeshift solution of erecting a wall turned out to be an acceptable outcome for all parties involved .
 For the United States the construction of the wall turned out to be a ‘blessing in disguise’, as it enabled the government to withdraw from a direct confrontation with the USSR without denying the West its access rights to the city .
 The wall blocked the outflow of people from East Germany and contained Ulbricht’s ambitions – namely the signing of a peace treaty and the seizure of West Berlin . For the USSR, also, the wall blocked outflow from East Berlin from the West .
 By pushing through the construction of the Wall, Ulbricht achieved his primary aim, but also lost his most powerful bargaining tool for achieving his above-mentioned goals . The Wall was built in a bid to build on the Internet, but was also a bargaining tool .
 Princeton Studies in International History and Politics, 200, 141. “Soviet-East German Relations, 1953-1961” Princeton studies in international history .
 New Evidence from the Polish and East German Archives,” CWIHPB, 11 , 221. “New Evidence from East Germany Archives’s archives’. ‘Poland and East Germany.’ ‘New Evidence’ is published by CWI
 The wall marked the beginning of a period of greater social and economic stability for the GDR . In other words, also for the . GDR the wall marked . the . beginning of . greater social . stability – and of oppressive control for the East German population .
 Four Power Communiqué on Berlin in Paris in Paris, NSA/Berlin , 14 December 1958 . Four Power Communications on Berlin were published in Paris .
 Conference of first secretaries of Central Committees of Communist and workers parties of socialist countries for the exchange of views on the questions related to preparation and conclusion of German peace treaty, 3-5 August 1961 . Conference was held in 1961 .
 La politica internazionale internazionalale nel XX secolo. Dagli imperi militari militari agli impersi tecnologici.
 Hungary became a member of the IMF in May 1982 after a very fast accession procedure lasting only six months . Hungary’s Road to IMF Membership Ágnes REMETE . Hungary became an IMF member in 1982 .
 The membership can be considered an ending point to a nearly 20 year period, during which Hungary strove to achieve a peaceful, potentially even fruitful relationship with the Western Bloc based on mutual interests . The membership is considered an end point to the nearly 20 years period .
 Hungary had to push through this maneuvering operation in such a way that the interests of the Soviet Union and the countries of the the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance could not be damaged . The Socialist Bloc could not conduct independent foreign policy, Hungary said .
 Hungarian leadership was to exploit the available foreign political space for manoeuvre, always within the given framework of constraints . In this situation, as highlighted by Csaba Békés, the only option for the respective Hungarian leadership is to exploit foreign political spaces .
 Hungary’s foreign political manoeuvrability was not determined solely by the changing relations of the two opposing blocs, but by a more complex system of ‘tripartite determinism’, including the Soviet Union, the Western countries and the East Central European states . The
 "Hungary had to perform a balancing act to pursue specific objectives in terms of an all-East-Central-European lobby-contest’409, which was no simple task .
 Question of possible membership was first considered more seriously almost 20 years before Hungary’s admission, already in the 1960s . As I have mentioned, the question of the possible membership of the European Union first considered in the 60s .
 The essay will concentrate only on this short period of time, which led to the country’s accession to the IMF in 1982 . It will focus only on the short period, which finally led to an IMF membership .
 Some basic agreements that the country managed to conclude in the first years of its membership that rescued the country from a state of complete insolvency . Besides this, I would also like to mention some basic agreements .
 I would like to present the events in chronological order, concentrating only on the most important steps and highlighting the different character of certain phases influenced by partly international, partly national necessities . The events will be presented in a chronological order in order to highlight certain phases .
 I do not intend to give an overall analysis of the broader international situation of this period . I am going to take into consideration only those factors that are relevant, certainly bearing in mind the deterministic nature of the international circumstances . Hungary’s place in the international bipolar system, especially
 The first timid steps towards the new, Western-based financial organizations were made in 1968 . The financial world was shaken by the rise of financial institutions in the 1960s .
 Hungary is considering membership of the European Economic Union . Hungary is the only member of the EU in the world . Hungary has been in the process of considering membership since 2008 .
 The country’s economy was in such a ruined state that it would have been crucial to obtain additional financial resources to rebuild and modernize the structure of the economy . The country was in a state of ruin that would have needed financial resources for rebuilding .
 Hungary submitted its membership application to the IMF and to the World Bank in 1946 . Being an ally of the Nazi Germany during the war was obviously not a proper reference for the country . In 1946, despite the unfavorable international circumstances, Hungary submitted .
 The application was rejected at that time and the question was not seriously reconsidered until the 1960s . Thus the application was . rejected at the time .
 Hungary joined the U.N. in 1955, but it would have been a logical step to join the Washington twins at the time . Hungary was one of the first countries to enter the United Nations .
 This was discussed by the government, but the return to power of the Stalinist Mátyás Rákosi in July 1955 made this step untimely . For the Soviet Union, it was extremely important to represent the interests of the socialist countries with the votes of its satellite
 Brezhnev purposefully emphasized at the Warsaw Pact Political Consultative Committee meeting in 1965 that the imperialists were trying to extend their contacts into the socialist countries to influence their domestic lives . It was unwilling to join the IMF, however, and expressively “advised” socialist
 Schönfeld, Roland ed. ed., The role of international financial institutions in Central and Eastern Europe . He says the role of financial institutions is to be considered in the region .
 The real economic situation was not at all in compliance with the promises of accelerating growth, the government says . The real economy is not all about growth, according to the government, it says . It is not about growth as much as it is supposed to be .
 In October 1964, a new reform committee was convened to discuss how to get out of this dead-end . New reform committee convenes in October 1964 . Committee: Reform is needed to find a way out of the current political grid .
 The most radical reform variant was approved and 1968 was chosen as the year to implement the timid version of this reform . 1971-1972 were the targeted years for the introduction of the more radical market socialist variant . The idea of IMF membership also came up in the 1960s .
 Only Yugoslavia was a member of the organization from the Soviet Bloc . At this time only Yugoslavia was in the organization .
 Yugoslavia obtained more than $2 billion in credit from the capitalist international financial organizations by 1968 . Yugoslavia had obtained $312. million only from the IMF, which was quite an attractive amount .
 The financial minister already indicated the possibility of applying for a total amount of $150-200 million in long-term credit from Western countries in 1966 . The idea of IMF membership was also introduced as a means to reach this goal .
 The National Bank of Hungary submitted a resolution in March 1966 which proposed a start to negotiations with the IMF and the World Bank . The resolution was submitted by Hungary's National Bank .
 Hungarian policymakers regarded IMF membership important because of its possible contributions to reach the goals of the New Economic Mechanism . Hungary's economy has been hit hard by austerity measures in the past year .
 It was already clear in the 1960s that it is an unrealistic presumption to hope for financial help from the CMEA countries, simply because of their similarly harsh economic situations . The initiators of the proposal pointed out that it would have been preferable to obtain the needed credits from socialist countries
 Hungary had to turn to international financial institutions for help, according to the initiators . This was to be achieved through personal contacts, not on an official level, says the initiator .
 The role of international financial institutions in Central and Eastern Europe is to be played by the world's leading financial institutions . Central and eastern Europe is a key part of the continent's economy .
 The Soviet Union was aware of Hungary's intentions . However, they also highlighted the importance of informing the Soviet Union about the Hungarian intentions .
 The proposal gives an overview of the functioning and operation mechanisms of the IMF . It lists the possible advantages and dangers resulting from membership . The proposal also lists the advantages of membership .
 From 1966, discreet negotiations began concerning the possibility of Hungary’s IMF membership . The proposal concludes that IMF membership would entail significant economic advantages for the country .
 Leaders of the National Bank, Chairman Andor László and Managing Director János Fekete played an outstanding role in negotiations .
 In June 1966, Fekete held confidential negotiations with the deputy governor of the institution, Jaspers Rootham, and asked him to intimately inquire about the Hungarian question . The Hungarian question is still unanswered today .
 Fekete had informal meeting with a representative from the Bank of England who assured him that the Hungarian case was welcomed within British Foreign Ministry circles . France also fostered the admission of socialist countries to the IMF and to the World Bank, with the intention to reduce the already existing Anglo-
 The U.S. alone gave 25% of the total quotas of the IMF member states . However, it was obvious that the leading capitalist country, the United States, could not be circumvented, as it alone gave .
 Fekete met with U.S. politicians as well; he even had a negotiation with Brzezinski, an advisor from the United States Department of State and former Deputy Secretary of Finance Robert Roosa .
 Hungary was the most loyal member of the group of ""closely co-operating socialist countries"" being formed within the Warsaw Pact at this time . Besides Bulgaria, Hungary was part of a group of socialist countries . Hungary was most loyal to Bulgaria and Hungary .
 Hungarian leadership maintained good relations with the EEC and the GDR in the 1960s . The Hungarian leadership even concluded a partial agreement with the Vatican in 1964 .
 Hungary broke out of isolation during the isolation period of 1956-1962 . Hungary became independent in 1962 . Hungary was then isolated from the rest of the world .
 The culmination of this process could have been Hungary’s membership in the IMF, but by this time the Soviet anti-reformist forces, led by Brezhnev and Kosygin, strongly opposed the idea of such a dependent relationship . Following the invasion of Czechoslov
 1968 Czechoslovak intervention significantly overshadowed the relations of the socialist countries and the international financial organizations . Czechoslovakia became part of the New Economic Mechanism in 1968 . The “Golden Age” and the New economic Mechanism were the key to the success of the new economic system
 Adalék Magyarország háború utáni gazdaságtörtörténeténehez . Változó erőtérben – vál tozó  – v
 After the ‘Prague Spring’, it was feared that the events in Czechoslovakia, sooner or later, would transgress the limits that could be tolerated by the Soviet leadership . The events in Prague would disqualify all kinds of reform in the Soviet Bloc, including the
 Still, economic reform was already on its way in the form of the launched New Economic Mechanism . The reform process even resulted in unexpected, however only initial, economic successes .
 The positive economic results of the NEM also contributed to the drop of consideration of IMF membership for a period of time . Therefore, besides the changed international environment and the Soviet opposition to the Hungarian IMF related conceptions, the Hungarian government dropped consideration of membership .
 The Soviet Union did not support Hungary’s membership either in 1982; still it managed to join the organization . Hungary joined the organization in 1982 .
 The USSR agreed to accept every step that did not entail a profound change of the socialist system . This could have happened because the USSR finally agreed to acceptance of every step . The USSR could have accepted every step, but not any profound change .
 Hungary's membership of the EU was an urgent necessity rather than a matter of choice . Hungary joined the European Union in 2007, but it was not a choice for the country .
 Hungary's main question was not the Soviet opinion in regard to membership, but rather the state of the national economic balance and other, basically economic factors . For the Hungarian leadership, the main question is not Soviet opinion, but state of economic balance . Hungary joined the Soviet Union in 1956,
 Csaba László argues that the main characteristic of the Hungarian economy in the 1960s and 1970s was the unilateral, absolute dependence on the Soviet . He argues that it is quite imaginary and nostalgic to claim that we can talk about any real modernization and reform in the case
 Hungary's independent institutions would have the opportunity to get an inside view on the country’s present economic situation, development goals, etc. Besides this, it would put a limit on Hungary‘s independent activities,’ says Ferezi Szasz .
 Opinion stated that the advantages gained from membership were not considerable at all . In addition to this, the opinion stated that membership was not considerable .
 Csaba Nagy points out that the members of the Hungarian administration responsible for the guidelines of the economic policy were not aware of the real profoundness of the Soviet political shift . Nagy: It is quite surprising – as well as surprising – that the . members and even the leaders
 Kádár made it clear that without the consent of the Soviet Union, Hungary could not make a decision in this issue . However, at the above-mentioned meeting of the PC, he said that . Hungary cannot make such a decision without the permission of Soviet Union .
 Political deliberation is needed in order to address such a question, he said . He also pointed out that political deliberation was needed in the first place .
 Hungarian leadership was realistic when they suspended negotiations with regard to the IMF membership . Hungary's decision to suspend IMF membership was "absolutely realistic," says the Hungarian leader .
 The decision was no longer a question of deliberate consideration, but rather of urgent necessity . Nevertheless, a few years later the decision was made, it was not deliberate consideration .
 Years in between these deliberations proved to be waste of time, regarding the Hungarian economic situation . And the years in between, these deliberations prove to be wasted time, according to the Hungarian economy .
 Hungary suffered after the oil crisis of 1973: rising energy and raw material prices, large deterioration in terms of trade, and consequently the rising level of convertible currency debt . The “age of illusions” refers to the policymakers’ response to the external shocks Hungary suffered following the oil
 Policymakers believe that the shocks were temporary and that the best policy response was to accelerate the rate of economic growth . Policymakers believed that the shock was temporary .
 Hungary needed to purchase a rising share of energy and raw materials on the world market for convertible currency . For this, Hungary needed a rise in energy, raw materials and needed to buy convertible currency in exchange .
 The modern technology was available largely in the West, again only for convertible currency . The technology was only available for convertible currencies .
 Most of the people in leadership positions were replaced by anti-reformist forces in 1974 . Without them, Hungary could have elaborated a program of adaptation in response to the new economic environment, and it may have avoided serious indebtedness .
 The fifth five-year plan did not contain any economically rational response to the deteriorating external balance of the country . The philosophy of ranking the country’s foreign relations took shape at this time .
 The most important partners were – not surprisingly – the socialist countries . They were the first contact if the country needed any kind of goods or had any problems .
 Hungary’s economic needs dictated the continual fostering of relations with the West . The Third World countries were regarded as the second in this rank, with the Western capitalist countries being regarded as ‘last resorts’
 Only a gradually growing economy could secure political stability and a rise in the standard of living promised by the Kádárist concept, says Fárásárálárószárzál Száréz Szálós .
 Hungarian leadership asked for formal approval from the Soviet Union . Talks were successful, but the Hungarian leadership wanted formal approval . Hungary was the first country to join Hungary in 1956 .
 The question of indebtedness was handled in top secret . Even members of the Central Committee did not know the exact numbers concerning the debt .
 The Political Committee concluded that Hungary was in severe economic trouble, and because of this, they should ask for the help of the Soviet Union, in compliance with the idea of hierarchical economic relations . But before this, in July, the Political Committee examined the question of the country’s
 Prime Minister of Hungary György Lázár indicated that another possible solution for overcoming the financial distress by expanding credit resources could be through the settlement of relations with the IMF and the World Bank .
 Prime Minister’s proposal was ultimately not included in the PC resolution . From that time on, the issue of IMF membership was on the agenda of Hungarian policymakers, even if the proposal was not .
 In July 1977, Kádár met Brezhnev at the usual Crimean summer meeting and asked for Soviet financial help in order to remedy the problems of the Hungarian balance of payments . Also in July 1977 the Hungarian Prime Minister asked for financial help from the Soviet Union in order
 In October 1977, the question was again discussed by the Central Committee, where Rezső Nyers pointed out that it was in the crucial interest of Hungary to join the IMF, even if it was definitely not in the interest of the Soviet Union . Surprisingly, Brezhnev
 He also considered it important to get the approval of the Soviets to start the negotiations . However, he also said it was important to have the approval from the Soviets .
 The proposal was rejected and was not included in the final resolution . At this time, the proposal was again rejected .
 Kádár was convinced that Hungary had to examine the question seriously, since it was mainly and primarily a political question . As for his position, we can deduce that he was convinced he was . .
 The chance for Hungary to obtain another financial bailout from the Soviet Union was extremely low . Thus the Soviet leadership had to be consulted before any decision was made .
 Question of membership evolving into a constraint for Hungary . Hungary has been in the process of joining the European Union .
 In the 1970s, the communist regime institutionalized economically unrealistic, utopian ideas . IMF membership is an "inescapable Necessity" for Russia .
 After the oil crisis of 1979, Hungarian foreign debt reached 50% of the country’s GDP, thus by this time the Kádár regime could not remedy the effects of the external shock by growing indebtedness .
 In 1979, even this possibility was unavailable, since the conditions were not given to obtain more credits from financial markets . This was not available in 1979, as it was not possible to obtain credits from the financial market .
 Hungary "caught" in a severe balance of payments crisis . As a result, Hungary got “caught’s” in a balance of pay crisis . Hungary is now in a state of emergency force of emergency measures .
 The Kádár leadership turned its back on Moscow again, but before that, a significant change happened within the Hungarian leadership . The new Hungarian leadership has turned their back on Russia again .
 The Political Committee discussed the issue of IMF membership again in February 1979450.450. 450.
 Kádár’s proposal was included in the resolution, and it can be regarded as the first formal political decision in favor of Hungarian IMF membership . The resolution is regarded as a formal decision to join the Hungarian IMF .
 Hungary told the Soviets that Hungary would follow Romania, which had joined the IMF in 1971 without prior discussion . Romania had joined IMF without any prior discussion in 1971 . Hungary joined the European Union in 1971 and joined the International Monetary Fund .
 The Hungarian “bargaining strategy’s” strategy was based on the argument that Hungary was ready to refrain from this step if the Soviet Union could find an extra couple million tons of crude oil to be paid for in soft currency . The Soviet Union paid for the extra
 Brezhnev convinced Kádár that joining the IMF would be an infringement of socialist brotherhood and a couple million tons of oil would not be an issue among true allies . The Hungarians took his words at face value and convinced Kádán .
 Hungarian policymakers neglected the fact that the world had changed, and there was absolutely no reason to believe that the Soviets would honor their promise . Consequently, the Political Committee decided to postpone the question of membership, and again – but for the last time – the Soviet veto encumbered the culmination of
 Brezhnev could not bring up any new arguments against Hungarian IMF membership and he implicitly accepted the idea as an inevitable fact . The economic problems of Hungary were so severe that the situation threatened with the possibility of political destabilization, not only in the case of Hungary, but within the
 After decades of flattering and opposition, personal anger was the last motive that convinced Kádár and the regime of neglecting the old dogma of “eternal socialist brotherhood”
 Antireformist forces led by Mihály Komócsin and Gyula Dabrónaki presented their reservations . During the debate, the antireformists presented their concerns . The debate was held in Budapest .
 Ferenc Havasi, Rezső Nyers and Kádár himself stood up for access, and this was enough to convince reluctant members in favor of the membership . Just 60 minutes after the Central Committee had approved Hungary’s IMF access, János
 Hungary had formally applied to join the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development on November 4th, 1981 . Hungary was the first country to formally join the IMF and the World Bank .
 All macroeconomic data related to the country’s economic situation were handled as top secret issues . The news of the accession arrived as a shock to the general public . The country's economic situation was handled as a top secret .
 Hungarian leadership has no other possibility to escape from serious economic problems, says Ferezi Szasz . Hungary's economy has suffered a long line of problems, he says . Hungary has been hit by serious economic and political problems since 2008 .
 May 1981 was last time the country could tap medium-term international funds . May 1981 had been the last time it had been able to tap international funds in the 1980s .
 Following the imposition of martial law, a lending embargo on the Soviet Bloc was declared . The embargo was imposed on Soviet-bloc countries .
 Soviet-run International Bank of Economic Cooperation and some Arab investors withdrew deposits of $1.1 billion from the National Bank of Hungary . This prompted the de facto Soviet bank to relend the money to Poland and to bridge Soviet cash-flow problems .
 Bank for International Settlements and Margaret Thatcher both extended their help to Hungary . This would surely have knocked out the Hungarian economy, had not the help of the IMF .
 Hungary's application for IMF membership was well underway when it applied to join the IMF . Hungary has received exceptional assistance from the IMF to help the country's economy .
 Hungary could maintain its solvency thanks to these operations . Whether the timing was foresight or just plain luck is difficult to judge .
 Hungary became a member of the IMF and the World Bank at record speed in May 1982 . Hungary has obtained a considerable amount of financial assistance from these institutions .
 In December 1982, the IMF approved a $600 million stand-by loan to Hungary to support its economic stabilization program . The IMF approved the loan in December 1982 to support Hungary's economic stabilization .
 Hungary obtained a second stand-by loan of $440 million in January 1984 to support the government’s further economic and financial program . In January 1984, Hungary received a second $440million loan to support a further economic program . Hungary was granted the loan in 1984 .
 Hungary obtained almost $1 billion in loans from the IMF during its first two years of membership . Hungary used largely to repay the BIS and for debt service payments to other lenders . Without these, Hungary could not escape from the “result” of the ‘age of illusions
 Hungary's economic policy shifted from stimulation of growth to the improvement of the external balance in the two-three years before the accession . Hungary’s economic policy took place during the early years of the transition period .
 Hungary enjoyed the support and the confidence of the international financial community . Hungary enjoyed support and confidence from the international community, he says . Hungary's economy has been hit hard by the fall of communism .
 "They were not in a position to help us... Then we were turning to our Western partners," he says . "Then we were ... turning to their Western partners. They were not ... helping us," he adds .
 It was based on the concept that the current Soviet standpoint should always be supported, or should not be openly taken against it . The Soviet-era Soviet policy was based around the idea that current Soviet views should be supported . The current Soviet stance is based on a belief that steps should not
 Hungarian behavior was passive within the Warsaw Pact . However, this did not mean that Hungarian behavior within the Pact was passive . Hungary was the only member of the Soviet Union in the Cold War .
 Hungarian leadership often made independent initiatives, but only if they knew that these were not contrary to Soviet intentions . The Hungarian leadership made independent moves only if it knew that they were not against Soviet intentions, says Fárák Szasz .
 The policy of “constructive loyalty” included conflict prevention on the one hand, and flexibility and adjustment to Soviet requirements, with a willingness to cooperate .
 Hungarian leadership tried to influence Soviet leadership within the framework of bilateral relations, which served the concrete interests of Hungary . In practice, it meant that the Hungarian leadership attempted to influence the Soviet leadership .
 Western credits granted to socialist countries served the same purpose; that is to make the Eastern Bloc dependent on Western capital as much as possible . The credits were granted to Socialist countries in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The West knew that beyond a certain period of time, economic reforms would implicate political and social changes as well . Western organizations wanted to enhance closer relations with the socialist countries, says Matolcsy .
 The BIS deliberately granted credits to Hungary in order to prevent the fall of the Hungarian ‘liberal socialism’ But I assume that this relationship with Western financial organizations was not a unilateral interest at all . Hungary had a considerable stake in the ‘transaction” as well,
 Hungarian leadership is trying to open up the country’s economy towards the West . The country's economy is gradually turning away from the Soviet Bloc . The attempts made by the Hungarian leadership can be regarded as an endeavor .
 Hungarian foreign policy, however, always remained within the framework of the ‘socialist brotherhood’ and therefore did not challenge the unity of the Bloc directly . Hungary did not join the unity in the unity .
 In conclusion, the final answer to the heading question of the paper could be summarized as the following. The answer to that question could be summed up in the conclusion of this article .
 Hungary was understandably not in the situation to act freely with regard to its international relations . However, due to international circumstances and the deterministic nature of Soviet-Hungarian relations, Hungary did not act freely . Hungary was not able to act free in relation to the situation .
 The IMF is a vital part of the IMF's work to help the country survive, says the IMF . The IMF has helped the country's economy, but it has also had to rely heavily on the IMF to survive .
 Anti-communist resistance in Slovenia represents a fairly understudied, rarely addressed and relatively unknown topic . In contrast to the cases of armed anti-Communist struggles in the Baltic countries as well as in Ukraine or Romania for instance, Slovenia's resistance is relatively unknown .
 Slovene history has not yet received much attention from the Slovene historiography .
 Most Slovenes are not even aware of the existence of the Slovenes . Thus, it has also not become an object of public discussion, as most Slovenes do not know of its existence .
 The scale and intensity of this resistance was fairly low, but partly due to the difference in the public perceptions of the communist past . This is not only because of the important fact that the scale of the . . extent of the resistance was relatively low, and partly also due to . the
 Available sources on this topic are scarce, and available sources are scarce . The available sources for this article are scarce.
 They mostly consist of documents created by and for the use of Yugoslav communist secret services . Records from court trials that took place against the real or alleged insurgents .
 A few rather short memoirs also exist, written either by former members of the security forces or by people who had been involved in organizing the anticommunist resistance .
 Premk's 2005 book attributed this role to the activities of émigré centres in conjunction with the British and American secret services . Premk’s 2005 book, Premk, said the role was primarily to the activities of the emigré cent
 Mateja Čoh, on the other hand, laid more stress on the participants’ individual motives for rebelling against the regime . Mateja said the discontent with regime policies among Slovene peasantry was the main motivation for the uprising .
 "My paper will leave the questions of principal causes and primary motives aside and shall limit itself to an account of some general figures and facts that can be discerned from the known data"
 The main aim shall be to provide an overview of the forms and activities of the armed anti-communist groups, as well as the measures employed by the Yugoslav security forces for fighting them . The aim of this article is to provide a summary of the activities of anti-Communist groups
 Yugoslavia was invaded by the Axis forces on April 6, 1941 . Yugoslavia was carved up into annexed territories, occupation zones and puppet states . Yugoslavia experienced a number of internal conflicts during the war .
 In addition to the anti-Axis struggle, interethnic wars raged in most of the nation's nationally and religiously mixed parts of the country . The conflict was also fought in Dalmatia, Bosnia, Herzegovina and Kosovo .
 These were in most cases also intertwined with ideologically-based conflicts, above all between Communist-led partisans, and various counterrevolutionary military organizations .
 Most notable were the forces under the command of General Dragoljub Mihailović, who was acting as Minister of War for the Yugoslav King and the official government in London . Most notable of the latter were those of the Yugoslav forces .
 Yugoslav partisans led by Josip Broz Tito gradually gained upper-hand in achieving Anglo-American support . Competing with official Yugoslav Army in the Fatherland (popularly called the Chetniks)
 The constant struggles between Croat and Serb members of consequently unstable royal governments also contributed to the Western Allies’ decision to transfer their support to Tito’s Communists .
 After the June 1944 Allied-sponsored agreement between Tito and Ivan Šubašić, the Prime Minister of the Yugoslav government in-exile, Mihailović was deposed as War Minister and the partisans proclaimed the official Yugoslav army . After the war, M
 Internal conflict in Slovene lands was based exclusively on ideological lines . In contrast to the other parts of Yugoslavia where the situation was more complicated due to interethnic conflicts, the internal conflict in Slovenia was based solely on ideology .
 These occurred in Slovenia under foreign occupation and simultaneously with resistance to it . These occurred during the foreign occupation of Slovenia .
 Counterrevolution in large part came to adopt the role of military collaboration with first the Italian and later the German occupying forces . Since the latter came to be monopolized by the Liberation Front of Slovene Nation .
 At the end of the war in May 1945, Communist rule was swiftly established . The country was ruled by the Communist Party .
 During the summer of the same year, the great majority of returned or captured counterrevolutionaries were systematically massacred . The approximate figure of those killed stands at 13,500 .
 Its nature was thus counterrevolutionary and, due to special conditions, also partly took the form of military collaboration with the occupational forces . The nature of the counterrevolution was counter-revolutionary .
 They were armed by the Germans and formally acted as an auxiliary police force under German command . The German police force was formally known as a German Auxiliary Police Force .
 The Home Guard operated quite autonomously, being in addition perceived as the Slovenian army by a considerable part of the population in the territories where it operated . In fact, in certain respects, the Home Guard nonetheless operated quite autonomousously .
 The “Chetniks’, on the other hand, were numerically few, at no point numbering more than a couple hundred soldiers . The Chetniks were known to be a few hundred soldiers at the time .
 Some Home Guard units were secretly members of the Chetnik movement . They did not stand under German command and enjoyed secret support from Home Guard .
 In June 1944 he was arrested by the Gestapo, sent to Dachau concentration camp . After the war he acted as one of the most important organizers of armed resistance against communist rule .
 Their origins and goals, affiliations and motives, however, varied highly between various parts of the country and among specific groups within them . Their origins, goals and affiliations vary highly .
 In Croatia, Dalmatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, for instance, groups of Croatian separatists usually also of the Ustasha background prevailed . Pro-Yugoslav, as well as Serb nationalist, “Chetnik” ones were also present .
 Some of them were composed of members of WWII military formations that had remained in Yugoslavia and were hiding from authorities . Others were formed by discontented peasants, army deserters and former partisans .
 The extent and intensity of the armed anti-communist resistance in Slovenia (and Yugoslavia in general) never reached or even approached the state of full scale war . The extent of the anti-Communist resistance never reached a state of war .
 It was fairly limited in terms of the number of people involved or immediately affected . It did not include larger combat actions from either of the both sides .
 Around 35 larger illegal armed groups operated between 1945 and 1950 that had emerged as a form of resistance to the measures of the communist authorities . Nevertheless, in Slovenia alone, around 35 larger . illegal armed . armed groups operate between 1945 to 1950 . Slovenia alone .
 Civil war affected a major portion of the Slovene territory, but was at the same time far more intense in the northeast . The northeast had previously been left largely unaffected by the civil war .
 In terms of periodization, three different ‘phases’ may be discerned when speaking about the type and dynamics of post-WWII insurgency in Slovenia .
 Large groups of WWII counter-revolutionary and collaborationist troops were still present in Slovenia, scattered throughout its territory . This periodization corresponds roughly to the phases that were defined already in the detailed reports on insurgency written by officers of the Slovenian Administration for State Security . During the first �
 These were mainly uncoordinated groups of former Home Guards that were hiding from the winning side, although there were also some better organized Chetnik units that had most probably remained in Slovenia intentionally .
 Around 2000 armed men were hiding in Slovenian forests in June 1945 . These armed groups were, however, quickly diminishing in strength .
 Most of the men managed to escape over the Austrian or Italian border or turned themselves over to the authorities after general amnesty had been proclaimed in August 1945 . The main goal of most of these men was to survive .
 Some of them organized themselves as rebel units, conducted acts of sabotage, attacked military installations and transport infrastructure . They were particularly active in spreading anti-communist and royalist propaganda .
 These groups sometimes even organized secret political meetings in villages, where they agitated against the elections .
 By the time of the general elections, the establishment of an organized and coordinated resistance had already begun . The establishment of a coordinated resistance to President Obama's election was already underway .
 A few of the above discussed groups established contacts with émigré centres in Italy and Austria, from where they started receiving instructions and propaganda materials . The groups were able to recruit members of their own groups .
 By the autumn of 1945 they were joined by new, ‘genuine’, rebel groups . They were not comprised of former Home Guards in hiding, but of civilians and army deserters .
 These groups operated mostly in the northeast of Slovenia, close to the border area .
 Originally they had operated on their own, but at the same time had sought to establish contacts with the émigré anti-communist organizers across the border . The group was originally established on the basis of contacts with anti-Communist organizers .
 Mainly belonging to the ranks of former Chetniks and Home Guards, some of these messengers tried to establish links with the Yugoslav Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović, who was still hiding in Bosnia with some of his remaining troops .
 By the spring of 1946, most of the remaining groups of WWII fighters were already gone from Slovenia . Mihailović himself was captured in March 1946 and executed after a public trial .
 The “second phase’ of illegal group’ activity in Slovenia had commenced, distinguished by the highest degree of insurgency activity . The ‘second phase' of the . “Second phase” of . illegal group' activity had commenced .
 Most importantly, coordinated attempts from the outside (that is from . émigré centres in Austria and Italy) to create broad-scale armed resistance took place . Most notably, coordinated . attempts from . outside (from . outside, that is from  electronic . centres in
 Armed units, called “assault groups, and ‘assault detachments” (usually between 5 and 50 people) were permanently present in Slovenia . Some of them trained in espionage and military tactics, some of them were trained in spying and tactics .
 Intelligence centres in Austria and Italy succeeded in establishing contacts with some of the already existing units and sending groups across the border .
 The aim was to create a guerrilla force along with an organized network of supporters . The aim of the guerrilla force was to be created along with a network of support .
 Skilled propagandists and intelligence officers from the former Home Guard and Chetnik ranks were sent to accomplish this task . Home Guard members were sent from the Home Guard to carry out the mission .
 The units on the ground were provided with arms and logistical equipment . The units were also provided with weapons and logistical support .
 Some of them maintained radio contacts with intelligence centres abroad . Some of the intelligence centres in the UK maintained contacts with other countries .
 The clandestine groups operated at night and were hiding in secret bunkers in forests or on desolate farms during the daytime . They were hiding at night in bunkers or in remote areas of the country .
 They perpetrated acts of sabotage, gathered intelligence and spread anti-communist, royalist, pro-Western and pro-democratic propaganda . They spread pro-western propaganda, they said .
 Illegal groups operated in all parts of Slovenia but were most numerous, active and successful in the northeast . They managed to establish a broad network of supporters in Slovenia's northeast .
 Most armed actions happened there, and the presence of guerrilla groups was permanent . Most of the armed actions were carried out by guerrilla groups . The presence of guerrillas was permanent.
 In other parts of Slovenia, clandestine groups were less overt and more sporadic . They were limited mostly to propaganda, espionage, and single acts of sabotage .
 They presented themselves as anti-communist, pro-democratic and loyal to the monarchy . Often carried official royal Yugoslav insignia and were, to some extent, coordinated from abroad .
 Several other national committees were subordinated to the central one in Rome . Several other committees were subordinate to the Rome committee .
 Former Chetnik officer and Serbian Radical politician Stevan Trifunac was part of the "National Committee of Kingdom of Yugoslavia” in Salzburg . Among those was also the “National Committee’s “national committee” led by ex-Chet
 “101/501’ – Located in Klagenfurt and led by former Home Guard and Chetnik officers Ivan Drčar and France Grum . “305” located in Trieste and led . by Dušan Lajovic. “505�
 All of these centres were supported by and cooperated with the United States Army’s ‘Counter Intelligence Corps’ and the British ‘Field Secret Service’ The extent and significance of this cooperation is not being entirely clear .
 Creation of underground network of supporters succeeded only in parts of northeastern Slovenia . Creation of an underground network failed to reach parts of Slovenia, and even partly .
 Matjažev glas was printed in Austria, secretly brought to Slovenia and distributed there by mail . More successful was the dissemination of a newspaper printed in the Austria, brought to the country by mail.
 It delivered accounts about better life in the West, the undemocratic nature of the Yugoslav regime and political repression . The Yugoslav regime was undemocratically ruled by the West .
 Appeals were issued to the Slovene people to rebel against the regime, whereby the strength of the ‘Matthias’s Army’ was often grossly overestimated .
 During 1947 and 1948, a radio program was broadcast to Slovenia from the intelligence centres in Austria . During the same period, Slovenia was broadcast from intelligence centres .
 The insurgents also engaged in assaults on police stations, local administration offices and military installations . Apart from espionage and propaganda, the insurgents have engaged in attacks .
 Collectivization of agriculture is one of the most directly hated government measures . Collective farms were the most common targets of armed attacks in the country .
 Local communists, public officials and supporters of the regime were threatened by insurgents . Some were also killed by the insurgents .
 The latter actions were conducted mostly without previous approval from abroad . Armed groups acted quite independently and did not always strictly follow instructions that were given to them .
 In addition to the ‘Matthias’s Army’ units, entirely independent groups also existed, including the “Yugoslav Liberation Movement” and “Slovene Voluntary Army” Slovene Anti-Communist Organization .
 These units regularly launched large-scale missions in which they examined large sections of terrain, thereby searching for insurgents and destroying them . These missions were often launched in search for insurgents .
 Their task was to assassinate the leaders or bring the group into an ambush . They were tasked with bringing an ambush or bringing an assassination .
 UDBA succeeded in developing a widespread field network of informants and infiltrating agents into insurgent groups . The U.S. government says it has succeeded in infiltrating the insurgent groups in Afghanistan .
 This enabled a fairly successful uncovering of the groups’ operations and collection of data on their members . This enabled the uncovering the groups' operations and collecting of data .
 UDBA arrested groups of civilians as “collectively responsible” when an act of sabotage happened or propaganda leaflets appeared, basically taking hostages to pressure on insurgents to turn themselves in .
 This extreme measure is however not known to have ever been implemented in Slovenia .
 Alleged supporters of the illegal groups, very often family members as well as many Catholic priests also received punishment by forced labour . Many Catholic priests were punished between 1 and 10 years in prison .
 UDBA noted in its reports that in 1947 “the emigration suffered a final defeat in the field of banditry” and that most of the armed units were destroyed .
 Anti-communist activities led by intelligence centres persisted but adopted new strategies . Nevertheless, anticommunist activities continued to take place .
 The “third phase” of anti-communist resistance between 1948 and 1950 was distinguished by smaller units of commandos, spies and messengers . Thus, the ‘third phase of resistance’ between 1948-1950 was distinguished .
 Their activities were mainly limited to espionage and propaganda, although they also committed acts of sabotage . Their activities included spying and propaganda .
 Even in February 1950, 1,000 leaflets with anti-communist content were disseminated in the streets of the Slovenian capital Ljubljana alone . In 1949 the émigré centres lost Anglo-American support as the Western powers began supporting Tito .
 In the second half of the year, the centres were disbanded because their activities were banned by U.S. and British authorities . They were disbanded due to the ban on their activities .
 Last messenger tried to cross the Yugoslav border in September 1950 . The last messenger crossed the border into Yugoslavia .
 This figure does not include the remains of counterrevolutionary forces in 1945 . This figure is based on data from 1945 and 1945 .
 The presence and activity of armed anti-communist groups in Slovenia was relatively limited and small-scale, according to available data . It could therefore not have posed a serious threat to the regime, the author says .
 The figures concerning killed and arrested fighters and supporters reveal that it was not a completely negligible force either . At the same time, however, the figures show that the figure is not completely negligible .
 Slovene modern history should not be overlooked, as well as a small piece in the mosaic of Central and Eastern European Cold War history . As such, it represents a topic of Slovene Modern history that should be not overlooked .
 Many questions remain open about the role of the Western Allies and the extent of influence and control of the armed groups on part the émigré intelligence centres .
 The degree of possible involvement of the Yugoslav secret police is also unclear . The Yugoslav police might have used “banditry” as a precedent and an instrument .
 Most of the analyses of these similarities are formed in the Jewish-Armenian perspective . Moreover, most of the analysis of the similarities is formed in a Jewish perspective .
 Armenian survivors and future generations reacted to the events similarly, while various parallels were shown during the organization and execution of the extermination plans . For example, in comparison to processing the trauma of the Holocaust, the Holocaust trauma was less traumatic .
 Viewing the consequences of the Armenian genocide, both constructive and destructive responses to – processing strategies of or attitudes towards – the trauma are present . This may serve as bases to prognoses concerning the aftermath of other mass traumas – not only genocides, but also civil wars
 All survivors and refugees experienced nearly the same traumatic events . The effects of the Armenian genocide influenced all survivors psychologically, regardless of their future location .
 The six ideal types of reflections do not constitute a scale and are possibly present on the individual level in each community of survivors and their descendants . The ideal reflections are possible present on an individual level .
 Another attitude is resignation and despair, which may also result in silence . It may also be a conscious refusal – in contrast to avoidance described above – of the events .
 Reconciliation and forgiveness is also present among survivor attitudes, says survivor . Reconciliatory and forgiveness are also present in survivor attitudes .
 This means recalling the events regularly and, on the other hand, having an optimist view of the future . This means remembering the events and having a positive view of future .
 Outrage and anger is another strategy, which involves verbal or non-physical violence towards perpetrators and those who were responsible for the genocide as organizers or supporters .
 The last form of trauma progressing is revenge and restitution, which means physical aggression against the perpetrators or those who are symbolic targets as “followers” of the perpetrators . The victim’s relationship with the perpetrators is that of those who follow them .
 In other words, against those who still deny the Armenian genocide and burden its recognition . The Armenian genocide is a crime committed by Armenians in 1915 .
 Miller and Touryan-Miller also consider symbolic revenge –g.e.g. when survivors assume that natural disasters affecting real or supposed perpetrators mean divine retribution .
 Study classifies outrage and anger as anger because it does not result in physical violence . In contrast, the author of this study classifies the latter phenomenon as outrage . Anger and outrage are not physical violence, the study says .
 Armenian communities settled in different parts and countries of the world have not reacted unanimously in a given period . Although the trauma was common for all survivors, a periodical generational change in attitudes is present, Armenian communities .
 There has usually been a given community which played a leading role or served as a catalyst in promoting different attitudes from previous ones during a given phase . Some other community members did not even participate in the progress of the given period .
 Armenians in Turkey stayed silent, as the state had condemned Armenian genocide commemoration . Similarly, when public progressing of the trauma began, Armenians stayed silent . The state condemned the commemoration of the genocide .
 Third generation terrorist movement probably would not have evolved without the often tense and militarily active social and political environment of Armenians in Lebanon . Futhermore, the third generation of the terrorist movement .
 The phase usually labelled as integration by Armenian scholars was encouraged by Gorbachev’s reforms . Finally, the phase of integration by Armenians was also encouraged by the reforms of the Soviet era .
 Armenians in the Armenian SSR started to feel threatened in a manner like the Armenian Genocide . Reviving national sentiments of the latter period contributed to the Karabakh conflict, during which Armenians felt threatened .
 Armenians in the diaspora started to cooperate in supporting those living in the home country, which had become independent a few years after the mentioned events . Armenians began to cooperate with each other after the events .
 Miller and Touryan-Miller say only six individual trauma processing strategies have been present on the collective – social, political or public – level . Armenian communities’ host state made possible by the given Armenian communities' host state, they say .
 The collective speak out of the trauma started simultaneously in the Armenian SSR and the U.S. and the United States. It started simultaneously .
 1965, the 50th anniversary of the beginning of the Armenian genocide, was the initial year of the genocide, experts say . 1965 is considered the first year of Armenian genocide in existence .
 The Metamorphosis of the Post-Genocide Armenian Identity as Reflected in Artistic Literature . Armenians have been the victims of the Armenian genocide in the past .
 It cannot be stated that they lived in a socio-political environment determined by a host state or its respective dominant ethnic group . Therefore, it cannot be said that they . lived in an environment determined . by the host state, or their respective dominant ethnicity group .
 In contrast, the Armenian SSR did not act independently in domestic and foreign politics . The principles of these areas had been determined by the actual Soviet central power in Moscow .
 While testing the hypothesis, instead of a host state, the term ‘host environment’ will be used in the study . Instead of a state state, it will be called the host environment .
 The society of the Armenian SSR had to adapt to the frameworks of this environment . The society had to adjust to the framework of this .
 The examination period lasts from the beginning of Soviet rule in Armenia in 1920 until 1985 . During that period, the first secretary period of Gorbachev was the Soviet-era secretary of the USSR .
 The establishment of Soviet state power ensured quite different frameworks of genocide commemoration and reflections than the previous environment of the Republic of Armenia .
 The collapse of the USSR, the demand for social and political reforms, the re-evoked Armenian nation-building process and the Karabakh conflict with Azerbaijan – resulted in dynamic changes and a diversity of collective approaches to the genocide within a very short period .
 An analysis of these newly emerged trends would exceed the scope of this study . An analysis would be more extensive than this study could have covered .
 In testing the hypothesis, various elements of the Soviet-Armenian public will be examined in which indicators of the need for speaking out the trauma could have appeared, thereby the strategies of trauma processing possibly affected a broader part of society . The hypothesis of the hypothesis is to look at the
 As a result of societal impacts, political actions related to the trauma could have been initiated . The trauma was caused by the trauma of a young person's suicide .
 The non-governmental sector was totally absent and the sectors mentioned above reflected what state power tolerated . Non-governmental sectors were totally absent .
 Changes in activities within these fields had possibly followed changes of the central party-state ideology . However, on the other hand, possibly reflected some bottom-up initiations .
 In parallel, aspects and frameworks of scientific research related to the genocide will be also examined . The study will focus on the quite narrow ways, aspects of the genocide .
 Non-governmental sector was prohibited in the Soviet Union, but one certain, partly non-governmental movement, the process of “re”-settling diaspora-Armenians in the USSR is possible to analyse .
 Local organisations of the diaspora lacked total control by the Soviet authorities . Most of them were at least partly based on civic initiation .
 Political actions naturally related to the examined social phenomena will be examined . Also, political actions natural related to these social phenomena to be examined.
 Beside these collective trends, there is a useful instrument to reconstruct individual responses . Beside the collective trends there is also a useful tool for reconstructing individual responses, says David Frum .
 Ethnographer Verjiné Svazlian has collected hundreds of interviews from survivors of the World War II . Ethnographers have collected thousands of interviews with survivors .
 This oral history collection was published only after the change of the regime . A feature of these is that due to the frequently non-party-conformist content and the restricted ways and areas of Armenian genocide research, this collection is only published after change of regime .
 Interviews offer a non-restricted overall picture of the reactions of Soviet-Armenian individuals . As a result, these interviews most probably offer an overall picture, the interviews most likely offer the .
 In the initial post-genocide period most Armenian literary authors in the diaspora did not mention the traumatic experience in their works . Most Armenian literary works in diasporporporation were published in the 1990s .
 They either reconstructed the memories of the homeland or were occupied with issues concerning the rebuilding of their lives . They were either reconstructed or occupied with concerns about rebuilding their lives.
 At that time a new generation of Armenian writers were emerging who started to deal with questions of Armenian historical and cultural heritage .
 A very plastic example for genocide trauma processing is a short story entitled Lar Margar508 by Axel Bakunts . The story is about a genocide survivor who was raped and murdered in the 1980s .
 The main character Margar had become supervisor of the irrigation canal in the village he settled in . Margar was the main character of the novel . He had been a supervisor of an irrigation canal .
 He had started a fresh life in a new homeland by bringing up his grandson and planting apricot trees . He had brought up grandson and planted apricots in his new homeland .
 He threw the keys of his old house into the sea while being transported by ship away from the Ottoman Empire . He let go of the memory of the old home through a symbolic act, throwing the keys into the water .
 The short story ends with an image of Margar seeing his grandson at the schoolyard and simultaneously viewing his growing apricot trees . Margar's father Margar is a father of two children .
 Bakunts does not contradict communist ideas, such as equality, for Margar . Margar pays attention to providing equal quantities of water to all in the village . Bakunts is not a communist, but a communist .
 There is no sign in this work of an attempt to defeat communism. In addition, there is also no sign of attempts to defeat communist. In fact, there are no signs in this project to defeat Communism.
 In this period merely mentioning the Armenian genocide was labelled as nationalistic . On the other hand, in this time, merely mentioning Armenian genocide would be labelled nationalistic.
 Bakunts used the national symbols of Mount Ararat and apricots in this short story . Furthermore, Bakunts also used national symbols such as Mt. Ararat .
 This and similar kinds of approaches to Armenian cultural and historical heritage including the genocide resulted in the extermination, imprisonment and/or Siberian exile of the writers’ generation of the 1930s . The writers' generation was exterminated, imprisoned and exiled .
 The Union of Writers of the Armenian SSR was filled with artists loyal to the regime after having silenced Bakunts, Yeghishe Charents and Vahan Totovents, together with other writers or poets . Most of them were imprisoned and most were imprisoned . Most were imprisoned
 Silence was not a sign of repression and avoidance anymore, but a present need for dealing with the trauma of the genocide, which was not allowed to gain public space . On the contrary, after the 1937-1938 extermination wave silence was not an expression of repression .
 The next experiment for collective processing began in the Khrushchev era . The experiment was the next experiment in collective processing . It was the first time collective processing was allowed to be done in the past .
 Paruyr Sevak’s philosophical and epic poem, “The Unsilenceable Belfry,” was written in 1957 and published in 1969 . Sevak was among one of the earliest attempts of this period to reflect on the genocide .
 Komitas, the Armenian clergyman, folk music collector and composer, was deported in 1915 . Komitas was deported among the first Armenian intellectuals in 1915. The work is about Komitas .
 Hovhannes Shiraz, another emblematic member of this generation, also started to publish his works on the genocide and Armenian heritage in the late 1950s . Shiraz's works on genocide and genocide were published in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Silva Kaputikyan also started to turn towards the issues of Armenian national identity in the same period . His most famous genocide-related work is The Armenian Dante-esque calling for the establishment of a spiritual monument to the victims of the Armenian genocide .
 Her 1961 poem, “Midway Reflections’513, lists and addresses the various trauma-progressing attitudes, including revenge and resignation .
 She gives an extensive explanation of the strategy she chooses and calls for Armenians to follow her . She also calls for Armenia to join her .
 “Silva Kaputikyan’s reflections at the midway and after”, Lraber Hasarakakan Gituthjunneri, HH GAA hratarakčuthjun, 2001 .
 Amongst authors of Armenian prose of the same period, Hrachya Qochar wrote his novel Nahapet in 1964 . Amongst . authors of the . same period of the 1960s, Qocha wrote his first novel in 1964.
 The novel frequently indicates respect towards the Soviet ideal of life, while some episodes introduce the ways of interpretation of communism by average Armenians living at the periphery of the Soviet Empire .
 In addition to the demand for genocide remembrance and representation of the memories, the novel expresses an optimistic view of the future . The novel expresses a demand for remembrance of the genocide .
 The political system had not silenced such opinions during this period, says author . Literature represented the atmosphere of a meltdown after the Stalin era . The strategy to be followed became reconciliation .
 During the 1970s and early 1980s many of the above mentioned works had been reprinted or adapted for motion pictures . Many of the works were adapted or adapted into films .
 The majority of authors from the 1930s writers’ generation were rehabilitated by the state and their works became authorized for publication . Similarly, the majority of the authors’ works were published in 1930s .
 The meltdown in literature had been an indicator and, most probably, also a catalyst for political developments concerning the genocide-issue .
 Such initiations had been previously banned and were prohibited also after the 1965 events in the Soviet Union . The initiations were banned after the events in 1965 .
 On April 24, the 50th anniversary of the imprisonment and extermination of Constantinople’s Armenian intelligentsia and the beginning of deportations, demonstrations . Demonstrations evolved in numerous Soviet Armenian cities and in the capital .
 State permission was given in May 1965 for a public competition to plan and construct a memorial for the victims of the Armenian genocide .
 An entire people, an entire nation coming from the depths of millennia was killed, was dying . "An entire people ... was dying," says the author of the book, "an entire nation ... dying"
 We condemn genocide or zhoghovrtasbanutiun [“folkmurder”] with all our heart and soul. We condemn the genocide or  genocide or ” with all the heart and . soul.
 There is and there cannot be either juridical justification or any motion of prescription for genocide for genocide . There is no legal justification for the use of such a form of genocide in Syria .
 Genocide, be it the horrifying slaughter of Armenians in Der or in the banks of the Euphrates in 1915, or the torturing death by massacre of the other peoples during World War II in Majdanek and Bchenwald, must always be condemned without reservations, and its perpetrators
 This is an attempt to prove that both events were rooted in racist ideologies . Thereby, this is a . attempt to . prove that the events were . rooted in . racist ideologies. Thereby .
 The Soviet Union considered these ideologies and their supporters as their enemies . The Soviets considered the ideologies and supporters of these ideologies to be enemies .
 In this speech, a possible way of the genocide’s implementation into Soviet ideology is represented . Therefore, in this speech the genocide issue was represented .
 Tsisternakaberd is a hill in the surroundings of the centre of Yerevan, Armenia . It is located in the surrounding of the city centre .
 By choosing this place the state willingly or unwillingly adapted genocide commemoration to Armenian funeral and burial traditions, the state chose to honor the Armenian genocide victims . The Armenian genocide is a genocide crime committed by genocide survivors .
 The Armenian Genocide Memorial Complex became a sacral place in the officially atheist Soviet social and political environment . As a result of the complex, the memorial complex became a place in an atheist Soviet state .
 In a similar way, the eternal flame and the surrounding open circular walls of the monument symbolize resurrection and the eternal life of the victims’ souls . The obelisk belonging to the monument represents the rise of the Armenian nation, while the surrounding circular walls represent resurrection .
 Through the memorial complex optimism and remembrance was manifested in an architectural form . In conclusion, through the . memorial complex, through . optimism and . remembrance was . manifested in the architectural form.
 Thereby expresses the strategy of reconciliation as suggested by literary forerunners of collective trauma progressing . Thereby expressing the strategy .
 The monument was opened in 1967 and the inauguration ceremony was synchronized with the celebration of the establishment of Soviet power in Armenia . It was opened with the opening of the monument in 1967 .
 The memorial complex served yearly on April 24 as the place for mass-processions, which were also attended by state leaders . After this, the memorial complex became a permanent place in memory of the victims .
 From the 1970s on, the political leadership of the country had started the official commemoration on the Memorial Day . The political leadership had begun the commemoration of the day in 1970s .
 It is obvious that the strategy of reconciliation had become internalized by the state . Therefore, it was obvious that it is obvious, the state had internalized the strategy .
 Armenians’’re’-turning from the diaspora was also a crucial factor in the Armenian SSR’s social and political life . As it has been expressed before, the process of Armenians''re'’�re'-
 The issue of masses of Armenian refugees had become an essential concern for the newly established communist leadership of the 1920s . The issue was an important concern for communist leadership .
 This had been constantly a subject for Soviet Armenian political leaders reminding them of the Armenian genocide despite any restriction . The Armenian genocide had been a topic of discussion in the Soviet Union .
 He projected Armenians of the diaspora as instruments for spreading the communist world revolution . Even if he criticised the two historical Armenian parties, he considered cooperation with these organisations as vital .
 Armenia-Armenian organizations are cooperating more than a mere political step . Armenia is one of the most successful countries in the world to join the world's largest political parties .
 The Armenian Assistance Commission had been established by diaspora and Soviet Armenian intellectuals to achieve cooperation for the development of refugees’ social circumstances . The Commission was established by the diasporporporations and Soviet Armenians .
 A similarly broadscale cooperation was founded for the ‘re’-patriation of Armenian refugees in Soviet Armenia . A similar cooperation was formed for the 're‘patriating’ of Armenians .
 The process involved public promotion of the possible return, gathering refugees willing to settle in Armenia, and organization of their travel and accommodation .
 The “Great Home Turn” started in the 1930s and reached its peak between 1946 and 1948 . Cooperation and organizing projects in the diaspora communities were completed by the local Armenian National Fronts. The Great Home Turn was started by the Armenian Diaspora .
 In spite of widespread efforts, the new homeland had been lost for more than 20,000 returnees . The new homeland was lost for many of the returnees, according to the report .
 Hamahajkakan gitažołov: Zekuumneri žownovau, [Repatriation and Its Lessons.], [reatriation] and its Lessons.au, . The book was published in 1939 in Poland .
 For humanities and social sciences the Armenian genocide had also been forbidden topic . The Armenian genocide has also been a forbidden topic in the social sciences .
 Mentioning the trauma was labelled as nationalism, in the same way as it had been also characteristic in literature . The trauma was also a characteristic characteristic of literature, and was linked to nationalism .
 Due to this past, she started to research the heritage of the Armenian Genocide . The Armenian Genocide was the Armenian genocide .
 Her work in this field began in the mid 1950s, when she started to visit places where immigrants from the diaspora had settled in en masse . Her work started in the 1950s when she visited places where she began to visit .
 She was hiding another archive, which she had systematized the memoirs of genocide survivors . She was also hiding a trove of memoirs from survivors of genocide .
 The further atmosphere of scientific work in the field is described . Presently, the further atmosphere is described. Presently. work in . the field has been described.
 Svazlian's interviewees would first – fearing repeated persecution – not let her into their homes, even if she asked for their cooperation in documenting the folk culture of these migrants .
 She had to make even greater efforts when she asked them to share their painful memories with her. Moreover, she had to be even more careful when she .
 Facing these facts, it is evident that research related to the genocide was not supported by state power . "Gathering information on this issue was a hard task," says author of the book .
 After the meltdown, social scientists and experts in humanities received the possibility to research some questions related to the genocide, albeit in a restricted way . The meltdown can be also observed in literature and politics .
 Only those events which had been recorded during the genocide in documents were permitted for research . Only those . events which were recorded during . the genocide were allowed to be recorded in documents .
 Several distortions can be observed within the historiography of the Armenian genocide in the Soviet period . For the reason that the memory of the genocide has been maintained mainly by oral history, several distortions are observed .
 Armenians have had even more limited access to this information than historians . The existence of such Armenian efforts at other littleknown places has recently begun to appear .
 The ‘lack’ of resistance still undermines the self-esteem of many Armenians, who rely on the collective self-image suggesting that Armenians had been slaughtered like sheep during the genocide . Verjiné Svazlian made several efforts after 1965 to introduce survivors and
 Remembering and commemorating the genocide still remained between restricted frameworks . Her attempts were not supported by the state during that period . Remembering and commemorating the genocide therefore still remained .
 The efforts of Soviet Armenian leaders and the presumable early resistance by Moscow suggests that the central power had tolerated, rather than supported, the political frameworks . The Soviet Armenian political leadership attempted to find the balance between social pressure and the power of Moscow .
 Having viewed the collective responses to the genocide, in order to create a comparison to the individual strategies the latter have to be reconstructed . The collective responses have been reconstructed by the author of this article .
 Two of these testimonies have been maintained as manuscripts from the period before Svazlian’s research . Two of the testimonies are kept as manuscripts as manuscripts .
 Eighteen interviews only described the events experienced by the survivors during the genocide without mentioning their future lives or interpreting the genocide in any way .
 "Let our new generation understand well what kind of hypocritical, bestial, criminal, plundering, ruthless, unjust, perfidious enemy we lived with in order to maintain our existence," one of them said .
 The third testimony in this group only states the intensive hatred the given survivor felt against Turks . The testimony only states an intensive hatred against Turks, the survivor said .
 Some mythical descriptions include Talaat pasha’s gambling with one Armenian leader or Russians selling the Armenian lands to the Turks for treasures . The most unique interpretations of the reasons for the genocide range from the Turks’ jealousy of Armenians’ wealth, their need for Armen
 The escape of a certain person or of numerous survivors is rationalized . In two cases, the escape of an escape of the certain person was rationalized. In two other cases, escape of that person or several survivors is justifiedized .
 One of these describes the escape of the interviewee as being a result of divine wonder . The escape is described as being the result of 'divine wonder'
 Sixty-seven interviews, a vast majority of the examined testimonies, reflect a positive image of the future of the refugees . In a further case, the survival of the participants of the Musa Dagh resistance is explained also by a miraculous apparition .
 The possibility of a new start, emphasized by most of them, was offered most probably by the ‘Soviet dream’ through the promise of equality, education, work, home, financial security and social welfare .
 Armenians had been deprived of these completely during the genocide . Even if these had been limited by the totalitarian regime, they were deprived of them completely . Armenians are not entitled to the right to freedom of speech and privacy .
 Some memoirs reflect on exile of ‘re’-settled Armenians to Siberia or describe temporarily returning post-traumatic symptoms of the interviewees . Some of these memoirs also reflect on the exile of 're-setled Armenian Armenians .
 The vast majority still remembered the genocide while reflecting positively on the future, thereby again the strategy of reconciliation can be observed . However, the vast majority of the survivors of the genocide still remember the genocide .
 These individual responses do not correspond to the tendencies observed on the collective level, say experts . The study finds that individual responses to individual responses are not the same as others .
 All but one interview reflecting on the aftermath of genocide recorded before the meltdown already expressed the strategy of reconciliation . For example, all but one of the interviews reflecting on genocide had already expressed reconciliation .
 This individual strategy was overwhelming during Soviet times irrespective of the philosophy emphasized by the actual state and party ideology . Other approaches had also been also present at the individual level, albeit at a lesser extent .
 It cannot be stated for sure whether the official ideological principles had caused the dominance of reconciliation, or whether these principles had been created and shaped by social majority . However, concerning the small number of memoirs recorded before the mid 1950s, it cannot be said for sure .
 Four trauma processing strategies were surely present at the individual level in Soviet Armenian society . Four trauma strategies may have been present at individual levels in society .
 The existence of the remaining two other approaches cannot be excluded . Furthermore, the existence of three other approaches can't be excluded.
 Three of the undoubtedly existent ones – outrage and anger, anger, revenge and restitution, and finally rationalisation – had not become official state strategies . Three of these were not official strategies – outrage, anger and anger and revenge – had never become official strategies .
 During Stalin era the fourth strategy, reconciliation and forgiveness was not permitted either . It has been also mentioned that during the Stalin era it was not allowed to be reconciled or forgiven .
 More research is needed to prove reconciliation as a collective strategy evolved from a bottom-up initiation . Reconciliation may have evolved from bottom-down initiation .
 This would have been an exceptional phenomenon in a totalitarian regime . This would not have been a phenomenon in totalitarian regime, it says .
 A topdown effort for controlling the commemoration processes was also present after the meltdown . On the other hand, topdown efforts were also present .
 This is represented by the attempt of literary authors and political leaders who consciously and explicitly tried to interpret the need for speaking out and commemoration within the official ideological framework of the Soviet state .
 The latter phenomenon does not clearly suggest the direction of the process, but offers the possibility of a crossing point of top-down and bottom-up moves, which could have been also unique in the Soviet Union .
 The appearance of reconciliation and forgiveness on the collective level is also worthy of further analysis, as this is one of the few trauma processing strategies described by Miller and Touryan-Miller among Armenians . It shows a creation or recreation oriented path for survivors and their descendants, while it does not
 This strategy keeps the memories of the past alive, thereby possibly making signs for future genocides more visible, and thereby contributes to genocide prevention . In addition to this strategy, this strategy also makes signs of genocide more visible in the world .
 It also proves that a revival of a community after mass trauma is possible, and that trauma processing is feasible without self-blaming, self-destructive or revengeful actions . Finally, it also proves . that a revived community is possible .
 Lobbyists are trying to restrict Armenian genocide commemoration for fear of the negative reactions by the victims’ community . This has to be considered especially especially when lobbyists attempt to restrict Armenians' commemoration .
 Hajastani Hanrapetuthjan Sphjurchi Naxararuthjun, HH Gituthjunneri Azgajin Akademia, Erevani Petakan Hamalsaran, <<Noravanch>> gitachrtakan himnadram
 Marutyan, Harutyun, Iconography of Armenian Identity . The Memory of Genocide and the Karabagh Movement . The memory of the Armenian Genocide and Karabag Movement .
 As one of many West Germans who were interested in Africa, she sought for an increase of German-African relations . She espoused an intensification of the commitment of the West German state on the African continent . She was one of a number of West Germans interested in the continent .
 In 1959, KühnLeitz had semi-privately undertaken – as she was acquainted with Chancellor Adenauer – a journey to Africa . Already in 1959, she had already travelled to Africa in search of Africa .
 She was one of the first West Germans who made semi-governmental contacts with African politicians, parties, and mass organisations . She was able to make semi-official contacts with politicians and parties in Africa .
 On 23 February 1960, a bus of the DFG Wetzlar crossed the German-Belgian border . The bus crossed the border in the direction of Wetzler on her initiative .
 The trip initiated a new phase of the West German activities not just in the Belgian Congo, but also in the Central African region as a whole .
 Several Belgian officials still wished to maintain a purely Belgian sphere of influence in the Belgian-Congo . Their entrance to the Federal Republic of Germany was accompanied by difficulties .
 The Belgian intelligence service Sûreté de l'État had successfully prevented their border crossing . Just one day before, the Belgian intelligence services had successfully stopped the border crossing in Belgium .
 Kühn-Leitz had several contacts within the Belgian government and intelligence service at her disposal . She finally succeeded in bringing the future Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of Congo to her private mansion in Wetzlar .
 During the following two days, Lumumba and his party colleagues established contacts with the semi-governmental organisation Deutsche Afrikagesellschaft and several agents of the German private economy .
 The Congolese asked for permission and state support to establish a MNC-L office in the FRG539 and further support of their party by West German companies . The party is most likely for the upcoming election campaigns in May .
 Marcel Lengema, representative of the MNC-L in Germany and special secretary to Lumumba, received an office for party politics from the DAG in March . As a matter of fact, Marcel .
 The popular West German magazine Der Spiegel published a six-page interview with Lumumba in June .
 Burger-Eisenwerke had already operated in the East of the Congo for several years . In return for this support, Lumumba bound himself and his party – by contract – to lead the MNC-L on a pro-western political course . Meanwhile, the German Democratic
 The fact that these Congolese, who soon would play major roles in the development of the DRC, had chosen Germany of all possible allies to strengthen their position in decolonization had not been a coincidence .
 The FRG and the GDR were able to manoeuvre – even though officially involved in the global system contradiction of Cold War – their foreign policy concepts between the ones of the global super powers and those of the European colonial powers . The GDR and the FRG were able .
 Many Africans perceived attractive enough to wish for a close partnership with Germany . This provided the German states with a unique profile that many Africans saw attractive enough .
 It was not just the preference of the Congolese that had led to this example of German-African encounter . But it was not the only choice of the Congo .
 Officials of both German states had realized the economic and political potential of the Belgian Congo in regard to the purposes of their respective states . Already a decade prior, officials of both Germany and Belgium realized the potential .
 Resources – mineral as well as botanical – were abundant in the Belgian colony . The colony was founded in 1881 .
 The country's infrastructure is highly developed by African standards . Furthermore, its infrastructure was highly developed .
 The West and East German state had shown interest in the Belgian Congo . However, it was not just Belgium but the West and the East German had also shown interest .
 In the wake of decolonization, a second struggle on spheres of influence had begun in the Belgian Congo, the Central African region, the African continent, and the emerging 'Third World' as a whole – a struggle, the FRG and the GDR could not afford to ignore
 The practical execution of this struggle by West and East Germany – their activities – is central in my macrohistoric and comparative arranged thesis of which this paper shall give a brief insight into . The West-East struggle is central to my macrohistorical and comparative thesis . The thesis is that West
 In it the developments of the activities of governments, economies, and societies of both German states are represented and analysed by using the Central African region as a projection surface . In it it is analysed by analysing the development of governments and economies of both Germany and Africa .
 A complete region serves as a geographical frame of this German-German topic . In doing so not a simple case study on a single state of German interest but a complete region .
 Usually, studies regarding this topic focus on main areas of German interest as Western and Eastern Europe or North America, to draw their pictures of the German foreign relations .
 I argue in my thesis – and this paper – that it is reasonable to undertake research regarding this topic in such an area precisely because of its peripheral position .
 Main areas of interest usually form an exception – leading to an exceptional German behaviour – are the main areas of concern . It is reasonable to focus on the much more common periphery, to make general statements on the German foreign relations .
 A diplomatic recognition of the GDR would implicate its recognition as 'a' German state . It said that a diplomatic recognition would undermine West German claim of representing 'the German state as a whole'
 The West German Foreign Office was allowed and equipped to create counter-measures . Counter-measures came down to a full termination of diplomatic relations with each state threatening this doctrine . To prevent such a development, the West German foreign office was allowed .
 To this day, the German-German contradiction is one of the most popular myths in German history . The German and German contradiction is a popular myth .
 German activities in the Central African Region during the Second Scramble . German Activities in the . Central African . Region . During the Second .
 In it, the German activities in an area defined by the UNO as Middle Africa, but by myself as Central African region, are examined . The UNO defines Middle Africa as Middle African, but Central African .
 Chad, Cameroon, Gabon and Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, the Central African Republic, the Republic of Congo, the DRC, Angola, and Sao Tome and Principe . The African nation is one of Africa's most impoverished countries .
 A brief look is taken on the German activities on the African continent as a whole either . In addition, a look is also taken on German activities in the continent .
 The subjects, this thesis tries to outline and analyse – defined as German activities – involve a wide range of activities of the German states, economies, and societies . The subjects are defined as Germany activities, defined as . defined as activities involve a range of . activities .
 The activities of the German states include regular diplomatic activities, development policy and aid . The activities include economic, cultural and military policy and intelligence policy . The German states are also involved in the support of foreign media and development .
 The activities of the German private, semi-governmental, and state-owned economies involve activities of manufacturing companies, trade companies, and banks as well as financiers . Germany's economy is dominated by manufacturing companies and trade companies .
 The dealing of Central African issues within German societies and media will be analysed briefly . Furthermore, the dealing of these issues in German society and media is also discussed briefly .
 As this thesis attends to basic research, it had to fall back on a wide range of sources, situated in a great number of archives . The thesis had to rely on a range of archives, situated around the world .
 Some contemporary witnesses were interviewed and a wide range of secondary literature was consulted . In addition to some contemporary witnesses, some of the authors were interviewed .
 When African states gained their independence around 1960, a global run on the African continent – a second scramble for Africa – began . The African continent is now a global race for Africa, with many African nations gaining independence .
 It was contingent on imperial, postcolonial and Cold War conflicts, as its catalyst – the contemporaneous process of decolonisation . Decolonisation was the result of imperial and postcolonial conflicts as well as postcolonial postcolonial struggles .
 'Second scramble' was and still used as a postcolonial catchphrase – commonly, by African politicians and progressive authors . Usually, the term 'second scramble' is still used .
 This paper shall provide a brief insight into the meaning of its actual meaning . Therefore, this paper shall . provide an insight into its . meaning .
 Around 1950, the West produced 97% of its diamonds, 62% of manganese, 55% of gold and 47% of chrome on the African continent . The West produced its diamonds and manganes in the region .
 Uranium and Cobalt were produced as well, but information on their production rates is highly classified . Information on their quantities cannot be provided, as they were military relevant .
 81% of palm kernel, 64%  palm kernel oil, 70% cocoa beans and 70% of cocoa beans, 52% of sisal and 100% of gum Arabic were produced in Africa – to a large part in the Central African region .
 In the cases of wood, fur and fruits, no indication on their quantity, compared to global production rates, can be made .
 Africa had a high relevance to the Western, but also for global imports of several vitally needed products . This high relevance was also reflected in the value of African exports, according to the report .
 In Western Europe, former colonial powers, France, Great Britain, Belgium, Portugal and Spain, but also the FRG and Italy became significant competitors . France, Britain, Portugal, Belgium and Spain were significant competitors in Europe .
 The commitment of the former colonial powers, especially the ones of France557 and Great Britain, remained mainly concentrated on their former colonial empires . Although the commitment of former . colonial powers has been limited to former colonial . empires .
 In Eastern Europe, it primarily was the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics that participated . The Soviet Union was the most successful participant .
 Czechoslovakia and the GDR took part to a certain extent . Czechs and GDR also took part in the war .
 Near and the Middle East were initially represented mainly by Israel . The Near and Mideast was initially represented by Israel and the Near . Israel was first represented in the Near Middle East .
 Since the end of the 1960s, it was joined by Iraq, Persia and Saudi Arabia . Since the 1970s, the country has been joined by Iran, Iraq and Iran .
 In East Asia, the People's Republic of China and Japan became involved . Taiwan, North and South Korea showed some interest in the scramble .
 In North and Central America, the United States of America, Canada and Cuba participated . In South America, Brasilia showed most notably some commitment to the project .
 Algeria and Egypt – later on, Libya – participated in the north, the Republic of South Africa in the south . On the African continent, Algeria and South Africa – later later on - participated .
 Also regional centres of power, like Nigeria, Zaire, Tanzania, Guinea, Guinea and Ghana, can be mentioned here .
 Non-colonial powers had started to invest bigger amounts of money in African territories of the colonial powers . Already in the late colonial period of the 1950s, first non-colonies had started investing in Africa .
 They had established and consolidated their influence in the respective regions . Thus, they had not just done some business but also established and consolidated their influence . They had not only established and established their influence, they also consolidated their power .
 The colonial powers could most widely retain their influence monopoly, as it was backed by the colonial status of these territories . Nevertheless, the colonial powers were able to retain their power monopoly .
 When the Treaties of Rome were signed in 1957, the colonies became associated with the European Economic Community . Member states confirmed the influence monopoly of the colonial powers .
 EEC member states received additional liberties and rights for their activities in the associated territories . In return, EEC members received additional rights and liberties in the territories .
 This provided them with several economic, political and diplomatic advantages against their non-European competitors . This enabled them to have several economic and political advantages against European competitors .
 After decolonisation, this arrangement of influence distribution continued . After decololisation, it continued to distribute influence distribution .
 Admittedly, a jurisdiction backing it no longer existed, but the actual structures, that had grown over the years, were sufficient . The actual structures were sufficient, but they were sufficient to back the government .
 The networks of the former colonial powers were able to assert themselves against their new international competition . The networks were successful in the fight for their independence .
 The EEC and its member states were able to achieve a similar successful economic position . EEC member states have achieved a similar success in economic terms .
 Almost exclusively super powers, like the USA, the USSR, and later also the PRC, could challenge this hegemony of the EEC . In doing so, they were able to retain the independent associated states under West European influence .
 The superpowers also had a stimulating effect on the involvement of the Cold War in the second scramble . The second scramble was also stimulated by the superpowers .
 The USA pursued a radical policy of “global transformation” to establish “societies in conformity with system” and integrate them in the USAmerican sphere of influence . The USA sought to establish societies in ‘conformity’ with the system .
 Regional powers were powerful enough to influence the hinterland and their surrounding neighbour states for Western purposes . Regional powers should receive intense support either .
 65% of Western European and 28 % of US-American oil imports were transported on this route . The primary objective of the West was to secure transportation routes with strategic importance, like the route around the cape .
 In contrast to the USA and the West, the USSR exercised primarily restraint . The USSR exercised more restraint than the USA, the West .
 In the case of the PRC, this contradiction even lead to an open competition with the USSR on supremacy of the socialist movement in Africa . The PRC and the USSR even competed with each other on supremacy in Africa, according to the former president .
 The USSR and the SSC had a radicalisation of their Africa policies . European, Asian and African communist parties showed a radical commitment either .
 For the execution of the latter, the socialist states operated primarily from bases in Egypt, Guinea, Ghana, and later also Tanzania . For the executions of the former Soviet Union leaders, the Soviet Union was headquartered in Cairo .
 "From these bases, they tried to gain influence on the African continent," says Nairobi . "They tried to try and gain influence in Africa," she says .
 Similar to the West, their preferred target areas were the North African states and the bigger regional powers . Primarily here, conflicts of Cold War inflamed .
 Central African region – with its Congo Crisis and its Angola Crisis – became the hot spot of the Cold War in Africa between the 1950s and 1970s . Besides the Egyptian Suez Crisis, the region also had its Congo crisis and Angola Crisis .
 The much smaller conflict which appeared in Cameroon between the mid-1950s and the beginning of the 1960s can be put in this context as well . The smaller conflict between the 1950s and 1960s also can be seen in Cameroon .
 Refugee villages and fortified villages were built and a counter revolution was initiated, to take the movement its support in the population once and for all . After that, refugee villages were . built and fortified . villages were build and . built .
 This strategy worked out in the Congo but failed in the Portuguese overseas territory Angola, where in 1975 the socialist People's Republic of Angola was founded . In 1975, Angola became a socialist state .
 At the beginning of the 1970s, ties between the Western and the Eastern states fell loose . At the start of the 70s, the ties between Western and Eastern states were loose .
 Joined projects of Western, Eastern and 'Third World' countries were initiated . Joined projects were initiated. Joined projects began in the 1980s .
 East German ambassador Heinz Deutschland wrote to the East German Ministry for Foreign Affairs in July 1970, “For us it is important that the line Kairo-Brazza could become a barrier for the further expansion of the American imperialism and its allies in the South of Africa to
 Besides the Cold War and besides the super powers, even powers as the PRC, Japan and Brasilia – and West and East Germany – got a chance and expanded their spheres of influence on the continent .
 Man muß man sogar einmal den Gedanken erwägen, inwiewieweit es sogart gemeinsame Interessen des soz. "Gedankens"
 Quality and quantity of the two German states varied from target area to target area . Quality of the German states vary from target areas to target areas . It is difficult to provide exact information which applies to Central African region as a whole .
 The German commitment was notably intense in states with large strategic mineral and energy carrier resources and with a simultaneous high endangerment of security of supply . The commitment was notable in states such as Russia and China with large oil and mineral resources .
 The FRG supported primarily the moderate powers, who sought an evolutionary development of their states towards the West which would ensure an adequate security of supply for the West German economy .
 A greater financial support for the Belgian colonial power was initiated already during the process of decolonisation . Therefore, in the Belgian Congo, a greater financial backing was initiated .
 The FRG at first supported the moderate, antilumumbist powers, like the political party Alliance des Bakongo . Later, after the murder of Lumumba, also partly radical pro-western powers .
 In doing so, the West German state supported indirectly the anti-lumumbist opposition movement . The West German government supported the opposition movement in doing so .
 Another West German option to intervene indirectly into the political development of the Congo formed its media support . The Congo was ruled by the West German government .
 A printing office was installed in the Congolese capitol Léopoldville by the West German intelligence service Bundesnachrichtendienst for 23 million DM .
 Its revenue financed bribedies of politicians, unionists, journalists, and editors . Its revenue funded bribed politicians, unions, and journalists .
 Even the renegade government Tshombé of the Katanga province received West German weapons and vehicles as well as mercenaries . Even the government of the renegade government received weapons and mercenaries .
 In Angola the West German support was concentrated on moderate powers as well as moderate powers . In Angola it was mainly supported by moderate powers such as West Germany .
 During the Portuguese Colonial War, the FRG supported the Portuguese colonial power financially and militarily . The FRG was involved in the war between Portugal and the Philippines .
 Since the beginning of the 1960s, this support contained indirect financial support and supplies of military equipment . Since 1967 small amounts of weapons supplies have been provided to the country .
 Not until some months before the outbreak of the Angola Crisis in November 1975, the aid was extended . The Angola crisis was the first of its kind in 1975 .
 Military equipment and weapons were shipped from the East German international port Rostock to the People's Republic of Congo and flown to the Angolan capital Luanda .
 In this way, the MPLA received ten recoilless guns B-10 with 2,000 fragmentation grenades . 10,000 sub-machine guns with 10 million bullets ammunition, forty pistols, and ten,000 grenades . The MPLA also received 40 pistols, 40 pistols and
 Ulrich van der Heyden, Ilona Schleicher and Hans-Georg Schleichher are the co-stars of the documentary . The film was shot in Berlin, Germany, in 2009 .
 During the Portuguese colonial war, the GDR supported the pro-soviet powers in the MPLA . The GDR seems to have had a share in its government takeover in November 1975 .
 Compared on an international level, the East German commitment kept within limits. Compared on a international level on the international level . Compared to an international . level of international . levels, East German commitments kept within . limits .
 A tighter research on the exact worth and extent of the East German investments still remains to be done .
 The FRG seems most likely to have been one of the most important powers, operating at these African hot spots . Anyway, the FRG is most likely .
 Comparisons are possible, but should only be undertaken while being conscious of its weak empirical basis . As empirical studies on the concrete activities of the further involved states are still limited to date .
 The German commitment was low in countries with small strategic mineral and energy carrier resources . Contrary to these hot spots, the German commitment is low in some countries with a low endangerment of supply .
 FRG concentrated its commitment in the development of its already existing economic networks by the extension of existing economic structures . The FRG said it will continue to develop the country's economic networks .
 West German company Krupp cooperates with the Companhia Mineira do Lobito and the Sociedade Mineira de Lombige to build a mining and production site for iron ore near Lobito . Krupp says it will build the site for the iron ore in Angola .
 In exchange, Krupp and several West German steel companies should receive the major part of the Lobito iron ore production for a reduced price for several years . Krupp: "In exchange, several West Germans steel companies will receive the majority of the lobster iron ore .
 In exchange for industrialisation of this region, Assinez should receive resources, like copper, manganese, wolframite, zinc, and lead, at a discount on a longterm basis .
 In contrast, the GDR abstained from these activities – at least until 1975 . The GDR didn't take part in these activities until the end of the GBM era .
 The activities of both German states seem to have effected and accelerated an evolutionary development of the Central African economies . Thus, the activities of the German states have effected .
 By international comparison, it is a hard task to specify the German rank in the Central African second scramble . Germany's success in Africa's second-tier scramble is unlikely to be replicated internationally .
 Germany's economic influence in the region was high enough to increase the German influence . What is sure is that it was . high enough .
 The share Central Africa had in the West and East German global commerce may have decreased financially, but simultaneously, it increased materially . Central Africa's share of commerce with the West decreased financially but also increased materially in the 1990s .
 German Africa policies are fixated on trade and not on economic investments . Here, the success of the German African policies becomes apparent . The success of these policies is apparent .
 During the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, quantity and quality of the products, which Germany imported from Africa, could be raised, while the prices were lowered . Germany imported the products from Africa from Africa in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s .
 The German participation in the second scramble in Central Africa was a success . The two German states took part in the scramble . Germany and Germany will take part in a second scramble .
 The Hallstein doctrine is the superior relevance of Hallstein's doctrine, writes David Frum . Frum says Hallstein is a good example of the Hallstein theory . He says he is not satisfied with Hallstein’s claim that the doctrine is superior to Hallstein .
 Only when the German-German basic treaty was signed in 1972, was this policy replaced by a 'new' leitmotif – the German economic interests . Only when this policy was replaced by the 'New' policy of Germany's economic interests was replaced .
 The German-German contradiction was awarded, but it can be questioned, the author says .
 Hallstein doctrine was a commitment on behalf of the FRG and the GDR on the African continent . Already before the issuing of the doctrine in 1955, there had been a commitment .
 Admittedly, the German-German contradiction became a significant argument in the internal discussions to handle the regulation and utilization of the available resources in both German states in the 1950s and 1960s . The contradiction was a significant issue in internal discussions in both states in Germany .
 The excessive usage originated in the official formalities and unofficial regulations of the German ministerial bureaucracy . But it originated primarily in the unofficial regulations .
 Nearly all project proposals – written to receive resources from the state – forwarded to the respective ministries, were reasoned with the German–German contradiction . Nearly all proposals were written with the help of the German government .
 Only a fraction of these proposals finally received government subsidies .
 Economic – sometimes also geostrategic – arguments led much more often to a successful proposal . Instead, economic – sometimes – often – arguments often led to a proposal .
 Their implementation received a substantial amount of economic, cultural, and military aid of the German states . The implementation of the program received substantial economic and cultural aid .
 Development and intelligence aid can be made out as attempts to influence African decision makers – but not in context of the Hallstein doctrine . Several cases of aid to African governments have been made out of influence .
 Every survey on German history and foreign policy mentions this paradigm . Germany has a long history of its foreign policy, including the rise of the Nazis .
 It is impossible to give an overview on the secondary literature applying to this point. Therefore, it is impossible .
 In this case, not millions or billions, but hundreds of thousands of DM were invested . "Hundreds of thousands and ten thousands" were invested in the project, he says .
 In contrast, millions were invested for economic and geostrategic reasons –g.g. in projects of development and military aid .
 Parts of the GDR's commitment can also be interpreted as an attempt to breach the Hallstein doctrine . Certainly in the case of the . GDR, parts of its commitment to the G.N. could also be . interpreted as a breach of the doctrine .
 The overtures of the GDR concentrated themselves mainly on some economically relevant states and therefore suggest an economic background either . But looked at more closely, the overtures were not economic .
 The German-German contradiction cannot be referred to as the leitmotif in context of an evaluation of the West and East German activities . Therefore, the German-East German contradiction can't be considered as the main point of analysis of West and West German activities.
 The doctrine can be conceded a greater meaning in the field of propaganda and public relations . At best, the doctrine has a better use in the public relations realm .
 The German-German contradiction only flanked this and the other interests and masked them with its popularity in the German societies . The contradiction was only flanked by this and other interests, the author says .
 Hallstein doctrine seems to have been something propaganda and public relations always produce – more fiction than reality . Therefore, the paradigm of a primacy of the Hallstein theory seems to be something propaganda always produces .
 Wirtschaftsbeziehungen der Bundesrepublik Deutschland zu Angola und Mozambique. Wirtshaft beziehungs beziehabenen wirtschaften in Angola and Mozambica.
 Frey, Marc, “Die Vereinigten Staaten und die Dritte Welt im Kalten Krieg’s,” in Heiße Kriege im Kalte Krieg, ed. Frey .
 Eine historische Analyse über die Entstehungsbedingungen der eurafrikanischen Gemeinschaft von der Weltwirtschaftskrise bis zum Jaunde-Vertrag.29-1963 .
 In Heiße Kriege im Kalten Krieg, edited by Bernd Greiner, Christian Th. Th. and Bernd. Greiner . The book is published by Christian Th., Bernd . Greiner and Bergen .
 Der Beitrag der Staaten des Ostblocks zur Wirtschaft der Entwicklungsländer Afrikas. Tüttenberg, Elke, . Elke .
 Dániel VÉKONY: Relations between Hungary and countries of the Middle East during the Cold War . Vékony: The role of communist parties of these countries was key to Hungary’s relationship with these countries .
 The paper will shed some light on the economic aspects of the links between the states in question . It will also shed light on some of the link between the two countries .
 Hungary's role in the Eastern Bloc’s policy regarding the Middle Eastern region . Hungary was part of the Middle East Bloc's policy in the 1980s and 1990s . Hungary is a key member of the Eastern bloc .
 Due to scarcity of secondary literature at the time of writing this paper, I will lean on the relevant primary sources we collected during the above mentioned research process .
 The Middle Eastern region during the Cold War era was the focus of this article . Nevertheless, in order to put the whole subject into a sound context, I will use some vital secondary sources that cover the region . The author will use these secondary sources as a guide to the Middle East .
 Hungarian-Israeli relationship was such a special and delicate one during this era that it would not be possible to fully present this relationship together with those, Hungary had to other Middle Eastern countries in one conference paper . The reason for this is that because of the reasonably large number of Hungarians with
 The paper will ignore relations between Hungary and Israel and focus mainly on the links to other Middle Eastern countries that were “friendly” as far as the Eastern Bloc was concerned . This is why the paper will focus on the relationship between Israel and Hungary .
 By this expression I mean those states that were part of the Soviet sphere of influence at a certain time during the Cold War . By this term, this means those states who were in the Soviet zone of influence .
 I will further demonstrate this by presenting some examples in the domain of economic cooperation . I will also present some examples of cooperation in economic cooperation in the future .
 Relations with other Middle Eastern states that decided to side with the U.S. and its allies will not be covered here .
 The other objective of this paper is to demonstrate that although Hungary’s foreign policy was largely influenced by Moscow, Budapest was still able to play a somewhat autonomous role as part of the Soviet Bloc . Budapest was able to continue to play an autonomous role in the Soviet-bloc
 Post-war occupation and ensuing Stalinization of the country left little room for manoeuvre as far as foreign policy was concerned . Besides, the post-war Soviet occupation and the ensuing . Stalinization left little . room for . manoeuvre . as well as the ensuing Stalinized of the
 After the take-over by the communist party in 1948, Hungary had to follow the foreign policy dictated by Moscow . Hungary's foreign policy was dictated by the Communist Party .
 Stalin chose not to focus his attention on the Middle East . For a number of possible reasons, Stalin did not want to focus on the Mideast .
 He was tried and sentenced to death by the Rákosi government in 1948 . Shortly afterwards he was called back to Budapest, tried and executed .
 During the late 1940s into the early 1950s most of the Middle Eastern territories were still under the control of European colonial powers . Moreover, one has to keep in mind that during the . 1940s to the early . 1950s was still under European colonial . powers .
 Truman chose to leave this region to be dealt with by the colonial rulers . Stalin probably considered this region either as in the sphere of interest of the UK and France or not personally feel powerful enough to deal with the Middle East .
 During the last years of Stalin Hungarian foreign policy was very closely aligned to that of the Soviet Union . This era is characterised by very low-key connections between Hungary and the Middle East .
 Relations between the Soviet Bloc and the Middle East intensified after Stalin’s death . Relations between Russia and the Mideast intensified after his death .
 The Soviet Union’s ‘leap-frogging’ into the region after 1955602 led to a more active Hungarian foreign policy as well . Nevertheless, what Bernard Lewis described as the Soviet Union's “leap froggings” in the region
 Connections with “friendly” states such as Egypt, Syria, Iraq and Libya lay on a double-layered foundation . Connections to ‘friendly’ states like Egypt and Syria are based on a ‘double’ foundation .
 On the one hand, there were official channels between governments and embassies . On the other hand, the official channels were between the one and the other .
 Hungarian government kept close working relationships with communist parties of these countries as well . Hungary kept working relations with the communist parties in communist countries . On the other hand, however, the Hungarian government maintained close ties with these countries .
 There were regular meetings of communist party delegations from several countries in Hungary including those from the Middle East .
 HSWP Central Committee Department for Foreign Affairs, Motion fro the PC for the plan o the nonsocialist inter-party relations in 1979 . Motion fro PC for plan for the . plan o . the . nonssocialist inter party relations in . 1979 .
 The above-mentioned communist parties provided some vital, but many times flawed, information to the Hungarian officials and through Foreign Ministry officials residing in these countries .
 Official connections between the states provided data through the Foreign Ministry as well .
 Moscow made sure its allies were provided with all necessary data and insight in order to enable them to keep to the line favoured by the Soviet Union .
 The reconciliation of all the information from these sources meant a challenge . The reconciliation was a huge task for the team, with the help of the BBC .
 László J Nagy was involved in the Algerian coup d'état in 1965 . Nagy's role in the coup d’état was a key figure in the events of that year's coup in Algeria .
 Foreign Ministry officials in Budapest were much more sober in their analysis of the same situation . Foreign ministry officials thought twice about condemning the coup606 .
 The new government decided to keep a positive attitude towards the Eastern Bloc . This turned out to be the good decision, with the new government keeping a positive stance .
 In this situation, we can clearly see a dilemma between realpolitik and foreign policy based on ideology . In this case, the U.S. should be careful not to engage in the conflict with Russia, the Russian president says .
 Realpolitik gained the upper hand during the Cold War era during the Soviet Bloc . It was not always easy to reconcile these two factors during that era .
 Központi Bizottság Külügyi Osztály, Javaslat a Politikai Biziotzágnak a nem szocialista reláció pártközi kapcs
 It seems the communist movement in Egypt was expendable in order to keep Egypt in the Soviet sphere of influence and to avoid damaging valuable economic ties . It seems that it was necessary for Egypt to remain in the sphere of Soviet influence .
 Ideology played only a secondary or even less significant role in the relationship with these “friendly” Middle Eastern countries . Ideology was a secondary to the relationship between the U.S. and Mideast countries, writes Peter Bergen .
 Egypt is one of the best examples as to why we need to use the term friendly with a citation mark . In this sense, Egypt is a good example of why we should call it friendly . Egypt is the best example of a friendly relationship with the U.S.
 Nasser adopted many leftist elements as far as the government was concerned such as nationalisation of key sectors, land reform and anti-western foreign policy . But it did not mean that the Egyptian government was ready to go down the road of communism .
 Leaders used relationship between them and the Soviet Bloc in order to further their own and their nation’s interests .
 The economy and especially trade played a major role in the relations between Hungary and the Middle Eastern countries . Economic relations were important in Hungary's relations with the Middle East countries .
 The Middle Eastern countries’ markets presented an opportunity to market not only agricultural goods and products of the food industry, but those industrial products that were otherwise not competitive on the Western capitalist markets .
 Budapest relies heavily on the flow of foreign currency . This reliance on foreign currency meant that Budapest needed the goodwill of the partner governments . Budapest is now dependent on the goodwill from the governments of its partners .
 Hungary needed hard currency in order to get back into the system . But some of the countries themselves lacked the hard currency Hungary needed so badly . Hungary's economy has been hit hard by the recession .
 Many countries did not have the kind of goods that Hungarian industry could absorb on a mass scale . Hungarian industry has been hit hard by the lack of goods it can absorb on mass scale in Hungary .
 By re-exporting vast quantities of a given good such as cotton, the result was a downward pressure on the price of that good in question on the world market . The result of this is the result of a decrease in the value of the given good .
 Hungary has been hit hard by the fall of the price of its goods . The price of the goods has been reduced by a decrease in Hungary's export value . Hungary is the only country that tried to make up its accounts to Hungary .
 Foreign Ministry warned about deteriorating foreign currency conditions of some of these countries . Hungary needed to allocate loans to these countries in order to keep these relations from freezing altogether .
 This is indeed a damning picture of the partners that were supposed to act as markets for products of the Hungarian industry . The Hungarian industry has been in decline for years .
 This difficult situation eased somewhat after the skyrocketing of oil prices after 1973 . The situation eased after the rise of 1973 oil prices .
 A number of Middle Eastern countries boasted major income from petroleum exports, thus they found themselves in a much better financial position . Afterwards, a number of Mideast countries boasted income .
 As the financial situations of countries such as Iraq and Libya improved during the 1970s and 1980s, so did Hungary’s financial situation become increasingly worrisome . Hungary's financial situation became increasingly worrisome in the 1980s .
 This issue was caused by the ever-present negative trade-balance as mentioned earlier . This issue is caused by a negative trade balance as mentioned above .
 The fact that the financial institutions of these Arab countries chose to remove deposits in question from Budapest further demonstrates the limited scope and trust of these ‘friendly” governments towards Hungary . The banks in question removed deposits from Budapest .
 When talking about export markets for products of heavy industry, one must not forget the ‘special” trade relations with these countries . The export markets are important for heavy industry exports .
 The word “special” obviously refers to the defence industry in the archive documents . It is said to be a ‘special’ to the Defence industry .
 As early as 1947, Egyptian politicians tried to set up cooperation between Budapest and Cairo in this dimension as well, but it only materialised some years later in the 1950s .
 Hungary never played a significant role in providing military hardware to countries in the Middle East . However, one has to keep in mind that Hungary never provided military hardware in the region .
 Kádár’s words: “the actual suppliers were two socialist countries”
 It is more likely that the two countries in question were the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia . The two countries were more than likely to be Czechs and Soviet Union .
 The intention of importing civilian and military products from non-western countries was part of a wider attempt by the governments of the Middle East to break ties once and for all between them and their former colonial masters .
 The determination to develop an industrial sector that is not dependent upon the post-colonial economies of Western Europe naturally pushed these countries towards the Eastern Bloc .
 The military cooperation inevitably had some spill-over effects into the civilian sectors of the economy . On the one hand, with the military cooperation, it has also had a positive effect on the civilian sector .
 Hungarian heavy industry increased significantly from the 1950s onwards . For instance, the deepening “special” ties between Egypt and the Soviet Bloc meant interest for other products of Hungary heavy industry .
 Hungary’s offering of some hardware from its own stocks . This resulted in Hungary offering some hardware to the public . Hungary has offered some of its own hardware from own stock .
 The shortages could have positive effects on the Hungarian defense industry . The Soviet Union and some countries of the Middle East were strained during the Cold War .
 Hungary played a secondary role in foreign policy between the Soviet Bloc and the countries of the Middle East . Hungary’s role as a member of the Bloc was a secondary .
 As a member of the Warsaw Pact, the country needed to align itself to the policies dictated by Moscow . There was always some limited room for maneuver, but there were always some limitations .
 Hungary's national interest sometimes differed from those of other Eastern Bloc countries . After all, the national interest of Hungary sometimes differed . Hungary's own national interest was sometimes different from that of others . Hungary is one of the most successful countries in the world .
 Hungarian delegation to Syria in 1972 was a high-profile visit to Syria . Hungary has a long history of foreign policy in the Middle East .
 At the end of the visit, the two sides failed to issue a joint statement, which would have been a sign of political understanding . The two sides did not issue a statement, instead of a statement .
 Czechoslovak delegation visiting about the same time did not have such a problem . Czechoslovakia delegation was not at fault for the incident . The Czech Republic was visiting the Czech Republic at the time of the event .
 These events demonstrate that the foreign policy of the Eastern Bloc countries were not hand-controlled from Moscow, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: These events show that the policy was not hand controlled from Moscow .
 Hungary’s role in respect to negotiations with Iran further supports this idea . Hungary's role in Iran negotiations with the country further supports that idea, says Ferez .
 The Soviets asked the Hungarian government to act as a mediator between the two sides . Thus, the Hungarians were able to reach an agreement with the Soviets .
 Moscow did not shy away from using the diplomatic services of its allies when there was a problem in a bilateral relationship with a given country . This document further demonstrates that Moscow used its allies' diplomatic services when it faced a diplomatic crisis .
 Eastern Bloc countries were able to play an autonomous role in foreign policy during the years of Soviet dominance . Besides, this further increased the significance of the role the countries of the . Eastern . Bloc . could play an important role in the . role of the countries .
 This paper presented a quick glance into the complex relationship between Hungary and the countries of the Middle East . Conclusion: This paper presents a brief glance into Hungary's relationship with the region of Middle East countries .
 Budapest needed to keep a balance between self-interest and the realities of the Soviet Bloc . Budapest was in the midst of the Cold War in the early 1980s .
 As far as the “friendly” states of the Middle East are concerned, this ‘friendly’ attitude was a result of domestic and historic necessities . As far . as far . away, this "friendly" attitude was the result of historic and domestic necessities, he says
 The anti-colonialist ideology paired up with a leftleaning nationalist agenda made the Eastern Bloc a convenient “friend’s” to these regimes . Anti-colonialism and leftleaning nationalism made it a convenient "friend" to the regimes, writes Peter Bergen .
 The “friendliness of these governments had their clear-cut limits,’s author says . However, the ‘friendliness’ of the governments had to be checked, he says .
 The way the way the communists treated their own communist parties is very telling alone alone . The way they treated themselves was very telling and very telling .
 The persecution of Middle Eastern communist activists never really jeopardized the relations between the Soviet Bloc and these governments . Political and economic interests were always above ideology as far as these relationships were concerned . The fact that the persecution of Mideast communist activists didn't really jeopardize the relations with
 The effects of the closer than average relations between these countries and Hungary can still be felt today .
 Some of these students returned to their homelands, but many remained, creating a small, but rather well-educated, Muslim population in Hungary . Some of the students went back to their home countries, but some remained .
 The current government’s new foreign policy agenda, the so-called Opening to the East, also aims to warm up these relations between the Middle Eastern countries and Hungary . Hungary's new Foreign Policy agenda aims to warmer relations with the region .
 Relations that never lacked the clear aim of maximizing benefits, even if it meant sacrificing ideology . Relations that were friendly at times, but never lacked aim to maximize benefits .
 Hungary and the Arab World – Connections, opinions, standpoints 1947-1975 – JATE Press, Szeged, Hungary, 2006 . J. Nagy, J László, J. Lánszárászág és az arab
 Jaroslav Bureš studied Muslims in Visegrad, Institute of International Relations, Prague, Checz Republic, 2011 . Jaroslav Bureš is the author of a book about Muslims in the Czech Republic .
 Hungarian Foreign Ministry, Annual report of the Hungarian embassy from 1958 . Hungarian foreign ministry, Annual Report of Hungarian Embassy from 1958. Hungarian embassy .
 Austrian foreign policy under four power occupation was special during the Second World War . Dóra HORVÁTH: Austria's foreign policy during the occupation of Austria was special .
 On the one hand, the country was occupied by both Eastern and Western powers, just like as in Germany . On the other hand, there was a war between Russia and the West, and on the other side of Germany .
 There was no coherent verdict about the role of Austria in the War. On the other hand, there was no consensus on Austria's role in the conflict .
 According to the Moscow Declaration, Austria was the first free country to fall victim to Adolf Hitler’s aggression . Austria was also the first country to be attacked by Hitler's aggression .
 Austria was deemed responsible by the Declaration for its participation on Nazi Germany’s side . Austria was also deemed responsible for its involvement in the war .
 Due to this paradox, the legal form of the post-war treaty raised some questions . Due to the paradox, this post-WWII treaty raised questions about the legality of it .
 They wanted to sign a state treaty because this would have meant the re-establishment of an independent and democratic Austria following the occupation by the German troops . The treaty would have seen the return of Austria to a democratic and independent state .
 Austrian politicians wanted to avoid signing a peace-treaty which the Allies used with defeated countries . Austria refused to sign a peace treaty with the Allies .
 Austria was trying to run away from its past troubled by the Anschluss . Austria found itself exposed to a cross-fire between the East and West .
 The young republic had to learn how to balance between the East and West in order to achieve sovereignty . The young nation's sovereignty is now in full control of its sovereignty .
 Austria could have influence on treaty with Allied powers and on its own future, or its destiny was at the mercy of the Cold War . In this paper I would like to investigate the question whether Austria could influence on the treaty .
 I would like to prove that Austrian leading politicians and diplomats could affect the decisions of the four occupying powers on the Austrian treaty, even though Austria had a narrow room for maneuver as I will demonstrate later . I will show how Austria had to act in order to get around the world .
 The sovereignty of Austria promised both economic and political advantages to the U.S. in this region . Austria's sovereignty could impede the long-term occupation of the Eastern Zone by the Soviets .
 Such a treaty did not materialize because of the opposition of the USSR which wanted to economically exploit the Austrian Soviet Zone . However, such a treaty never materialized due to the opposition .
 Four occupying powers signed the First Control Agreement on July 4, 1945 . The occupation was also important for the Soviets as a pretext for stationing the Soviet Army in Hungary and Romania .
 This was meant as a short term solution for the period up to the establishment of a freely elected Austrian government recognized by the four powers . The four powers will be recognized by an elected government in Austria .
 The Austrian Treaty Commission had to create a preparatory form for the Austrian treaty . The Austrian treaty commission created the form of the treaty .
 It became clear that drawing up a treaty for Austria would take more time and would be strongly influenced by the relationship between the occupying powers . The process of drawing up the treaty would take longer than expected .
 The Second Control Agreement gave certain rights to the Austrian government . The agreement was part of an agreement to allow Austria to take control of the world's most populous countries .
 Any international agreement required a notice to the four powers . The government had a certain degree of maneuvering in foreign policy decisions as well .
 One was the economic interests of the main occupying powers, perceptible especially during the first part of the negotiation process . The economic interests were visible during the negotiations, especially in negotiations .
 The other was their international political strategies during the Cold War . The two countries were allies in the Middle East and Latin America .
 U.S. leaders after World War II were aware that the wartime economic boom would soon be over and that the international economy would need new stimulation to grow . U.K. leaders knew that the war boom was over and needed new stimulation .
 American economists were convinced that only a liberal world trade environment could sustain demand . U.S. economists believed that only liberal trade environment would sustain demand for goods .
 In the American strategy after 1947, the economic factor gained an especially important role . In the U.S. economic factor became an important part of the strategy .
 The United States wanted to focus on economic initiatives rather than military rearmament . The U.S. saw the Soviet threat in this first period of the Cold War primarily as political and psychological, not a military one .
 They wanted to answer to the Soviet challenge with economic strength and with a network of economically strong, self-supporting European and Asian power centers .
 The so-called Marshall Plan was essential to the postwar European economy . It addressed the continent’s serious dollar shortfall and thereby enabled its economic recovery .
 It became possible for the beneficiary states to put in place costly welfare systems which also defined their political choices . The beneficiary states were able to make their own political choices through welfare systems .
 The Marshall Plan's political and cultural impact on the beneficiary states was enormous as well as the economic and cultural importance of the Marshall Plan .
 The ERP was especially important both for Austria’s economy and for the political and cultural attitude of the country . Therefore, the ERP is especially important for Austria's economy and its cultural attitude .
 Austria was the only Soviet-occupied country to join the ERP, the Soviets having refused the Marshall Plan . Austria was also the only country in the Soviet-controlled zone to join ERP .
 The idea of the ERP marked ‘the Rubicon’ with no return in the course of the Cold War . The ERP is the idea of a Cold War-era-era ERP . The idea was marked “The Rubicon,’s ‘
 The fact that the divided Austria joined the program enhanced tensions and slowed down the negotiation process . Therefore, the fact . that the fact that . the . divided Austria . joined the . program enhanced . tensions and . slowed down . the negotiations .
 Smart diplomacy on Austria’s side was needed to avoid a more serious crisis with the Soviet Union . Smart diplomacy was needed for Austria to avoid more serious problems with the USSR .
 The USSR’s main economic interest was the acquisition of as many assets as possible in the occupied territories . After having lost at least 27 million people and about a quarter of its reproducible wealth637 as a result of the war, the USSR's main economic .
 They acquired the whole oil industry of the Eastern Zone and the facilities of the Danube Steam Shipping Company . They also acquired the entire oil industry in the Eastern zone . The Danube steam shipping company was owned by the company .
 Around 63,000 people worked in the so-called USIA-factories owned by the USSR in Austria . The factories were owned in Austria by the Soviets .
 The relationship between the Austrian government and the occupying Soviets became strained at an early stage . Because of this confiscation, the relationship became strained between the two countries .
 The tension and rivalry between the two superpowers started to grow immediately following the end of the World War . The tension between the superpowers began to grow after the war .
 Their strategies and actions were determined by their fears and beliefs concerning the aims of the other . Their strategies were determined to protect each other from each other's aims .
 In the years I am examining, their strategies changed according to the current international situation which of course had an effect on the fate of the Austrian treaty . The treaty was signed by the Austrian Republic in Vienna in 1961 .
 The tension between the two was growing constantly until the death of Stalin . The tension was constantly growing constantly between Stalin and Stalin .
 There were some international cases during the Cold War which had a particularly strong effect on the Austrian story . Such as the deterioration of the relationship between the USSR and Yugoslavia, the proclamation of the ERP, the communist takeover in Czechoslovakia and the negotiations on Germany .
 Stalin spoke in February 1946 in which he called capitalism the main source of wars and a threat to Soviet security . Stalin said capitalism was the main threat to the Soviet Union . Stalin called capitalism a source of war and said capitalism is a threat .
 This speech was understood by the West as a call for ideological struggle and Soviet expansion . West understood it as a sign of ideological struggle for Soviet expansion.
 The West’s answer was the demand that the Soviets leave Iran and the famous speech of Winston Churchill about the Iron Curtain in Fulton in March 1946 . Winston Churchill's famous speech in Fulton, Fulton, was the answer .
 The relationship between the Western powers and the USSR began to deteriorate even further at the time of the Cold War . The relationship with the West and the Soviet Union deteriorated further .
 The creation of the Austrian treaty was stymied during the Pfirst committee meeting in 1947 . The treaty was created in 1947 after a meeting in Vienna .
 Yugoslavian territorial and material claims also caused difficulties because they were accepted by the USSR but refused by the Western powers and Austria . Besides the problem of how to define the German assets, the Yugoslavian claims were also controversial .
 Yugoslavia, as a socialist country, was supported by the Soviet Union, despite the fact that it was not a Soviet bloc country, but not by the Western countries . Yugoslavia was not supported by Western countries, but by Soviet bloc countries .
 At this time the Cold War powers did not want to negotiate any longer . However, at this time, they wanted to negotiate a deal .
 Harry Truman proclaimed his doctrine against Soviet expansion two days after opening the conference in Moscow about the Austrian treaty . Harry Truman declared his doctrine two days later .
 International tensions increased in June when the ERP was proclaimed . Moreover, international tensions increased during the summer .
 A modified form of the Cherriére Plan came again into play at the London conference between 25th of November and 15th of December 1947643 .
 This plan would have given the Soviets a significant influence on the Austrian economy . It would have allowed them to influence the country's economy .
 The USSR would have gained control of 58% of Austrian oil production for thirty years . Certain equipment of the Danube Steam Shipping Company would have remain in Soviet possession . Austria would have supplied commodities to the value of one hundred million dollar within seven years .
 Austria was an important strategic point between north and south, between the western zone of Germany and Italy . In 1948 the negotiations on the treaty continued, but soon stopped, as news of the communist takeover in Czechoslovakia spread .
 Czechoslovakia appeared to be successful in balancing between the East and West . There was not even one Soviet soldier in this country . This shocked the Western powers and Austria because of the country's success .
 The USSR became more flexible about the content of the treaty; the Western powers were rather uncertain . The West was rather uncertain, and the USSR was more flexible .
 The USSR set up a blockade around WestBerlin, following currency reform in Western Germany . The tension further rose as the USSR . The blockade was set up by the USSR following currency reforms .
 The breakdown in relations between Tito and Stalin created a good opportunity for the Austrian treaty . The breakdown of Tito's relations between Stalin and Tito led to the treaty . Austria signed the treaty in 1945 .
 Real reason behind the failure of the meeting had more to do once again with the current international situation . However, the real reason for the failure is that the international situation in the world continues to be a problem .
 The USSR succeeded in detonating its atom bomb so the U.S. no longer possessed a monopoly on nuclear weapons . The USSR detonated the atom bomb in 1953 . The United States no longer had a monopoly in nuclear arms .
 This increased American concerns regarding the Soviet intentions; this also slowed down the negotiations between the two countries . This increased concerns regarding Soviet intentions and slowed down negotiations .
 In May 1949, the Federal Republic of Germany was established in the West, while in October the German Democratic Republic was proclaimed in the East . In October, the West and the East were established in 1949 .
 German unity failed which was especially relevant regarding Austria . German unity obviously failed, especially regarding Austria, says Jahn .
 The two cases were often mentioned together together on international negotiations .
 Both countries were occupied by Western and Eastern Eastern and Western powers . Both needed an agreement between the Eastern and . Western occupiers to be independent and unified .
 Even the American policy was divided on the issue of Austria, even the U.S. policy . Besides all of these international happenings which resulted in a . deep gap between the West and East, even American policy on Austria .
 As the European strategy of the U.S. changed in the 1950s, the latter got a larger role in American politics . The European strategy shifted in the 50s and 60s .
 They wanted to strengthen their European presence not only economically, but also militarily . The establishment of NATO in 1949 was underlined by the establishment of the organization .
 At the beginning of the 1950s, only five uncertain points remained in regards to the treaty . The treaty was signed in 1953 .
 Both the United States and the USSR offered options for agreement which the other side could simply not accept . Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union offered options which were simply not accepted . Both sides could not accept a deal which would have to be accepted .
 The Soviets linked the Austrian issue with the situation in Trieste . For example, the issue was linked to the crisis in the city of Trieste, Italy .
 They impugned the Austrian measures against former Nazis and the remilitarization of Austria by the Western powers . They said Austria's measures against the former Nazis were part of the West's policy .
 Austria wanted to reimburse the aid they gave after the World War . They wanted Austria to reimburse them for the help they gave .
 Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, representing the USSR, created the solution for Germany with a precondition for the reduction of the occupying troops from Austria . The solution was to reduce the number of German troops in Austria .
 The Western powers created a draft for a short treaty, which did not even mention the case of the German assets . Western powers also had enough fantasy to create a draft . The draft for the short treaty was not even mentioned in the case .
 It became clear that none of the Cold War powers wanted an agreement on the Austrian question . The Austrian question was a Cold War issue, but it was never solved .
 Austria tried to bring its case to the forum of the United Nations . Austria has tried to take the issue to the U.N. as a result .
 The Security Council of the UN could make binding decisions, but both the United States and the USSR held veto power in the Council . Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union were in charge of the Security Council at the time .
 Only consensus between the U.S. and the USSR could have offered a solution to the problem . Only consensus could have been reached between the United States and USSR .
 These two events fundamentally changed the relationship between the Soviet Union and Austria . The Soviet-Austria relations between the two countries changed dramatically in recent years .
 The USSR took over the costs of the maintenance of the Soviet occupation in the Soviet-occupied Crimea . The USSR was forced to take over the cost of maintaining the occupation .
 In 1953, a marked-change of tone between the two countries gradually took place . The two countries became friendly and friendly .
 In 1947, Trieste was declared an independent city state under the protection of the UN as the Free Territory of Trieste . Trieste is now a city state declared by the UN in 1947 .
 Austria would forbid Austria any involvement in coalitions or military alliances . It would forbid the establishment of foreign military bases on Austrian territory . Austria would not be allowed to join military coalitions, alliances or alliances with foreign countries .
 Molotov also proposed that the occupying powers would defer the deduction of their troops from Austria until the conclusion of the peace treaty with Germany . The occupying powers also proposed to defer the deductions until the end of the treaty .
 Only an independent state could decide not to join any alliances, says Dulles . Dulles: Only independent state can choose not to do so in any alliance .
 Molotov became more flexible about the connection of the German and Austrian cases in early 1955 . This idea played an important role later when it was agreed that Austria would declare neutrality as an independent state .
 He mentioned the need for bipolar reconciliation between the USSR and Austria in order to reach an agreement . He also said the USSR-Austria need to reach a bipolar reconciliation with Austria .
 The Austrian government responded that it was glad that the USSR was open to settle the unresolved issues . However, all occupying powers should be involved, the Austrian government said .
 The Austrian government agreed to make sure an Anschluss would not occur again . Furthermore, the Austrian government said it would make sure it would not happen again .
 The government wanted to understand how they should guarantee that Anschluss would not occur anymore . Government wanted to know how to guarantee Anschlassuss would no longer occur .
 The USSR promised to investigate the question of the guarantee against the Anschluss . The USSR agreed that all powers would have to be involved in the developments .
 Austrian statesmen invited to Moscow bipolar meeting . The meeting was a prelude to an invitation of statesmen to a Moscow meeting . Austria and Russia will meet in Moscow on bipolar matters .
 The parties agreed on the redemption of the German assets by Austria for a much lower price than stated in the earlier plans . Austria will redeem the assets for much lower than the earlier planned price stated .
 Austrian policy played a significant role in the birth of this treaty as well . Austrian policy also played a role in this treaty .
 Austria did not have the needed sovereignty to follow its own ways in political decision making . This was not an easy role considering Austria's lack of sovereignty . Austria's role was not easy considering Austria not having the necessary sovereignty, it said .
 Austrian political leaders had to find unconventional ways to enforce the country’s interests . Because of this, Austrian politicians had to look for unconventional ways of enforcing the country's interests .
 Austrian politics and diplomacy helped Austria drive the occupying countries towards an agreement . Austrian politics helped Austria to drive the occupied countries towards a deal . Austria's diplomacy helped the occupying nations to reach an agreement on a treaty .
 This aimed at gaining tangible advantages while avoiding unilateral constraints by continuously maintaining good relations with both sides . This aimed to gain tangible advantages , while also avoiding unilateral . constraints by avoiding . unilateral constraints .
 The unified strategy of the Austrian foreign policy after the Second World War pointed to a policy of balance . Austria's foreign policy was based on balance between the two sides of the war .
 Austria tried to build good relations with both of the Cold War superpowers without any commitment; just as Switzerland did . Austria's relations with the U.S. in the 1950s and '60s were strained by Cold War tensions . Austria had no commitment to any Cold War relations with
 The main goal of the political leaders was to obtain the sovereignty of the country, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin says the main goal was to get the country's sovereignty .
 After 1945, the Austrian people, the political elite at least, believed in the viability and the future of their country, which was not the case in 1918 . The Austrian people believed in their country's viability and future .
 The first important step was the meeting of the Austrian regions from the Western zones in 1945 . The meeting was the first important meeting between the two regions in Austria .
 They urged for the expansion of its competence to the whole of Austria . They also urged for an increase in its competence in Austria .
 The Renner government was established in the communist zone with some communist ministers . They did so even though the Renner Government was established with some communists .
 One of the main perspectives of Austrian politicians was that they wanted to forestall the partition of the country . Austrian politicians wanted to prevent partition of Austria from becoming a nation .
 It also helped to forward the Austrian interest that in contrast to the interwar period both political sides now paid attention to the stability of their internal affairs .
 The political elite exploited everything for the aim of independence . Although there were occasionally tensions and disputes between the two main political parties concerning some concrete decisions .
 Austrian leaders agreed that it would only serve the country’s swift independence and its future in the international community if Austria would be seen as a victim of the German aggression rather than an ally of the Nazi Germany . Austria's leaders said it would serve Austria's swift independence .
 The Nazis wanted to avoid bearing any responsibility for the crimes of National Socialism . Hence they wanted to . avoid bearing . any responsibility . for the . crimes of . National Socialism, they said .
 Austrian government and state authorities were not open for discussion on questions such as reparations for Jewish victims or the facilitation of the return of Austrian emigrants . For this reason, the Austrian government did not discuss reparations .
 No real confrontation and discussion could emerge about Austria’s recent past and the role of Austrian National Socialism . Moreover, because of this aspiration, no real confrontation could emerge over Austria's recent past .
 Austria could take decisions except of certain fields in foreign policy issues . Austria could make decisions except in certain fields . Austria's foreign policy could include foreign policy in certain areas .
 The occupied country was allowed to establish diplomatic relations with other governments for example . The occupied countries were allowed to set up diplomatic relations .
 Any international agreement required a notice to the Allied powers and could be considered as accepted only if it was not appealed within 31 days by the Allied Council . The structure of foreign policy had to be organized as well .
 Actually, this began before the provisional government was established, says the BBC . "This began before this began," he says .
 On April 16th 1945 a fruitful, efficient meeting of the former employees of the foreign affairs institution took place . The former employees negotiated about reorganizing .
 In this first established institution of foreign affairs, onetime Christian Socials predominated . In this case, they predominated. In the 1930s and '60s, "Christian Socials" predominated."
 In the developing state framework foreign affairs belonged to the Chancellor’s Office and this remained until 1959 . Foreign affairs remained in charge of foreign affairs until 1959, with the Chancellor's Office .
 Guidelines were published aiming at the unified action of the Foreign Service, keeping the interests of the state . Guidelines aim to unify action of Foreign Service keeping the interest of the State .
 These guides were among others about topics such as Austria’s victim role or the viability of the country . Austria is Austria's victim role and the country's future is uncertain .
 Austria started to build up relations abroad . For the control of the country’s international image the Foreign Service sent delegates to Austrian News Agency .
 The country was dependent upon the permission of the occupying powers . However, it was dependent on the permission granted by the occupation powers .
 First, Austria could only establish representations in the capitals of the occupying countries . Austria was only able to establish representation in the capital of the occupied countries .
 Allied Council allowed the Austrian government to set up political representations in states which acknowledged Austria – except for Japan and Germany . Austria's Foreign Service leader Karl Gruber requested the move .
 After the Second Control Agreement Austria could commence diplomatic relations with member states of the UN without the special permission of the Allied Council . Austria could begin diplomatic relations without special permission from the allied council . Austria was the last member of the United States to enter into diplomatic relations .
 The Austrian Foreign Service under Karl Gruber’s management made a big effort to expand the network of representations all over the world . Despite the modest financial and human possibilities, the Austrian foreign service under Gruber's management expanded its network .
 In 1949 there were already twenty embassies, four political representation and twelve consulates . In 1949, there were twenty embassies and four political representations .
 Austria also built up relations as soon as possible with international institutions . Austria joined the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund by 1948 . Austria also joined the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in 1951 .
 Austrian League for the United Nations was established in 1946 aimed at spreading the objectives of the UN and at raising awareness on the need for Austria's integration into the international community of states . The Austrian government exploited every auditing opportunity at the negotiations to bring its conception closer to the occupying powers .
 Austrian diplomacy confronted Washington after 1949 when the U.S. was reluctant to restart the negotiations . Austrian diplomacy even confronted Washington .
 Politicians of both big parties tried to exploit their party-relations as well for the aim of speeding up treaty negotiations . Politicians from both parties were trying to speed up negotiations .
 In 1947, Figl, then Austrian chancellor, turned to the French president, Léon Blum with his claims about the treaty . Figl turned to Blum in 1947, who was Austrian chancellor .
 Until 1955 the whole infrastructure of the Foreign Service was working for a swift contract with the occupiers . Austria sent a memorandum to all members of the UN concerning its case .
 Az osztrák külpolitika a szövetséges megszállástól az európai integrációig (19451995), 30 -31.1995, 30 -30.1995 . Az os
 Der UN-Standort Österreich und der außenpolitische Status Östersreichs nach 1945, 20.30, 1945, islööös . The status of Österria is Österrea, aufregnant Österra
 Austrian politicians were of the opinion that Austria could not be effective if it would turn to the General Assembly alone, as a non-member state . However, Austrian politicians said that Austria would not be able to be effective in the process .
 This initiative would be only effective if a member state of the UN would bring the case in front of the Assembly . The initiative would only be effective if member state would bring it to the UN Assembly .
 Austria planned to start negotiations with a state which was member of the UN, but was not a member of NATO so that Austria could avoid that the initiative looks as a unilateral action . The initiative was intended to avoid that Austria would look as an act of unilateral action.
 Austrian leaders decided to make contact with Brazil for this aim . Austrian leaders have been in contact with the Brazilian government for this week .
 Gruber said Brazil would be a suitable partner as it was a UN member, but non-member of the NATO; it was an important country and quite independent from the two superpowers . Gruber’s explanation was that Brazil was a member of the UN, but not of
 Gruber writes that the government was choosing between Brazil and India . Gruber says the government is choosing between the two countries .
 They found that India represented neutrality too strongly to come up with this initiative in front of the Assembly which was sensitive and did not affect the Indian sphere of interest . They said the initiative was too sensitive to be taken up by the Assembly .
 Brazil urged the General Assembly of the UN to make a statement to the four powers insisting on their responsibility for reorganizing a free and independent Austria . Brazil has called on the U.N. to hold a statement on reorganizing Austria .
 In December 1952, Gruber gave a speech in front of the UN General Assembly . Gruber was a member of the U.N. General Assembly in 1952 .
 He stressed the need for an early agreement between Austria and the EU . He explained the country’s situation and highlighted the merits of the country . Austria is currently in the process of reaching an agreement .
 The General Assembly appealed to the signing powers of the 1943 Moscow Declaration for the fulfillment of their pledges towards Austria . All of these efforts resulted in an appeal of the General Assembly on December 20,1952 .
 The General Assembly addressed an “earnest appeal’690 to the governments concerned to reach an agreement and sign an Austrian treaty . The appeal was addressed to governments concerned .
 Foreign policy of the Austrian government became very determined after 1953 . The Austrian State Treaty was signed by Julius Raab in 1955 .
 He succeeded in reaching an agreement with the USSR, with whom Austria had had the most conflicts . Austria had also had a conflict with the Soviet Union in the past .
 It was a big step because the USSR gave up most of its claims and its significant impact on the strategic industrial branches of Austria . The USSR had a significant impact in Austria's strategic industrial areas .
 On May 14, 1955, the occupying powers met in Vienna to sign the Austrian State Treaty . The USSR hoped it would set a good precedent for the question of the German case to prevent West-Germany from joining NATO . After a process lasting ten years, the occupy powers signed the Austrian
 Figl succeeded in removing clause about responsibility of Austria for participation in the war on the side of Nazi Germany . Figl, as Minister of Foreign Affairs, succeeded in the last minute in removing the clause about the responsibility .
 The Treaty restored the independent state not established it, it is also important for Austria that it was restored not established . Austria is now in the process of becoming an independent state of Austria . The Treaty was also important to Austria that the Treaty restored its independence .
 Germany has occupied the sovereign state before . This expression also confirmed that Germany had occupied the country before .
 On May 15, the State Treaty was signed by the ministers for foreign affairs of the occupying powers . It ensured sovereignty and freedom for Austria during the thick of the Cold War . The treaty was signed in May 1945 .
 The process of the Austrian treaty negotiations took place during the Cold War which created a very tense international environment . The destiny of the treaty and of Austria depended highly upon the relationship between the two blocks . Other twelve countries joined the treaty acknowledging Austria as a sovereign, independent and democratic state .
 The history of the Cold War period and the international environment affected the arrangement of the treaty . On the one hand, I wanted to demonstrate how the history of Cold War era affected the arrangements .
 Austrian politicians and diplomats still have an affect on the decisions of the four occupying powers . On the other hand, I wanted to prove that Austrian politicians .
 They could speed up the negotiations and influence the final decision, even though they had only a narrow room for maneuver . They were able to speed up negotiations .
 Albrecht, Robert Karl: “Der UN-Standort Österreich und der außenpolitische Status Österrianichs nach 1945.” ‘Dieder’: ‘Albrecht’, ‘Der UN
 Austrian Foreign Policy and Security Structures in the 20th Century . Institutional Change in Austria Foreign Policy . Austrian foreign policy and security structures .
 Der österreichische Staatsvertrag und die Voraussetzungs seines Zustandekommens ise in Germany . Der überreichischischisch ise auf aussussungsvertrag .
 War operates as an explicit mechanism aimed at either annihilating the enemy or forcing surrender by completely damaging the enemy’s capability for resistance . War is aimed at annihilating or forcing the enemy to surrender by damaging its ability to resist resistance .
 The concept of war also entails various non-lethal activities, targeted at the minds of enemies instead of their bodies . extermination could be the most direct and physical means to facilitate disarmament .
 These activities aim to assault not just enemy combatants, but also the entire political body of the enemy . These activities are aimed at attacking the enemy's political body, the author says .
 The term ‘psychological warfare’ has been used to represent these activities that target minds in order to destroy the morale of the enemy . The term has also been used in the context of psychological warfare in the US .
 This shift toward unorthodox methods of warfare has changed the dynamics of how strategic warfare in the battlefield is understood . This shift to unorthodox methods has led to a shift toward unconventional warfare .
 This article intends to explore the relationship between psychological warfare and soft power in context of the Cold War . It will explore how psychological warfare can be used as a weapon of war .
 This article aims to argue that when psychological warfare interacts with soft power, it civilianizes the battlefield, creating a perpetual state of total war . In doing so, this article argues that psychological warfare can be used as a weapon of war . The author also argues that soft power can also be
 The Cold War Propaganda Machine is a profound case study that demonstrates sophisticated frameworks that shaped the totality of war beyond a nuclear battlefield that never materialized between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 The lack of physical confrontation needed to civilianize the conflict between the two powers, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Nearly every aspect of civilian life was weaponized with psychwar and viewed as a potential battlefield for the “hearts and minds” of the population . Nearly all aspects of life were weaponized by psychwar .
 Soft power tactics and propaganda interacted with dynamics of civilian culture, media, radio and social capital to broaden and modify the understanding of unconventional warfare for the Cold War rivals . The Cold War used soft power tactics to fulfill the fulfillment of strategic aims of the rivals .
 The enhanced role of the intelligence and military community within the distinctly civilian consciousness of the body politic played a pivotal role in blurring the identity of combatants and non-combatants, says the author of the book .
 Interaction between psychological warfare and soft power reshaped this understanding during the Cold War . Even though intelligence and military are understood to be central to the conventional operations of armed warfare, psychological warfare reshaped the understanding .
 Public communications and information dissemination were viewed as part of the war strategy . Public communications was viewed as key to the success of the campaign .
 Intelligence and military became more pertinent to civilian spheres. Consequently, intelligence and military become more pertinent .
 This production of a civilianised battlefield of psychological warfare and tactics of soft power that were employed does not follow the hard power dynamic of two or more well-identified rivals . This is not the same as a hard-identified rival, it is a soft power dynamic .
 The identity of the perpetrators and planners of propaganda in many cases was purposefully obscured . Instead, the identity of perpetrators of . propaganda was purposefully . obscured, while inherently combatant bodies of the war machine such as the intelligence community and army found enhanced roles in non-combatant civilian parts of
 The consequence of this perpetual state of war was the appearance of a mainstream American culture of conformity . The result of the war was an appearance of conformity that relied heavily on propagation rather than substantial realizations of material life .
 Counterculture movement was a backlash to the state of total war and culture of conformity . Disillusionment with this propagation gave birth to the counterculture movement as a backlash . The movement was born out of disillusionment with total war .
 Radio was one of the most profound mechanisms in which the battlefield infiltrated civilian life . Radio was an attempt to include non-combatants into the variables of war .
 Radio Free Europe was used as a pivotal instrument of propaganda to exercise American soft power and psychological warfare in countries behind the Iron Curtain . Jackson, authored by John Allen Stern, quotes the example .
 RFE gave voice to the European political exiles with a strategic ambition to empower internal opposition to Communism in Eastern Europe . RFE was founded in 1945 and published the first version of this article .
 RFE exploited a wide range of elements of civilian life including news, music and culture to operationalize the battlefield of psychological warfare, thereby facilitating the creation of total war . As a result of the RFE exploitation of the battlefield, RFE used news and music to operate on the battlefield
 The identity of the perpetrators behind RFE propaganda was kept a mystery for strategic reasons, Stern said . Stern emphasized that the Central Intelligence Agency’s relationship with RFE was not disclosed . Stern said the identity of RFE's perpetrators behind the propaganda was a mystery .
 Only the soft power dimension of this form of warfare allowed for such obscurement of the identities of the perpetrators of psychological warfare tactics . The example of RFE reinforces this.
 The relationship between soft power and psychological warfare also civilianized the identities of combatant intelligence outfits such as the CIA, which furthered the formation of total war . Soft power helped create the rise of the CIA as a major intelligence agency .
 RFE was a significant public communications project that emerged out of the interaction between soft power and psychological warfare . The project transformed the role of the intelligence community away from the combat zone and into civilian life .
 Intelligence community became relevant to civilianized battlefield that it facilitated . CIA went to farthest extent possible possible to remain credible within civilian sphere . CIA and RFE have a history of working together in the U.S.
 Great emphasis was placed on establishing and maintaining the identity of RFE as private . Great emphasis placed on maintaining RFE's identity .
 One method that was adopted was the use of philanthropic foundations because it was “the most convenient way to pass large sums of money… without alerting the recipients to their source” However, the nature of this mechanism was only a guise and the actual relationship was much different than
 The power of the relationship was unchecked by the stockholders which made the relationship starkly different from a typical public corporate structure . This is because, as Saunders mentioned in a quote from the 1952 Congress Committee, the power was unchecked . Saunders mentioned that the relationship between the two was starkly
 This led to the question of the strategic necessity behind this effort of maintaining a private identity, especially in ensuring that the monetary relationship with the CIA remained a well kept secret . The CIA's relationship with Russia's intelligence services remained a secret, the author says .
 The answer to this question can be found in the dynamics of the civilianized battlefield and total war . The answer is to the question: The dynamics of total war and civilianized war .
 Creators of RFE understood that when civilians were viewed as variables of war, credibility was an important weapon to achieve victory in the battle of ideas and information .
 The necessary goal to accomplish credibility among civilians could not be achieved if ties with the CIA were exposed . Civilian views of the intelligence community were largely associated with deception, the author says .
 The decision to make news reports as accurate and as objective as possible was crucial to the RFE operation . It was not assumed by Voice of America and BBC because they were known as government-supported entities .
 It can be deduced that exposing the CIA’s relationship with the Committee and the radio stations would have worked against the interest in establishing credibility . From this understanding, it can be . deduced . that exposing . the relationship between the CIA and the Committee would have . worked against
 'Great caution was adopted in ensuring that the relationship remained a secret'
 The military facilitated the creation of total war by civilianizing the battlefield . Along with the intelligence community, the military also helped create total war . Civilian Role of the American Military was civilianized .
 The American military entered the civilian sphere when it assumed responsibility for cultural dissemination, which included activities that were inherently non-combatant and non-violent in nature . The U.S. military became part of the military's role in cultural dissemination .
 The military attempted to use soft power to introduce American way of life to civilian populations particularly in Germany . The U.S. tried to introduce soft power .
 It conducted psychological warfare by using artistic and cultural expression to shape opinions and control information, says the U.S. government .
 Music served as a compelling soft power instrument in postwar Germany as noted by Amy C Beal .
 OMGUS facilitated the ICD in conducting cultural renewal within civilian spheres of Germany . OMGUS was a strictly military organization, but OMGUS allowed ICD to conduct cultural renewal in civilian spheres .
 Officers of the military government undertook tasks of popularizing American classical music and diversifying German views of Western music . Officers were tasked with popularizing German classical music, diversifying Western views .
 Cold War policies that civilianized the battlefield and created a state of total war had consequences that impacted social and cultural dynamics of civilian lifestyle, as discussed in the next section . The next section will discuss the consequences of the Cold War .
 A mainstream American culture of conformity emerged as the most ardent consequence of state of total war in the 1950s . Conformity culture emerged as a result of the state of war in 1950s. Conformities emerged as most of the world's most extreme expression of conformity .
 As the state of total war deepened, it impacted cultural aspects of an increasingly weaponized civilian life and created a lifestyle of conformity . As the war deepens, it also impacted the cultural aspect of civilian life .
 The overarching societal impetus was to conform to the Cold War narrative and to live a life consistent with that narrative in every aspect of behavioral expectations . The Cold War era was dominated by Cold War propaganda .
 The culture was based on an American way of life that upheld ideals of freedom and prosperity . It was allegedly depicted the American ideology of democracy as opposed to the communist tyranny of the Soviet Union .
 This culture operated through massive levels of consumption and the free market economy, says CNN.com's John Sutter . This culture operates through massive consumption and free market economies, he says .
 It created a culture of conformity to a way of life that reflected an ideal living standard of the American middle class . Hence, it created an ideal standard of living for the middle class, the author says .
 Ownership of comfortable homes in growing urban areas along with an income that allowed purchasing of consumable goods became central to the projected culture of ideal American life . Ownership in comfortable homes was central to an ideal American lifestyle rooted in conformity .
 The Rebellions Against the Cold War Order, 1965-1975’s “The Rebellions” argued that the state of total war created a need to project a certain image of American prosperity asserted as the core of good and democratic American life in order to confront the image of
 Because the battlefield entered civilian lives, there was a strong pressure to conform . American civilians had to fall in line with the anti-communist expectations of the American way life .
 “The Rebellions Against the Cold War Order, 1965-1975,” The Cambridge History of the Cold . War, Volume II: Crises and Détente, ed. The Rebellions against the . Cold War . Order, Order, and Order, were created in
 This culture emerged out of a civilianized battlefield was based on propagated ideas instead of substantial realizations of material life . However, this culture was based largely on propagating ideas, not realizations .
 Heavy dependence on propagation caused overarching disillusionment in the U.S. people.708.
 This disillusionment was created by what was perceived to be an empty ideology . It gave rise to the counter-culture movement as a backlash to state of total war and culture of conformity .
 The counter-culture movement was not confined to America, but was global . It was a global movement that spread to all over the world .
 Counterculture was a unique rebellion that took shape differently from previous forms of resistance to dominant Cold War ideas and policies . Counterculture took shape in a unique way different from previous Cold War rebellion .
 This rebellion originated not externally, but within “the universities, the literary circles and even bedrooms of mainstream society”710.710. The rebellion originated within ‘the universities and literary circles,’ says the author .
 Counter-culture posed challenges not only to authority but also to the very basic ideas about the good life and underlying notions of social life . Counter-culture posed challenges to the authority and basic ideas, says author .
 Counter-culture can be viewed as the unintended consequence of Cold War policies meant to resist social change . Counter culture can be seen as a Cold War response to anti-American sentiment . Counter-cultural counter-culture may be the unintended result of the Cold War .
 These policies unintentionally established and encouraged the social change that they were intended to prevent . The policies were meant to prevent social change, the author says .
 Leaders of states introduced policies of research, development, education and innovation to initiate strong competition against global adversaries . Leaders of state introduced policies to encourage research and development .
 Cold War policies equipped citizens with intellectual and ideological tools to rebel against social norms that emerged from the policies of Cold War . However, these policies equipped citizen with intellectual tools to resist social norms .
 Citizens began to question not just the credentials of their leaders, but also their values . Citizens began questioning their leaders' credentials, and values .
 The United States, West Germany and even the Soviet Bloc witnessed youth movements . Youth movements protested the state of total war created by the Cold War narrative .
 In the United States, the Civil Rights movement protested racism in a society propagated as epitome of equality, freedom and liberty . In the U.S. it emerged as a subgenre of the counterculture movement .
 The environmental movement, anti-war movement and feminist movement also surfaced as progressive subgenres of the counter-culture movement . Anti-war, environmental and anti-feminist movements surfaced as counter-campsals .
 Backlash to civilianization of battlefield also took the shape of domestic terrorism and violence . However, along with these progressive movements, backlash to civilianizing of battlefields also took place .
 Right-wing conservative groups mixed counter-culture politics with paramilitary behavior, Jeremi Suri argued . Suri: It gave rise to politics of “law and order” in the early 1970s in the United States .
 Mainstream politics moved away from the revolutionary sentiment of counter-culture because of its violent streak . Counter-culture's violent streak led to mainstream politics moving away from revolutionary sentiment because of violent streak, says historian .
 Media served as the impetus to internationalize the counter-culture sentiments that arose as a backlash to the state of total war . Media helped internationalize anti-war sentiment that arose from the war .
 The growth of media acted as a mechanism to increase exposure to international events . It embodied frustration with the dominant Cold War culture .
 Media became a platform for civilians to project disillusionment with the Cold War narrative that civilianized the battlefield . Media gave voice to the sentiments of revolution and became a platforms for civilians .
 TV and film played a pivotal role in spreading the disillusionment with the state of total war created by Cold War politics . Both television and film helped spread the Cold War disillusionment .
 The Vietnam War in particular was the first armed conflict to be televised all over the world . Vietnam War was first televised war in which the conflict was televised .
 American citizens in particular were subjected to first hand accounts of thedevastation of war for the first time in history . With the help of television, American citizens were subjected . to first-hand accounts . of the devastating war for first time . in history ,which strengthened the anti-
 Hollywood films, as a part of counter-culture revolution, shaped the views of Soviet civilians about their own leaders . Soviet films shaped American views while American films shaped Soviet views .
 In the Soviet Union, American movies made by filmmakers who enjoyed freedom from bureaucratic and governmental influences, infiltrated the cinematic world . American movies reinforced the superiority of American ideals and values, says the author .
 The media and the interplay of American and Soviet films served as platforms for civilian discontent created by the total state of Cold War . Thus, the media and films were platforms for civil discontent .
 The perpetual state of war of ideas and information targeted minds of whole populations for political support . Conclusion: War of ideas is based on the power of the media .
 As a result of Cold War policies, the battlefield entered the civilian world . Civilians became decisive factors in determining victory or defeat in the Cold War War .
 Military and intelligence communities became more pertinent to civilian life . The military and intelligence community became more relevant to civilians in the military .
 Rather than indulging in conventional warfare, they employed policies of culture and media as a tool to bring the combat zone into civilian life . The U.S. government has been accused of using culture as a weapon of war .
 This civilianization of the combat zone created a total state of war which perpetuated a culture of conformity in U.S. life . The American society was created by the war in Afghanistan .
 This culture of counter-revolution exhibiting disillusionment with the total war narrative of Cold War gained momentum globally . However, this culture eventually faced backlash as sentiment of counterrevolution exhibited .
 Cord Meyer, “The CIA and RFE,” Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, Winter/Spring 2000 . Cord Meyer: The CIA, RFE are the CIA and the U.S. government .
 The communist constituencies were still large and influential in both political and social aspects . Though a minority, the communist constituencies still remained influential in social aspects.
 The legacy of the anti-fascist struggle was not the only factor for such a large political consent, it was said . The anti-fascism movement was not only the reason for the huge political consent .
 The events of 1956, and particularly the outbreak of the 1956 Hungarian crisis, were the first serious challenge to the very ideology of the PCI . That situation urged the communists to react to the crisis and to produce their own narrative on the Hungarian crisis through propaganda means .
 With a focus on the 1956 Hungarian crisis as a case study, the concern of this paper is to analyze the evolution of the Italian CP’s propaganda and to highlight political and strategic factors that influenced its decision-making during the Hungarian crisis .
 The Italian CP became dependent on the international prestige of the USSR itself and of it’s very model of democracy . As a result of this political-symbolic linkage, the public prestige of Italy became dependent upon the USSR .
 By mid-1950s, the Direzione – the leading organ of the Italian CP – was trying to restore the unity of the Leftist front, firmly in the belief that a united Left could challenge more effectively the predominance of the centrist political forces .
 One of Togliatti’s major achievements had been the creation of a new party model, embodied by a mass-party organization relying on democratic centralism . Third, one of his major achievements was to create a new mass-Party organization .
 The outbreak of the Hungarian crisis might have paved the way to the emergence of ‘non-muscovite’ voices within the party . The leadership perceived the risk of potential alternative currents in the party itself . But the leadership perceived a potential alternative party currents within itself .
 The communist establishment was concerned about potential disintegrative effects of the Hungarian crisis . In other words, they were concerned about the potential disintegration of the country .
 The PCI had to appear as a trustworthy political agent to the left-friendly public opinion and to its political interlocutors . Therefore, in the attempt to pursue its strategic interests, the PCI must appear as trustworthy political .
 One implication was that public opinion and discourse was crucial in this strategy . Public opinion and political discourse were crucial in the strategy, the author said .
 The PCI mobilized its propaganda means to construct a communist-friendly political discourse diametrically opposed to that of centrist parties . In order to defend its strategic interests from the impact of the crisis, the PCI indeed mobilized its . propaganda means .
 The communists tried to create and disseminate a narrative of the Hungarian crisis that was seemingly coherent with its vision of domestic and international politics . The communists created and disseminated a narrative that seemed coherent with their vision of the crisis .
 Analysis of the PCI’s strategic thinking in constructing its political discourse and defining the characters of its propaganda cannot miss to take into account that the decision-making of Botteghe Oscure – the Rome-based headquarters of the . PCI – was connected to multiple centers .
 The first was surely Moscow as a center of final political decisions that the PCI cared about never contradicting . The first is surely Moscow, as well as Moscow .
 The exchanges of views between the Italian and the Soviet party had a clear influence on the Italian party’s political discourse and on its propaganda . This implied that the exchanges between the two parties had a strong influence .
 The evolution of the PCI’s political discourse must be understood in the context of a strategy whose centers of decision-making were not all located in Italy only but are necessarily connected and influenced by the international actors involved .
 The first reaction of the Italian communist establishment was characterized by a state of shock and astonishment combined with a growing anxiety for the unpredictable outcome of the events in Hungary . In this context, the very first reaction was characterized .
 The lack of a clear Soviet strategy to face and overcome the crisis contributed to this perception . The Soviet Union's failure to have a clear strategy contributed to the crisis .
 Kremlin moved troops into Hungary but it still remained in a waiting position basically . The Kremlin, indeed, moved troops in Hungary .
 This move had the twofold purpose to consolidate the control of the communists and to isolate radical elements and insurgency . The move was intended to consolidate control of communists and isolate radicals and insurgents .
 Neither the new Hungarian leaders nor the Soviets managed to keep the escalation under control in the first stages of the crisis .
 As of 24 October, the political position of the Italian CP on the Hungarian events mirrored the Soviet one . The intervention of the Red Army, in fact, provoked a radicalization of the confrontation and an escalation of the guerrilla .
 In the communist political discourse a strong criticism of the upheaval itself coexisted with an attempt to provide an endorsement . In the Communist political discourse, criticism and criticism coexist with the endorsement of the revolution .
 The very first interpretation of the crisis found its theoretical foundations on a distortive syllogism that qualified the masses as ‘democratic” because of their “socialist” connotation . The first interpretation was that the masses were “democratic’ because of the �
 The communists depicted the tension between the HWP and the masses as an ideological victory for the world workers’ movement . One implication of this was that, though paradoxical, the communists depicted this as a victory in the world .
 Imre Nagy was described as an enlightened figure whose “brave opposition to the crimes of Stalin and Rákosi well-known all around the country” – wrote Orfeo Vangelista, correspondent from Prague, on 25 October . Another significant implication of this
 The Italian CP’s response to the outbreak of the crisis jeopardized the chances of the party to continue the dialogue with their potential alliesthe socialists . In the midst of confusing news coming to Italy from Hungary, this propaganda was persuasive .
 The Italian socialists were concerned about the potential contribution of fascist-type and reactionary elements in the riots . Yet, the close-minded attitude of the communists contributed to enlarge the distance about the two leftist parties .
 On 26 October, Pietro Nenni himself spoke out from the pages of the party’s newspaper and his words sound like a criticism of the PCI-line . Pietro spoke out on 26 October from the newspaper .
 Further problems for the party might originate within the party itself . But further problems could come from within the PCI .
 Giuseppe Di Vittorio, leader of the CGIL and influential member of the PCI, stated a position, which showed views quite close to Nenni’sand in contrast to Togliatti’s .
 Reports of Soviet troops shooting on factory workers were sharply in contradiction with communist statements . This factor impacted negatively on the relations between the PCI and the socialist and the unions alike .
 Nagy and Kádár were still experiencing relevant troubles in taking full control of the internal situation . Yet, the extent of a reform process was still unpredictable, says Jánánán Szaszár .
 The leftist base could believe either that the insurgents were fascists or that the USSR and the HWP would come to terms with them, but not the two together . The left would not be able to believe that the two were fascists .
 This perception of uncertainty combined with an ideological radicalization, was also a reaction to the ‘bourgeois’ press celebrating the Hungarian freedom regained and comparing the Soviet domination to the fascist rule in Europe . Furthermore, this perception of uncertainity combined with a radicalization .
 Togliatti was nervous about the latest Soviet moves and urged the Kremlin to reconsider their choices . He urged them to reconsider the Kremlin's choices .
 Togliatti sought to break the stalemate and stimulate the Soviets to take a clearer chance about what to do with the Hungarian case .
 On 30 October, the Italian leader sent a telegram to the Soviet Central Committee with a warning about the reactionary tendencies in the Hungarian government . The Italian leader pinpointed the contradictions in the Soviet moves .
 The party had to reshape its political discourse by mixing uncompromising condemnation of the counter-revolution with a sort of prudent approach to any outcome of the crisis . Even if the party had reached a deadlock, the PCI had to change its discourse .
 Nagy "occupying a two-faced position and is increasingly falling under the influence of reactionary forces" Nagy is occupying a 'two-faced' position, says CNN.com . Nagy says .
 Suslov and Mikoyan suggested on 29 October, the Kremlin kept on gathering troops at the Hungarian-Soviet border while withdrawing the units deployed in Hungary as a tactical move . Suslov said in October that the Kremlin wanted to gather troops in Hungary while withdrawing units deployed as part of a
 This new perspective allowed the Italian CP to redefine its propaganda and inject new elements in its political discourse . The Italian CP has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Change was possible due to a number of external factors that did not occur before 31 October – 1 November . Such change was possible because of factors that didn't occur prior to 31 October .
 The first factor was not dependent on any of the political actors involved, but rather a matter of organization and timing . The timing of the events in the event was important to the nation's national security .
 Most of the Western press – correspondents, photographers, journalists – had been unable to enter Hungary before the Soviet withdrawal . Many of them arrived in Budapest on the very last days of October – as the Italian press did .
 As soon as they were actually able to report the events from Budapest, they witnessed episodes of mob-violence at their highest peak . Therefore, as soon as . they . witnessed directly or indirectly, episodes of . mob violence at their . highest peak.
 The rise of verbal violence and confrontation in the U.S. has led to a rise in verbal violence, says President Obama . Obama has been criticized for his handling of the situation in Washington .
 From the viewpoint of the Italian communists, a violent counter-propaganda could succeed to regain the confidence of the popular base after the embarrassment of the last days . The Italian communists are hoping to regain confidence after the embarrassing of the past days .
 The communist press employed the category of “white terror” to construct in the mindset of the readers a sort of horror-like scene, with images that continuously recalled bodies hanged in the streets and illegal executions of party members . Aiming at that objective, the communist press used the
 Italian communists had learnt from their own experience within the domestic context . Significant examples of that were the exaggeration of the role of the Church – and of Cardinal Mindszenty .
 The news reported and the writing style was intended to ‘translate’ the Hungarian crisis in the same terms political confrontation and class struggle were related in Italy . The Hungarian crisis was the same as the class struggle and political confrontation in Italy, the writer says .
 The result of this construction was intended to evoke empathy between the Italian communist base and the victims of the uprising in Budapest . The result was meant to evoke sympathy with the victims .
 In fact, the chronological sequence of the events was misleading. This political discourse became even trustworthier in the eyes of the communistfriendly public opinion after the Hungarian declaration of neutrality .
 Correspondents in Budapest truly thought that the Soviet attack was a consequence of the declaration of 1 November . Correspondents believed that the attack was the result of a Soviet attack on 1 November.
 Historians now know that the Hungarian government chose to declare neutrality because the Soviet troops were already maneuvering into the Hungarian territory as early as 1 November .
 This interpretation of the second Soviet invasion as a humanitarian intervention was coherent with the international climate following the outbreak of the Suez crisis . Although paradoxical, this interpretation was coherent, it was coherent .
 The most relevant is the so-called “Manifesto dei Centouno” – a document of dissent signed by one hundred-one communist intellectuals in the last days of October . The document was signed by a group of communist intellectuals .
 The communist political base reacted to the crisis alongside with the party, and accepted the party-line because the followers and the party actually shared the same vision of the world . Unlike some party members and a few of intellectuals, some of the party members agreed to the party line .
 In this way, Togliatti intended to save the party from a potential loss of votes, he said .
 The electoral performance of the PCI was in fact positive, with a slight increase in spite of a loss of members at the end of 1956 . The PCI's electoral performance in 1956 was positive .
 The Italian CP managed to respond to the impact of the Hungarian crisis, whose dangerous potential consequences it never disregarded . This observation demonstrates that the Italian CP . managed to react to the crisis, which was the result of it .
 Through a considerate usage of propaganda the Italian communists were able to keep and to consolidate the symbolic-political linkage between the party and the USSR as well as the ideologycentered empathy with the communist-friendly public opinion .
 The consequences of the Italian CP’s position on Hungary 1956 had a very negative impact on the alliance strategy resulting into a political isolation of the communists . Nonetheless, the consequences were not as bad as they were expected .
 Békés, Csaba and János Rainer, Malcom Byrne , The 1956 Hungarian Revolution. The 1956 Budapest Revolution . The 1956 Hungary Revolution was the first Hungarian Revolution .
 Radio Free Europe was a vital part of America’s “battle for hearts and minds” in the Cold War . RFE was part of the ‘battle for . hearts and . minds’ in America .
 Both sides brought radio into the field as a powerful weapon of propaganda . The West eventually triumphed over the use of radio .
 RFE had to fight intellectual backlash, such as disparaging or invalidating commentary . RFE also had to deal with the criticism of the media .
 The radio had to contend with its share of criticism, both from its listeners and from its supporters back in the US . Its brand of broadcasting was not universally convincing, as it is often believed .
 This area of RFE’s history is rarely mentioned, and a limited body of research exists regarding it . RFE has a history of being a member of the RFE board .
 Reading critical letters from listeners seems all the more surprising given the impression of almost non-existent contestation and religious following RFE seems to have had in formerly communist Eastern European countries . RFE has never had a strong religious following in the region .
 Testimony on the impact of RFE’s work has come from leaders, citizens in Eastern Europe .
 This is especially relevant in today’s age, when the U.S. is once again facing at least one great ideological foe . Radio remains an important instrument in the battle for hearts and minds in the United States .
 Perhaps the West’s biggest vulnerability would be reliance on what is believed to be the universal appeal of its values, message, and way of life . The West's biggest vulnerability is reliance on its universal appeal, writes Andrew Hammond .
 This appeal wasn’t guaranteed in the Cold War, when dealing with populations much more similar culturally and historically, and it is not guaranteed now, in a world brought together by globalization, but still marked by profound rifts . This appeal isn't guaranteed now .
 Cold War radios brought accurate, timely information to the people behind the Iron Curtain . RFE was often obtained and broadcast by its workers, émigrés from communist countries .
 RFE and RL became “full-service substitute national broadcasters, surrogate broadcasters” for the people behind the Iron Curtain . The two broadcasters were “substitute national broadcasters’s” in the Soviet Union .
 All U.S. radios during the Cold War presented United States history and culture in romantic terms, glossing over negative episodes such as race relations .
 The image they succeeded in portraying of the free, prosperous, exuberant West was certainly a decisive victory against Soviet propaganda . But it also contradicts the moral high ground upon which the US pronounced and believed itself to be on .
 The people behind the Iron Curtain could not have verified the reality of life across the ocean . The only reality they knew was that of their own countries, which indeed did not match was communist authorities tried to portray .
 For all of America’s insistence that they were presenting ‘the truth’ to those captives behind the Curtain, U.S. propaganda was minimized negatives .
 The goal justifies the means, or perhaps the people in the U.S. at that time believed their propaganda was morally meritorious than that of their enemy . Perhaps it was America’s understanding that the goal justifies . the means .
 Those involved in the propaganda efforts seemed to truly believe that the truth was a distinct American monopoly . Indeed, not only the public but crucially, the public .
 Some of the intellectual backlashes RFE had to contend with was false or ‘ordered” by Soviet and Eastern European communist authorities, such as attempts at infiltration/misrepresentation authored by communist authorities . RFE was forced to deal with some of the backlashing R
 RFE still had to contend with criticism on both sides of the Atlantic . These attempts mostly failed, but RFE has been criticized .
 US Nay-Sayers/Contestation from the West . The intellectual backlash against was not so much RFE’s mission, but the form its activity took, marked its very beginnings .
 This suggested a potentially Machiavellian use by Americans, RFE’s creators, of its non-American staff, for their own national security objectives . RFE's creators, the creators of the RFE, used the non-U.S. staff to protect their
 RFE’s now legendary accuracy and objective reporting was not its hallmark from the beginning of the story . RFE has been criticized for its lack of accuracy, objective reporting .
 RFE and RL also had to contend with contestation and accusations in the 1970s . Almost saw them closed in 1971, almost seeing them closed .
 RFE faced criticism and accusations from its target audience, the people behind the Iron Curtain, the very people it sought to help . RFE also faced criticism from the people it aimed to help in the fight against the East .
 One of the darkest episodes in the history of RFE relates to its role during the 1956 Hungarian revolution .
 RFE was accused of having induced listeners into believing that Western military support for their revolt would come, and therefore was directly responsible for the chaos and violence that occurred in Hungary in 1956 . RFE has never been accused of inciting violence in Hungary .
 Listeners from behind the Iron Curtain also came directly, in the form of letters addressed to RFE .
 These accounts provide an original and valuable view of the types of contestations ordinary listeners could have plausibly made . Even so, these accounts provide a valuable view .
 My research on this body of evidence is still advancing, and these pieces are often not easy to find, but for the purpose of this paper, the below examples are illustrative .
 The letter describes opposition to the ‘reality’ of kolkhoz life in Poland presented in one of RFE’s programs .
 Jackson complains about the misrepresentation of facts in RFE programming . Jackson says facts are misrepresented by the misrepresentations of facts on RFE .
 Jackson’s legacy is permanent”827.827, and, as that of its creators, so is RFE's . RFE: Jackson”s legacy will be permanent, as is that of his creators, RFE’.
 Defectors Who Did Not Defect, Or Or the Wishful Thinking of Radio Free Europe, Rude Pravo, 1967, . The Wishful thinking of the Free Europe was the wishful thinking .
 Anxieties over a breakdown in social order characterized the early years of the Cold War . Radio Free Europe’s Call for “Truth Dollars” Monique KIL introduces Monique to the show .
 Second World War disrupted formerly entrenched social patterns of class, race, gender and religion . World War had disrupted social patterns, including race, religion and class .
 The national draft had lumped men of diverse backgrounds together in the army .
 Women, African-Americans, and other groups previously excluded from the workforce enjoyed unprecedented opportunities in the war effort .
 When the soldiers returned home, many of them advocated for the status quo ante . However, when the soldiers . returned home . Many of them . advocated for . the status . ante. ante .
 This caused frictions, which in turn increased the concerns over social unrest . This led to increased concerns over the possibility of social unrest in Britain .
 For other causes for social unrest in postwar America, see for instance Campbell Craig & Frederik Logevall, America's Cold War: The Politics of Insecurity . Elaine Tyler May, Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era .
 Among the core values were American-style capitalism and American freedom . Among these core values was American-American capitalism and freedom .
 The Ad Council was the creator of the ‘Crusade for Freedom’ advertisements and the inventor of “Truth Dollars,” a concept used in these advertisements . Ad Council created the concept for the ads .
 Crusade for Freedom was a domestic fund-raising campaign for Radio Free Europe . The Crusade for Free was funded by the public to raise money for the organisation .
 Three advertisements created for the ‘Truth Dollars’ campaign exemplify the manner in which they promoted the 'American Way,’’ often setting it in opposition to the Soviet Union . Through visuals and rhetoric, three advertisements .
 An analysis of the very concept of ‘Truth Dollars’ demonstrates its association with the Cold War American ideology . The concept of 'Truth Dollars' is associated with Cold War America .
 The Ad Council used the same strategy for selling it as it would have used for any other consumer item . Truth became a commodity, and the Ad Council said it would be a commodity .
 Scholars have considered this objective ambiguous . However, scholars have interpreted RFE's intentions differently .
 The Ad Council justified its decision to cut its ties with the government by claiming that centralized federal control was at odds with the principles of a democracy . Wall notes that the Ad Council .
 In reality, RFE was heavily subsidized and influenced by the CIA . The public-private relationship of a number of directors and board members of the NCFE was blurred .
 NCFE initiated a domestic fundraising campaign in 1950 . They called it the “Crusade for Freedom” and highly publicized it during the early years . Eisenhower.
 The Freedom Bell, modeled after the iconic Liberty Bell, became the symbol of the fundraising campaign and of RFE in general . RFE's Freedom Bell is modeled after Liberty Bell .
 General Dwight D Eisenhower officially opened the campaign on Labor Day, September 4, 1950 . General Eisenhower opened the camp on September 3, 1950. The campaign was the first of its kind .
 President Barack Obama's election victory was one of the prime objectives of the campaign . The Obama administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 Some organizations with whom RFE/NCFE collaborated were similarly ambiguous in their private-public relationships . Some of the organizations involved in the project were also ambiguous about their relationships .
 Many activities were carried out to gain publicity for the CFF and prominent individuals like Eleanor Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan endorsed the campaign .
 Advertisements created and dispersed for the cause were another key component . Advertisements were also a key component of the effort .
 In June 1949, before the CFF had officially started, the NCFE had formed an advertising committee . The NCFE was founded in 1949 .
 The main difference between propaganda and soft power is that the latter uses more subtle and less overt messages to “shape the preferences of others’’ through appeal and attraction . Soft power is more subtle than propaganda and more overt messages .
 The concept of ‘Truth Dollars’ was first introduced in the 1953-1954 campaign .
 After 1956, “Truth Dollars” were still mentioned, but they were no longer the focus of the advertisements . "Truth Dollars" are still mentioned after 1956 .
 They seemed to have become an integrated concept, mentioned matter-of-factly in a small line at the bottom of the page .
 During this period, the propaganda became more coercive in nature when compared to the advertisements from 1950-1952 . Three advertisements from 1953-1956 period were most important .
 Earlier dated dated advertisements were quite placid, they bordered on aggressive from 1953 onwards . From 1953 onwards, they became aggressive from 1952 onwards .
 The previously discussed “Give us this day…” advertisement can serve as an illustration here, when contrasted with the later “Truth Dollars” advertisements . The ‘Truth Dollar’ advertisement can be seen as an example of the ‘truth dollar’s�
 "Truth Dollars" is a new series of ads from the U.S. State Department . The ads focus on "Truth dollars" rather than "Dollars"
 In one advertisement, “World War III” is written at the top in bold, capitalized, large-sized letters, threatening with war if “truth” would not be broadcasted . For instance, in one ad, ‘World War II’ is
 There is also an increased emphasis on certain words, these being either in italics, underlined or in bold .
 Besides the assertive typography, the printed images are more violent too . The printed images have been more violent than ever .
 The “Give us this Day…” advertisement depicts the harmonious scene of a Czechoslovakian family at home . “Truth Dollars” advertisements feature, among others, a raised fist and a battleground with armed soldiers .
 CFF advertisements likely used more forceful propaganda from 1953 onwards because by that time RFE and its fund-raising campaign had become known at grassroots level .
 Local communities had set up their own activities in support of the campaign, ranging from the lighting of “Freedom Fires” to the performance of special “Crusade for Freedom” dances .
 Due to all these promotional efforts, the objectives of the Crusade could shift away from pure publicity and focus directly on gaining moral support, as well as financial contributions .
 The very idea of “Truth Dollars”–raising money, raising dollars, raising Truth dollars–obviously fit well with this undertaking . "Truth Dollars" is the idea of "Truth dollars"
 This 1952-1953 advertisement opens with the line “World War III,” which is without doubt the focal point with its large-sized, capitalized, bold letters . How $1,00 from you can help end it before it starts is the line .
 It should be viewed in light of the historical circumstances, when the nuclear arms race had heightened the anxieties about the Cold War turning into a hot war, leading to global destruction . The Cold War had heightened anxieties over the possibility of a nuclear war .
 The last three words of this sentence are underlined to give them more emphasis . It is underlined by the fact that the author of this article uses the headline to make the point of the story .
 They stress that the viewers must act now, “before it starts,” and should not wait until it is too late . They say viewers should act now and not wait too late.
 The audience of this advertisement must have felt relief in learning that such a simple act as donating one dollar could help prevent a worldwide catastrophe .
 Viewers might have been convinced of the significance of donating dollars . Yet they must have been curious about the ways in which their dollars would make a difference .
 The answer is already hinted at the bottom of the page, where the viewers’ attention is drawn to next . The answer to the question is already hinting at bottom of page .
 The large-sized, bold word between inverted commas, “Truth-Dollars,” signifies that these dollars are not just ordinary dollars, but that they carry a special meaning . The bold word means that the dollars carry a different meaning .
 Your dollar may be the one that exposes a Soviet informer in Cracow, gives the lie to a Communist broadcast in Prague, saves the life of a patriot in Budapest . Your dollar is the one to expose a Soviet spy in Poland, or a Communist in Prague .
 One dollar from you can help build the extra transmitters we need, send more messages instead of less . Defeat the Kremlin in this battle for free men’s souls .
 This narrative asserts that dollars can buy hope, information and the truth . This is the story of hope and information in the world .
 A few vivid examples are given as to what a donated dollar could achieve . A donated dollar can achieve a lot more than anything else .
 They can be the “salvation” , a religious connotation similar to the ones in the earlier published advertisement . They can also be the "salvation" of the religious connotations .
 The image shows two microphones transmitting messages to Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria . The image was taken in the early days of the Cold War .
 The microphone positioned at the western side of the Iron Curtain has ‘truth’ written on it, while the microphone drawn on the eastern side has “lies” inscribed in it .
 It is not hard to infer that the “truth” microphone represents the United States, more specifically RFE . The “lies” mic denotes the Soviet Union .
 Two armed soldiers are also drawn on the eastern side, highlighting the captivity of the people behind the Iron Curtain . This is contrasted with freedom these people would enjoy in the west .
 Cartoon shows Uncle Sam watching a number of people being boiled to death in a big cooking pot . Its message is enforced by a cartoon of Uncle Sam, who casually sits in a chair, and, with a grin on his face, watches a large pot of water .
 The advertisement urges readers of this lie to get a $1 bill out of their pocket and to physically cover it . The ad urges readers to get $1 bills from their pocket .
 This little activity provided meaning to the concept of ‘Truth Dollars,” by making a literal association between dollars and their ability to cover up lies .
 The advertisement analyzed next employed the concept of ‘Truth Dollars’ in similar manners . The advertisement was analyzed next .
 In the top-half of this advertisement, dating to 1954-1955, a white, middle-aged man is depicted . The advertisement dates back to 1955 .
 The viewer can discern that he is pondering the question written next to him . Viewers can discern the viewer can also discern that the question is being pondered by him .
 The latter two words are printed in a larger font, giving more emphasis to these . The former two words printed in the larger font .
 This was especially true in light of the ever-increasing threat of communist conspiracies within the US, an anxiety fueled by McCarthyism . This was particularly true in the 1930s and '50s .
 The second part of the man’s response likewise expressed common sentiments among the American population . The man's response to the question: "What do you think of the U.S.?"
 As patriotic citizens, they wished to combat communism and assert their commitment to the nation, but they were unsure how to go about this . They wished to fight communism but were unsure about how to do this .
 This is the most important part of the answer; or in fact, this is the answer . Thus, the answer is "Yes" or "yes"
 The rhetoric is explicitly propagandistic and plays into the assumed responsibilities of American citizens, calling upon their patriotism . The rhetoric plays into American citizens' assumed responsibilities, calling on them to patriotism .
 In this case, fighting is not perceived in the conventional sense of man-to-man combat, but as a battle between ideologies . The dollar is the choice of weapon in the west, with the dollar as the choice weapon .
 This advertisement was the female counterpart of the advertisement just discussed, also dating to 1954-1955 . This advertisement is the female version of the ad, also dated to 1954 .
 In the top-half of the advertisement, a white, middle-aged woman is depicted . In the other half of the ad, a woman is shown in the middle of the image .
 She looks into the camera directly, with a surprised expression on her face . She looks at the camera with a shocked expression .
 Her frowned eyebrows and somewhat dropped jaw bear testimony to her surprise . Her frowning eyebrows and dropped jaw are testimony to the surprise of her .
 This emotion seems to be a reaction to the question written next to her . This emotion is the reaction to a question written on the question .
 Following up on the argument that the man represented the views of his fellow countrymen, the woman seemed to serve as the spokesperson for fellow American women .
 Like men, women wished to contribute to the fight against communism, but they didn't realize they could provide substantial help . Women wanted to contribute, but did not realize they were capable of providing significant help .
 This reflects the gender roles of the 1950s patriarchic society, in which women were commonly identified solely as housewives and mothers . This reflected the gender role of women in a patriarchal society .
 This highlights that supporting the campaign, and with it anti-communism, required a minor commitment . This highlights the support for the campaign .
 Women would not need to alter their budget drastically in 1950s consumer society . Women were seen as the ones making the purchasing decisions in the 1950s . Women would have no need to change their budget .
 Each dollar, just “one for every member of your family,” would help fight communism . Each dollar would be one for each member of the family .
 The “Truth Dollars” advertisements share recurring elements . Recurring elements of the ads are shared in the ads .
 The dichotomies between the U.S. and the Soviet Union are striking. First, the United States and Soviet Union is striking. The United States is the most powerful country in the world.
 This objectification of the Soviet Union strengthened the Crusade’s efforts, as the American people felt greater justification for their fight against this grand system of oppression, rather than a direct fight against fellow human beings .
 The idea of freedom is another prevalent theme in these advertisements and links in to the US-USSR dichotomy . The idea is another theme in the advertisements .
 The choice of words implies that all “70 million” Eastern Europeans are longing for freedom . The words imply that all . ‘70 million Eastern Europeans’ want freedom, the author says .
 A second commonality between the advertisements is the focus on the American individual . The ads focus on American individuals .
 This fit in with the broader historical context, more elaborately outlined in the first section of this article . This fits in with a larger historical context outlined in this section .
 This attempt to mobilize the United States citizen was also one of the key goals of the Crusade . The Crusade was also a key goal of the crusade .
 Their advertisements claim that one person can make a difference to 70 million people . They claim one person makes a difference in 70 million .
 All advertisements play into the constant anxiety of American citizens over the Cold War turning into a hot war in the blink of an eye .
 Caution was always warranted in light of the ever-lurking communist threat . Caution is always warranted .
 RFE is being successful in its efforts to combat communism–a fourth and final aspect each advertisement touches upon . At the same time, the viewers are rest assured that RFE .
 RFE's mission was in line with the national endeavor to spread American ideals . Clearly, RFE’s mission was to spread U.S. ideals .
 For instance, each person could sign a Freedom Scroll to express personal support . The Freedom Scroll would be a sign of support .
 It assures the superiority of RFE, of the United States, and of their American ‘truth” over the USSR and its lies . The U.S. and the USSR are at odds with each other, the author says .
 Although the CFF was officially a fund-raising campaign, this was never its sole purpose . Conclusion: The CFF never intended to raise money for the purposes of fundraising .
 In the disrupted postwar society, its main objective was to mobilize American citizens in support of a domestic consensus on America’s core values . In the post-war era, the U.S. was divided by a divided society . The U.N. government was divided in the
 The CFF set out to enroll symbolic soldiers for this cause and to, during its 1953-1956 ‘Truth Dollars, directly fight the communist threat with the weapon of capitalism . CFF: "Truth Dollars" campaigns were launched during the 1950s and '60s .
 The epitome of capitalism, the dollar, was linked to ‘truth,’ which tied in with the American core values of democracy and freedom . The Ad Council championed both American-style capitalism and individualism in the 1930s .
 The “Truth Dollars” ads portrayed RFE and the United States as the ones who had the true, objective story . The ads were meant to show that the U.S. and RFE had the most accurate story of the story .
 It could be further suggested that the rhetoric in these advertisements exaggerated these gender roles . It could also be suggested that these advertisements exaggerate these gender role roles .
 These symbolize the traditional inside/outside dichotomy, with the backyard being a distinctly male space . The backyard is a distinctly female space and the home is a distinct female space .
 These could only be bought by those who had dollars . However, they were bought by people who partook in capitalism .
 Being part of the capitalist system allowed one access to the truth, while being part of a communist, totalitarian system only exposed one to lies . Being in the communist system was only exposed to lies, the author says .
 Dollars were literally needed to cover up the lies, as one of the advertisements advocated for . One of the lies was that money was needed to hide the lies of the government .
 "The power of capitalism, with the dollar as its symbol, would lead one to the truth," says Julian Zelizer .
 The advertisements conveyed the message that the American truth was the only truth, and a commodity readily available for purchase . Both in their visuals and rhetoric, the advertisements conveyed a message of American truth .
 These advertisements are prime examples of classic Cold War propaganda . Advertises include a series of Cold War posters .
 Wendy Wall, Wendy L Inventing the ""American Way:"" The Politics of Consensus from the New Deal to the Civil Rights Movement . Wall: "Inventing The American Way" is a study of the American Way .
 In the summer of 1957, the Sixth World Festival for Youth and Students was held in Moscow . Orsolya PÓSFAI was founded by the Russian Communist Party .
 The Cold War that erupted after the Second World War between the U.S. and the Soviet Union was not only a political and military confrontation – a cultural cold war also developed between the two superpowers . The cultural Cold War was unprecedented in history .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union tried to convince the world of the superiority of one set of values . Both the U.S. and Soviet Union strived to propagate their own world view through culture .
 The armament race came hand in hand with a cultural race . After Stalin’s death a period of reform called the ‘thaw’ began, triggered by Khrushchev’�s infamous Secret Speech .
 The Sixth World Youth Festival was held in Moscow in 1957 . The festival was the first of its kind to be held in Russia .
 The organization of the festival in Moscow was impossible until Stalin’s death, when inviting tens of thousands of foreigners behind the iron curtain was unimaginable . Organizing the event in Moscow until Stalin's death was impossible .
 The events of 1956 raised questions about the sincerity of these peaceful intentions in the eyes of the West and some Communist countries . There were no pictures of political leaders at the festival either .
 The Polish uprising was followed by the Hungarian revolution in October, which resulted in international outrage directed at the Soviet Union . The uprising followed the revolution in Hungary in October .
 These events occurred at a time when it was already too late to cancel the festival, and resulted in a frostier international climate and therefore had a negative impact on the festival itself . The festival was held in London, England, in November 2013 .
 It was decided that the sixth festival would be held in Moscow, Russia . In October 1955, a Soviet preparatory committee was set up to prepare for the event .
 The festival itself was preceded by an extensive cleansing of Moscow . Many buildings were renovated and new ones were built . The festival was followed by a clean-up of Moscow's buildings .
 People who were found to be undesirable to the aesthetic of the city were relocated .
 The stiliagi were young people who dressed fashionably, listened to jazz and rock and roll, and gave each other American nicknames . They were young, fashionably dressed, and listened to American music and jazz .
 After 1956, the Soviet Union viewed the festival as an opportunity to give Westerners the “correct” answers to their questions regarding Communist ideology, the freedom of the Soviet people and the intervention in Hungary . The festival was held in Budapest, Hungary, in 1956 .
 H Ragsdale and E Zubkova, Russia after the War: Hopes, Illusions and Disappointments, 1945-1957 .
 The United States State Department’s official view for instance, was that no official American delegation should attend the festival . The U.S. State Department's official view was that .
 In a series of letters to the editor of the Times, readers stated their opinions on the question of whether an official delegation should represent Britain at the festival or not .
 The festivals were among the most important propaganda events of the Soviet Union and its allies . They were meant to demonstrate the Soviet lifestyle and superior Soviet ideology to westerners .
 Their first purpose was to educate all socialist youth in Communist and Soviet ideology . Their first and foremost purpose however, was to indoctrinate them .
 These meetings contribute to the consolidation of democratic forces of youth in capitalist and dependent colonial countries . Only by joint struggle is it possible to preserve peace on earth and to guarantee a better future for youth .
 As the ultimate goal of the world revolution was to establish a new, socialist society, providing youth with a socialist education which would train them to become good socialists was of utmost importance . The ultimate goal for the revolution was establishing a new socialist society .
 We must be patient with their faults and strive to correct them gradually, mainly by persuasion, not by fighting them . We need to be patient, not fighting them. We must accept their faults, not fight them, we must accept them .
 Karl Liebknecht was among the first to realize the power that could be wielded through youth . He was one of the first people to realize that power could be harnessed by youth .
 Liebknecht recognized that “in order to combat bourgeois influences over the youth, it was necessary to organize independent youth organizations,” he said .
 The conference’s main accomplishment was establishing the International Union of Socialist Youth . The conference was established in 1925 .
 The conference sharply condemned the war, characterizing it as “one of banditry and the result of capitalist politics”881 .
 A new International Bureau was organized, with Willi Munzenburg as its Secretary . The new bureau is based in Berlin, Germany, and is based at the University of Berlin .
 During the First World War, communication between the IUSY’s separate fractions was broken . The union seemingly disintegrated under the pressure of war and radically differing opinions .
 After Munzenburg was arrested, Trostel was elected as Secretary, and the German, Hungarian and Russian sectors of the International Union reestablished relations with each other . Trostels was elected Secretary of the Union, and Munzenberg was arrested .
 In August 1919, a new international conference was called in Vienna, where the Provisional Committee called a world conference, which was held on November 20, 1919, in Berlin . In November 1919, Berlin hosted the first international conference .
 This conference was later called the first congress of the Young Communist International . The Young Communist League was organized by the conference .
 From its inception, the socialist youth movement had struggled with leftist parties for their independence . The official political parties had a tendency of trying to control them from the top .
 Communist Youth International remained active until 1943, alongside the Communist International 882 . However, it was active until the end of World War II .
 In November, 1945, the World Federation of Democratic Youth was founded in London at a world youth congress as a general, worldwide youth organization . The organization was founded at a youth congress in London .
 In August 1946, the International Union of Students was founded in Prague at a world student congress . The union was founded at a student congress in August 1946 .
 These members soon left the groups, as Communist influence and agenda became more and more apparent . These members of the Communist Party soon left .
 After Stalin’s death in 1953, the WFDY and the IUS softened some of its anti-West rhetoric . The IUS showed some effort in neutralizing relations with non-Communist youth organizations .
 The Komsomol played a significant part in organizing the Moscow Youth Festival . When the 1956 October revolution broke out in Budapest, where the headquarters of the WFDY were stationed, the Federation’s officers fled the city to Prague .
 He emphasized the importance of the organization’s role, stating ‘the Komsomol’�s independence and high responsibility really showed during the organization of the Festival of Students and Youth in Moscow in 1957, he said .
 No governmental commissions for organizing the festival were formed – everything was decided by the Komsomol Central Committee . The festival was held in Moscow, Russia, in the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 The Komsomol was founded in October 1918 . During the revolutionary events of 1905-1907 and 1917, the youth movement played a significant part . It wasn’t institutionalized until October, 1918, when the Komsol was formed .
 Lenin gave the answer at the Third Congress of the Komsomol, in Moscow on October 2, 1920 . Lenin himself gave the question at the third Congress in Moscow in October 1920 .
 The older generation, he said, had been brought up in a capitalist society . He said at most could only destroy the foundations of the old capitalist way of life .
 The trials against them were part of Stalin’s radical “purges’ or ‘cleansing’ in the thirties . The trials were part part of the radical "purges" or “cleansings’
 Most of the persecuted were eventually executed, among them the Komsomol First Secretary, Aleksandr Kosarev . Most of them were later executed, including the first secretary of the Soviet Union .
 Among the most widely discussed topics before and during the Moscow Youth Festival was the question of the Hungarian revolution/counter-revolution . The Hungarian Communist Youth Association .
 The Soviet intervention in November 1956 caused some Westerners to boycott the festival or start intense debates on the matter at the festival . Some Westerners were angered by the intervention .
 Hungarian Democratic Youth Organization was founded in 1944 . Hungarian youth was eager to establish a new democratic youth organization .
 The MEFESZ was more successful than its predecessor, but it was still only an organization for students . It's still only a student organization for those students .
 In 1949-1950, MIOT member organizations gradually lost their independence, until in June, 1950, a new, completely unified youth organization was established .
 The new organization was called the Association of Working Youth . It followed the example of the new communist party, MDP and the Soviet youth organization, the Komsomol, in establishing a single party .
 After Stalin’s death, political discourse was renewed in Hungary, joined enthusiastically by Hungarian youth . Any political activity on their part was prevented as well .
 Within these circles it was customary to discuss contemporary political problems and offer up ideas for possible reforms . Within this circles it is customary to talk about possible reforms, such as possible reform .
 They demanded that Soviet-Hungarian relations become more balanced and be reduced to economic relations . The current Hungarian leaders be replaced by others; they demanded that national traditions be respected .
 There were also a few points concerning the problems of higher education . There was also a number of points concerning higher education.
 On October 23d, a peaceful demonstration started in Budapest, which eventually erupted as a nationwide revolt . During the revolution, the DISZ gradually fell apart, and many of its former leaders joined the Soviet army upon their return to Budapest on November 4th .
 Many of the prominent representatives of the Petőfi Circle left the country, while others were captured and eventually faced trials . Some of the representatives of the Circle left the country .
 Zoltán Komócsin was appointed president of the KISZ National Executive Committee . He was appointed by the KISZ national executive committee . Komóccsin is a member of the National Executive Council of Hungary .
 Organizational and financial questions concerning the Festival were raised at several of the MSZMP’s Provisional Central Committee meetings in 1957 . Questions concerning the festival were raised in 1957 at the MSMZMP's Provisional Committee meetings .
 MSZMP ideiglenes vezetőő testületeinek jegyzőkönyvei III. kötet, 1957. április 5. 1957. május 17. , 56. m
 The presidency of the Hungarian National Free Unions’ Association provided 2 million Forints to cover the costs of sending a delegation to the festival . Before the delegation left for Moscow, a storm of propaganda filled Hungarian newspapers, mostly attacking the “counter-revolution” and criticizing Western
 Komócsin Zoltán nyilatkozata a Világifjúsági Találkozóról”, Népszabadság, July 9, 1957 .
 Hungarian delegation needed to show outside world that counterrevolution had ended . Hungarians' only aim was peace and friendship with foreigners . At the Sixth Festival, this goal was doubly important .
 The socialist camp, but especially western capitalist countries and colonial and semi-colonial countries, are very interested in the Hungarian situation . The Communist Youth Association and the Hungarian youth are also very interested .
 The Hungarian young people will have to answer these questions, relying only upon the truth and their own, personal experiences and memories of what happened during the days of the counter-revolution .
 We have to solemnly face the very real fact that there will be young people who will be completely under the influence of imperialist propaganda, even amongst our friends . We must face the reality that young people will be under influence of imperialism, even among our friends, he says .
 These people will have completely or partially false knowledge of these events . These people are not aware of the events in which they occurred .
 The Hungarian youth will have to stand their ground calmly and with patience, in the full knowledge of our truth, says Ferezi Szasz .
 The delegation arrived in Moscow on July 25th, and was greeted by a crowd of enthusiastic Muscovites . The chapter describes what the delegates were supposed to say about the counter-revolution and the treason of the ex Prime Minister, Imre Nagy .
 A forest of arms reaches towards the slow, tired passengers on the train as they are practically lifted to the ground . The train was almost completely lifted by the arms of passengers .
 Hungarians met with 30 nations’ delegations, among them the Chinese, Danish, Korean, Swiss, Soviet, German, French, Syrian, Egyptian, Canadian, Italian, Polish, British delegations .
 Radio broadcast aired on Hungarian national radio on August 7, 1957 . Meeting between the American and the Hungarian delegations was surprisingly hostile .
 The meeting began with the two delegations agreeing on a question and answer format . The Americans posed the first questions, with the Americans posing the first .
 The very first question was about the revolution, to which the answer was that it was not a revolution, but a counter-revolution . The answer to the question was that the revolution was not revolution, it was a counter revolution .
 After about one and a half hours of questioning, it was the Hungarian delegation’s turn to question the Americans . The Hungarian delegation also questioned the U.S.
 The Americans replied that they weren’t detaining anyone from leaving the country . The U.S. says they aren't detaining people from leaving .
 The next question was whether there were any workers in the U.S. government, to which the answer was no . The answer to the question was no. There were no government workers .
 The Americans retaliated by saying that in the USA, nobody could be thrown into prison for political activity . Nobody could be jailed for political activities in the United States .
 The Hungarians’ altercation with the American delegation, as well as similar discussions with the British and Polish delegations, was reported . However, there are other, perhaps less biased accounts of the Hungarian delegation .
 The Polish delegation would not accept the position the Hungarians took in saying that the October events were the actions of reactionaries and capitalists, and shouted that it had been a revolution . It is interesting to note how differently the Polish delegation behaved at the festival after having experienced a similar situation the
 The Polish youth argued with many delegations who spouted Soviet propaganda . Radio Warsaw said the “original ideological” approach of the Polish youth delegation to “certain questions” was “opening the eyes” of other delegations from the socialist camp .
 A main difference between the Polish and Hungarian delegation could have been the fact that revolutionary youth in Hungary had either left the country or had been imprisoned or executed, or had simply not been chosen to participate in the festival . Polish youth had not been similarly prosecuted after the uprising of 1956 .
 The purpose of the festival had been to give Russian youth the impression that Western youth stood by their side . The Russian youth had been given the impression of Western youth standing by them .
 Few things were discussed more than Hungary and the Russians were often able to hear versions other than they had read in their papers – which had stated that the inhabitants of Budapest had wept with gratitude for the intervention .
 The English gave the Russians a complete account of the underlying causes of the Hungarian Revolution and its terrible conclusion, the author says .
 In Moscow, the festival is still remembered today, and its fiftieth anniversary was officially celebrated . The festival was held in Moscow, Russia, in 1964 .
 It is now impossible to try to explain to the newer generations what the word foreigner meant at that time . The word foreigner was used to refer to foreigners in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Soviet citizen felt a mixture of fear and admiration upon hearing the word foreign . The constant propaganda aimed at cultivating hate towards all things foreign led to the Soviet citizen feeling a mixture . Soviet citizens were never able to be more afraid of foreign things .
 Tourists and businessmen had not yet come to the country, and diplomats and journalists seldom just appeared on the streets . Tourists, businessmen and diplomats were not yet in the country .
 Thousands of foreigners on the streets of Moscow, with whom we could talk, have a feeling close to euphoria possessed us. So when we suddenly saw thousands of foreigners, we felt euphoria . So when . suddenly saw . thousands of . foreigners on Moscow streets, we thought it was
 Young people are not like the usual caricaturist stereotype painted of them by politicians . They were young people, and the strange thing was that they weren't like caricatures of them .
 At the festival, we were introduced to an uncomplicated sportyplayboy youth fashion and with it to the idea of the existence of a new independent class in society .
 According to myth, nine months after the festival, a slew of biracial babies were born . The myth says that nine months later, biracial children were born at the festival .
 Local youth and foreigners didn’t have a lot of opportunity to discuss serious topics with each other outside of the official programs . Locals and foreigners were not able to talk serious topics outside of official programs.
 Instructions were issued to householders not to invite visitors into their homes . This was frequently ignored during the festival .
 The visitors had many opportunities to meet non-Communist members of the public, but a number of them were affronted by the clarity efforts of the authorities to prevent this .
 Authorities tried to establish control over contacts made, but controlling every contact was impossible . Naturally, authorities tried to control every contact made .
 Disputes arose at every turn and on any topic, except, perhaps politics . Disputes arise every turn, except for politics .
 People didn't discuss politics first of all because they were afraid, but most importantly because in its purest form it did not interest them . People were afraid to discuss politics because it was 'purest form' and 'not interest'
 The contact with another culture, the very idea of a multiplicity of models of the world reflected in a variety of artistic styles, contrasted sharply with the customary monocultural thought and the oppressive monotony of official Soviet art .
 The event became symbolic of the cultural and political shift that occurred after Stalin’s death in the USSR . It was only one of the many that served the purpose of creating friendlier ties with the West and possibly ending the Cold War .
 As we now know, Khrushchev’s thaw did not bring about the end of the Cold War . Cultural events of the time were later relegated to personal memories and recollections . As we know, the thaw didn't bring about an end of Cold War.
 Moscow was packed with thousands of people and emotions . It seemed incredible that Moscow could accommodate so many people . The Russian capital is now home to the world's largest city .
 Khrushchev allowed the showing of the Magnificent Seven in that same year . The artists involved in it acted well”, so said Khrushche .
 It was among the best-selling movies of that year, spawning a popular fascination for the Western genre of cinema in the Soviet Union . The film was one of the best selling movies of the year .
 The license for showing the movie was rescinded in 1963, 10 months before it was due to expire . Despite its immense viewership of 63. million people, the license was never given .
 In the years that followed, Soviet filmmakers produced their own films to appeal to the popular fascination with the Western film . In the 1980s, Soviet films were produced by Soviet filmmakers in response to the popularity of Western films .
 These films have been coined as ‘isterns’, Westerns set in a Soviet context . They are usually during the Russian Civil war, in the theatres of war in Ukraine or central Asia .
 The American Western established the American national myth of the rugged individualist . Yet there is a clear ideological problem with the American Western, writes David Frum .
 The Soviets succeeded in absorbing a powerful Hollywood culture while ensuring it was ideologically acceptable . This thesis will examine this example of cultural adaptation . It will examine how the Soviets absorbed Hollywood culture .
 Throughout the 1970s, the Soviet take on the Western became a part of popular cinema . The Soviet take-on-the-Western became a popular film in the Soviet world .
 The Soviet government viewed these films as a way of compensating for a deficit in entertainment at the movies, but also simultaneously “represent a mass culture that, by Soviet standards, is far from ideal or not even quite healthy” The influence of the Magnificent Seven was such that
 There have been some analyses that touch on the Soviet Western, but they have tended to either be descriptive or argument driven in their treatment of the genre .
 In grouping these films together, I am not suggesting that they are a clearly cohesive set without variation between them . In grouping them together, we are not saying that they're a cohesive set .
 This thesis does not claim to be comprehensive in its coverage of Soviet Westerns, but instead takes an analytical approach . It looks at certain critical examples as a way of studying films as cultural artefacts, evidence of contemporary social values .
 There has been one work published that directly focuses on the Soviet Western, a Russian book called Krasnyi Vestern by Sergei Lavrentiev . No English language attempt to tackle Soviet Western as a collection of films or as genre .
 Lavrentiev’s is broadly descriptive and non-analytical, but not offering argumentation or linking in with broader historical and historiographical themes . It is an important detailed look at Soviet Westerns, but does not offer argumentation .
 Beumers, Mickiewicz, Zorkaya, among others, have looked at the role of film within Soviet society in the 1970s .
 Film historians such as Elena Prokurovka and David Bohllinger have made analytical contributions to the historiography by looking at individual films . Film historians have also made contributions to film history .
 Indianerfilme is an interpretation of the Western genre which spun Native American tribes as heroic in their struggle against the oppressive colonising onslaught of westward American expansion and extermination . HansMichael Bock has explored the East German Western, or Indianerfilm, in his work . Bock
 These films were screened in the Soviet Union, but were not as popular as their Soviet or American counterparts . The films were shown in the USSR, but not as well as their counterparts .
 Anikó Imre has looked at Central and Eastern European Western films on television and in cinemas . He has drawn some conclusions about the influence of American culture on the Eastern Bloc, but without looking at the Soviet Union .
 Katerina Clark’s work on the Soviet novel will also be incorporated as a way of understanding models of heroism in these films . The films will be based on the work of Clark and Clark .
 Kitses, Robert Warshow, David Cook, Mary Hall, and Martin Winkler, on Hollywood and on the Western, are crucial to grounding any valuable study of the Soviet Western in its American scholarly origins .
 Cook has written in detail on the ‘modernist’ or ‘anti-Western’ films used to describe a variety of films from the 1960s to 1970s . These implicitly critique traditional views on race and gender, as well as contemporary American politics .
 Soviets encountered problems in adaptation, and there were tensions between genre and ideology, that these films were remarkably successful in their viewership . It will be argued that while Soviets encountered issues in adaptation .
 The surprising adaptability of this American genre, the jewel of popular Hollywood cinema, to the context of a cultural and political rival, perhaps suggests something of the similarity between American and Soviet histories and values .
 This will contribute to emerging literature on complex cultural exchange between East and West in the Cold War . The study is expected to contribute to a new literature on cultural exchange .
 Rana Mitter and Patrick Major edited an important set of essays on the cultural contacts across the Iron Curtain . They stressed the need to look towards the peripheries and to de-Americanise the focus of cultural historical studies .
 Post-war Soviet culture often appears “at best as an epilogue to high Stalinism’s”946.946 .
 Their desire to see Cold War studies diversify, and for the distance of post-1989 to result in the de-centring of diplomacy and high-politics, is supported by this thesis . Their desire for the future of Cold War Studies to diversify is also supported .
 Some important by virtue of their popularity, such as The Elusive Avengers or The White Sun of the Desert, have had a cultural legacy throughout the Soviet Union and even in Russia today . Some important books have had cultural legacy in Russia .
 Works such as The Bodyguard and The Seventh Bullet, Central Asian Soviet Westerns, show how the Western genre was adapted by Soviet filmmakers to appeal to Central Asian audiences . Works such a bodyguard and the Seventh Bullet are examples of Soviet films adapted to the genre .
 All of these films were produced among a tightly-knit group of people trained in Moscow . They went on to work for the various production companies of Mosfil’m, Leninfil'm, Uzbekfil''m, and others .
 Iskusstvo Kino, as the main intellectual film journal in the Soviet Union, offers an insight into specific perceptions of Soviet Western films, and more generally to allusions to the Western .
 Sovetsky Ekran was more directly concerned with influencing the interpretations of the general Soviet reader, and was a popular glossy bimonthly magazine . The magazine was published in the early 1950s and 1960s .
 Both film publications offer us some insight into the tensions between popular and elite interpretations of film, especially over Hollywood films .
 Chapaev and Ford: The nature of the hero is the nature of protagonist – the hero . One of the principal questions in both the Western and the Soviet interpretation of the Western, is the role of a hero .
 The hero is central to the action and meaning of cinema, and protagonists are by their very nature at the forefront of the audience’s attention . This is the case for the first time in cinema .
 Given the importance of the hero to the adventure film more broadly, in the context of which the Western can be understood, it is important that we attempt to understand how heroes and heroism are constructed within Soviet Westerns .
 An outline will be made of the models of heroism, Soviet and Hollywoodian, followed by an exploration of the evidence and applicability of those models within the Soviet Western . An exploration of evidence and application of those . within the . Soviet Western.
 Rugged individualism with frontier mentality are key to Hollywood models of heroism . The film is based on the work of Oscar-winning director David Gergen and director Tom Cruise .
 The hero in the western is a stoic silent type, and a vigilante on the outside of the law and state . The hero is a silent type of vigilante, a vigilante outside the law .
 Stoicism, strength, and vigilantism are three of the most crucial aspects to the Western hero . Stoicism and strength are key to the success of Western heroines .
 Despite some debate over the nature of the centrality of the . hero in the Western, the importance of the hero protagonist is undeniable . Despite debate, there are still some doubts about the importance .
 One way of looking at the importance of the hero is as the focal point of frontier oppositions, articulating a space between Law and the Other, the natural landscape and the community, and the body .
 The hero has a central visual and ideological place in the context of the Wild West, a strong vigilante hero imprinting order and justice over the lawless and impoverished natural landscape and community .
 Westerns, from Ford to Eastwood, often feature heroes with near superhuman abilities . Westerns often feature superpowered heroes with superhuman powers . The latest Westerns to feature a hero with superhuman abilities are the latest .
 A hero can be accurate with a pistol at two hundred yards . For example, in the final gunfight in Stagecoach, a hero can also be accurate . A hero is accurate in a gunfight with a two-mile shot .
 Hollywood's Western hero embodies an American model of masculinity, imbued with male emotional repression and feats of physical strength . Hollywood’s Western hero is a model of American masculinity .
 The heroism of the Western culminates in the imposition of order and vigilante justice on the 'Wild West' in all its perceived disorder and lawlessness .
 The heroic devotion to Soviet values was a legacy of socialist realist influence . It was the heroic devotion of Soviet values that led to the collapse of Soviet communism .
 Socialist Realism refers to an idealised form of realism . It is a depiction of life as it is, not just life as is, but life as should be . Socialist Realist Realism is a form of idealised realism .
 It focusses primarily on workers, farmers, class-conflict, and the realisation of class-consciousness and the victory of the proletariat . The film is based on the work of Karl Marx and his work in Germany .
 Ideology and party mindedness are at the heart of socialist realism . Socialist realism is a glorification of communist values through realistic imagery . Ideology is key to socialist realism, a glorified communist values .
 In the early 1930s, in Soviet literature, there was a move towards a romanticised hero, with the rise of the bogatyr . The move towards romanticised heroes was seen in the 1930s as a result .
 The notion of vigilantism or solitary action that is so associated with the American hero, can also be found in the manifestation of the bogatyr .
 These bogatyry were essentially ‘rebels’ directing efforts against bureaucratic obstacles to the heroic physical achievements of the hero in service of their prince, Stalin .
 The irony of the 'freedom-loving' and 'daring' hero-bogatyr and the authoritarian dogmatic society in which he operates is reconciled by his ritual role as the model son in service of the ‘father’ or Stalin .
 The hero’s rebelliousness is not a notable feature, his vigilantism and solitariness is always grounded in the knowledge that he serves Soviet power, which is made evidently clear .
 The individual is implicitly in service of the state, rather than explicitly achieving ‘consciousness’ in the style of the 1930s . The Wild West manifests itself in the individual hero taking on the responsibilities of the State .
 These films feature the hero as a dispenser of justice within an uncertain and lawless time and place . These films are about the hero who is a disponer of justice in a lawless place .
 Relationship between the state and the hero differs in Hollywood and Socialist realist models . The relationship between state and hero is different in Hollywood, Socialist realists .
 The socialist realist realist model of the 1930s involved the hero acting unconsciously with socialist principles, before realising ideology and achieving consciousness . The hero acted unconsciously with the socialist principles of the . 1930s .
 The idea of character development is absent from the Soviet Western films of the 1960s and 1970s . In contrast, this idea of . character development was absent from Soviet Western . films .
 The hero in the Soviet Western undergoes a journey or task in order to help defeat the enemy of Soviet power, summoning remarkable emotional strength and tactical thinking from a profound ideological belief in the righteousness .
 This is not following realisation after a period of ‘spontaneity’ but a driving constant . Yet this is not the following realising after a . period of 'spontaneousity' but a . driving constant. Yet this . is not a period after a
 Red Army Officer Bardin and his assistant Shura are driven by a mission to infiltrate a White Army gang to help win the Civil War for the Bolsheviks . In Tachanka from the South, the Red Army is driven by an officer Bardin .
 Shilov in At Home Among Strangers is one such hero whose allegiance to the party and the ideology of the state is implicitly constant rather than realised after a period of spontaneity .
 The state stands behind Shilov’s heroism, because he is an employee of the state, as a member of the Cheka . But it is not the state which principally motivates his heroic actions, says the author . The state stood behind his heroic action, but not
 He must prove his innocence by recapturing the gold that has been stolen by a gang of bandits, acting out of a personal desire to redeem himself in the eyes of his friends . The film is set to be released in cinemas on December 26 .
 Shilov is reminiscent of the Western hero as in service of American values and westward expansion . He was in service in service to the U.S. and Westward expansion, says historian .
 In the classical Hollywood Western, the hero has no realisation of American values or initial stage of spontaneity that one could compare with the character development outlined in socialist realist novels, but is instead heroic partially because of his consistency . In the classic Hollywood Westerns, the character has
 In some respects, Shilov’s conception of the ‘state’ itself is that of his friends in the Cheka –a personal motivation and connection . In some . respects, the conception of . the 'state' itself is . that of . his . friends
 The American state-building orientated expansion west through the Western’s hero, who seeks to use his immutable skill and sense of justice, as an individual, to help create America in the Wild West . Personal moral decisions also shape the American state of the West .
 In The Elusive Avengers, the main character of the ‘Avengers’ acts in service of the state, but acts as a member of the group . The group of ‘Bolletian’s’ is the group of members of the Bolsheviks
 His father – a Red agent – was tortured and executed by the warlord Lyuty . His father was tortured by Lyuty, who was executed by warlord .
 The film presents a version of socialist heroism that allows for ‘spontaneity-toconsciousness’ to be superseded by a constant, personal commitment in the interests of the state for the hero . Personal vendetta, as well as the mutual bonds of friendship between
 In an unexpected scene the film ends on a strongly rhetorical note – with the entry of the children, the ‘avengers’ into the Red Army .
 In a modification to the socialist realist formula of achieving consciousness, the 'avengers' are always conscious of their ideology, but are in this instance rewarded by the Red Army for how their small efforts contribute to the consolidation of state power .
 In White Sun, the film is interspersed with flashbacks to Sukhov’s flashbacks to images of his wife surrounded by the greenery of his hometown . The film was released in April 2014 .
 The film was to include more scenes flashing back to Sukhov’s wife, including nudity, but the censors forced Motyl to cut them . Furthermore, more scenes were to be flashed back to the wife, but they were forced to be cut .
 In the same way as Hollywood’s depiction of heroic expansion westwards did not involve any sudden epiphany of the hero . Sukhov in White Sun serves the interests of the state but undergoes no character development in the way that Chapaev does, who undergoes the
 The relationship between gender relations and heroes in Soviet Westerns reveals how, although American and Soviet society in the 1960s and 1970s, the forces of male patronisation were strikingly similar .
 In the USSR there was an official enunciation of the virtues of equality enshrined in the revolution, that women had equal rights to men . The revolution had liberated women by providing them with equal pay, abortion rights, and legal protection .
 In spite of repressive measures introduced in the 1930s under Stalin, improvements in the 1960s were made in the Soviet Union .
 New laws in 1965 and 1968 kept the Soviet Union at the forefront of divorce rights for women . There were measures which provided surprisingly legal recourse for women, with new laws .
 In the USA, equality for women was also something constitutionally enshrined and socially popular, but with a greater emphasis on traditional family roles . In the U.S. it was more socially popular with a more traditional family role than equality .
 The values underpinning notions of gender relations may differ but the fact of patriarchy did not . Yet, while these values underpining notions of . gender relations . may differ, they did not, but the . fact of . patriarchy did .
 Hollywood and Soviet cinema both adopted a paternalistic attitude in their presentation of women and their relationship to male heroes . Hollywood and the Soviet cinema, both adopted paternalistic attitudes to women .
 In John Ford's The Searchers, the heroes Ethan and Martin go on a hunt to find Ethan’s niece, Debbie, who was abducted by a gang of Comanche native Americans . The film is based on the novel by John Ford, directed by Ford .
 Ethan tries to kill Debbie after she says that she would rather stay with the Comanche . Ethan is determined to kill her after she tells him she wants to stay with them . Ethan and Debbie are on a mission together to find Debbie and find her .
 The hero of White Sun, Sukhov, rescues the veiled multiple wives of Abdullah . In a similar way, the hero of the novel White Sun rescued the veiled women of Abdullah.
 Both have the same underlying male patronisation of women, who are deprived of the choice of their own actions, so as to serve the social-political values motivating male heroic missions . Yet both have the underlying male patronage of women as well as the women themselves .
 In The Elusive Avengers, one of the gang of protagonists is a young girl Ksanka . In the book, Ksankanka is a member of the Elusive Avengers .
 She is characterised as meek and traditional, even when around the other avengers . She is the meekest and traditional figure in the world .
 Ksanka actively use her own meekness and innocence to spring a trap on the bandits at a tavern . The trap takes place in a tavern at the end of the night .
 The very use of the conservative gender role suggests that the female heroes were still limited in their agency . While on some level, the message is that Bolshevik heroes can utilise existing gender roles in heroic ways .
 Keosayan did not write a character who radically fought on the same terms as men as a Bolshevik revolutionary, subverting gender roles, but one who found her traditional gender role to be a revolutionary asset in and of itself .
 The agency of women is an aspect of the Hollywood Western which was hardly challenged by several 'anti-Westerns' of the late 1960s and 1970s which had heterodox approaches to race and violence .
 A common feature of the Western is that of the hero as the conquer of nature . The hero as a conquerer of nature is the conqueror of nature, says author .
 Stagecoach is a classic example of the journey made through harsh conditions to an ultimate destination which resolves the action of the film . The film is set in the backdrop of a series of events in which the journey is made to resolve .
 This journey is in many respects a taming of nature, the physical victory over the harsh environment in which the quest is situated . The journey is the physical triumph of the quest, and it is the result of a physical victory against nature .
 ‘A Revisionist View’, Rocky Mountain Review of Language and Literature, 34/4 , 243. ‘‘’ is a revisionist view of the world’
 Winkler, ‘Classical Mythology and the Western Film’, Comparative Literature Studies, 22/4 , 524. Winkler . Winkler’s work is based on the works of classical mythology and film history .
 He travels on horseback into the wilderness to pursue on foot the thieves of the gold . He is chased on foot by horseback to pursue the thieves .
 The film features a chase along river rapids, in a culmination of the journey into the wilderness . The film is set in the wilderness and features a finale of a journey .
 Shilov’s success is shown in of his ability to defeat Brylov and Sarychev, but also his transverse the rapids and rocks that stand as nature's obstacle .
 Similarly, Sukhov in White Sun defines his heroism through battling against the hostility of his environment . The film is based on the experiences of a young man in a hostile environment .
 In the opening titles sequence, the camera pans multiple shots of Sukhov walking across the desert at different angles and distances, accompanied by a tentative marching-style timpani beat . The film was released in March 2014 .
 Sukhov has to travel over sand and sea in order to capture the rebel warlord, Abdullah . He has traveled over sand to capture Abdullah, Abdullah, the rebel leader of the rebels in Syria .
 The hero’s success, framed by harsh landscapes, is a crucial way in which the hardiness of the Western hero was incorporated into the mission of the Soviet hero in the 1920s .
 The cowboy hero was a powerful symbol of the American other – a visual reminder of difference in values and cultural practice . It was a symbol of difference between the American two cultures .
 In 1968, the Soviet satirical magazine Krokodil published a piece on how Reagan had just become Governor of California . The piece was published in the satirical magazine, Krokadil .
 The bogatyr hero of the 1920s to 1940s offered a domestic Soviet model for which the Hollywood hero could be adapted to, but yet it was not . The film is based on the real-life story of a Soviet-style hero . It is the first time a film
 The bogatyr as a hero involved a focus on the taming of youthful rebellion and achievement of consciousness, but no such transformation occurs in the Soviet Western . The Bogatyr is a hero for the first time .
 The influence of the Western in Soviet cinema’s heroes, on a basic level, was the influence of a genre and set of images and themes from Hollywood .
 The Western, for heroes, could be interpreted and adapted into a Soviet context . Western values had much in common with Soviet values of heroism, author says .
 The films revealed an underlying parallel between the horrors of the past in the Wild West and of state mandated violence and war in the early 1970s . The films reveal the parallels between the past and the violence of the West and the state of the early 70s .
 Corkin suggests that “the western has the mythic power to define the past not simply as a body of material and ideological events that are recognizable and subject to analysis . But as a triumphal moment when a compendium of quintessentially American traditions took hold”
 The Wild West is a frontier, on the very brink of American territorial control, but one representing a better future for those who seek it . It's a frontier on the brink of U.S. territorial control .
 In this sense, the Wild West is as much a temporal frontier, of a bygone era, as it is a geographical one . The Wild West was as much of a time frontier as it was a geographical frontier, as much as a time .
 The notion of the temporal frontier, the cusp of historical development, can be applied to the Soviet Western . This notion of a temporal frontier can be used to explain why the Westerners are still at the moment .
 Most of these films are set in the Russian Civil War, the defining moment for the birth of the Soviet Union . The films are based on the events leading up to the Soviet-era Soviet invasion of the USSR .
 The glorification of America’s past was, at the same time, critiqued and complicated by several ‘anti-Westerns’ whereby a “historically realistic depiction of the harshness of Western life’ was depicted – in films such as Monte Walsh
 By the 1960s and 1970s the struggles for the development of communism’s future were happening in the corridors of power in Moscow . Soviet Westerns could have used these new anti-Western models which demystified the past and showed the reality of historic suffering and harshness
 Filmmakers reflect on a heroic past space, lost to urbanisation and bureaucratisation . Filmmaker: 'Heroic past space' has been lost in urbanisation .
 Soviet films that dealt with contemporary themes were the most highly recommended by the authorities and the most frequently produced, but also among the least profitable films . The focus on nostalgia in cinema is evidenced from movie attendance and sales . Soviet films dealing with modern themes were also the most profitable films, but
 The Elusive Avengers drew in 54. million viewers, White Sun 34. million, and At Home Among Strangers saw 23. million . To put this into context, The Avengers drew a staggering 54 million viewers .
 The Civil War landscape of the Soviet Western reflected a nostalgia for the loss of daring and heroism in the wilderness . The Soviet Westerns were nostalgic for the lost daring and bravery .
 Landscape is crucial to the Western in terms of its articulation of ‘the frontier’, the frontier between the past and present, between civilisation and wilderness, between stability and disorder . Landscape can be seen as a symbol of civilisation and the wilderness .
 The battle for communism was no longer one of bureaucracy not train robberies, horses, and guns, and Soviet filmmakers wanted to use the Western to recapture that exciting and revolutionary stage of the battle .
 The American Western is used as a vehicle for nostalgia by Soviet filmmakers . The backdrop of wilderness and the fact of being set in a ‘bygone era’, allow these films to utilise long standing narratives of heroism and Soviet glory .
 In White Sun, the barren desert of central Asia is used to create a environment distinctly alien to the majority of Soviet viewers . White Sun is set to be released in cinemas in the summer of 2014 .
 The desert, a near ubiquitous setting for Hollywood Westerns, is here consciously employed to draw a parallel for a Soviet context . The desert is used to draw parallels with the Soviet context of the film .
 The cinematography uses the sparsity of the desert background to draw the viewer’s eye towards the foreground, with the frequent recurrence of the protagonists, and their horses, as the centre of the camera .
 The old clay-bricked buildings, the inhabitants of the desert in traditional dress, and the half-a-century old Civil War uniforms, evoke a bygone era situated in the desert .
 The only purpose for Sukhov’s mission in the desert, to fight for the survival of the new Bolshevik state, is emphasised by nostalgic glimpses into his lusciously green hometown . His wife at the centre of his flashbacks .
 The flashbacks emphasise the distance between the desert of central Asia, as the place for the chapter of the Civil War in Soviet history, and the greenery of European Russia which both precedes and follows the desert .
 Sukhov cannot return to his beautiful and fertile home until his mission in the barren and alien desert of the Civil War is finished . He cannot return home until he has finished his mission .
 The film is set in the Siberian forests and steppe, and used to create a sense of distance and particularity from the urban political elites in Moscow .
 Shilov’s mission is one which requires him to go beyond the bounds of city life, and to pursue the danger of fighting by himself in the ‘wild east’ of immediate post Civil War era Siberia .
 The start of the film is a sequence in which an old carriage is loaded up and sent down a hill crashing into the distance by a group of the future Chekists .
 This black-and-white sequence, accompanied by a mournful ballad composed by Eduard Artemyev, symbolises the destruction of the past and joint creation of the future by pushing the carriage down the hill .
 Revolutionary cries to action are used to further embed the film in a sentimental and emotionally charged interpretation of the past . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in cinemas worldwide on September 28 .
 The carriage is first and foremost a deliberate echo of John Ford’s Stagecoach . contemporaries of Mikhalkov recognised the use of nostalgia, with E Stishova writing in 1977 that the carriage was a deliberate reference to Ford's Stagecoaches .
 The bureaucracy of the office of the Cheka is tragically distant from the romanticised revolutionary-era activity . The Cheka was founded by the Communist Party in Moscow .
 The motorcar symbolises that move from the Civil War era of personal courage and physical exertion in the establishment of Soviet power, to the comfortable but unromantic time of the post Civil War maintenance of power . It symbolises the move from personal courage of personal exertion to the
 The Elusive Avengers was directly influenced by Hollywood in its use of the wildness and its relation to a nostalgic view of past adventure . The film was influenced by the film's use of wildness .
 The Soviet state during the civil war with its young Elusive Avengers] daring protagonists moving across that steppe, in ways that echo the Western . Fistful of Dollars .
 A common feature of the Western, notably in Stagecoach and My Darling Clementine, is the wide angle shot of the hero riding off into the sunset . The wide-angle shot is a common feature in the Western films .
 The Elusive Avengers opens with the striking silhouettes of the four avengers on horseback, riding towards the viewer, against a backdrop of a glowing red sunset .
 The image clearly situates the film within the nostalgia of the Western genre . The image sitsuate the film in a Western style style .
 Leone’s film was not publicly screened in the Soviet Union until the 1980s . Directors and studios had access to foreign films for private screenings for the purposes of studying American culture .
 By consciously borrowing from the Western genre, situating the heroes, the avengers, within this stark wilderness nostalgically draws the entire focus of the viewer on the simplicity and concentration on the glory of the Civil War .
 Although mostly achieved visually, nostalgia also is present in the music of these films through the use of ballads . The films have been released in cinemas and cinemas .
 In White Sun, Motyl uses a ballad written by the famous artist, Bulat Okudzhav . Motyl is Motyl's first solo in White Sun .
 The ballad, “Vashe blagorodie, gospozha razluka’, is sung by by Pasha Vereshchagin, a former Russian customs officer lamenting the home and life that he used to know .
 Sukhov's nostalgic longing for his home and his wife is linked to the Vereshchagin’s longing for a lost world and his long-suffering wife through the opening lines of both verses . VereshChagin's homesickness is . transferred to Sukh
 The first verse’s “горппожа Разлука” is linked to the next verse”s ‘грага’ , referring to Sukhov�
 Bulat Okudzhava provided the lyrics and music for White Sun . He also did so for Belorusskiy Vokzal, a film about the end of the war .
 The ballad in White Sun is used to rouse feelings of nostalgia for a time long past by 1970 .
 The song evokes a fleeting romance, with the repetition of ‘ноч прощ’ to emphasise how time has past . The repetition of the repeated 'пра, но�чь птра
 The dancing villagers and the spectacle of performance evokes nostalgia for the past but evokes the loss of the traditional Russian village in the push for industrialisation and collectivisation .
 The late 1960s and 1970s saw increasing popularity of Village Prose . It reflects a keen self-awareness of the loss of pastoral settings and lifestyles . At Home Among Strangers and Tachanka from the South, nostalgic ballads reflect loss of the mythic revolutionary zeal of the
 In At Home the opening montage sequence is accompanied by a soulful ballad written by Mikhalkov’s mother . At Home is a Russian film based on the life of his mother .
 In Tachanka from the South, a central ballad song is repeated throughout the film, culminating in a final shoot-out accompanied by the song before the credits role . Similarly, in  Tachanka from the film, a final shoot-out 
 If the Western locates the Wild West within a visual and auditory landscape of old-world charm and excitement, then the Soviet Western seeks to achieve the same things but in the context of the Civil War . The Soviet Western is the same thing as the Western, but in a context of
 The use of the ballad is poignant in these films for trying to evoke a bygone era of past nostalgia and glory . It is poignant for these films to evoke an era of nostalgia .
 The success of the Western genre in the Soviet context related to the ways in which the genre could use the past, says the author . The success was related to how the genre used the past.
 In the Soviet Union the very use of a genre that utilised the past facilitated the implicit criticism of the present . In America the development of the ‘anti-Western’ involved the use of the Western genre’s past-setting to make modern-day criticisms of Nixon
 Sovietisation could, if not override Americanness, could, at least contribute alternate currents of thought for viewers of these films .
 Drawing on the past may have demonstrated correct Soviet values to viewers, but it ultimately did so using history . Drawing on Soviet values may have roused party and ideological pride .
 In the 1920s, a multi-ethnic project was envisioned in the creation of the Soviet Union . Nationalisms were secondary to creation of a communist utopia, before which bourgeois nationalism would dissipate .
 Stalin actively sought to minimise the role of national identities within a broader Soviet identity . In the 1930s, Stalin initiated a programme, which sought to reduce national identities in Soviet Russia .
 Terry Martin has argued that for the cultures and peoples of the constituent republics (e.g. republics) for the purposes of the republics, the republic is not a viable option . Terry Martin argues that for many of the peoples of republic republics it would be difficult to
 Soviet ideas of ethnicity rested around an official rejection of nationalism as a dangerous and bourgeois concept . There was minimal threat of forced assimilation, but instead that the Soviet state valued the voluntary absorption of Russian culture and language by these constituent identities .
 Francine Hirsch rejects comparisons between Nazi and Soviet ethnic and racial policies . Claims that the Soviet nationalities policy in the 1930s was one principally invested in protecting against perceived 'enemy nations' rather than ‘enemy races’ .
 1002 Zhuk, ‘Hollywood’s Insidious Charms, 595. While not explicitly to do with ethnic difference, but rather cultural differences, the book is about the culture of China .
 ‘Amerikanskoe Kino S Trekh Tochek Zreniia’, Iskusstvo Kino, 12 , 79. Mel’vil’. ‘The American’s ‘American’ and ‘Zren
 Soviet film and television allowed racist depictions of difference that dehumanised Central Asians . In this thinking, the potential arose for the characterisation of ethnic and cultural difference as underdevelopment .
 In the Hollywood Western, a central theme is that of ‘degenerate barbarism’ as the enemy of rising civilisation . The ultimate exemplification of that barbarism is the non-white Native-American tribalism . Sturges’ presentation in The Magnificent Seven is
 The film was produced during the height of the Civil Rights movement in 1960 . Steve McQueen and Yul Brynner play a native American who is buried on racial grounds .
 The Magnificent Seven’s attempt at dealing with racial equality made it less of a target for derision by Soviet authorities seeking to bolster anti-American propaganda . As an important founding film for the birth of the Soviet Western, the film was viewed in a positive light .
 Sturges' work offered a positive encouragement, through exploring racial politics, for Soviet filmmakers to incorporate themes and tropes of the genre into their work without appearing overtly American . In this sense, Sturges’ work offered an opportunity to explore racial politics .
 Yasha is, on one level, emblematic of racial equality – a token minority within an all white case of heroes . Yasha, a black hero, is an emblematic minority within a case of white heroes .
 His ethnicity is presented as an impediment to his heroic Soviet credentials . Yet his ethnicity has been presented as a problem for the film .
 His Roma identity, as just ‘Yasha’s, is insufficient for the Red Army . Part of his commitment towards the revolutionary cause is the Russification of his name .
 In the original Little Red Devils (Krasnyie d’yavolyata, 1923), which was remade into The Elusive Avengers, the character of Yasha was a black circus performer called Tom .
 The replacement of a black character with a gypsy one is emblematic of how ethnicity is important to Soviet filmmakers and studios primarily within a Soviet context . Ethnicity is important in Soviet films and studios .
 Jarmusch’s Dead Man and Traditions of Revisionism in the Western’, Journal of Film and Video , 3.3.5 (2013)
 The issue of ethnicity in 1966 was not one of showing an international egalitarianism of different peoples, but rather to show the multiplicity of equal races within the Soviet Union . The white-saviour complex, so frequent in depictions of race or ethnicity in Hollywood Westerns, is clearly also
 In At Home, ethnicity also relates to Soviet ideas of development, although in this instance the white saviour complex manifests itself in visually shocking racism towards the ‘uncivilised’ Asian Tartar man .
 In the film, the Muslim Tartar bandit, Kayum, is discovered by Shilov to have stolen the gold . The gold was destined for the new revolutionary government in Moscow .
 Kayum is presented as an unintelligent, childlike, treacherous, and at times even animalistic – speaking with agitated frenzy and moving with bent back and limbs . Kayum was presented as unintelligent and childlike .
 Rather than being presented as willfully ignorant and evil, Kayum is presented as simply too uneducated and perhaps unintelligent to comprehend MarxistLeninist logic . Kayum was presented as being too ignorant and perhaps uneducated .
 Soviet ideology argued that ethnic difference was important insofar as it related to how developed, politically, different narodi were . Soviet ideology said that ethnic differences were important to determine how developed they were .
 This presentation of the non-white character of Kayum is as physically different, sub-human, and in need of the white Bolshevik man to educate him . This presentation is as physical different and sub-humans, as well as being sub-white .
 The notion that ‘cultural backwardness’ can be remedied by a Russian speaking Soviet officer’s rhetoric is connected to the legacy of Russification of the 1930s . Kayum – whose poor Russian is linked to cultural backwardness – has poor Russian .
 In a scene in the corn-fields, Shilov transfixes Kayum with a simple magic trick . In the film, Kayum is confronted by a man in a corn field .
 Kayum is held in rapture by superstition and an ‘uncivilised’ belief in magic . The hard realism and pragmatism of the Cheka officer Shilov is contrasted with the hard realism .
 The hero, Sukhov, presents his mission as not just of the immediate liberation of the wives of Abdullah – but the general liberation of all women from traditional moral conservatism and restrictive religious practice .
 The women are presented as naive and idiotic, when in one scene to avoid being seen without wearing the traditional hijab and violating their modesty, they frantically pull their garments up over their heads – revealing their underwear in the process . Cultural differences are seen by Sukhov not as a permanent
 The Soviet emancipatory project argued that ethnic difference was not important in the notion of levels of development . Ultimately argued for voluntary sovietisation of different groups . The Soviet project argued for the voluntary 'freezing' of groups .
 This involved more than the absorption of political ideology, but the assimilation of cultural and religious practice in an attempt to imitate the white man from Moscow . This involved . The assimilation involved more . than the . assimilation . of cultural . practice .
 The Soviet presentation of ethnicity in their Westerns was inherently a patronising one . In the vein of classic Hollywood Westerns, and even ‘Anti-Westerns’, the Soviets presented ethnicity as an anti-Western Western .
 These films reflect an imbedded hypocrisy on the part of Soviet filmmakers and authorities, who sought to criticise the racism of American society, while constructing Soviet ideals out of ethnically and culturally Russian models .
 This is not to say that Soviet identity was a form of Russian nationalism . Soviet leaders were fearful of the threat from Russian nationalism as a reactionary ideology .
 The connection is made in these films between cultural and ethnic pride and a lack of development among Soviet nations . These films are made in connection with cultural and economic pride .
 Central Asian Soviet film studios produced an array of Civil War era adventure movies in the 1970s,1017 which Birgit Beumers attributes to the popularity of White Sun, released in 1970 .
 In line with Soviet hierarchies of development, a positive-Bolshevik model for the Central Asian man forms a contrast to a negative model of ethnic and cultural pride embodied by the nationalists or Basmachi separatists .
 Franz Fanon argued that colonised peoples self-colonised with the whiteness of their coloniser and denied their own ethnic and cultural heritage . It is this internalisation of the Soviet idea of hierarchies of development among different Soviet nations . Fanon argues that the films internalise
 Both films are from Uzbekfil’m and directed by the acclaimed Ali Khamraev . Both films were shot in Uzbekfil, Uzbekfil-m, and are set in Uzbekistan .
 In The Seventh Bullet, the hero, Maksumov, is presented as the same sort of ‘civilising force’ that we find in the Western – the hero imbued with a foreign ideology conquering the wildness and unruliness of natives in distant desert lands
 Although he is ethnically Uzbek he exhibits no signs of being Uzbek other than his skin . He fully inhabits the role of an officer in the Red Army – fully inhabiting his role as an officer .
 His mission is to go on a journey across the desert and try to win back his men, who have switched allegiance to the anti-Bolshevik Basmachi warlord Khairulla .
 The enemy, Khairulla, is portrayed a backwards embodiment of Uzbek identity . He is portrayed as morally and politically bankrupt because of it . He flees to the UK with his two wives at the last moment rather than fight .
 The hero, Maksumov, serves as a positive Soviet role model of Central Asian identity as a counterpoint to the failings of the traditionalist and ethnically and culturally arrogant Khairulla .
 He manages to persuade his men that their futures are better under his personal command and in the service of the Soviet state . He managed to persuade them that their future was better under him . The film is set in New York and London .
 As a group of 20 or so Uzbek men, their anxieties over who to fight for are representative of the wider anxieties of Uzbek society during the Civil War . The group is represented by the group's anxieties about whether to fight either communist forces or islamist, nationalist Bas
 Maksumov’s victory in managing to persuade his men to recommit themselves to the communist cause under his leadership is a way of showing to audiences the positive role that non-white Soviet citizens could have within the Soviet state .
 Khamraev dismisses an ethnic or cultural conception of Uzbek identity in his presentation of the native villagers he encounters on his journey . Khamraeva dismisses a cultural or ethnic conception in his portrayal of the villagers .
 Ismail almost kills Maksumov in a rage, before realising he was not the person who stole his horse and killed his brother . Ismail realises he is not the man who stole the horse from his brother and kills him .
 Discovering that it was actually the Bamachi warlord, Khairulla, who killed his brother, positions Ismail as a friend and ally of Maksumov .
 The rage and irrationality of the Uzbek villager is presented as having to be soothed by Maksumov’s rational communist ideals, and in doing so he turns the villager into an anti-Basmachi ally . In doing so, the author turns the
 In this way, the Red Army officer, with this superior western ideology, is capable of convincing a villager to turn his back on the traditional and anti-Soviet ethno-religious identity promoted by the Basmachi . The Red Army is able to convince the villagers to turn their
 In The Seventh Bullet criticisms of native levels of cultural and political development are explored through moral and personal failings . In The Bodyguard, traditional cultural practices are explicitly ridiculed . Whereas in The Seventh bullet criticisms are explored in the moral, personal failings of the characters .
 At one point, Saifulo, Nazar’s slave, is shown to be foolish in his belief that pretentious dress can give the courage and strength that the Bolsheviks find in their common belief .
 The culture of the Basmachi is presented as antiquated and alien to Soviet U.S. values . The culture has been presented as an antiquated culture .
 An alternative is created by Khamraev in the form of the all Uzbek Bolshevik forces in the film, led by the hero Mirzo . The film is based on the film's adaptation of the novel .
 Basmachi company are blissfully ignorant that the performers are allies of Mirzo . They use the performance as a distraction – while a young boy severs the ropes of the awning .
 The cultural practices of the traditional Basmachi are reduced to an emblematic farce performance, where their engrossment in their native forms of entertainment lead to their ambush .
 This contrasts sharply with the presentation of tradition in the next scene, where an old man, Nazarat, laments his lack of land because of local Basmachi tyranny . The next scene is a scene of a man lamenting the lack of a place in his land .
 Suimenkul Chokmorov, who played Maksumov, also played a revolutionary captain in The Red Poppy Seeds at Isk-Uslk, a Krygzfil’m production .
 The film presents the smugglers as more invested in their Central Asian heritage, and that their cultural self-indulgence is linked to their lack of Soviet moral and political values . The film ties itself in with orientalist notions of opium as a part of eastern decadence .
 These Central Asian films focus on the racial conflict of the frontier . 1026 presents developed civilisation as the Soviet imposed force of modernity emanating from the west .
 Both American and Soviet views on the historic imposition of their states and ideologies over peoples who drastically differed, ethnically and religious, are linked to conceptions of development and civilisation . The views of the two sides are similar to that of America and Soviet states .
 The American and Soviet projects of state building in far and ‘exotic’ lands were forms of colonialism masked as modernisation . The domination of their peoples was the domination of the peoples, and their peoples, were domination .
 The Soviet project involved the mission to capture the hearts and minds of citizens, to try and create the novyi sovietskyi chelovek . The creation of a new kind of person, an active citizen invested in Soviet values .
 The Soviet Western in the 1960s and 1970s was on such an attempt to help create citizens through cultural output, requiring a balance between entertainment and ideology . It required a balance of entertainment and ideologies .
 These films are emblematic of more than the influence of the U.S. on Soviet culture, but actively demonstrates the way that genre could be used as a new way for ideology to coexist with entertainment .
 In many respects, the surprising similarities between American and Soviet influences on the Soviet Western, demonstrate that cinema – and in particular genre cinema – could offer more than just culturally specific expressions .
 Even if the Western was a genre which was always “quintessentially American”,1028 it was also able to adapted into a Soviet context and still be popular .
 Socialist Realism is how to create a work that adheres fully to ideological demands without being boring and unreadable . In some respect, the fact that these Soviet Westerns could be enjoyed is reflective of fact that the ideological demands on artists after 1953 were fewer, and more freedom was given
 The fact that these films were Westerns and successfully sovietised and made popular suggests that cultural policy under Brezhnev had some successes in balancing ideology with popularity . The films are Westerns, and the fact that they were successfully so vietised suggests some successes under Bre
 The irony is that while these films appeared to Soviet authorities to be adhering to Soviet views on ethnicity, nostalgia, and heroism, they were doing so in a way that actually illuminated some of the underlying similarities between American and Soviet culture .
 John Ford Svoy Sredi Chuzhikh is directed by John Ford and directed by Sredy Sreda Svoikh . The film is based on the book "At Home among Strangers, A Stranger among Friends"
 How the 1960s Cold War Made Russians Likeable in Star Trek and The Man from UNCLE . ‘To be different is not necessarily to be wrong or ugly,” is one of the central themes of Star Trek .
 The 1960s saw the rise of counterculture and protest movements . While the decade had been one of conformity and fear of being targeted as a suspected communist .
 Popular culture in the mid-1960s reflected changes in popular consciousness, as well as changes in political relations with the Soviet Union in the midst of the Cold War .
 Star Trek and The Man from UNCLE each represented genres particularly indicative of Cold War preoccupations . Two 1960s television shows, Star Trek and The Man From UNCLE, appeared in the 1960s .
 Science fiction dealt with space travel and nuclear fear, but was also able to make social commentary from its setting in the future or in galaxies far away . Science fiction deals with social issues such as nuclear fear .
 Espionage shows fed on public imaginings of spies, while also commenting on growing international . Espionage . shows . fed on . public imagination .
 Pavel Chekov and Illya Kuryakin were appealing, especially to young female fans . They were also likeable Russian characters, which had certainly not been present in 1950s popular culture .
 These popular Russian characters were possible because of a combination of the political thaw in Cold War tensions, and the counterculture movement in the U.S. in the United States, which made rebelling against authority the norm .
 Their portrayal and character traits speak to popular opinions at the time, as well as the greater public consciousness in the U.S. in the 1960s . Additionally, their portrayal speaks to popular opinion and public consciousness .
 In the 1950s, the percentage of American households with televisions rose from approximately nine to 90 . In the 1960s, American households had about 90 televisions .
 Because of the ubiquity of television, it was beholden to the will of its viewers and was forced to be adaptable to changing social currents . Because of its ubiquity, television was behold to its viewers .
 TV is a useful medium through which to study social and cultural trends of the Cold War . Thus, television is useful medium for study of Cold War social trends .
 This adaptability allows scholars to periodize television in a similar way that Hollywood is periodized . The adaptability of television is important to scholars, they say . This adaptable periodizes television in the way Hollywood does .
 This periodization refers to Hollywood films, but it reflects larger social and cultural trends . The larger social trends it reflects are useful in the examination of Cold War television .
 TV was still a relatively new medium in this era, but these events affected both creators and viewers . The events affected viewers and creators, causing the popularity of shows that pushed back against the conformity of the 1950s .
 Star Trek and The Man from UNCLE each fall into one of these generic categories, making them excellent signifiers of broader Cold War tropes . Star Trek, UNCLE and Star Trek are examples of Cold War themes .
 Both of these genres had long lives before the Cold War, but the midcentury conflict forever shaped and changed them . The Cold War changed the genres of both of these movies .
 Sci-fi became an updated version of the western as a vehicle through which to explore modernism . Spy-fi grappled with the globalizing world and the shifting image of espionage .
 Each of these genres reflected Cold War themes in different ways . Each genre was forced to adapt in the climate of counterculture .
 These two shows offer a new perspective on the cultural Cold War, as well as a renewed understanding of the broader cultural climate .
 Often times, the actions of the crew reflect a principle closer to the Wilsonian impulse to remake the rest of the world in U.S. image, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The mission to explore strange new worlds could also be neocolonialist . The very nature of the mission “to explore strange . new worlds” could also have been neocolorialist .
 The 60 Television Shows and Events that Made Us Who We Are Today are 260.0 shortlist . The 60 shows and events that made us who we are today include some of the most recent ones .
 The Perspective of the Original Star Trek Series,” Journal of Cold War Studies 7, Nº 4 : 78 .
 Initially, Star Trek was not incredibly popular, although it would grow to carve out a distinct presence in American popular culture . Star Trek would grow out of its roots in the U.S.
 NBC eventually cancelled the show because it did not have wider success . The show was cancelled because of the show's lack of success .
 Several stations picked Star Trek up for syndication, showing reruns of its three seasons . The series was canceled in 2009 .
 It was in syndication that Star Trek became widely popular, soon rising to be one of the most successful syndicated shows . This popularity led Star Trek to become a popular culture mainstay in the U.S.
 The allegorical nature of Star Trek allowed the story of a starship in the 23rd century to stand in for contemporary America . Many episodes centered on plots that dealt specifically with events viewers would have read about in their newspapers .
 Aside from political liberalism, the show was also known for being relatively diverse and forward thinking, especially for its time .
 Star Trek is credited as being the first television show to have a scripted interracial kiss (between Captain Kirk and Lieutenant Uhura) The diversity of the cast certainly “made a progressive statement on race and gender relations that few in the late 1960s would have missed,” says
 Sometimes the attempts to be progressive and diverse could backfire on themselves . Much like the purported anticolonialist sentiment behind the Prime Directive, sometimes the attempt to be diverse and diverse may backfire .
 Through its futuristic setting, Star Trek and its creators were able to advocate for a future in which equality had been achieved . Even if their own personal view of what that equality looked like was sometimes colored by internalized prejudices, it was often colored by prejudices .
 Star Trek could deal with the Vietnam war because of its futuristic setting . Most networks would not allow specific references to the Vietnam for fear of provoking unnecessary controversy . In fact, diversity and progressive 1051 is the reason for Star Trek .
 Several members of the creative team behind Star Trek signed a petition in 1968 that stated “We oppose the participation of the united States in the war in Vietnam,” making their political position even clearer than it was through the allegorical episodes of the show .
 Nuclear fear and space travel were two major Cold War themes that influenced this new form of sci-fi . Space travel and nuclear fear were major themes in the new sci-fiction .
 Pessimism and dystopian themes were prevalent because of the nuclear fear, but the real possibility of space travel caused the genre to take on tropes of a different generic form – the western .
 Western themes like exploration, conquest, and survival dominated science fiction stories during the Cold War .
 While the frontier in the western is the American West, in sci-fi it is space . The frontier in space is the space frontier, the frontier of space is in space .
 The idea of manifest destiny and conquering the American frontier is engrained in conceptions of American identity . By positing space as the new frontier, or the “final frontier,” science fiction was able to rely not only on western generic tropes, but also on a part of the
 Star Trek is the epitome of Cold War science fiction because of its social commentary and its excitement about expanding in the new frontier of space . Star Trek's social commentary is due to its excitement to expand in space .
 The other camp claims that science fiction only became possible after the scientific revolution, placing its origins somewhere between the 17th-19th century and the 19th century .
 He ends this essay with the claim that a new frontier must be found now that the west has been won in order to preserve American identity . He ends his essay by saying that the new frontier needs to be found in order for American identity to be preserved .
 Henry Luce, in his “American Century” essay, follows Turner’s line of thought and claims that the new frontier in the 1930s is the rest of the world, which American can become a great power of . Henry .
 These are just two examples of the centrality of the frontier conception in the imaginings of American identity and American history . The frontier conception is central to the American identity of American history and American identity .
 By the 1950s modernism had become a part of American mainstream culture . During the Cold War, modernism became the American symbol of freedom and the superiority of capitalism .
 In many ways, Cold War science fiction relied on this mainstream conception of modernism, as well as on the emphasis it placed on technology . The emphasis on technology in science fiction was the focus of the story .
 In the midst of the space race, a genre like science fiction was very appealing . "Science fiction" was popular in the 1960s and '90s .
 In this era, whoever had the most technology and whoever could prove they were the most modern could also prove that their ideological system was better . Whoever had the best technology and who could prove to be most modern can also prove it was better, says CNN .
 Modernism and futurism collided in Cold War sci-fi, making it a genre that held promises of what the future could be if the American way championed over the Soviet way . These themes were present in American Cold War architecture, especially in embassies .
 The show is about an American from the CIA and a Soviet from the KGB . They work for the United Network Command for Law and Enforcement, a fictional international spy organization .
 No, the first Bond film, came out in 1962, building on the popularity of Ian Fleming’s novels . The first film, based on Ian Fleming's novels, was released in 1962 .
 Fleming was consulted in the creation of the show and is credited with creating and naming one of the main characters, Napoleon Solo . Originally, the show was just supposed to focus on Solo as the main character, but then a Russian agent in one episode, Illya Kuryakin, was
 The interactions between the two characters, each from opposing sides of the Cold War conflict, became one of the defining features of the show . The interaction between the characters was a defining feature of the series .
 Napoleon and Illya’s relationship seems very progressive for a spy show made during the Cold War . Napoleon's relationship with Illya seems progressive for the show .
 The president and his wife often have disagreements that are rooted in their differing ideologies . While they sometimes have disagreements, they always remain civil, they are civil .
 The trust and friendship that forms between the CIA agent and the KGB agent certainly seems to run contrary to Cold War trope . In fact, the friendship that formed between CIA and KGB seems to be quite unlike Cold War tropes .
 UNCLE was committed to the cause of international peace and stability, but was driven by greed and lust for power . THRUSH acted completely in its own interest, says UNCLE. UNCLE .
 Despite its lack of allegiance to any particular country, THRUSH is described as believing in a natural order that consists of masters and slaves, which sounds suspiciously like the early Cold War rhetoric about the Soviet Union .
 The Man from UNCLE used consumerism to reinvent the spy genre, further idealizing American capitalism . Additionally, the film also uses consumerism as a vehicle for the film's marketing .
 Spies in Fiction and Film (Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers, 2005), 117. "Spies in fiction and Film"
 The Man from UNCLE was very popular while it was on air . Part of which is credited to the two main characters, but also to the show's satiric tone .
 UNCLE departed from the spy-fi of the 1950s in its more complex worldview and its refusal to play directly in the Cold War trope of the United States good, Soviet Union bad .
 The spy shows of the 1950s and 1960s satiric depiction of the Cold War conflict . However, the crucial difference between the spy shows and those of the 1960s was their satiric portrayal of the conflict .
 This parody can be seen in the mock thank you message at the end of each episode and in the banter between Napoleon and Illya . The parody is seen in many of the episodes of the popular series .
 Many credit UNCLE with being at the forefront of this satirical trend . It was a theme that permeated the whole spy-fi genre in the 1960s . UNCLE is one of the most popular films in the world .
 In the espionage dramas of the 1950s the agent models “appropriate” American citizenship and more broadly represents the United States in his missions . While UNCLE does revisit the authoritative 1950s model, it “reconfigures the agent’s relationship to the state as an
 Spy shows that represented the moral goodness and rightness of the state no longer popular or necessary . Spy shows no longer represent moral goodness or rightness, state was no longer necessary, it is claimed .
 1960s saw shows that poked fun at the infallibility of the American government, but still showed that the American way was ultimately the best . Instead of poking fun at government infallibility, the 1960s showed that America was ultimately best .
 Spy-fi changed from the dramatic nationalist project of the 1950s to the more comical international parody of the 1960s . Spy-Fi became a popular film series in the 1970s and '60s .
 Shows like Get Smart, I Spy, and The Avengers relied on UNCLE’s popularity and built upon its themes . UNCLE was created by UNCLE in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The satirical spy shows of the mid 1960s are examples of the growing pains of the greater genre, and can explain why these shows did not have particularly long lasting popular culture lives . Thus, these shows were examples of growing pains in the genre .
 One of the generic tropes of spy-fi that developed in the 1960s and helped to form the modern imagining of the genre, was the idea of international and world travel . The idea of world travel was one of the most common themes of spy fiction .
 Klaus Dodds discusses the geopolitics of James Bond based on the locations the fictional agent travels to . Dodds argues that scholars can learn about popular conceptions of geopolitics at a certain historical moment by looking at the role and significance of places in popular culture .
 The people in these locations are represented in a certain way – often in a racist or patronizing way – while the Western agents come in and save the day . The people are represented by the West in this way, but the people are often represented in the wrong way .
 The international travel of spy-fi hints at a broader popular conception of a globalized world . However, it also hints at the wider popular conception .
 Espionage shows portray a world that is connected enough that agents have no problem traveling all over the globe . Espionage is based in New York City and Washington, D.C.
 International organizations dominate the spy shows of the 1960s . International cooperation is often necessary to defeat the villains. International cooperation was often necessary .
 The geopolitics of travel and the notion of a connected world were particularly important popular notions during the Cold War . Travel was a popular topic of popular interest in travel and travel .
 Official propaganda in the U.S. was extremely anti-Soviet and anti-Russian in the 1950s . The Cold War tensions solidified into what many considered a new world order .
 By the mid-1960s, two network television shows, Star Trek and The Man from UNCLE had exceptionally popular Russian characters, marking a drastic change from the inhuman Russian characters .
 In order to investigate how this change occurred, we can look to the greater geopolitical and cultural context of the era . We can also look at the wider geopolitical, cultural context, of the time .
 In 1953, Joseph Stalin died and in 1956, Nikita Khrushchev denounced Stalin and his policies . In 1956, the new Soviet premier Nikita Krushchev denounced Stalin and denounced Stalin .
 This led to what historians call ‘the thaw’ in Cold War tensions, which lasts roughly from 1956-1968 . Historians say the thaw was the result of the Cold War thaw, which lasted between 1956 and 1968 .
 Khrushchev visited the United States and Vice President Richard Nixon visited the Soviet Union in 1959 . Nixon visited Russia in 1959 and visited the U.S.
 The thaw did create a Cold War environment that was significantly less chilly than during Stalin’s time . The election of President John F Kennedy and his somewhat amenable relationships with Khrushchev created the thaw . Additionally, with the election of . President . Kennedy and . his
 These targeted filmmakers, accused them of communist leanings, and destroyed their careers . Filmmakers were accused of being communists, but their careers were destroyed .
 Many in Hollywood felt it necessarily to be obviously anti-communist . Thus, many in Hollywood thought it was necessarily anti-Communist . The film was shot at the heart of the Soviet Union .
 In the 1960s, cultural changes also occurred within the United States . The thaw culture in the U.S. was a major factor in cultural changes .
 Counterculture and protest movements began to take over the compulsory conformity and anti-communism of the 1950s, creating a space for dissenting voices . Counterculture became a movement of protest movements in the 1960s .
 Both the Civil Rights Movement and the Vietnam War were major causes for unrest . The Vietnam War was a major cause for unrest in the United States .
 People began to disagree with U.S. political policy and to mistrust, even resent the government . People began disagreeing with policy and began to mistrust the government in 2008 .
 This translated into a larger mistrust and resentment of authority and societal norms . This led to a larger distrust of authority, resentment of societal norms, the author says .
 These sentiments are part of what made popular Russian characters possible in the mid-1960s .
 The combination of the thaw and counterculture created an environment in which American television creators could make likeable, even good, Russian characters . American television viewers were more able to like and identify with those Russian characters, the author says .
 This was true of various forms of popular culture, not just television . This is not just TV, but other forms of pop culture, including television .
 Hollywood in particular changed its attitude both because of the larger political climate and because of large structural shifts within Hollywood that did away with the old studio system and brought in younger filmmakers . This broader sentiment made it possible for Star Trek to provide social commentary on the Vietnam War .
 The fact that they are presented as firmly on the side of good is an important development in 1960s popular culture . While they both still fall into certain stereotypes of Russian characters, the fact that . they are . still fall in line with certain stereotypes .
 Both of these characters had wide and avid fanbases, showing that viewers were also ready to like Russian characters .
 Gene Roddenberry, the creator of Star Trek, added the character of Pavel Chekov to the crew of the USS Enterprise in the show’s second season, which ran from 1967-1968 . Chekov was introduced in the second season of the show's second season .
 Being a younger character, he was certainly meant to appeal to younger female fans . He was created as a 'younger character' who appealed to younger fans .
 Chekov’s addition stresses that “by the twenty-third century the cold war is long gone,”1081 is yet another instance in which the sci-fi genre allows for poignant social commentary .
 Chekov did appeal to a lot of young female fans, bringing in a teen audience who loved this character and who helped elevate him to series regular status . "Chekov" was a popular character for a young audience .
 Russian character is no longer portrayed as evil or inhuman as he might have been in the 1950s .
 He is not only one of the main crewmembers, but also very popular in the fan community . Instead, he is a member of the crew, and very popular among fans .
 Pavel Andreievich Chekov joins the crew of the Enterprise when he is in his early twenties . Chekov is a member of the Enterprise's crew .
 He is portrayed as at once young and naïve, but also as an extremely smart and capable graduate of Starfleet Academy . He's portrayed as a young, naïve and smart graduate of the Academy .
 His youth and exuberance were part of what made him appealing to teenage viewers . He felt they had much more in common with him than with the older members of the crew .
 Chekov is very proud of his Russian heritage, reminding viewers time and again where he is from, if Koenig's strong Russian accent had not already tipped them off .
 Chekov's naivety and his Russian heritage became defining features of his character . Chekov’s naivety became defining feature features of character .
 Chekov claims that some of the most famous inventions and stories in the world originated in Russia . Chekov: Some of the world's most famous inventories and stories originated from Russia .
 If Chekov still thinks that Russia is responsible for all of these things, then there is something wrong with the way Russians look at history . Chekov, someone who is so smart and well educated because of Starfleet Academy, still thinks about Russia .
 If most Russian characters in film and television over the past decade had been inhuman and evil, presenting a Russian character who is naïve and silly would seem a good antidote to preconceived notions . If most film and TV characters in recent years have been inhuman, evil, it would be a good
 This plays into an older stereotype of Russian characters and communist characters as ignorant . However, this also plays into a stereotype of an ignorant Russian character .
 The fact that his Russian origins were never seen as a sign of evil or bad intentions was certainly indicative of a change in perceptions of Russians in the 1960s . However, the fact that he was not seen as evil or evil was seen as an indication of a changing attitude .
 The Man from UNCLE was originally supposed to focus on CIA agent Napoleon Solo and his exploits working for the international UNCLE agency . Napoleon Solo was originally intended to be a CIA agent .
 Kuryakin was compared to a pop music star by Chekov . Chekov was the son of a famous singer .
 McCallum’s good looks and the enigmatic persona he created for Illya Kuryakin earned him nicknames like ‘the blonde Beatle” or “the fifth Beatle,” comparing the hysteria surrounding him to the hysteria 1086 surrounding the British pop
 McCallum's approach to the character was to build a persona based on ambiguity and enigma in which he would often hide rather than reveal aspects of the agent’s backstory and personality . The actor's approach was to create a persona that would be based on an enigma .
 Soviet citizen of good standing rather than defector . What is known about him is that he is not a defector, but a Soviet citizen . He is known to be in good standing .
 Kuryakin’s mysterious and exotic character plays on many tropes of Russian characters from before the Cold War . In the episode “The Neptune Affair” he even appears in the uniform of the Soviet Navy, suggesting a history .
 This “sexy and enigmatic” Russian spy soon became a heartthrob character . Kuryakin was a good foil for his American partner, Napoleon Solo .
 While Solo’s outgoing, risk-taking personality is more like James Bond, Kuryakin is more intellectual, pessimistic, practical, and intense . The pair are more intellectual and pessimistic .
 This trope of the sexy and mysterious Russian is not a new one, and in fact was present in anti-communist popular culture of the 1950s . This trope is not new one . It is present in the anti-Communist anti-war culture of 1950s and '60
 Kuryakin’s sex appeal can be seen as building upon that particular Russian character trope . In those cases, it was often a sexy Russian woman trying to seduce a man to the side of communism .
 His mysteriousness exoticizes him, which may have fed into viewers seeing him as not quite human . In addition to his mysteriousness, he also exoticizes himself .
 His heartthrob status also made him someone that women could desire and who men could want to be like . However, he also made it clear that men could also want to emulate him .
 Russian and communist characters of the 1950s often portrayed as grotesque or evil . While he was not harmless the way Chekov was, he certainly was a far cry from the communist characters .
 The characters of Pavel Chekov in Star Trek and Illya Kuryakin in The Man from UNCLE are both Russians in mid-1960s television shows . The characters are both Russian characters in the mid-60s TV shows .
 1087 Worland, “The Man From U.N.C.L.E. and TV Espionage in the 1960s,”155 . Both appeal to young women because of the parallels drawn between them and pop stars . They both manage to overcome the negative stereotypes
 Chekov is innocent and naïve, and therefor harmless, but Kuryakin is mysterious, exotic, and a deadly secret agent . Kurykin is mysterious and exotic, exotic and deadly agent . Chekov and Chekov are innocent and naive .
 Chekov's eagerness and youthfulness are played for laughs, while Kuryakin's taciturn character balances out his more excitable partner . Chekov’s eagerness, youthfulness and his taciturnity are played out for laughs .
 This variety in popular Russian characters of the mid-1960s also says something interesting about the perceptions of Russians at that time . This variety of Russian characters says something about Russians at the time .
 If we compare the two major American characters from each of their shows, we find them to be eerily similar . While these Russian characters can be diverse, if we compare them to the two American characters, they seem to be similar .
 Captain Jim Kirk from Star Trek and Napoleon Solo from The Man from U.N.C.L.E. are both somewhat reckless risk-takers whose optimism and charm get them through most tough situations . Captain Kirk from the Trekkies and Captain Solo from the Man from
 The lone American leader with the burden of morality is a trope that is very entangled with American notions of masculinity . While Russian characters grow and change in the 1960s, American characters stay consistent .
 This can be broadened into the concept that American identity is constant during the Cold War because the U.S. was never in the wrong . The United States never was in the right during that time .
 The Soviets, on the other hand, have begun to realize the error of their ways and are changing . The Soviets are changing, hence the greater thaw atmosphere and the more likeable portrayal of them .
 Pavel Chekov and Illya Kuryakin were made popular largely by young female fans . The pair were both made popular by young women in Russia .
 Both were loved for their sex appeal, but there is also something interesting about the intensity of their female fandoms .
 Female fans of science fiction and espionage shows in the 1960s would not have had many female characters to idolize and look up to . Female fans would have had to rely on their favorite female characters for inspiration .
 In Star Trek there was Uhura and The Girl from UNCLE ended up being a spinoff show staring a female lead . The Girl From UNCLE was a spin-off show .
 The people having adventures and making the decisions were largely men . However, the people having the adventures and deciding decisions were mostly men .
 The popular culture craze that surrounded musicians at the time, like the Beatles, certainly had an influence on young girls’ infatuation with Chekov .
 Women as they were becoming more liberated from gender expectations of the 1950s . Women might have felt that liking a Russian character was a small rebellion .
 The gendered aspect of these characters and their fans is certainly something that deserves further insight and research . It is something that needs further insight, research .
 The memory of these two shows is still present in contemporary popular culture, just as the memory of the Cold War is . Conclusion: Memory of Cold War and Cold War still exist in popular culture .
 Both Star Trek and The Man from UNCLE have had modern reboots through film franchises in the twenty-first century . Star Trek reboots include a reboot of the popular sci-fi film series .
 Both are updated and updated to reflect their origins . Both pay homage to their origins, but have also been updated .
 The nostalgia for the Cold War is still very much present in the U.S. today, and part of it can be seen in the revival of these Cold War shows .
 Star Trek is much more prominent and well known in American popular culture than Star Trek . However, in terms of legacy and influence in popular culture, Star Trek has far more influence .
 Until the release of the updated Man from UNCLE film, the fandom was relatively small and niche, with many people not really knowing anything about the show . In fact, until the film's release, many people didn't really know anything about it .
 This is indicative of the adaptability of the sci-fi genre, while spy-fi has in many ways struggled to stay relevant in the post Cold War world . This is a sign that the genre is adaptable and adaptable .
 In the 1960s, the sci-fi and spy-fi genres were particularly representative of Cold War themes and concerns . In the 60s, however, they were both representative of the Cold War .
 Sci-fi was an update on the western, while also dealing with nuclear fears and space travel . Sci-fantasy was a sci-fi update to the western . The film series was released in 1998 .
 Espionage shows played on popular conceptions of spies and spoke to the growing connectedness of the globe . The most recent series of espionage shows featured spies and spies .
 Within each of these genres, two representative television shows each featured a Russian character who was made popular by female fans . The Russian character is a popular Russian character .
 The changing geopolitical and cultural climate of 1960s America was changing the way people thought . Star Trek’s Pavel Chekov and The Man from UNCLE were both evidence that the changing geopolitical climate of the 1960s was changing .
 These Russian characters were stunning departures from the Russian characters of 1950s popular culture . The characters were Russian characters .
 Chekov and Kuryakin were likeable, relatable, and fought for the side of good, alongside Americans . Instead of being evil, ugly, and stupid, they were relatable and relatable .
 Because of the greater thaw in political relations between the Soviet Union and the United States, these characters were possible to create, they were also possible to love . The characters were not only possible to make, but they were .
 With Russian-American tensions escalating on the geopolitical scene, we are once again in dire need of regaining a basic understanding of the “other” by means of rebuilding the communication bridge that no longer connects the two former superpowers .
 Scholars on both sides have resumed debates on whether the turbulent U.S. and Russia relations are entering a new phase of a new Cold War . Vladimir Putin’s re-election for the third term followed by the Ukraine Crisis and the annexation of Crimea .
 The relationship includes almost as many serious conflicts as it did during the Cold War,”1094 writes Stephen F Cohen .
 Jack Matlock, the former U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union, disagrees . Matlock: "I don't think it's a good thing to be in the Soviet Russia"
 While during the cold war there was a “mutual fear” and “respect” between the two superpowers, at present, the relationship is largely based on ‘mutual scorn and contempt” The United States has many more important priorities in the world than
 Pozner laments, “The gorilla is no longer afraid, nor does the gorilla respect the chimp . It makes the chimpanzee extremely angry,” he says . “It makes the gorilla extremely angry.”
 Anger leads to arguments, which in turn results in prolonged periods of sulking at best and severe political conflicts at worst . But ultimately, actions rather than mere emotions are causing a deeper split between the gorilla and the chimp, say experts .
 He concluded by stressing the need to establish a common ground between the U.S. and the Soviets that would be portrayed through a hypothetical set of couples . Ivan and Anya and Jim and Sally .
 It was instituted by Mikhail Gorbachev in the late 1980s and began the democratization of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was founded in the 1980s .
 Glasnost also permitted criticism of government officials and allowed the media freer dissemination of news and information . The media was also allowed to be free to criticize government officials .
 The unedited version of the broadcast that included limited opposition and “clashes” between the two opponents, “virtually disappeared” in the final cut . The final cut was made of the unedited broadcast .
 Donahue was visibly more “dramatic” and “adversarial” than the average “Jim and Sally” in the studio . Yet certain exchanges remained sharp, including those voiced by Donahues .
 Zhuk argues that skepticism was fueled by curiosity and deeply rooted suspicion of Soviet ‘aliens” seen as “different species” altogether . Zhuk: This skepticism was ignited by both curiosity and deep rooted suspicion . The skepticism was sparked by curiosity, he argues .
 Melvyn P Leffler and Odd Arne Westad, eds., The Cambridge History of the Cold War . The Cambridge history of Cold War is published in Cambridge University's The Cold War (The Cambridge History Of The Cold Wars)
 Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–1977 (London: Harvester Press, 1980), 133. Selected Interview Interviews with Marilyn Manson published in 1980s .
 From the 1940s the father of Cold War containment constructed these stereotypes that helped form the nucleus of foreign policy . Indeed, from the . 1940s, the father . of Cold . War containment . created these stereotypes .
 Kennan’s prognosis about the intricacies of dealing with the Russians remains problematic in the U.S.-Russian relations . Kennan's prognosis is partially attributed to a lack of insight into the Russian psyche and Soviet mentality .
 American observer perceives himself to be the Chosen One, his mission as a proud citizen of the country waving a flag of exceptionalism is to convert the ‘other’ to the universal answer that lies in Capitalism .
 If these assumptions are dangerous to our understanding of the communist movement itself, how much more so when it comes to understanding the Russian people, it's dangerous .
 Literary icon and Soviet historian, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, believes these seemingly unintentional tendencies to be highly dangerous . The Soviet historian believes these tendencies are highly dangerous.
 Kennan’s early Cold War trope lasted through the 1980s, to the chagrin of both television newsmen . Both Kennan and the late President Richard Nixon were the subject of much of the Cold War .
 In Space Bridges, Phil Donahue highlighted the presence of this Soviet ‘disease of communism” in the Western media . In Space Bodies, he said, “It is a disease of communism in the West’s media .
 It had the potential to culminate in an idealistically tilted ‘peaceful coexistence” beyond meticulously-crafted political statements that could rarely be applied to the real world, not just cleverly scripted talking-heads on political programs .
 Soft power practiced through citizen diplomacy shaped social and psychological factors that accelerated internal changes within the Soviet society . Soft power played a key role in the development of soft power in the Soviet Union .
 Soft power1131 undoubtedly has its limits and ramifications, but as with all forms of power, soft power has limits . Soft power has been used in the U.S. since 2001 .
 Citizen diplomacy is a vital piece that is missing from the complex puzzle of diplomacy, says John Defterios . Citizens diplomacy is hardly perfect and clearly limited in its abilities, he says .
 A collective bond—though temporary in its previous incarnation—has likely vanished in transition, along with a mutual understanding that has, yet again, been lost in translation . Indeed, a collective bond, though temporary in their previous incarnation, has likely vanished .
 Phil Donahue asked his Soviet counterpart to share his honest feelings about the first Space Bridge between Leningrad and Seattle . The bridge was the first between the two rival nations .
 The reluctance to understand and accept the other side of the argument continues to dominate U.S.-Russian relations in the post-Cold War world .
 Space Bridges 2016 is a vital communication platform that has the potential to help resume dialogue to start rebuilding the human-to-human bridge through citizen diplomacy beyond politics . In light of the increasingly strenuous relations between the two global actors, it is time for Space Bridges .
 Melvyn P Leffler and Odd Arne Westad wrote The Cambridge History of the Cold War . The Cold War was the first Cold War in the United States .
 Building a Nation of Global Citizen Diplomats, ” Public Diplomacy Magazine. Building a nation of global citizen Diplomats. “Public Diplomacy . Magazine. ”
 A comparative study with special reference to Russia and Iran . Over the last two decades, an unprecedented trend toward democratization has taken place across the globe .
 In a relatively short time span, military dictatorships and authoritarian regimes have collapsed in Latin America, Southern Europe, sub-Saharan Africa and former Communist bloc .
 Nearly the totality of the new regimes adopted the institutional formulas of western democracies, with multiparty elections being the trademark . The new regimes adopt the institutional formula of the western democracies .
 The end of history, 1138 brought about by the seemingly unchallenged supremacy of liberal democracy, was soon thwarted by the empirical observation of a much different reality . Unfortunately, the ensuing optimism over a possible ‘end of history’ was soon overthrown .
 Only some of the countries that embarked on a transition away from authoritarianism consolidated into stable liberal democracies . In fact, only some of these countries have since consolidated into a stable democracy .
 As of today, not only are these regimes not democratic, but they are no longer even ‘in transition’ to democracy . The majority of them did not follow suit and as of today are not democratic .
 The present paper tries to address these questions by reviewing the existing literature and attempting a classification . It is the first attempt to attempt a classification of the subject subject of classification .
 It will further formulate a theory with regard to the role of contestation as a pivotal concept for the regime’s stability, it says . The theory will be further formulated to further formulate its theory of contesting .
 Guillermo O’Donnell and Philippe Schmitter were already warning about the uncertain outcome of transition . Yet much of the transition literature that followed has been flawed by a ‘democratization bias,” whereby regimes breaking away from authoritarianism were seen as necessarily heading towards democracy
 Analysts have overstretch the concepts of ‘transition’ and ‘consolidation’ in some cases, such as Russia, Congo or Cambodia . As a consequence, their political situation is analyzed in terms of their movement toward or away from it . This bias
 Adwords such as “flawed,” “protracted,’ “unfinished” or “stuck” transitions reveal the inadequacy of this interpretative lens . Indeed, adjectives such as "flawed," "protracted" or
 Only a minority of the so-called “third wave countries” became fully-fledged democracies . The majority entered the grey zone of hybrid regimes .
 The persistence of some hybrid regimes for nearly two decades has shown that they can have some stability as they are, reaching a ‘dysfunctional equilibrium’ which may be long lasting .
 The excessive reliance on electoral processes as “generators” of democracy is a flaw, says Carothers . Another crucial flaw highlighted is the excessive use of electoral processes to generate democracy, he says .
 As mentioned above, most hybrid regimes possess some formal characteristics of democratic elections . Most hybrid regimes, even those with the strongest authoritarian flavor, have democratic elections, say experts .
 The voting process shall be secret, transparent and free, without pressures on voters nor relevant frauds . The voting process should be transparent and without pressures .
 Regimes that do not fulfill these criteria, regardless of the formal setup of multiparty elections that they may display, violate the minimal democratic “rules of the game” to such an extent that defining them as democracies is plainly misleading .
 The debate on hybrid regimes brings back to the table the never-completely-settled debate about what democracy actually is . We can spot the pitfalls of a minimalist, procedural, “Schumpeterian” definition of democracy that only focuses on the electoral process .
 For a democracy to be liberal, the protection of civil liberties, fundamental rights, media pluralism and the rule of law are of vital importance . For a liberal democracy, civil liberties are important to be protected, says David Cameron .
 Focusing on the electoral processes alone, without adopting a broader definition of democracy, results in an inflated use of the democratic label . The label still misleadingly puts liberal and illiberal democracies on an equal foot, writes David Cameron .
 Hybrid regimes constitute a heterogeneous category that can be conceptualized by referring to the similarities with the similarities . with the closer extreme ideal types . Hybrid regimes can be defined as hybrid regimes without renouncing to its conceptual independence, nor its multi-dimensionality .
 Hybrid regime “is not an exceptional category … it is a state of normality for many societies”. Hybrid regime is not exceptional category . Hybrid regimes are not exceptional categories, says Julian Zelizer .
 International pressure has played a large role in establishing democracy as the only legitimate game in town . International pressure helped establish democracy in the U.S. democracy .
 If more regimes than ever before are shaping themselves into the form of democracy, most of them fail to meet the 1148 Diamond . Most of these regimes fail to live up to the requirements of democracy .
 Linz’s early mapping of regime types (published originally in 1975) makes a reference to “pseudo-multiparty systems”, 1152 . We can generally label these regimes as pseudodemocratic, “in that the existence of formally democratic political
 The ambiguous, shaky nature of hybrid regimes has favored the proliferation of labels and categories among scholars of democratization . An attempted classification is an attempted classification of the hybrid regimes .
 Semi-democracy, delegative, electoral or limited democracy, competitive, electoral, soft or liberalized authoritarianism are just some examples . Freedom House’s ‘partly free’ list is just some of the most recent examples of democracy .
 Not all regimes share the same features, and a rough classification is both possible and necessary . Yet not all of these regimes are likely to be the same .
 Schedler divides hybrid regimes into defective democracies, new authoritarianisms and hybrid regimes strictosensu.54 . The division between what we may call ‘democracies with adjectives’1155 is helpful .
 Under the former label, we can put those regimes that fulfill the minimum requirement for electoral democracies, namely free and fair elections, but lack essential attributes of liberal democracies . This is the case of regimes that don't meet the requirements of electoral democracies .
 The adjective usually refers to the particular flaw, such as delegative, illiberal, or clientelist . To this category belong also also O’Donnell and 1152 Juan J Linz .
 Lynne Rienner, xviii 1154, 1154 Schedler, Electoral Authoritarianism, op. cit. Schedler: Electoral authoritarianism is a form of authoritarianism . Lynne . Rienners: Electoral Authoritarism is an expression of an authoritarian
 A different case is that of ‘new authoritarianisms’, where the democratic façade is a mere deception . A new authoritarianism is a different case of “new authoritarianism”, writes Andrew Hammond .
 This category encompasses disguised dictatorships, dictablandas 1162, dominant-power politics, competitive authoritarianisms 1164 and electoral authoritarianisms . These regimes “play the game of multiparty elections by holding regular elections for the chief executive and a national legislative assembly”
 They are markedly different from the classic authoritarianism, where ‘no viable channels exist for opposition to contest legally for executive power’,1167 such as in Saudi Arabia, China or the former Soviet Union .
 Elections take place with some minimal degree of contestation and some limited forms of pluralism . On the contrary, here elections take place without contestation, says the president .
 Unlike classic oligarchic regimes, they endorse universal suffrage and mass participation . Unlike monarchies, the head of state or government is subject to electoral confirmation .
 1159 O’Donnell and Schmitter. These concepts are utterly similar and can be employed almost interchangeably . 1159 can be used to transmit information to the public .
 In competitive authoritarian regimes authoritarian rulers are insecure, while in ‘hegemonic’ electoral regimes they are invincible . As detected by Diamond, in competitive regimes authoritarian leaders are insecure . In ‘competitive authoritarian regimes’ they are insecure and invincible, Diamond says .
 Schedler’s term is used as a general category for authoritarian regimes in which elections present some form of contestation of any degree . The following pages will be dedicated to the analysis of “electoral authoritarianisms”
 The gown does not make the friar, says David Frum . He says it's not easy to categorize political regimes . Frum: The gowns do not make a friar. The gown doesn't make a man a man .
 For electoral authoritarianisms, scholarly consensus is usually difficult to reach, given the dissonance between the declared and the actual nature of the regime . For election authoritarianisms it is difficult to find consensus among scholars .
 They promulgate constitutions, organize elections, set up parliaments, courts, local governments and supervisory authorities . They also organize elections and set up courts, courts and local governments .
 They even allow private media and some degree of civic society organisms . The government allows private media to be used in the country .
 None of these institutions, however, are designed to serve as counterbalancing mechanisms to government power . None of the institutions are designed as counterbalance mechanisms to governmental power .
 Although they portray a liberal-democratic landscape, their contribution to the rule of law and accountability is fictive . Although they depict a liberal democratic landscape, they are not responsible for their fictional contributions to law .
 While outspoken supporters will praise their political system as ‘democratic,” the reality may be extremely different . The reality, especially as seen from the point of view of the opposition, may be very different .
 The illusion of a multiparty system may be credible and subject to only minor criticism . The incumbent rulers may even be so skilled in their manipulation of the channels of access to power that the illusion of the system may not be credible .
 In this case, the continuous defeat and marginalization of the opposition forces is justified as an exogenous consequence . The opposition’s incapacity or the genuine preference of the population for the incumbent party, the author says . The incumbent party is usually justified by the opposition's incapacity
 It may be the case that the opposition is actually ravaged by internal strife, organizational weakness and an incapacity to reach the wider electorate . This condition of inferiority in this sort of regime has to be seen as a consequence, not as a cause of the opposition’s exclusion from
 It is then clear to what extent ‘the main methodological difficulty in identifying electoral authoritarian regimes lies in the obstacles that they establish to the visibility of their manipulative practices’, 1169 . The analysis to operate between form and substance, between institutional approach and more actor-based ones,
 Another difficulty is dictated by the imperfect information we possess on citizens’ opinion formation . The government is trying to get citizens to form an opinion opinion form .
 Even a methodology based on opinion-surveys would not shed light on the dilemma as to what extent citizens’ preferences are formed independently from the authoritarian context . In this context, even a methodology . Even a . methodology . based on opinions-surveyys would . not shed
 If this is the case, electoral manipulation – although existent – would amount only to a small share of the overall cast votes . It would then amount to only a small percentage of the votes cast in the general election .
 For a relatively small percentage of votes to successfully determine the electoral outcome and a sufficient margin to secure the lead to the regime, the election outcome must be already skewed in favor of the incumbent, prior to the manipulation . The electoral outcome must already be already sufficiently skewed .
 This is compatible with the idea that the regime’s electoral manipulation starts already at the moment of opinion creation, and not simply at the time of voting, says the author . The regime's electoral manipulation begins at the start of the election, he says .
 The control of public authority over the result is nearly complete, says David Cameron . Yet their degree of contestation is equal to zero, says Cameron .
 ‘Official election results are the combined outcome of two unknown and unobservable variables – popular preferences and authoritarian manipulation’ ‘Competition is thus real but unfair’. ‘In electoral authoritarian regimes, however, ‘official election results may be the result of popular
 If they can demonstrate the popularity of the authoritarian rulers, they at the same time create an opportunity structure for opposition forces to present alternative views and unmask the democratic façade of the political process .
 Diamond: 1176 is a mismatch between norms and behavior that prevents consolidation . It is necessary for consolidation to happen, he says, but it is not necessary for it .
 Although this usually takes the tone of reckless populism and remains highly skewed in terms of advantaged over the opponents, it is still a step into the antechamber of democracy . It is still not a step away from the 'reckless populism'
 Russia and Iran are both situated on the rather “authoritarian edge” of hybrid regimes . The two cases, both situated in Moscow and Iran, are both places on the ‘authoritarian’ edge’
 Russia’s hybrid nature is relatively undisputed, 1177 the literature is more reticent on Iran . 1177 is a Russian-Iranian hybrid state of fiction .
 Levitsky and Way exclude the Islamic Republic from their analysis of “competitive authoritarian” regimes . They consider the Iranian case to fall under a different type of hybrid regime type, namely “tutelary regime”
 If it is true that in Iran the religious ‘supreme leader’ acts as a non-elected tutelary power, then it can hardly be claimed on the other hand that electoral competition for offices is genuine .
 Electoral manipulation, repression of opposition and freedom of expression contribute to the balance of the 1176 Diamond.99.99 Diamond . Electoral manipulation and candidates vetting are also factors in the balance balance .
 Iran's case is well-suited for comparison with Russia's case, says CNN.com . The Iranian case is particularly well suited for comparison, it says . Russia's alleged involvement in the case is key to its success .
 Russia was considered for a long time to be a ‘country in transition’, and sometimes it still is . It has become clear since the 2012 elections that “reinstated” Vladimir Putin as president of the Federation that Russia is not heading towards liberal democracy .
 The Kremlin intends to make the point that the Russian Federation is indeed a democracy, just not a liberal, western one . With this catchphrase, the Kremlin wants to make it clear that Russia is a democracy .
 Russian leaders are eager to reaffirm their autonomy in handling the country’s political course, both at the level of principles and in political practice . In reaction to what it perceives as intrusive western pressure, Russia perceives western pressure . In line with its anti-unipolar foreign
 This “sovereignty” translates into an exclusive and all-encompassing right of the government to supervise the definition of its institutional forms and political procedures . The government has a monopoly over collective memory, political decisions, economic priorities and a strong grip over civil society,
 A strong leader and a strong state still remain the main legitimizing elements of Putinism . Order and stability are perceived as far more important principles than democracy . Putinism and his preservation of a centralized, hierarchic and personalized institutional setting are key to Putinism, says Alex Politkovsky
 The concept of “sovereign democracy” betrays the hybrid nature of the Russian regime, as well as its ambivalent relation with the west, primarily with the European Union . The concept betrays Russia's ambivalent relationship with the West .
 Russia sees the west as one of its main points of cultural references . In its external relations, Russia punctually subscribes to the declarations of the Council of Europe . Russia sees west as a point of cultural reference .
 On the domestic front, if, on the one hand, Russia formally upholds the general principles of democracy, the notions of “national interest” and “sovereignty” sanction their negation . On the other hand, the notion of national interest and sovereignty is
 The 1993 constitution is, after all, a fundamentally liberal document, proclaiming civil rights and freedoms as well as democratic representative institutions . The internet is not censored, freedom of movement across the borders is granted and numerous political parties exist .
 Sakwa calls “paraconstitutionalist behavior”,1181 where strict constitutional conservatism is coupled with the practice of bending and adapting the rules to the political end . Sakwa: As the theory on electoral authoritarianisms predicts, these guarantees turn out to be voided by
 In Russia this was pursued through the logic of a “power vertical,” namely the creation of agencies accountable to the executive power replacing the intermediary autonomous bodies . In Russia, this was done through a ‘power vertical’
 A gulf has opened between state and society, says Nelson Mandela . The constitutional institutions supposed to fill this gap have either been disempowered or coopted and corrupted from above, he says .
 Sakwa postulates a Russian ‘dual state,” divided between a formal-constitutional and an administrative-informal one . Sakwa replicates that sort of dualism between form and substance that is the hallmark of hybrid regimes .
 This trend is especially visible in the ‘arena of contestation” 1182 most crucial for electoral authoritarian regimes, that is to say the elections . This trend has been especially visible for authoritarian regimes in recent years .
 It has become almost a truism that “in Russian elections, it is the outcome that is certain, while the electoral rules are protean and constantly rewritten to effect the desired result . It is true that Russia has a number of political parties and that the 2012 elections took place in
 The mixed use of repression, cooptation, vote-falsification, nationalist rhetoric, control over the media, state finances and local administrative elites, along with a strong 1181 Sakwa.
 As Krastev and Holmes have argued, Russia’s rigged elections are not just a decorative façade . Their role is not to select the country's leadership, but they are a complete fabrication either . The elections are a fabrication either, as they are not only to select
 Krastev and Holmes have a point when they suggest that these serve “to construct and drive home, on a regular basis, the ‘no alternative’ rationale for Putin’s rule’. Rather than a risk for the perpetuation of the elite’
 The Iranian regime emerged from a strongly domestic and popular movement, initially a great degree of legitimacy . Although differently from the former Soviet Republic, whose revolution had been rather ‘passive,’ the Iranian revolution emerged from the domestic .
 This important feature has been crucial for providing the necessary political and cultural capital to the idea of 1184 . 1184 is the first word of the book's existence .
 The forces that united to overthrow the Shah were not only religious factions opposed to his pro-western attitude, but also democratic, socialist and secular forces who advocated a democratization of the institutions and popular participation .
 The Iranian regime is fundamentally hybrid, says Iran's President Ahmad Ahmad Ahmad Shahbani . The Islamic Republic was founded by the Ayatollah Khomeini in 1979 . Iran's first government was overthrown in 1979, but it has since been transformed into the Islamic Republic .
 Ahmadinejad has greatly increased the deployment of the state’s repressive apparatus against oppositional voices . The second, inferior level is represented by the executive itself, writes Hamidinejad . The state's repressive apparatus has been deployed against opposition voices since the 2005 election .
 This dual-tier system limits the prerogatives of the president while it multiplies, while simultaneously limiting the possible sources of repression . The system is a "dual-tier" system that limits the president's power, but simultaneously limits the possible source of repression, the author says
 Iran's duality of power has created an inconsistency in the system which allowed, in 1997, the election of Mohammad Khatami to the presidency, and which later, in May 2011, caused the outbreak of an internal power-struggle between President Ahmadinejad and the Supreme Leader
 Elections in fact represent one of the few channels to express preferences independently from the ruling clerics . Elections are a rare opportunity to express views independent from ruling clerics. Elections are one of few channels of expressing preferences independent from clerics .
 The Iranian case demonstrates that elections may represent a threat for leaders in electoral authoritarian regimes . Conclusions conclude that the Iranian case is similar to that of Russia's .
 This is especially the case in regimes where apparent stability hides a non-consolidated regime . This is particularly true in regimes with internal power struggles and where opposition leaders represent a credible alternative . Opposition leaders can be credible alternatives to the ruling regime, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In order to maintain a ‘dysfunctional equilibrium,” the regime must increase its dose of repression and control . The regime must therefore increase its doses of repression, control, the regime says .
 More regime opening implies often a stronger burden for the state, to keep it under control . More regime openings imply often a tougher burden for state, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The existence of some degree of media freedom, for example, implies the necessity to constantly repress it.94 This tendency towards a more accentuated 1191 is often accentuated .
 The absence of viable opposition leaders reduce the risks of the regime’s order being challenged . However, the deeper sedimentation of the system and the absence of a viable opposition leader reduce the risk of challenging the order .
 Hybrid regimes possess their own modus vivendi and can be enduring if they manage to maintain the suboptimal equilibrium that represents one of their main features . Hybrid regimes and electoral authoritarian regimes in particular, do possess .
 As the Russian and Iranian cases show, elections can be both a source of empowerment and a threat . The Russian and the Iranian cases have shown that elections can also be a threat to their people .
 In Russia they are functional to consolidate the idea of national unity and the supremacy of the incumbent . In Iran they represent a channel of “voice” outside the hegemonic powers, which exposes the deep division of the society .
 The apparent internal contradictions of hybrid regimes only if coupled with other structural pitfalls and/or agency-based ‘strengths” (or weaknesses, from the regime’s point of view) such as an active civil society and oppositional parties .
 At this point, the only way to survive without further opening to real contestation is an increase in repression . This is a strategy that, while effective in the short run, may prove counter-productive in the long run .
 Since the collapse of the USSR, the United States pushed to democratize the former Soviet sphere of influence . Thomas Alexander GILLIS: The impact of U.S. aid on Democratization in Ukraine has been seen in Ukraine .
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization expansion and the enlargement of the European Union have smashed the formerly impenetrable Iron Curtain, pushing Russia’s area of control further and further back . The EU and NATO expansion have pushed Russia further back into the sphere of power .
 Ukraine, the cradle of Russian civilization, has become the most vital and revealing arena for these powers to compete, both symbolically and pragmatically . Over the last decade and continuing to continue to today, Ukraine has been the most important arena for Russia and the West .
 With the Orange Revolution in 2004 and the surge of protests towards the end of 2013, it became apparent that Ukraine has a realistic chance at reforming into a functional democracy . The Orange Revolution began in 2004 .
 The most powerful weapon each player possesses in this conflict is the mercenary incentive of financial aid . Each player has a powerful financial incentive to aid each other .
 In order to assess the success and shortcomings of democratization efforts in Ukraine, it is first necessary to determine the goals of the U.S. In Ukraine, the goal of the United States should be to improve the country's democracy .
 The main question that must be answered is whether the U.S. has been more interested in fostering a real shift towards democracy or merely establishing another friendly government in the former territory of its archrival .
 Journal of Comparative European Politics 9, Nº 4: Explaining EU Policies Toward Lebanon from an IR Perspective .
 Aid patterns suggest the U.S. acted opportunistically in an attempt to foster closer ties and friendly relations with the Ukrainian government . The United States capitalized on the success of the Orange Revolution in 2004, particularly capitalizing on the initial success .
 This normative-realist approach provides a number of advantages over better established frameworks in International Relations Theory . This approach is called 'Normal Realistic' and 'Normative Realistic', and provides an alternative to better established models of international relations .
 Normative-realism bridges the incomplete analysis offered by structural realist and liberal theory on their own . Normative Realism is an incomplete analysis of the liberal and structuralist theories .
 This article will consider United States aid to Ukraine as a product of these goals . It will consider U.S. aid as a result of the goals of Ukraine .
 Hyde-Price’s approach helps move beyond the “explicitly normative” “liberal-idealist” view that is unable to examine the power-seeking strategies that come with the promotion of “normative” goals . This approach is crucial to
 The Orange Revolution marks a change in the relationship Ukraine had with the U.S. power . The change in relationship with the United States correlates to change in aid pattern .
 It is impossible to draw a causal conclusion from this data alone, but establishing a correlation provides meaningful evidence of a link between aid to civil society organizations and steps towards democratization . The data is a framework that can be used to test other cases .
 The economy was characterized by hyperinflation, poverty, and high disparities in per capita income . The country's economy was defined by hyper-inflation and poverty .
 Ukraine's political relationship with the U.S. and Ukraine's consistently poor economy are key to maintaining aid flow . The aid flow seems to correlate with the maintenance of a steady political relationship .
 Fride: A European Think Tank for Global Action, www.fride.org/descarga/IP_WMD_Ucrania_ENG_jul10. Ukraine .
 The heavily weighted emphasis on economic assistance began to change drastically in the 2000s . It has been heavily weighted towards economic assistance since 2000 .
 From 2001 onward, USAID Economic Analysis Data Service makes available expenditures by sector and implementing partner type . USAID: USAID expenditures are based on sector and implement partner spending .
 Data from 2001-2003 will not reflect trends in the 1990s . These years can help establish a basis of comparison for the revolutionary and post-revolutionary period from 2004-2011 .
 The pre-revolution era’s aid scheme can be characterized by its emphasis on economic stimulation over politicized democracy promotion . Pre-revolution period's aid scheme was characterized by emphasizing economic stimulation .
 There is also a marked lack of aid flowing directly to non-US governmental recipients, i.e. the Ukrainian government . The Ukrainian government is one of the most important recipients of US aid .
 US aid to Ukraine in the period directly following independence was a reflection of the US’s neorealist agenda, as outlined by Hyde Price . Hyde Price: US aid in Ukraine during the period following independence reflected a neorealistic agenda .
 Ukraine is a priority for any international actor at odds with Russia . Because of its proximity, historical connection, and entrenched social as well as political relationship with Russia, Ukraine is key to Russia's success .
 Of course, funding the development of a free market economy and promoting democracy, rule of law, and civil society are normative endeavors . Funding of the economy, promoting democracy and promoting civil society is a key part of the story .
 Ukraine’s market economy is seen to be to the benefit of the population, but also align ideologically and politically with the U.S. This particular period, between independence and the Orange Revolution, featured a greater emphasis on Ukraine's market economy . This period featured a . greater emphasis
 This matter got the most attention in this financially struggling nation because it was a particularly pressing issue . The U.S. assumed it would bring natural strides in progress with regard to humanitarian and democratic issues .
 U.S. aid must be viewed as politically motivated and not strictly an effort to improve the lives of Ukrainians by spreading democratic ideals . However, United States aid to Ukraine must be seen as political motivated, not strictly .
 If the latter were true, it would be difficult to explain the surge in aid around elections . The aid surge is likely to be linked to the upcoming elections .
 Presidential election years have higher funding than the preceding or the following year . Parliamentary election years show more mild spikes in funding in election years .
 Ukraine’s entire existence as a sovereign state as a result of the pre-revolutionary period . This trend holds true not only for the pre, but for the entire existence of the country, as well as its sovereignty .
 Peaks in aid were seen in 1994, 1999, 2004-2005 and 2010, all years in which presidential elections were to be held . This suggests that aid, though not necessarily geared toward campaigns, is designed to have an impact on the elections .
 As Copsey noted, there was often a pro-Western and pro-Russian candidate . Copsey: Pro-Western candidates often run for pro-Russia candidates .
 By bolstering efforts in general for election years, the US’s aid patterns could be seen as trying to influence the elections and maximize its political influence over the Ukrainian state . However, if this is either the direct intent or indirect intent of this pattern, its effectiveness is dubious .
 The West’s role is frequently “overestimated,” the pivotal role played by the OSCE, a multilateral governmental organization, should not go unmentioned . It is also pertinent to justify claiming the OCE as a representative of the West, writes Peter Ber
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s election monitoring results that indicated fraud in favor of Viktor Yanukovych were the only truly causal contribution of the West . The West's only causal contribution was the monitoring of the Ukrainian election results, the West says .
 Foreign powers of the West demanded that the OSCE’s findings be addressed . The findings were taken seriously and led to outrage among Ukrainians and the international community alike .
 Different funds for democracy promotion experienced differing patterns . For example, the European Parliament went so far as to pass a resolution calling for another election .
 Democracy promotion funds of USAID were at a record high in 2005 at 58 million USD, nearly a 170% increase from the previous year . Increased funding for democracy assistance came from the NED as well as the Millennium Challenge Corporation from 2006/2007 onward .
 From 2004 to 2005, United States aid increased overall, but “Governance and Civil Society” expenditures rose nearly 10 million dollars . Another trend that emerged from 2004-2010 was increased aid given to the government .
 Between 2004 and 2007, there was 70% less funding being awarded to all non-state actors, while the government sector received 59% more . Rates also increased for aid granted to the Ukrainian government .
 This was presumably a symptom of the US government’s faith in the Yushchenko administration to successfully promote democratization efforts . U.S. government's faith in Ukraine's democracy was apparently a sign of hope .
 Some significant changes in aid patterns can be observed from 2004-2011 . In comparison to the period before the revolution, some significant changes were observed .
 General rates of aid decreased, democracy assistance received more funding, and there was an increase in assistance given to governmental sectors . Most significantly, general rates of assistance decreased .
 This was a clear break from patterns that characterize the previous era, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This was a very different era. This was the first time I've seen a change in the way the U.S. government has dealt with this problem."
 The outbreak of the Orange Revolution and Yushchenko eventually taking office indicated that U.S. aid efforts helped move the situation in a favorable direction from a Western perspective .
 The United States was criticized for its sudden drop-offs in democracy assistance through the promotion of civil society and its contributions to the Ukrainian government under Yushchenko . Gillis, op. cit.21 This evidence supported the claim that the United States “viewed the new leadership and
 Ukraine remains, simply, “a more complex semidemocracy” that saw limited progress in the Yushchenko years as a result of the lackluster performance of his administration . In some ways, the funding provided to the Ukrainian government was wasted .
 Millennium Challenge Corporation funding which totaled $64.58 million between 2006 and 2010 was largely awarded to the Ukrainian government .
 Freedom House’s democracy ratings chart gives Ukraine an unfavorable score of 5.75 for that period, only to have it drop to 6.00 in 2010 . Meanwhile, Freedom House gives Ukraine a favorable score for that time . Freedom House gave Ukraine a bad score of 4.75
 The U.S. found that CSOs offered the only opportunity to spur the democratization process . The Orange Revolution failed to produce any lasting figures of political change .
 Mitchell claims aid may have been ‘misguided’ because the quantity that was issued to its recipient did not result in major progress . Alternatively, the aid was issued in order to spur political stability and promote an amicable relationship between the two governments .
 The data supports the proposition that excessive aid to the government and little aid to civil society contributed to the stagnation of democratization processes in Ukraine . Excessive aid to government contributed to stagnation of democracy in Ukraine, the data suggests .
 The development of civil society is a useful process to the development of democracy, particularly when new governments cannot be expected to initiate or implement democratic reform . This leads to the ultimate conclusion that the development is a good thing for civil society .
 We can speak about “real’s neighborhood policy just after the transition,’S. ‘Real’ neighborhood policy will be discussed in the next few months, he says . “Real” neighborhood policy can be discussed just after, he adds .
 I would also like to present its main objectives, as well as hindrances that have occurred over the last 20 years . "I would also present the main objectives of the project," he says .
 This essay summarizes the necessity of neighborhood policy during the Euro-Atlantic integration process . Furthermore, this essay also summarizes the need for neighborhood policy in the EU .
 The case of Hungarian minorities will also be discussed, as when dealing with neighborhood policy we cannot pass over the question of their situation . Hungarian minorities are also being discussed, says the minister .
 "I will try to underline those events, which have had a determinant and main role in the process of composing a neighborhood policy. Additionally, I will . also try to . underline that events have had . had a . determinant or main role . role in composing a
 Of course, this essay cannot specify each of them and would be a topic of a future study . The essay does not address each of these topics .
 The role of Hungarian political organizations and/or parties in neighboring policy will only be referred to and not explained in details due to the limits of the essay . Similarly, the role played by Hungarian political parties and organizations in neighboring policies will be only referred to .
 When we use the term of neighborhood policy we talk about the relations of the country concerned towards its neighbors . The country's relations with its neighbors are said to be its relations with the neighbors . Neighbors are the nations concerned about their relations with neighbors .
 It is generally an important part of foreign policy . Due to geography each country has land and/or maritime neighbors therefore they have to define their relations to their neighbors .
 We can speak about good neighborhood policy in that case when the parties can handle the common issues successfully . We can't speak about neighborhood policy when it comes to common issues .
 Hungary's neighborhood policy is inseparable from minority policy and regional cooperation . Both sides have to rely on humaneness and stability, says Ferezi Szasz .
 Minority policy is an instrument of the government to deal with the issue of different minorities within the borders of Hungary as well as to handle the questions related to the Hungarian minorities beyond the borders .
 Regional policy became more important after the change of regime in 1989-90 . Regional policy was more important in the country after the regime change .
 There was no possibility for the East Central European countries to form a regional coalition without the participation of the Soviet Union . Moscow sought to prevent any intra bloc horizontal regional cooperation having learnt from the case of Yugoslavia when regional initiatives of Tito resulted in deviation from the communist regime .
 EU membership offers, and in some cases, necessitates the maintenance of regional policy . The term of ‘nation policy’ is a particular expression in this region .
 EU decision-making sometimes presses the set up of regional coalitions of certain Member States to defend their interests, e.g. in case of European Neighborhood Policy, etc. On the other hand, EU .
 State interest implies the interests of Hungarian citizens within the borders of Hungary . National interest includes additionally the interests  of Hungarian minorities beyond the borders .
 Nation policy generally links the question of identity and the conditions essential for maintaining the identity . Nation policy does not treat the concept of nation as belonging to borders and territories .
 Hungarian minority living beyond borders, especially in Romania, 1238 is a crucial point . Since nation policy is a constitutional responsibility of Hungary, the Hungarian public is aware of the issue .
 The question of nation policy cannot be ignored when we analyze neighborhood policy . Therefore, the question must be considered in the analysis of neighborhood policies .
 Since communist policy neglected the issue of nationalism, it did not deal with the problem of national minorities on the surface . The end of the eighties Antecedents .
 Hungarian Status Law: Nation Building and/or Minority Protection , 105. , 105 . Hungary's Status Law is based on the Hungarian Status of the Hungarian nation . Hungary is a nation of minority groups .
 According to the census of 1990, 1,603,923 persons declared themselves Hungarian in Romania; in 2002 1,414,718; and in 2012 1,238,000 declared themselves Hungarians in Romania . In 2002, there were 1,415,718 people declaring themselves Hungarian
 In Romania, the Hungarian Autonomic Territory was set up in 1952 under Soviet pressure led by ethnic Hungarian communists . The territory was established under the pressure of the Soviet Union .
 The autonomous region had a population of more than half a million Hungarians whose rights could have been protected in a more efficient way;1242 in contrast to the rest of the Hungarian minority living in Transylvania, outside the autonomous region, whose assimilation proceeded continuously; .
 Hungary's de-nationalization policy was more intense than in other countries of the communist era . For quite a long time, the issue of Hungarian minorities targeted by assimilation policies was not put on the table .
 The communist leadership was opposed to the national “irredentism” of Hungary’s pre-war government . On the other hand, the communist leaders were opposed to national ‘irredency’ of the pre-WWII government .
 For the management of the deriving social tensions, parochial nationalism proved to be a useful means in multiethnic societies . In most cases this resulted in the oppression of minorities .
 The quasi freezing of this issue did not solve the problem, but rather prolonged it . However, the quasi freezing was not enough to solve it all, but to prolong it .
 Nicolae Ceausescu, the Romanian party leader consolidated this approach to legitimize his power . Nicolae was the leader of the Romanian Communist Party in the 1980s .
 Hungarians living in Romania became gradually worse in recent years . As a result, the situation of Hungarians in Romania has become increasingly worse .
 After Ceausescu came into power in 1965 he dissolved the Hungarian Autonomic Territory in the frame of administrative reorganization of the country . Then in 1972 he announced the national homogenization program in 1972 in 1972 . In 1972 in the same year he announced a homogenation program
 Program aimed at reinforced industrialization of the country and rationalization of its resources . However, it resulted in an ethnic cleansing including the selling of Jews and Germans to their kin-states .
 Hungary's space for maneuvering was decreasing from 1956 to 1956 due to the sympathy movements of Hungarian minorities with the Hungarian revolution . But its space was decreasing gradually due to sympathy movements with Hungarian minorities .
 The ideology of dual loyalty (to the kin-state and the state of citizenship) and the bridge role of minorities (providing a space for dialogue between countries) were formulated . Nevertheless, the first steps taken by the Hungarian government were rather negligible therefore they had to face a certain degree
 The relationship between Hungary and Romania became tenser partly because of the actions of the Ceausescu regime . The relationship became more tense partly due to the action of the former communist regime .
 The aim of Hungarian foreign policy was to “achieve the international denunciation of the Romanian policy in international forums directly”1250.
 Hungary was the main promoter of the Helsinki process within the Eastern bloc . The main argument was the issue of human rights, which was reasonable as the Hungarian government was main promoter .
 Hungarian minorities living in neighboring countries, including Romania, were not explicitly mentioned . The protection of national minorities, especially thereof Hungarian minorities, was not explicitly discussed .
 Hungary had a legal basis to compel Romania on the treatment of Hungarian minorities at international fora . Nevertheless, Hungary had the legal basis for the action .
 Nothing happened concerning the situation of Hungarians in Romania . The situation corresponded to the expectations of Western countries in that time, says historian .
 Formally, its aim was the enforcement of urbanization through the demolition of villages in the countryside and reconstruction of villages to industrial centers . Formally the aim was to enforce urbanization by demolishing villages and reconstructing them .
 The Federal Republic of Germany and Hungary harshly protested against the program claiming that its goal was the final elimination of minorities . However, since it resulted in the destruction of historical buildings, including churches, monasteries, theaters belonging mainly to the historical minorities of the country, the program was destroyed
 The most enormous public protest was held at the Heroes Square in Budapest . These operations resulted in a huge number of Romanian emigrants, which motivated the Hungarian government to do something .
 Meeting of secretary generals of the two countries was held in Arad on 28 August 1988 . Meeting was a result of the Soviet pressure and initiative .
 Ceausescu did not want to make any compromises, what is more, offered two days to the Hungarian party to accept his conditions . The Romanian dictator did not accept any compromises .
 In July 1989, in parallel with the session of the Political Consultative Body of the Warsaw Pact in Bucharest, the Hungarian politicians (chairman of the HSWP Rezső Nyers, Prime Minister Miklós Németh and Foreign Minister Gyula Horn
 Hungarian leaders had a more powerful negotiating position by envisioning asking for an international supervision of Hungarian minorities . That time Hungarians leaders had asked for international supervision .
 Hungary declared principles of the Hungarian Foreign Policy . Furthermore, it declared the principles of Hungary Foreign Policy.
 Since then the targets have not changed significantly, but different governments gave different interpretations for them . Since then, different governments have given different interpretations .
 A román-magyar kapcsolatok és a francia-német megbékélési model. In Salat, Levente and Enache, Smaranda . A Román-Magyar model.
 Antall-government: For the establishment of good neighborly relations was the proper treatment of Hungarian minorities within the countries concerned, including Romania . For the Antall government, it was a precondition for the . establishment of the relations . relations was a pre-condition .
 Euro-Atlantic integration was considered to be the most important priority for the East Central European countries . Other problems like neighborhood policy, minority rights, etc. had only second-rank importance .
 Hungary's neighborhood policy was mainly the answer for an external need from the point of view of Hungary’s neighbors, including Romania . The development of the neighborhood policy has been criticized by some of Hungary's neighbors .
 For Western countries the preservation of stability was regarded as one of the most important goal in East Central Europe . Western countries were concerned about the stability of the region .
 Ethnic conflicts in the Balkans and the Soviet Union anticipated the fear of similar conflicts in East Central Europe . Due to the limited knowledge of Western countries on the region, Western countries had little knowledge of the region .
 Hungary undertook several efforts in order to prove its capacity for maintaining peaceful relations with her neighbors . During the Yugoslav wars Hungary undertook numerous efforts to prove her capacity .
 Its aim was to dispose the countries to regularize their neighborly relationships in the form of bilateral agreements . The agreements would contain guarantees on the inviolability of borders and minority rights .
 It represented a huge development even though the Declaration was not legally binding which proved to be an enormous defect . The Declaration of Declaration of Principles of Principles was not legal binding . It was signed by a group of people around the world .
 There is no sanction for the violation of the prescription . Instead, the prescription is a list of requirements of good neighborliness .
 Copenhagen criteria1261 also defined the eligibility of a country for EU accession . Copenhagen criteria 1261 defines eligibility for accession to the EU .
 Their importance derives from the fact that they emphasize the protection of minority rights as well . The importance of the minority rights is also evident in the case of minorities in the United States .
 Hungary and Romania perceived the need for the settlement of their relations in an agreement, but the negotiations were moving on quite slowly . Hungary and Romania perceived the need for an agreement in the past .
 Ion Iliescu, the leader of the National Salvation Front, was elected as president of Romania in 1990 . Iliesu was elected president of the Romanian Republic in 1990. Iliesuc was elected President of the Republic in 1989 .
 Iliescu’s policy was determined by the slow and gradual reform in all spheres from the economy to foreign policy, he says . The Romanian leader's policy is determined by a slow, gradual reform, he adds .
 In the beginning of the presidency he did not commit himself and his country to Western integration or comfort Hungary with the requested minority policy . Hungary has a long history of anti-Muslim sentiment in Hungary .
 Hungarian government declared minority policy was only one element of its neighborhood policy . But it was difficult to reach a real breakthrough even with this approach .
 The merit of the Horngovernment is that it managed to reach an agreement with Romania though it was partly the result of the international situation . The merits of the government is that the agreement was reached with Romania, the government says .
 The failure of this policy resulted in the fact that the right-wing parties could blame the social-liberal government for abandoning the minority groups beyond the borders . The failure resulted in this policy being blamed on the failure of the policy .
 In György Lengyel and Zsolt Rostoványi , The small transformation – Society, Economy and Politics in Hungary in Hungary and the New European Architecture in Hungary . In Hungary, society and politics in Hungary is undergoing a transformation, they say .
 The only language enjoying official status was Romanian according to Article 13 . The right to education on mother tongue was also tolerated .
 The NATO Foreign Ministers’ Summit was to be held in December 1996 and would name the states invited to the organization . The necessity of an agreement was urgent for both countries since the summit was scheduled for December .
 Both countries believed that in case of having solved the problems they would be able to join . Both countries were hoping to join the European Union in the future .
 Many political actors opposed to the conclusion of the treaty both in Hungary and Romania by rejecting the compromise on both sides, and also because of the upcoming elections in Romania . Nevertheless, many political actors oppose to conclusion of conclusion of treaty .
 The Basic Treaty between Hungary and Romania on Good Neighborly Relations and Friendly Cooperation1269 was signed on 16 September 1996 . The treaty was signed in 1996 . It was the first of its kind .
 Hungary renounced all territorial claims on Transylvania . At the same time, Romania reiterated its respect for the rights of its minorities and bound herself to meet EU standards .
 The parties agreed on mutual support of their Euro-Atlantic integration process . The parties also agreed to support each other in the process of Euro integration .
 The two countries decided to develop their economic and trade cooperation and relations . Other forms of cooperation were also objectives of the treaty,g.g. in the field of science and technology .
 Recommendation 1201 was accepted by Romania as a legal obligation . The Recommendation was accepted as a real breakthrough, as well as as a breakthrough .
 The Treaty contained the rights of minorities, in addition to the means of implementation of these rights . It also contained the means to implement these rights, the Treaty .
 Treaty represents a milestone in Hungarian-Romanian relations . Although collective rights of minorities including the concept of autonomy were rejected .
 Despite of the fact that an intergovernmental expert commission was charged with the monitoring of the implementation of the Treaty, the control mechanism of the agreement became weak .
 After that the situation of minorities has improved less than expected, but otherwise the relations between the two countries began to develop . After that, the relationship between the U.S. and Germany has improved .
 In November, 1996 presidential and parliamentary elections were held in Romania . The Romanian Republic is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 The Democratic Convention was elected as the majority in the legislature . It contained the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania . Subsequently, it contained the party of Hungarian minorities .
 DAHR in the government put real pressure on the executive branch . In the next few years, neighborhood relations developed immensely since the presence of DAHR . DAHR is now in charge of the government .
 Results of the elections implied that the executive branch would begin to put more emphasis on nation policy patterned by the Antall-government . Regarding neighborhood policy,
 According to the Basic Treaty Romania was not only neutralized, but there were also good relations between the Heads of Governments of the two countries . Romania was neutralized in 1272,1272 .
 The government maintained more proactiveness in neighborhood policy . As a result, the government maintained a more proactive approach .
 Its aim was to give support on the field to education, science or culture to the members of Hungarian communities living beyond the borders .
 Families of Hungarian families received financial support if their children went to a Hungarian educational institution . Additionally, it provided recourse of health care insurance, as well as financial support for families .
 The law had extra-territorial applicability, the lack of consultation complicated Hungary’s relations with its neighbors . The law was passed in Hungary in 2007, Hungary‘s first act of sovereignty .
 Hungarian government’s wrong-headed communication was also demonstrated by the inaccurate translation of the law . The Hungarian government's incorrect translation of a new law is also demonstrated .
 International discourse on Hungary denounced Hungary mainly due to the extra-territorial feature of the law without looking at its initial aims . Subsequently, international discourse on the Status Law denounced Hungary . Hungary's Status Law was also denounced by international discourse .
 Investigation of the European Parliament led by MEP Eric Jürgens declared the law extra-territorial and discriminative in his report . The definition of the 1273 Hungarian-Hungarian relationship refers to the connection between Hungary, as kin-state, and Hungarian communities .
 The adoption of the law of such a great majority can be considered mainly to a tactical choice of the then opposition preparing for the upcoming elections in 2002 . The adoption can be seen as a tactical move by the opposition to the 2002 elections .
 The issue of certificates for benefits could only be done by Hungarian authorities instead of Hungarian associations functioning in the territory of Romania . Over and above, they decided that preferences on employment would be available for every Romanian citizen, not only for Hungarian minorities .
 They agreed on the necessity of general, bilateral top-level meetings . Moreover, they agreed that they would meet again .
 Since then, the Hungarian Romanian relationships have changed for the better, although there are still some crucial points, such as the official use of Hungarian language at local and regional authorities, the fact that Romania is still considered as a unitary state, etc.
 This agreement improved Romanian Hungarian relations ostensibly, which was a prerequisite to ensure stability in East Central Europe . The agreement was agreed to improve relations between Romania and Hungary .
 From 2002 Hungary had a socialist-liberal government meaning that the focus from nation policy turned to neighborhood policy . There was a big challenge for the governments of East Central Europe to form their policies to meet EU requirements .
 The oncoming EU accession provided extra benefits for the neighborly states, which meant more possibilities for the cooperation . The neighborly nations are expected to join the European Union in 2015 .
 In 2003 the government announced the necessity of modification to the Status Law causing violent protests from the side of the exgovernmental parties . The government announced that the need to modify the status law caused violent protests .
 The government submitted and passed the amendment of the law and made an agreement with Romania according to the modifications . Even so, the government submitted the amendment and passed it, the Romanian government said .
 The aim was to support Hungarian minorities to stay in their homeland . The EU has had several opportunities for the development and improvement of cooperation between Hungary and its neighboring countries .
 Several joint programmes were launched to enhance regional cross-border cooperation . Joint programmes have been launched by the U.N. to enhance cooperation .
 Hungary joined the European Union in 2004 and Romania just 3 years later . Some envisaged a new iron curtain due to the strict control of EU borders and visa requirements .
 The hope that the EU would solve the question of minority rights was unsubstantiated . Within the framework of European institutions there is no single uniform system regarding their situation . The hope of solving the issue was unsubstantial, says the author .
 Countries who want to join the European Union have to meet the Copenhagen Criteria . Countries who join the EU must meet the above-mentioned Copenhagen criteria .
 Many accused the socialist-liberal government because during accession negotiations Romania was not forced to guarantee 1287 Kántor, “Status Laws and ‘Nation Policy’”, , 118 . Many accuse the Socialist-Liberal government of not guaranteeing the right to guarantee the
 Hungarian government did not exploit minority rights including collective rights, which was not exploited by the Hungarian government . Member States, following the fulfillment of Copenhagen criteria are not called to account for respecting them .
 EU has become an instrument for the law enforcement of minority rights, EU says . However, it is admitted that after the 2004 and 2007 enlargement of the European Union, another forum became an instrument .
 The European Parliament offers the opportunity for deputies to fight for minority rights . Deputies can do this through committees or intergroup reports .
 European institutions offer a platform for closer cooperation among the members from different nations . European institutions have the additional advantage to offer closer cooperation, the author says .
 The European Union aims to be the community of communities, though this feature can have different understanding for the Member States . So far the European Union has been a community of community, but this feature has different understanding .
 Hungarians living beyond the borders were guaranteed the rights of EU citizens throughout the Community, but at first place, in Hungary . Hungarians in the Community were guaranteed their rights in first place .
 In 2007 the nation policy was reformed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . Following this, in 2007 the country was reformed .
 The Treaty of Lisbon was intended to enforce closer cooperation with neighboring countries and organizations within the EU in order to enforce the regional development policy . After the French and Danish referenda rejecting the Constitutional Treaty, minority rights were dropped out from the text, so the treaty of Lisbon does not include them
 The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union did not become part of the Treaty; consequently it is not legally binding . Additionally, the charter of Fundamental rights of the EU was not included in the Treaty . The Charter is not a legally binding treaty .
 Slovakia exploited this approached and violated the rights of Hungarian minorities several times . Regarding Romania it did not result in major problems, but Slovakia exploited that approach . Slovakia violated this approach several times, including against Hungarian minorities .
 Romania and Hungary belong to the same group of countries (which can be called as EU-12 or new Member States) representing the same interests at EU-level negotiations, i.e. The two countries are part of the group of new members of the European Union . The countries are
 bilateral dialogue can hardly be stuck by certain debates, especially in the field of minority policy . As a result, bilateral dialogue cannot be stuck in certain debates .
 The recognition of the necessity and the perspectives of neighborhood cooperation facilitated the further deepening of relations along common objectives and interests .
 Since 2005, there are annual meetings of the ministers of foreign affairs of Romania and Hungary . Annual meetings are held between the two countries each year .
 Hungary and Romania jointly asked for EU support for several projects . The projects included a motorway to connect Budapest and Bucharest through Transylvania .
 Since 2007, Romania and Hungary have harmonized their National Development Strategies . This is necessary for the better exploitation of EU resources, says Romania . Romania has harmonized its national development strategies since 2007 .
 There are also many lower level initiatives, which are supported by the government . There is also many other initiatives, supported by government .
 The Hungary-Romania Cross-Border Co-operation Programme can also be highlighted . The Hungarian-Romanian Cross-border Co-Operation Programme is also highlighted .
 Its aim is to improve the key conditions of joint, sustainable development of the cooperation area . The aim is also to strengthen the social and economic cohesion of the border area .
 The role of non-government organizations is improving and NGOs are gaining greater importance in the formation and realization of neighborhood policy . Non-government groups are gaining more importance in forming and realizing neighborhood policy, experts say .
 Multinational companies, research institutes and Churches can add surplus to the intensification of Hungarian-Romanian relations .
 Romania, due to its geographical position, formulated its foreign policy in a way to enhance its interest in the Black Sea region on the one hand; on the other hand, in the Balkans, as well, as in the Danube Region . Romania's foreign policy is aimed at enhancing its
 Hungary considers relations with Western Balkan and Danube countries of utmost importance . Hungary also considers the relations with the Western Balkans and the Danube . Hungary is one of the world's most populous countries .
 High-level meetings among Serbia, Hungary and Romania took place to discuss issues of common interest, such as transport, energy, and environment . Serbia and Hungary also discussed transport and energy issues .
 The support of the EU accession of Serbia was put also on the table . The elaboration of the European Danube Strategy which is supposed to approximate the countries concerned is of mutual interest .
 Romanian parties have lost their radical nationalist views and propaganda in the last decade . Opposition to national and Europeanist forces still exist at a certain extent, which can hinder sometimes the efforts of neighborhood policy .
 The question of minority rights is still used by certain political parties as a source of propaganda . Additionally, the question of minorities rights is also used by political parties .
 In Hungary the change of discourse of governments influence the intensity of both neighboring and minority policy . Meanwhile in Hungary the . change of . discourse of . governments influence . intensity of . neighboring or minority policy.
 The EU support for the Danube Region was initiated by Austria and Romania, which was endorsed by the EU Commissioner responsible for Regional Policy, Danuta Hübner . The region is the most important part of the EU's support to the region .
 Hungarian government generally changed the priorities of neighborhood policy according to their own perceptions, they never rejected its necessity and importance .
 EU accession did not solve the problem of minority rights, it has provided wider opportunities for further cooperation which are supposed to be exploited successfully in the near future .
 Neighbors policy works in East Central Europe but depends on mutual willingness and actions . Neighbors' willingness to engage in neighborhood policy depends on willingness to work together, says Jurgen Schubert .
 "Achieving in this field is strongly dependent on the actual governing powers," says the government . "It is a very difficult task to do" for the government to do so, says the minister .
 Both countries had to commit themselves to Western integration which was not totally evident in case of Romania in the beginning of the 90s . Second, both countries had committed themselves to the Western integration .
 Euro-Atlantic integration processes demanded the efficient consolidation of neighboring relations between Hungary and Romania which was also time-consuming and required compromises on both sides . Nevertheless, the Euro-Atlantantantial integration process demanded the efficiency consolidation of relations .
 The European Union prescribes to pursue of a consistent and advanced minority policy . The EU provides only limited opportunities to enforce minority rights as such . The Hungarian expectations are similar to those of the EU .
 Common interests in this framework and the room for continuous dialogue contribute to a more successful neighborhood policy which does not ignore minority policy .
 European Council, Conclusions of the Presidency – Pact on Stability in Europe. European Council . European Council of the European Union – Pacts on Stability – Stability in the EU. EU. Council .
 Jeszenszky, Géza, Post-communist Europe and its national/ethnic problems . Gézézky: Post-Communist Europe has national problems and national problems . Jeszensyzky says he is proud of his work in Hungary .
 In Lengyel, György and Rostoványi, Zsolt , The small transformation – Society, Economy and Politics in Hungary in Hungary and the New European Architecture in Hungary . The small-scale transformation is the result of the transformation of Hungary's economy .
 In the years of the first Estonian Republic, the vast majority of its inhabitants were ethnic Estonians . Estonians were largely ethnic Estonian citizens .
 Only 61.5% of Estonians were ethnic Estonian in the 1980s . The issue of nationality became the main point of contention during the years following independence .
 Republic of Estonia first became an independent state in 1920 after the Tartu Treaty . Estonia is now Estonia's most populous country . Estonia was formed from Estonia in 1918 after the Treaty of Estonia .
 Estonia possessed lands that extended in the northeast close to the city of Narva and in the southeast to Petsory . Estonia had lands in the north and south of the country's borders .
 Ethnic Russians had also lived on the bank of Lake Peipus for centuries and smaller groups in other regions of Estonia . Ethnic Russians have also lived in Estonia for centuries .
 Approximately 12% of the pre-war state was non-Estonian, but Estonia was still considered to be a nation-state . The majority of them lived in rural areas, but a strong Russian-speaking elite also existed .
 During the Second World War, Estonia was also occupied by Nazi Germany from 1941 to 1944, and in 1944, the second Soviet occupation began . Estonia was occupied by the Soviet Union from 1944 to 1944 .
 Estonians emigrated or were either imprisoned or killed . Thousands of Estonians were killed or imprisoned during the period . Estonians died or emigrated .
 In the first years after the war, the Soviets had several means of taking control over society . The Soviets had a number of ways to take control of society, including the use of guns .
 The exact number of deported, imprisoned and killed people is still unknown .
 "The real power was in Moscow, and at the local level, Russians or Estonians from Russia controlled everything," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The real power is in Moscow and the real power in Moscow .
 He became the ‘voice of Moscow’ under Stalin, Khrushchev, and into the Brezhnev era . He came to Tallinn from Moscow, and became the 'Voice of Moscow' under Stalin .
 Between Käbin and Väljas the First Secretary was Karl Vaino, an ethnic Estonian, who was born in Tomsk, Russian SSR, and could speak only Russian . As a true ‘internationalist”, as a true internationalist,
 Thousands of people moved to Estonia from other republics of the Soviet Union in order to rejuvenate the area . Estonia was one of the most prosperous Soviet Union republics in the 1950s .
 The title of my paper is phrased as the Russian-speaking minority, rather than the Russian minority . Alongside the other historically present minorities (Germans, Latvians, and Finns), a significant group of Ukrainians and Belarusians emerged .
 Ethnic Russians were not the only people who spoke Russian in everyday life . This is because ethnic Russians not only spoke Russian . This was because of their daily life in Russia .
 Since education was in Russian or in Estonian, minorities changed their language . Since education in Russia or Estonian it has been in one generation, these minorities changed language .
 Their first “task’s” was to become the elite of the new Soviet power as previously mentioned . Their first task was to be to become an elite in the Soviet Union .
 During this time, there were huge industrial constructions, and the new ‘colonists’ were the workforce for the new factories and other facilities . The new “colonist’s” were the workers for the factories .
 A large group of inhabitants were soldiers and leaders of the Soviet army . Many of the inhabitants of the village were Soviet soldiers and Soviet leaders .
 It is still unknown exactly how many soldiers served in the territory of ESSR . It was definitely a large number .
 The geopolitical location of Estonia also demanded a strong naval presence . Estonia's geopolitical location, Estonia's location, has also demanded strong military presence .
 Though troops lived separately from society, military leaders held influence in several cities . Troops lived separate from society but had influence in cities .
 The millions of young soldiers also played an important role maintaining cohesion of the USSR after their years of service . Millions of Soviet soldiers played a key role in maintaining cohesion .
 This Russian-speaking group was supposed to be the new ‘Soviet nation’, the leaders of the communist Soviet Union . The group was meant to be a new “Soviet nation,” according to Soviet leaders .
 The only major “Soviet nation” that held power in every state and city of the Soviet Empire . This population was seen as being the majority of the population .
 They could move anywhere within it and usually given better opportunities than native populations . Native populations were often more likely to move into the U.S.
 Most of the Russian-speaking people in the ESSR even had Soviet identities . Most of those who spoke Russian in the Soviet Union were Russian .
 According to a survey taken in 1959, 81% of Russians lived in an apartment with all amenities, in comparison to only 54.5% of Estonians . 86% of Russian lived in towns and cities, according to the 1959 survey .
 In Ida-Viru County, there were huge construction projects during the Soviet era because of the oil shale industry . Huge construction projects were built during Soviet era .
 Narva, a border city, had an important Russian minority even in the pre-war period . Kohtla-Järve, Sillmäe and Narva became Russianspeaking cities .
 Tallinn, Estonian capital of the ESSR, became a Russian-speaking city according to Soviet policies . Tallinn is now Estonia's capital of Estonia .
 Until the collapse of the Soviet Union, the rate of ethnic Russians in the capital was growing constantly . By 1989, nearly 50% of the population was part of the Russian-speaking community .
 Russian speakers were still a small minority in rural areas of the ESSR . In rural areas, Russian speakers still a minority .
 Estonian migrants were essentially migrant workers who had come to Estonia for a few years to make up the workforce . They were essentially migrants who came to Estonia from abroad to help make up Estonia's workforce .
 The Russian-speaking minority who lived in bigger cities did not need to learn Estonian and could function using only Russian . The Estonian language is Estonian .
 Most Estonian Estonians did not learn Estonian . Most of them lived in the same place for decades .
 Estonians were not forced to learn Russian, but for several jobs, knowing Russian was a necessity . The Estonians are now employed in Estonia, Estonia, where they are not required to speak Russian .
 By the end of the 1980s, Estonians spoke more people spoke Russian than Estonian . Estonians speak more Russian than Russians .
 In 1993, 83% of the inhabitants of Estonia spoke Russian fluently . Only 77% could speak Estonian, while 83% spoke Estonian .
 In Soviet propaganda and in the Soviet Constitution, the right to use languages was declared, and everybody had a right to do it . The right to speak languages is declared in Soviet propaganda .
 Millions of Soviet citizens were never actualized for many of them . However, this right was never actually realized for millions of them in the Soviet Union .
 The party saw emphasis on the importance of any other language as nationalism as nationalism, which jeopardized communist ideals . The party also saw emphasis in the language as nationalistic .
 The effects of Soviet policies were only the facilitation of the ‘natural process” according to propaganda . The effects were only a facilitation, according to the propaganda .
 Russification reached millions of Soviet citizens in every corner of the empire . Russification was created in the 1930s and 1940s, and spread throughout the Soviet Union .
 In the economy, public administration and science, Russian was the most important language . In Russia, Russian is the most popular language in the world .
 The use of Russian was inevitable because of the centralization of all of the important decisions in Moscow, it was inevitable . Because of the importance of Moscow, the use of the language was inevitable, he said .
 In the Soviet Union Republics, each Republic’s native language was declared the official language . In the Estonian SSR, the language was Estonian, rather than Estonian . Estonian is the only language spoken in Estonia and Latvia .
 In different republics, the same legal status had very different meanings . However, in many republics it was very different to have legal status .
 Estonians felt that the Estonian language was in danger . The majority of Estonians feel that the language is in danger, according to the Estonians .
 One important linguistic division was that knowledge of Russian was required for high positions . One of the most important linguistic divisions was the need for high Russian knowledge .
 Estonian was excluded from city life and was on the precipice of becoming a rural language as it was until the mid-16th century . Estonian is now Estonian-language .
 In public places and special environments, Russian became the first language in Estonia . Estonians began to question the Soviet past in the years of glasnost and perestroika .
 Public opinion came to view Estonia’s incorporation into the Soviet Union as military occupation . Estonia's incorporation into Soviet Union was viewed as a military occupation by public opinion .
 Initially, the goal was to see the ESSR continue its existence in a federal Soviet Union . Initially, it was intended to see it continue to be in a Soviet Union, but it was later declared a republic .
 The Estonian Republic was formed to achieve full sovereignty and an independent state . However, this changed over the course of a few years, and the will was formed . Estonians are now an independent republic .
 In the Gorbachev era, the Russian-speaking population (including ethnic Russians and other Russified Slavic groups) did not share any common ground or goals with the government .
 One reason for this was the lack of a locally integrated intelligentsia . One reason is this is that the country has a lack of locally integrated intellectuals .
 The biggest protests in the late 1980s were huge concerts like the Tallinn Song Festival Ground where hundreds of thousands Estonians gathered . Estonians were protesting against the government of Estonia .
 In Estonia, song festivals were significant traditions since the 19th century . They formed an important part of Estonia's national identity .
 The stages of transition in the three Baltic States paralleled each other . The stages in the Baltic States are similar to each other. The Baltic states have been in transition stages for decades .
 The most brutal event in Vilnius was in 1991, when Soviet tanks attacked unarmed protesters, killing 14 people . While in the Caucasus region, ethnic conflicts caused violence, in the Baltic States, ethnic clashes caused violence .
 Ethnic Estonians held important positions in Estonian politics until the end of the 1980s . It was not until the late 1980s that ethnic Estonians had important roles in politics .
 Newly formed political organizations such as the Popular Front of Estonia and the Congress of Estonia were predominantly ethnic Estonian .
 Each of the Estonian groups had a small proportion of non-Estonian members .
 96% of ethnic Estonians and 26% of non-Estonians supported independence from the Soviet Union in May 1990 . In May 1990, the majority of Estonians voted for independence .
 ‘Internationalists’ continued to fight against ‘nationalist Estonians’ and supported the continued unity of the empire . However, a group of ‘internationalists” continued to . fight against . “nationalist . Estonianians” and “
 Russian workers in Estonia worried about losing their privileges in new regime . They drew support from a vocal section of Russian workers .
 Unlike ethnic Estonians, non-Estonians did not have a shared identity or history except for perhaps victory in World War II, which to the local population signified the beginning of the occupation .
 Estonia's status of Estonia depended on Moscow and the situation in the Soviet Union . Estonia was ruled out of Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s . Estonia became one of the most isolated countries in the world in the early 1950s .
 Estonia declared independence a day after a coup in Moscow against Gorbachev . Estonia declared its independence from Soviet Russia in the wake of the coup .
 The division in nationality continued to be significant following the independence of Estonia . Estonia's nationality division was significant following independence .
 The Russian-speaking minority did not have special representation in the democratic transition . The majority of the population was not represented by the government .
 In 1990 and 1991, a large proportion supported democratization, but there were no special Russian-speaking parties . In 1991 and 1992, a majority of Russians supported the reform .
 The most popular politicians among Russian speakers were ethnic Estonians . Ethnic Estonians are the most popular ethnic Estonian politicians .
 Around one-third of the population had special needs, but without real representation, there was no one to act on their behalf . This minority group, around one third of the country's population, has special needs .
 It was a shock when they suddenly became the minority in a small independent state after being part of the majority in a huge empire . As a result, it was also a shock that they suddenly become the minority .
 Not every person within the new Republic of Estonia was granted Estonian citizenship . Not all of Estonia's citizens were granted citizenship .
 Only those who lived in the jurisdiction before 1940 and their descendants automatically became Estonian citizens . According to the nationality law, only those who live in Estonia before 1940 automatically became citizens .
 People who either did not wish to take up the new citizenship or could not pass the exams required became noncitizens, otherwise known as aliens . People who did not want to become noncitizens are now known as noncitizens .
 Russians could apply for Russian citizenship, but the majority did not do so . The majority of those who did not apply for citizenship did not .
 This issue has continued to be one of the most difficult issues for the state . This issue is still a thorny issue in the state's political history .
 There has been significant progress in integration over the last 21 years . However, there has been a lot of problems with integration in the U.S.
 European integration was one of the main goals for the new state, but the issue of non-citizens was a major obstacle to this goal . The issue was the biggest obstacle to European integration in the country .
 In 2011, only 7% of the population did not have citizenship, and around 9% of these non-citizens were citizens of a different state .
 In the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic, the local ethnic Estonian majority was only a minority in the whole empire . In conclusion, in Estonia, the Estonians were only a minor in the entire empire .
 Due to Soviet policies and migration, a significant proportion of the population of the territory was non-Estonian, mostly ethnic Russians . The population of Estonia was mostly non-Russian, mainly ethnic Russians.
 Estonians were demanding their own rights during the transition years . This issue became visible in the years of Estonians being in power . Estonians are demanding own rights in order to protect themselves .
 Estonians were not a homogenous group, but a significant number of them took part in the Singing Revolution that paved the way for the newly independent Republic of Estonia . Non-Estonians have persisted over the last two decades .
 In wake of Tiananmen Square incident, the CCP has demonstrated remarkable resilience to the titanic pressures of the ‘Third Wave of Democratisation’, which saw 75% of the world’s existing communist regimes swept away by the 'Leninist Mass Mass'
 Nationalism has proved potentially in conflict with peaceful development . Nationalism is a form of conflict between peace and prosperity .
 With reference to comparative political theories and specific schools of Chinese 1316 Michel Oskenberg, ‘The Nature of Chinese Politics, from Mao to Jiang’, Unger, Jonathon .
 Next, an overview of key reforms will lead us to consider the burgeoning social, economic, and political pressures that the CCP faces in the 21st Century . Next, we will consider the social, political, and economic pressures facing the CCP in the future .
 We will consider how the CCP’s innovative strategies of pre-emptive reform and adaptation provide a bridge for both the CCP and the Chinese state to embark on an era of greater economic freedoms and potential political reform with distinct Chinese characteristics .
 This will allow the CCP both to successfully surmount the challenges presented by reform and avoid the apocalyptic fate predicted by critics . The CCP will also be able to avoid an apocalyptic fate, according to critics .
 Scholarships must also analyze contrasting scholarly opinions surrounding adaptation and regime survival .
 For the purposes of this essay, we will focus upon the post-Maoist reform era, which began under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping in 1978 and then develop under the successive leadership of Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao respectively . The Nature of Reform – ‘Opening
 Mao’s legacy and the need for pragmatic reform for the CCP to have survived . First, we will consider Mao's legacy and need to pragmatic reform . We will consider the need to have pragmatic reform in order to survive .
 Second, we will consider Deng Xiaoping’s moves towards pragmatic economic development in contrast to Maoist utopianism . We will also consider the Chinese leader's moves towards pragmatical economic development .
 We will consider the variety of reform undertaken on economic policy . Then we will consider a variety of reforms undertaken on the economy .
 After that, we will consider challenges presented to reform between 1985 and 1991 . We will also consider challenges faced to reform from 1985 to 1991 . After that we will look at the challenges faced by the government .
 The PRC was left politically, economically and socially exhausted by the instability created by the Cultural Revolution of 1966 to 1976 . The Cultural Revolution left the PRC politically and economically exhausted by instability .
 Minxin Pei is careful to remind scholars that Deng Xiaoping was no counter-revolutionary but a true believer in the Communist ideology that the PRC was founded upon . While appreciating the necessary and innovative nature of these reforms for the CCP rejuvenation and survival, Minx
 Deng allowed the creation of small private plots and private markets in which farmers could sell grain that was surplus to their quota . Tacit support was given to modernizing 1332 factions within the CCP, which oversaw the prioritization of economic modernization in all party work .
 This experimentation was an important precursory image of the reforms that were to come . The experiments were an important prelude to the reforms of the 1930s and '60s .
 'Opposition Movements, Wall Poster Campaigns, and Underground Journals’, 1981, 748. ‘. Opposition Movements. Opponents Movements . Opponents. Opponent Movements’s wall poster campaign’ was published in 1981 .
 The crowds began to directly challenge the regime, and the Democracy Goddess, a statue built to imitate the iconic Statue of Liberty, cast an shadow over Mao’s portrait . It became clear that the students wanted something that the CCP had refused to concede, glasnost (political
 Tyson argues that many young and middle-aged Chinese thinkers were raised not as obedient Confucian servants of the state, but as Maoist rebels . Tyson: Many young Chinese thinkers have been raised as Maoists, not obedient servants .
 Deng was a reformer, but Deng was no Gorbachev . Many young people looked to Western alternatives and began agitating for democratic reforms . Deng was reformer but not a leader of the Soviet Union .
 China’s economic achievements were so successful that the PRC was granted membership in the WTO in 2001 . The PRC has been granted membership of the WTO since 2001 .
 John Wong analyzes the factors that explain the ability of the CCP to retain power in China . The CCP prevailed where the communist regimes of Central and Eastern Europe, and even the Soviet Union had unraveled .
 The challenges arising as a consequence of three decades of reform and their implications for the CCP will be outlined in the next chapter of this chapter .
 As a result of growing inequality, unemployment, and corruption, there have been widespread protests, particularly in the impoverished interior . The challenges of reform have significantly threatened to undermine stability of the PRC .
 Growing inequality and a weak social welfare system are among the problems of the U.S. economy . The U.K. government has been forced to take action to tackle the problem of inequality .
 Rising unemployment levels and the collapse of the ‘Iron Rice Bowl’ exacerbate the problem of inequality, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Rising unemployment and collapse of “Iron rice Bowl” exacerbate the issue of inequality .
 The loss of housing and social welfare coincides with the increasingly transparent opulence of cadres . The government is no longer willing to support State Owned Enterprises that are not competitive .
 1367 has led to estimates that corruption accounted for 14.9% of GDP between 1999-2001 . Wedeman argues that during the 1990s, corruption underwent a qualitative change as the increasingly highstakes involved have led to a proliferation of high-profile cases .
 'The Shift of the Urban Proletariat from Master to Mendicant' in Gries and Rosen, ‘State and Society’, 50. ‘Mendicant’ is the work of Gries, Rosen, and Rosen .
 The Rise of the Middle Class has led to the rise of a prominent middestrata of Chinese society . The Middle Class is a key part of China's economic liberalization .
 Henan and Guangdong provinces’ in ‘Grassroots Reform in Contemporary China’, Elizabeth Perry , 2007, 47, .
 The most significant strategies developed by the CCP to ensure its maintenance of power will follow in the next section . Two imperial dynasties succumbed to the chaos caused by similar revolutionary movements . The CCP's strategies will follow a scholarly debate on their effectiveness .
 Tsai, ‘Capitalism Without Democracy, the Politics of Private Sector Development in China’, 2007 . Tsai: “Capitalism without Democracy is without democracy in China'
 Deng’s eudemonic development strategy disregarded the social and political consequences of economic reform . Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao's leadership has been augmented by both Jiang and Hu Zemin .
 CCP leadership has sought adaptive strategies to supplement the CCP’s legitimacy beyond that of continued economic growth and coercion . In recognition of the sociopolitical pressures that aggregate from below as a result of growth and wealth accumulation,1382 the CCP leadership have sought to supplement their legitimacy .
 The CCP has experimented with direct elections of village and township government committees, including contests between multiple CCP candidates and even a limited number of non-CCP members . The CCP is experimenting with direct electoral contests in villages and towns .
 The CCP has portrayed the PLA as the muscular embodiment of the PRC’s nationalism, giving them a considerable face after the humiliation of June 4th . Normatively, the PLA has portrayed itself as the embodiment of Chinese nationalism .
 CCP has been careful to make clear that their fates are intertwined . Instrumentally, the CCP has made it clear that they are intertwined with each other . The CCP has a history of using the power of the state to protect its own interests .
 The magnitude to which the adaptations have empowered the CCP to survive and rejuvenate is intensely debated by scholars . Analyzing the Scholarly Debate, the magnitude of the adaptations has been debated by experts .
 The CCP has been remarkably proactive, adapting to retain power, and this adaptive strategy can stabilize, and even reverse, atrophy . Weiss eloquently augments the debate, explaining that most states possess the ability to adapt . Weiss: Most states possess an ability to adjust .
 The inability of scholars to immediately identify these capabilities may lead to their mistaken assumption that the state is in decline . However, this essay identified somecrucial factors that may sway the balance of atrophy and adaptation in favour of the CCP’s survival .
 With China's economy emerging from the global recession intact, the current situation appears fortuitous . This reached as high as 10.7% in the final quarter of 2009, leaving the West trailing behind .
 Scholars have earmarked as a crossroads for the CCP in the second decade of the 21st Century . These factors underpin the window of opportunity, which scholars say is wide open .
 This transition will be a difficult process, and relies on the choices and innovation of China’s 5th generation leaders . This transition depends on the choice and innovation from the Chinese government, says Mr. Zhang .
 Crucial political reform will most likely come from the top and is dependant on sustaining fragile economic stability . There is hope, but there is hope for the country .
 Chinese Dissident Use of the Internet and Beijing’s Counter-Strategies, Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2002. RAND: Chinese Dissidents Use of of the internet and Beijing's Counter-strategies .
 Chao, Chien-min and Dickinson, Bruce J.,Remaking the Chinese State, Strategies, Society and Security, London, Routledge Press, 2001 .
 Power and Motivation in Chinese Foreign Policy, Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2005. Power andMotivation in China Foreign Policy. China's Foreign Policy .
 Journal Of Current Chinese Affairs’, 38, 35-6, 2009. Determinants, Progress, and Limits under Hu Jintao"", Journal of Current Chinese affairs’s, 38-35-6 .
 Huang, Yasheng, ‘Why China will not Collapse’, Foreign Policy, 99 Summer, 1995, . Huang and Yasheng were quoted as saying ‘China will not collapse’.
 Joffe, E., ‘Ruling China After Deng,’ Journal of East Asian Affairs, Winter-Spring, 1997, 1997 . ‘China After Deng’ was published in 1997 .
 Mahbubani, Kishore, ‘Understanding China’, Foreign Affairs, September-October, 2005, 2005 .
 Andrew Nathan, Andrew, ‘Authoritarian Resilience’, Journal of Democracy, Volume 14, Number 1, January 2003 . Nathan and Andrew wrote a book on authoritarian resilience .
 Ong, R., ‘'Peaceful Evolution', 'Regime Change' and China's Political Security’, Journal of Contemporary China, Vol. Vol. 1 . Ong: 'Peaceful evolution' of China's political security is a key part of its political stability .
 Pei, Minxin, 'Made In China' label won't survive without rule of law,’ Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2007 . Pei: ‘Made in China" label won’t survive without Rule of Law .
 Tsing-yuan, Tsao, Wasserstrom, Jeffrey N and J Perry, Elizabeth, . The Birth of the Goddess of Democracy from Popular Protest and Political Culture in Modern China, Boulder CO., Westview Press, 1994 .
 Wang, F and Deng, Y , ‘China Rising, Power and Motivation in Chinese Foreign Policy’, Rowman & Littlefield Publisher, Lanham, 2005. ‘Power and Motivated in China Rising’ .
 Wedeman, A., ‘The Intensification of Corruption in China,’ The China Quarterly 180, 2004 . Wedeman wrote in China's China Quarterly .
 Yong, Zhang, ‘Withering Governmental Power in China?’, Communist and PostCommunist Studies, 29, 1996 . Zhang, Yong and Zhang wrote about the Chinese government .
 The extinction of the Mammoths,1429 the traces of lead in the Greenland ice from the times of the Roman Empire 1430 are examples that mankind has had a transboundary and global impact on its environment .
 Humankind has developed more significantly and exponentially in the last two centuries . Humankind however has developed even more significantly . and exponentially . in the past two centuries.
 The effects of using more and more natural resources, such as fossil fuels, can already be felt . The effects are already being felt in the form of using fossil fuels .
 Since these effects know no boundaries, they are global problems without a doubt, they're global problems . The effects of the climate change are no longer confined to specific areas .
 The ever-growing danger was neglected in the international field until the 20th century . Nevertheless, it was neglected by the world's most powerful forces .
 Although humanity has had an impact on its environment throughout history, the general acknowledgment of this by scientists and the society is fairly recent .
 A historical perspective helps us to contextualize why recognition of the issue is still disproportionately low among scientists, policymakers and members of the public alike . The issue still disproportionately affects scientists and policymakers alike .
 It also presents how environmental protection has changed over the decades . Environmentalists say it's important to protect the environment from pollution .
 Protection of the environment has existed for centuries in some shape or form . Protests have been held around the world over the past century .
 Cause-causality links were seldom established between pollution and 1429 D Burney & T Flannery. However, since cause-causesality links have been seldom established .
 IR has yet to fully develop and incorporate the key principles of the discipline, such as multidisciplinarity . Some of the IR’s subfields such as environmental protection have yet to be fully developed .
 Treaties predominantly addressed conservation issues rather than transboundary pollution . Treaties were mostly addressed to conservation issues, rather than pollution .
 It was not until the second half of the 20th century that international treaties emerged dealing with broader issues . International treaties emerged in the early 1900s .
 From the beginning of the Cold War there were several scientists on the Soviet side as well . Several scientists were involved in the Soviet effort .
 Environmental protection was mostly neglected up until the nineteen-seventies . They predicted new phases of the Scientific Technological Revolution .
 In the first half of the Cold War period, many believed a nuclear war was imminent and would wipe out the human race anyway . In the early Cold War era, some believed a war was inevitable and would kill out the entire human race .
 Most resources by the two superpowers and their spheres of influence were focused on the political mechanisms of the competing camps . Most of the resources by both superpowers are focused on political mechanisms .
 Peaceful coexistence, the new doctrine emerging in the 1950s, was spreading very slowly towards such topics as global health or environment . Peaceful life was spreading slowly towards topics of global health, or environment, in 1950s .
 One of the first treaties was the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water of 1963 . The treaty was the first treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere .
 Hungarian government proposed several steps to tackle environmental problems . In 1972, the U.N. Environmental Programme was established . The Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes or Other Matter in 1972 . This is the first treaty that is relevant to connecting land-based
 In 1982, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea was signed . Later on, the 1986 Chernobyl accident further highlighted the importance of international standards and safeguards .
 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change was established by the World Meteorological Organization and UNEP in 1988 . At the end of the decade, the IPCC was established . The IPCC was set up in 1988, and the IPCC is now the IPCC .
 After the Cold War the wider international scientific community started to identify the key problems and solutions . This is a scientific body that assesses the findings of various scholars on climate change, and enables the UN and the world to formulate an effective response to the challenge .
 Social sciences were lagging behind even more, especially the relatively new discipline of international relations . Social sciences are lagging even more in the social sciences, especially in international relations.
 Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water . Treaty also bans nuclear weapons tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water . Treaty was signed in 1950 .
 Convention on Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter . Convention on the Prevention of . Dumping . of Marine . Pollution .
 The 1990s were the starting point to address harmful anthropogenic CO2 emissions, the key factor in ocean acidification . Land-based factors are also key to ocean acidifying .
 These emissions were addressed by the 1992 U.N. Conference on Environment and Development . These emissions are addressed by a United Nations Conference in 1992 .
 Most recently a different instrument under the UNFCCC was established, the Paris Agreement, which contains self-established targets . The Paris Agreement contains self established targets .
 By now most of the world has realized that the main causes for climate change are Greenhouse Gas Emissions . Greenhouse gas Emissions are the main cause of climate change .
 There are several initiatives to battle the GHG emissions, regionally and globally as well as globally .
 Countries are mostly focused on halting climate change, to protect their terrestrial environment . Countries are also focused on stopping the climate change .
 It is important to see what incentives countries may have to enact in order to reduce emissions, and what fault lines there are there are . It will be difficult to determine what incentives the countries must enact to cut emissions .
 The 1441 UNCED secretariat is the biggest problem of the UNCED Secretariat . Scientists say the biggest drawback of UNCED is its lack of transparency .
 Kyoto Protocol to the U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change. Kyoto Protocol . Kyoto Protocol on climate change . Kyoto protocol to the United Nations .
 Although environmentally-friendly technologies exist and are cheaper than before, they are still not always a viable alternative to polluting fossil-fuel based ones . The U.S. government is encouraging people to adopt more environmentally friendly technologies .
 In addition, developing countries say that they have to go through the same phases of development as developed ones, and this is just a simple tool of discrimination . Developed countries say they must undergo the same stages of development, and that is discrimination .
 Developed nations do not want to limit their economies by any means . Developed ones want to protect their economies from limits, say experts .
 The world price of oil dropped significantly, possibly weakening the costeffectiveness of renewables, providing less incentive to invest in them . As well, recently, recently the world . Price of oil has also weakened the cost of renewables .
 A fluctuating world price makes for a bad investment, but the cost of renewables is constantly decreasing . The cost of renewable energy will be constantly decreasing, according to the experts .
 On international level the deciding factor of cooperation on reduction is the participation of the biggest emitters, the Unites States and China, who make up of almost half of all emissions .
 There is another obstacle to effective solutions besides the reluctance of international actors . There is also a blind blind spot in international cooperation .
 The treaties and measures regarding the environment (particularly Greenhouse Gas Emissions) either focus only on the marine environment, or on land . The treaties focus on either marine environment (or on land) or land .
 The effect of CO2 emissions on the marine environment is not recognized by the scientists, they say . Therefore, they do not recognize the interconnectedness of the two spheres, such as the effect on the environment .
 There are grand discrepancies and blind spots between the fields of science, methods of implementation and information sharing . Because of this narrowly focused scientific and environmental-diplomatic viewpoint there is grand discrepancies .
 This results in ineffective and incomplete solutions, and the consequences of this will be presumably serious . This is a serious problem, and it will be a problem for the future of the country's future .
 Without firm action on all aspects of climate change, a global catastrophe is imminent . The UN warns that climate change is a 'global catastrophe' without action .
 Ocean acidification is the prime example of the problems in the world of ocean acidification . All these can be strikingly presented through connection with the problem .
 A rapid increase in acidification is probable if we do not limit greenhouse gas emissions . Projections vary for the future, but a rapid and dramatic increase is probable .
 Ocean acidification is a well-defined problem that will negatively affect global warming, the marine ecosystem, and thus livelihoods and food supplies . Overall, ocean acidification will negatively impact global warming and marine ecosystem .
 This would worsen the already severe problems of starvation around the globe, and create instability in international relations as well . This would also worsen the problems of hunger and international relations .
 There is still no clear financial estimate how much loss will occur due to this phenomenon . The data mentioned below are just approximations and not necessarily the total cost of ocean acidification .
 The change in pH has devastating effects on many marine lifeforms, especially those with calcification processes, since the carbonic acid dissolves their shells . Carbonic acid has devastating effect on many lifeforms .
 Many more species are susceptible to changes in pH, and this will lead to a catastrophic collapse of the oceans’ biosphere . However, many more species will be susceptible to pH changes, and will be affected by this .
 Climate-related variables suggest future physiological impairment in a top oceanic predator . Synergistic effects of climate-related . variables suggest physiological impairment .
 Dwindling populations of sea animals combined with serious overfishing, many species would go extinct . Many species would be extinct if over-fishing were not allowed to be caught .
 Ocean acidification will lead to a decrease in the deposition of carbonate sediments, and the dissolution of existing ones . This will cause a rise in ocean alkalinity (the quantitative capacity of an aqueous solution to neutralize an acid) meaning that the CO2 absorption factor
 Another problem is the effect the disappearing coral reefs will have on land . The disappearing reefs will also have an impact on the environment, scientists say .
 Environmental economist Luke Brander stated that coral reef tourism was valued at US$ 11.7 billion .
 The shoreline protection value of reefs was estimated at United States $9 billion a year, and reef-supported fisheries at 30 billion . U.S. shores are estimated to be worth $9billion a year .
 Scientists try to form an economic value representing the loss from ocean acidification . More alarming is that mostly developing countries, which are already vulnerable, sometimes monocultural in production of food and largely reliant on fisheries, will suffer .
 "This creates a great deal of political inequality and conflict in internal and international relations," says President Obama . This creates a lot of political and international tensions, he says .
 Biotic and Human Vulnerability to Projected Changes in Ocean Biogeochemistry over the 21st Century . Biotic . Vulnerability of human vulnerability to projected changes in ocean biogeochemicals .
 Present and Future Impacts of Ocean Acidification on Marine Ecosystems and Biogeochemical Cycle . Future impacts of ocean acidification on marine ecosystems and biogeochemical cycle .
 Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry Scoping Workshop on Ocean Acidification Research, 2007. Ocean Carbon, Biogeography and Ocean Carbon: Scoping Scoping . Scoping workshop on Ocean acidification research was held in 2007 .
 Assessing the potential longterm increase of oceanic fossil fuel CO2 uptake due to CO2-calcification feedback . Assessing potential long-term increase in oceanic carbon uptake .
 Some scientists go as far as to state that oceanography was not even recognized and a serious discipline until the last few years . Also stated that the ocean environment was separate from human sciences, and no multidisciplinary approach was applied .
 With this crucial element lacking, it is no surprise that human activities’ effects on oceans are not studied thoroughly . Human activities are not being studied thoroughly, scientists say .
 Historically the emphasis was almost always on land, and later, during the Cold War, in space . The emphasis on land and space is almost always in land .
 The closest thing to an Ocean Race was in the 17th century, when the first Ocean Race took place .
 So far more than five hundred people have been to space versus less than 10 in the deep ocean . It is no surprise that so far more people have gone to space .
 The oceans still hold many secrets and potential, from natural resources to biological discoveries . Oceans still hold great potential, with natural resources and biological discoveries still possible .
 When environmental historians organized a session on the history of ocean science in 2010, the audience consisted of one person . The audience was one person, says environmental historians .
 Oceanographers only have a professional entity, the Oceanography Society, and only since 1988 . Even more troubling is that among oceanographers there are clearly divided fields of chemistry, biology, geology, etc. Oceanographers are divided in their work .
 The relative freshness of oceanography, the division between its branches and the lack of interest in the oceans make it difficult to cooperate . Overall we can see that the relative . freshness and division between . its branches make it . difficult to . cooperate with the scientists .
 Fortunately, awareness has been raised through scientists, policy makers and NGOs in recent years . It is hoped awareness will be raised by scientists and policy makers .
 With dwindling natural resources on the ground, there is a growing incentive to extract from the deep oceans . This raises the importance of all ocean-related issues, says the author .
 Universally the world’s waters are regulated by the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea .
 It regulates matters of business, environment, and the management of marine natural resources . Oreskes is located at 55.55 1453 N Oreske .
 The main problem with it is that it only vaguely covers environmental problems, in very broad terms, and only territorially . It only covers very broad areas of the country, but only territorial problems .
 Drafted in 1982, 33 years ago, its contents have not changed much . But the world, however, did change .
 Amending the convention would change the fragile status of customary international law . Amending it would be almost impossible to come to an agreement . The wide acceptance of the convention is a positive aspect of international relations .
 The original convention mentions pollution, however there are multiple aspects that render its statements ineffective . The original Convention mentions pollution . However, there are several aspects of this that render it ineffective .
 This shows that this is clearly a regulation for traditional sources of pollution, such as chemicals, radiation or oil, it is clear . This is clearly an important regulation for the environment, says the BBC .
 Even in those times this was illogical, since due to ocean currents much of the pollution can cause spillover effects, and this is not covered . Even in the 1970s, this was not covered, as it is not currently .
 Oceanography was in a pioneering phase, and scientific models of the relations between ocean currents and the atmosphere were only starting to take shape in the 1970s . At the time there was simply no recognized relation of interconnection between the systems .
 The problem is that this type of pollution is not bound to territories, and this renders the UNCLOS regulation ineffective . This renders the regulation ineffective, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Of course one can argue that the Sic utere tuo tuo ut alienum non laedas (translated as “use your property so that the property of others is not damaged.”) principle may apply here as part of international customary law .
 For something to become custom, both objective and subjective elements must be present . The crucial point is that for something to be custom, it must be both objective or subjective .
 It is clear that subjective element of state practice does not corroborate this theory . It's clear that state practice is not corroborated with this theory, it is clear .
 It is clearly visible that its main purpose is to regulate international claims on waters, to allow for exploitation of natural resources governed by law . It is also a framework for interstate relations on the seas and oceans .
 Much of its contents are focused on this, defining zones such as the Exclusive Economic Zone . Environmental issues are phrased in a loose tone such as “states shall adopt States shall adopt laws and regulations to prevent, reduce and control pollution”
 Most of the debates on revising it are based on territorial and natural resource issues . Also most of the debate is based on territory and resources issues .
 There is much disputed territory in the Arctic for example, where multiple countries have competing claims over land .
 China, Japan and even South Korea have conflicting claims over the South China Sea . Another example is the South Korea-China-South China Sea, where China has conflicting claims . South Korea and China are also involved in the region .
 The focus of the international community on oceans or of the UNCLOS is on oceans, however recent developments of global warming and worsening developments on land and sea may raise the importance of other issues .
 The source of the problem has its similarities with other environmental problems, but it has unique characteristics as well . The problem has similarities to other environmental issues, but unique characteristics .
 "The main problem is what I call the blind spot of international relations in this matter," he said . The main problem was what he called "blind spot" in international relations .
 Since the source of the problem (CO2 emissions) is land-based, the effects are ocean-based . There is a gap between the regulations, mindset and vision regarding the problem, because the connection is not made by many .
 The first step to solving/managing it is to see clearly the connections and the circumstances of the situation, says Mark Hughes . Hughes: "The first step is to solve/manage it"
 One culture or group may not see things the way the other one does, even if 1457 United Nations. The U.N. has a history of not seeing the world as one of the world's most powerful nations .
 Anthropologist John Wilson was screening a film in Africa in a little village when he was screening it in Africa . John Wilson is an anthropologist who has worked in Africa for decades .
 The film was about sanitation and health related issues, how to dispose of waste, etc. It was about how to deal with waste .
 John Wilson was surprised, since he did not remember seeing a chicken in the film at all . After a careful examination frame-by-frame, he found that for a brief moment in of the corners of the picture there was indeed a chicken . This shows that people’s understanding
 Information needs to be passed on in a manner that is clear and straightforward . Because of this, information must be clear, straightforward, says CNN.com .
 Some people still deny or marginalize global warming and its effects, which is the same kind of blindness then the aforementioned anecdote . We all know some people still denied or marginalized global warming .
 First of all, awareness needs to be raised inside and outside of the scientific community, says Dr. John Sutter .
 Landbased actors need to adopt to the emerging problem by incorporating it into action and finally legislation on all possible levels . Land based actors also need to be involved in the solution to the problem . Landowners need to take on the issue with the help of land authorities .
 These need to be altered or interpreted in a way that it includes ocean acidification in a direct way, scientists say . Ocean acidification should be linked to climate change, they say .
 UNCLOS has an enforcement/dispute mechanism, it could be effective in reaching a positive outcome, says author . The UNUNCLOS could be an effective tool to reach an agreement .
 To limit ocean acidification, an acidity threshold should be introduced, similar to a temperature one, scientists say . Ocean acidity thresholds should also be introduced to limit ocean temperature .
 UNCLOS should shift focus from territorial disputes to environmental issues . This would ensure an objective criterion for protecting the marine environment . Currently GHG pollution is only implied by its clauses, but currently it is implied .
 Currently it does not acknowledge that the oceans act as a carbon sink, saving the world from further warming . The oceans are the world's main source of carbon dioxide .
 If the oceans’ uptake decreases due to high levels of CO2, the atmospheric concertation will increase . This is especially dangerous, since targets for GHG emissions often do not take this into account .
 It theoretically allows CO2 emissions to increase as long as other gases are decreasing . It allows for a reduction of GHG emissions in general, and theoretically allows for the increase .
 This would ensure that the carbon cycle remains in check and that the atmospheric reduction is in parallel with oceanic reduction . This would be in place to ensure the global carbon cycle remained in check .
 Carbon leakage may occur, offsetting atmospheric gains at the expense of the marine environment . Otherwise carbon leakage would occur, according to experts .
 The text of the COP21 final document only mentions oceans once, and makes no remark about ocean acidification or the marine environment as an equally important biosphere .
 The final document of the day by the International Working Group on Oceans and Climate expressed great concern . This is somewhat a paradox, since a whole day of the COP21 was dedicated to the oceans .
 The lack of focus on the marine environment is also supported by big data analysis . Big data analysis also supports the study .
 Research examined the roundtable discussions of the UNFCCC between 1995 and 2013 . The research examined the discussions of UNFCC roundtable talks .
 It shows that discussions are centered around five main macro-themes, none of which include the oceans . The oceans are one of the five main topics discussed in the world's major macro-economy .
 Although the oceans are carbon sinks, they are not taken into account by the UNFCCC discussions . The oceans are a carbon sink, but not considered as a major source of carbon emissions .
 Oceans' frequency of keywords is 17, water’s 20, among the least frequent terms . As for the frequency of words, oceans’ is 17 .
 In comparison, emission has the highest frequency with 990.1461 1460 U.N. emissions .
 Principles that are connected to the subject, such as common but differentiated responsibility, polluters pay principle, should be adjusted to include the marine environment .
 Affected regions should be connected with monitoring agencies to get an accurate picture of the situation, and economic, social and environmental impacts should all be summarized and then shared with policymakers and countries that may not be directly affected .
 The economic incentive should be highlighted as well, since it is less costly to stop events now than later . The economic incentives should also be highlighted, as well as the economic incentive .
 Investing in renewable energy is beneficial because it reduces CO2 emissions and it is getting cheaper every year . This means for example that investing in renewable electricity is beneficial to investors .
 Some species are more affected by ocean acidification than others . Regional and specific protections must be created, scientists say .
 This of course demands research on marine animals and then cooperation between based on the research . This is the first time the two countries have been able to work together .
 Currently only 1% of oceans are under protection . This needs to change in order to combat the effects of global warming .
 There is simply no other way to fight ocean acidification than to reduce CO2 emissions and battle the already 1462 EDF Energy Exchange . Unfortunately, there are simply no more ways to fight climate change than to cut emissions .
 Plans to use geoengineering tools have been abandoned by U.S. scientists claiming that it was “not ready for deployment”, 1465 .
 Many factors that hinder the solution of ocean acidification come from multiple sources, such as climate change .
 The history of environmental protection, the development of oceanography, the technical advancements in science, the global stabilization of international relations, the awareness raised on ocean acidification, the economic incentives to act all contribute towards the goal of dealing with this issue .
 The relative rapid buildup of forces in environmental protection, renewable energy and sustainable development all give us hope that a solution may be possible .
 Even the blind spot seems to disappear slowly as more and more stakeholders connect the dots, which is crucial for success . The blind spot will disappear slowly, even if it's a blind spot, it's said .
 Awareness of the problem is still not satisfactory, and there is no real sign that any of the future resolutions on climate change will specifically incorporate ocean acidification as one of the most important issues .
 It is a duty of every government and citizen to do everything in its power to support this effort, even against all odds . Not to mention that time is against us, since global warming may already be irreversible .
 Mary H Durfee, Professor of Michigan Tech for helping me organize thoughts and setting a path to this research topic . Mary H. Durfee is a professor at Michigan Tech and a member of the Michigan Tech faculty .
 On the Influence of Carbonic Acid in the Air in the air upon the Temperature of the Ground. On the influence of Carbon dioxide in the . air . on the . temperature of the . ground.
 Climate change threatens irreversible and dangerous impacts, but options exist to limit its effects . Climate change can be irreversible, dangerous impacts of climate change, scientists say .
 Greenland Ice Evidence of Hemispheric Lead Pollution Two Millennia ago by Greek and Roman Civilizations . Greenland Ice evidence of lead polluting two millennia ago by ancient civilizations .
 Inter-Government Conference on the Convention on the Dumping of Wastes at Sea . Inter-government conference on the convention on the dumping of wastes at sea . Meeting of countries involved in dumping of waste .
 Lepisto, C Iron Fertilization Experiment Proves Geo-engineering Unpredictable . Lepistosia, C. C. Iron . Fertilsia, a fertility experiment, is the result of a fertilization experiment in the region .
 Mora Mora, C Biotic and Human Vulnerability to Projected Changes in Ocean Biogeochemistry over the 21st Century . Mora: Human vulnerability to projected changes in ocean biogeochemistry is a vulnerability to the human vulnerability .
 Anthropogenic ocean acidification over the twenty first century and its impact on calcifying organisms . Anthropogenic sea acidification will affect the calcification of organisms . Ocean acidification has been a major problem for the past century .
 Paris Agreement to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change . U.N. Climate Change. Paris Agreement . Paris Agreement on climate change .
 László BÉKÉSI Ferenc DÁVID : The Hungarian Intelligence and Counter Intelligence Structure in the Cold War era . Roman KOZIEL : The Rise of National Communism in Poland and Czechoslovakia 1945–1956 . The rise of national Communism in
 A Case Study of the Yugoslav Involvement in the Angolan War for Independence 1961-1975 . The case was a case study of Yugoslavia's involvement in the war for independence in Angola 1961-1974 .