 State troopers finally called Kennedy's Secret Service agents, Joe Paolella and Larry Newman, to ask if some coyotes were bothering the president . But as the whoops and shrieks got louder, the alarmed state troopers called the agents .
 "Silent Night, Holy Night" played in the background during the celebration . Mere months earlier, the U.S. faced the biggest threat to Cuba since 1812 .
 The U.S. Coast Guard and even the British navy shielded Castro from exile attacks . After the Missile Crisis ""resolution,"" the United States .
 After the ""resolution,"" some of the very Cuban freedom-fighters who had smuggled out the very secret of the Soviet missiles found themselves stranded in a Cuba swarming with 47,000 Soviet troops . After the "resolution"
 Dozens of young heroes huddled in mangrove swamps along Cuba's coast, dodging Communist patrols and waiting for their scheduled ""exfiltration"" by motorboats back to the U.S.
 These heroes fell through the cracks of the Kennedy-Khrushchev deal . Their mission accomplished, their evidence to the Knights of Camelot was delivered .
 President Kennedy: "Let's be careful not to let any of these Cuban refugees upset the deal" President Kennedy's words to his attorney general brother on October 28, 1962 .
 The scheduled boat runs to the Cuban coast to carry the freedom-fighters were canceled . So the scheduled boat . runs to Cuba were canceled.
 Suddenly recue runs were impediments to Camelot's delicate diplomacy, you see . Suddenly these recues runs became impediments . Suddenly, they became impediment to the delicate diplomacy of Camelot, the author says .
 JFK ransomed the surviving Bay of Pigs freedom-fighters back from Castro's dungeons . Two months after his deal with Khrushchev, a guilt-stricken JFK made the deal .
 "I am here today not to be honored -but to pay honor,"" intoned the U.S. president .
 Two months earlier, this same Leader of the Free World had made a different pledge to Khrushchev, insuring anything but a Cuba Libre -promising, in fact, that Havana would remain Communist, as enforced by U.S. arms .
 The pledge to the Butcher of Budapest to preserve Castroite Stalinism has proven sacrosanct . The pledge was made by the Communist Party of Hungary to preserve Stalinism .