 U4 -wi.ii.n, ji.d lo irit* Oltico ol Mattj'jomeni joo iluJ jtM o ,p, torrn App/unJ UMtl No 0/04 01 ad 1 ad 1.
 The U.S. Army Command and General Staff College is located in Fort Worth, Texas . The college is based in the United States and hosts the U.N. command and general staff college .
 Presidential Decision-Making Kennedy Administration 18. 18. Security Classified of Report: Security Classification of Report .
 Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland, 1981 Fort Leavenworth, Kansas 1993 I Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited .
 This study investigates the methods by which President John F Kennedy arrived at decisions to deploy the military in the conduct of foreign policy . The study was commissioned by President Kennedy in 1963 .
 John F Kennedy's ascendancy to the White House was due in large part to his ardent belief in the containment of Communism and anti-Soviet rhetoric .
 Truman provided the definitive role of American foreign policy for years to come . Truman provided what 2 would be the definitive . role of U.S. foreign policy in the world .
 Eisenhower viewed covert operations as a convenient means by which to disguise failures and capitalize on successes . Eisenhower said covert operations were convenient means of disguise failures .
 President Kennedy would very closely adopt both Eisenhower's concept of the domino theory and also Eisenhower's propensity for covert operations . Kennedy would use the concept to justify his aggressive campaign against communist expansion .
 President Kennedy clearly recognized the deterrent value of maintaining balanced military capabilities . President Kennedy also recognized the value of balancing military capabilities.
 President Kennedy's newly appointed Defense Secretary, Robert S McNamara, admitted in a Pentagon press conference that no ""missile gap"" existed with the Soviet Union . The foundation was being laid for critical decisions which would be made a few short monthsnto Kennedy's Presidency .
 Kennedy was facing constituents to whom he had pledged during his campaign to he tough on Castro . Kennedy went so far as to proclaim that some sort of operation should be undertaken .
 Kennedy believed he had no choice. He did so unaware that Eisenhower had initiated the planning for just such an operation .
 In late March 1962, the Kennedy doctrine suggested that although it was not the policy of the United States to strike first, the U.S. must not be certain that, where its vital interests are threatened, the . United States will never strike first .
 In contrast to his belief in the use of military power, Kennedy's perception of the military as an organization when he entered the White House was one of contempt . The net result of Kennedy's strategy was to make the military an attractive option .
 The ""New Frontier" was a phrase coined by Kennedy during his nomination acceptance speech . It came to define the legion of advisors he brought with him to Washington . This feeling was shaped by both his association with the ""New Frontiersman,"" and his own military experience during World War
 Based on General Taylor's work with the Cuba Study Group, coupled with the fact he had authored a book. Based on the fact that General Taylor had written a book about Cuba, the decision was made .
 The Uncertain Trumpet outlined what the General considered inadequacies with the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Kennedy offered Taylor a position in his administration after the publication .
 This position allowed a military man into Kennedy's inner circle of trusted advisors, but did nothing to solidify the President's relationship with the remainder of the military hierarchy . His role would be to serve as an advisor or military matters but with no command authority .
 Eisenhower authorized the Director of the CIA, Allen W Dulles, to create, train, and equip a guerrilla force to overthrow the government of Fidel Castro . Eisenhower authorized Dulles to implement a program to create and train a force .
 Eisenhower was particularly fond of the first part of the program; indicating a desire to find a ""Cuban leader living in exile" who could direct the activities of the paramilitary forces . The decision to use the CIA as the lead agency in addressing potential foreign policy initiatives was in keeping with the
 He had been in charge of the program that resulted in the production of the famous U-2 photographicreconnaissance spy plane . He was a key contributor to the CIA's successful 1954 coup in Guatemala .
 The official estimate was that the entire operation would be functional in six to eight months . National Security Council members were increasingly outspoken in their desire to see the Castro government replaced .
 The CIA was given a free reign and broad mandate in the planning of the Bay of Pigs . Richard M Nixon was particularly interested in the success of the plan .
 When Nixon called for a ""quarantine"" of Cuba, Kennedy countered that Nixon's proposal was ""too little, too late" and called for direct intervention in Cuba . Kennedy was perhaps oblivious that such a plan existed .
 Nixon said backing the ""freedom fighters"" would have the United States ""condemned in the United Nations,"" and would amount to ""an open invitation for Mr Khrushchev... to come into Latin America" Nixon's seemingly timid response captured the imagination of the voters .
 Kennedy concluded that, ""if elected, he would do something about it, not just stand still" Kennedy was seemingly convincing himself that Cuba required immediate action upon his inauguration .
 Eisenhower worked to maintain as many options open as possible so as not to tie the hands of the incoming president . He proposed no new initiatives, but worked to keep options open .
 Eisenhower directed Bissell and the CIA to increase the size of the refugee force and step up preparations . This well-publi ed event added to the already growing public demand for action which Kennedy helped create during his campaign for the presidency .
 Under the energetic CIA leadership 27 of Allen Dulles and Richard Bissell the plan had taken on ""impressive proportions,"" and seemed to have developed its ""own self-contained dynamics"
 To reestablish confidence in his administration after the false ""missile gap"" was revealed, the new 29 President felt the need for rapid action .
 To do nothing would be a sign of weakness, and could potentially ham his credibility abroad . To do so would be seen as weakness, he would be showing weakness abroad, he said .
 President Kennedy presided over his first meeting on the plan in the White House . The plan was approved by President Kennedy in 1963 .
 Kennedy denied the JCS an opportunity to staff the project further . The report further stated that due to the complex nature of the operation, an independent evaluation of the combat effectiveness of the invasion forces should be made by a team of army r sic 1 .
 Dulles: The effect would be to discredit the U.S. and dishearten Castro opponents . The effect, Dulles pointed out, would eventually produce pro-Castro revolutions all around the Caribbean, he said .
 Kennedy wanted to dispose of Castro without expending any political capital, particularly overseas . Deniability was particularly important to Kennedy for he wanted it to be done quickly . Kennedy was particularly interested in disposing of Castro .
 CIA planners provided three alternative landing sites for the mission . CIA planners also provided three alternate landing sites .
 The greatest dissenters were Arkansas Senator J William Fulbright, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and special assistant Schlesinger . Fulbright provided unsolicited written memoranda outlining their objections to the plan .
 The universal consensus points to generally three causes of failure at the Bay of Pigs . President Kennedy's poor decisions before and during the operation . The limited role of the military in the planning and execution of the invasion is also noted .
 They argued that their role in the operation was a supporting one, charged solely with critiquing the CIA plan . They said they only provided limited assistance in training and logistic support .
 Dennison's anger was not abated when Bissell could not provide answers to the Admiral's queries . Bissell failed to provide answers about the evacuation of U.S. citizens from Cuba .
 Owing to the extreme secrecy surrounding the evolving plan, these concerns never surfaced in the White House . At this point, however, Dennison knew more about the operation than did the Chief of Naval Operations .
 On 28 January 1961, during a National Security Council meeting, the Joint Chiefs of Staff were officially introc*uced to the CIA operation . The CIA operation was the brainchild of the CIA .
 This was a joint exercise which integrated forces under the Commander of the North American Air Defense and added them to the defense and surveillance of the south Florida coast . None of these assets were specifically targeted for use in the Bay of Pigs operation .
 The Bay of Pigs operation quickly turned into the fiasco for which it is renowned . The squadron sailed from Norfolk, Virginia, under the cover of participating in anti-submarine warfare exercises .
 All indications are that the military made all preparations to make the plan work . Nevertheless, all indications suggest that the plan was successful .
 Admiral Dennison did what he could to ensure assets were put in place to support the invasion . The invasion began in September .
 The Essex airwing conducted intensive air-to-air and ground support training in preparation for any eventuality . "This thing was going to be a debacle and we'd better be prepared to do almost anything," he said .
 All that the present administration did was to take out of it those elements of strength essential to its success. All that that administration did is to take from it, he says .
 Kennedy Special Counsel Theodore Sorensen believed that Kennedy thought he was approving a plan that in the end was different than the plan the CIA and JCS perceived would be executed . Others believed that the key to the President's decision was that Kennedy believed he approved a different plan .
 To do nothing would have been counter to his campaign themes of providing youthful, vigorous leadership . The United States was the only counter to Soviet Conmiunist expansion in the world, he says .
 By allowing his concern for politics to take precedence over military and diplomatic considerations, he allowed his image to be taken into account .
 President Kennedy made a clearly disastrous decision which would bias his foreign policy decision-making and use of the military for the remainder of his Presidency . The decision would bias the President's foreign policy decisions and the military .
 The staff reorganization that produced the decision-making apparatus that would serve him during the missile crisis was guietly being set in motion . The reorganization was being set up for the crisis .
 Despite attempts at political damage control and an obvious desire to put the Bay of Pigs behind him, the Bay has never been seen as a major event in the history of Cuba .
 President Kennedy was besieged by stinging critiques of his performance and a demand for action . President Kennedy faced a barrage of criticism and calls for action from the White House .
 In response to Kennedy's concerns about the Soviets and Berlin, Nixon replied; “Khrushchev will prod and probe in several places at once.”
 Nixon professed that an invasion of Cuba could be justified under the guise of protecting U.S. citizens in that country . Nixon said an invasion would be justified if it was to protect American citizens .
 After the Summit, Kennedy clearly believed Khrushchev had gotten uhe best of him . Kennedy believed he had gotten the best of his enemies .
 Helms was told ""that getting rid of Castro was the top priority in the U.S. government" Helms says he was told that "getting rid" Castro was "the top priority" in the United States government . Helms died at the age of 92 in September 1961
 It consisted of at least thirty-three different schemes that were targeted principally at the Cuban economy . It included a host of activities that in the end only served to harm the Cuban population .
 Increasingly, the President's seemingly genuine desire to eliminate any vestige of communism from the western hemisphere, and his increasing personal animosity toward 58 Castro, demanded continued efforts to overthrow him .
 Cuba once again occupied the public debate in 1962 . Cuba was the focus of the November mid-terra elections that year .
 In August, Indiana Republican Senator Homer E Capehart stated, "It is high time that the American people demand that President Kennedy quit 'examining the situation' and start protecting the interests of the United States" Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, went so far as to
 He most clearly felt betrayed by the CIA, the Joint Chiefs, and the State Department, he says . The CIA, Joint Chiefs and State Department are among the agencies he felt betrayed .
 President Kennedy was determined to have a firmer grasp on his administration's foreign policy . He would do so by further cightening his inner circle of advisors . Henceforth, President Kennedy would have a stronger grasp on foreign policy.
 Kennedy sought military advisors whose thinking was in line with his own . Sorensen wrote that Kennedy sought advisers who he thought would be better than his own.
 The principal participants included VicePresident Johnson, Secretary of Defense NcNamara and Secretary of State Dean Rusk . Secretary of the Treasury C Douglas Dillon, Attorney General Kennedy, CIA Director John H McCone, CIA director John McCone .
 On 19 October, at General Taylor's suggestion, the President invited the Joint Chiefs to a meeting . This meeting did little except make the Chiefs feel better .
 The Americans had surrounded our country with military bases and threatened us with nuclear weapons, he wrote . The Americans would learn just what it feels like to have enemy missiles pointing at you, he said .
 Khrushchev was agitated by the American missiles in Turkey and the earlier revelation of the false missile gap . The missile gap gap was discovered in the 1950s .
 Operation Quick Kick took place off the southeastern coast of the United States in 1962 . The U.S. military conducted the operation from 19 April to 11 May 1962 .
 The Soviets presumed the U.S. was exercising a war plan for the invasion of Cuba . The Soviets believed the United States was exercising an invasion plan .
 The announcement very nearly coincided with the military's Operation Quick Kick exercise--CINCLANT's contingency plan against Cuba . The exercise is part of a military exercise to prepare for Cuba .
 Kennedy forbade General Taylor from briefing Admiral Dennison and his staff on the results of the EXCOMM meetings for fear that the seriousness of the impending confrontation would be leaked to the public .
 To refute some suggestions that Kennedy communicated directly with ships at sea. To refute suggestions that . Kennedy communicated with ships directly with . ships, he said, "I don't believe this is true"
 Flag Plot Watch Watch Officer Captain John H Carmichael commented later, "I know of no incident when civilian authorities gave orders directly to afloat forces" Captain Carmichael said he knows of 'no incident' when civilian authority gave orders .
 Acknowledging that the President's direct intervention may have offended some of his military colleagues . Acknowledged that the decision may have angered some of their military colleagues.
 The JCS had begun developing contingency plans for Cuba as early as 1959 . Castxo came to power in 1959 . JCS began to develop contingency plans in Cuba in 1959 when he became president .
 President Kennedy made it clear he preferred a more moderate response . They further stated that the “elimination of the Castro regime" would require an invasion by American forces .
 This was only one of three cases ever in which global American military forces have been placed in DEFCOii 3 or higher . This is the first time the U.S. military has placed forces in the top three of the world's highest-ranking military forces .
 Vice Admiral John T Hayward, commander of a carrier task force during the crisis, proclaimed of the outcome, "It was a defeat, and a cheap success for uhe Soviets" Vice Admiral Hayward said the outcome of the crisis was a 'costly success'
 Despite being severely hamstrung, the Navy did what it could to make the blockade work . The blockade was severely hampered by a lack of resources .
 The military's first clash with the President was over the issue of the distance from Cuba in which Soviet ships would be intercepted by the President . The military clashed with the Cuban President over the distance of ships being intercepted .
 President Kennedy routinely subordinated military considerations for diplomatic and political ones . President Kennedy regularly subordinated his military considerations to diplomatic ones .
 For the most part, each of the studies regard the use of the military only in the periphery of decision-making considerations . The most part of these studies are focused on the periphery .
 President Kennedy was undoubtedly one of the most charismatic Presidents of the 20th century . Kennedy personality: "I am a great man who I am sure will always be remembered as a great leader"
 The ensuing Vienna Summit, which Kennedy acknowledged that Khrushchev had bested him, further fueled the rivalry . Kennedy acknowledged in the post-Khrushchev interview that he had beaten him in the war .
 Kennedy felt betrayed after having supported Castro as a welcomed alternative to the Batista dictatorship . Castro became increasingly radical in his leadership of Cuba and, eventually, come under the sphere of Soviet influence . Kennedy felt betrayal after seeing him become increasingly radical .
 The Unified Commander, Admiral Dennison, responded that he could not execute the order ""unless you want me to undeploy," he said . He said he was not allowed to do so unless he was ordered to .
 Kennedy was extremely sensitive to media criticism . As Theodore Sorensen described of Kennedy, he not only could objectively measure his own performance but also cared deeply about how that performance would be measured by future historians .
 Kennedy was exceptionally adept at using the inedia to cast him in the best possible light . Considered the first television-age President, it was widely acknowledged that Kennedy was .
 President Barack Obama was elected to the White House in 2008 . The president's decisions reflect the political realities of how those decisions would play at home . Obama said he was proud of his ability to stand by his judgment .
 President Kennedy recognized that demands could be made of the Soviet Empire, and Communism could be contained, without resorting to nuclear war . President Kennedy accepted demands that demands were made of Soviet Empire and could contain Communism .
 President Kennedy closely articulated what is the modern day, textbook definition of the role the military performs as an element of national power . President Kennedy very closely articulated .
 The iminediate result was his undertaking of the Bay of Pigs invasion, which, in essence, produced a double-edged sword . The result was the result of his undertaking, which he called the invasion .