 Republicans nominated Vice President Richard M Nixon One of most active vice presidents in United States history . Traveled throughout the world as a ""troubleshooter"" in various capacities . Defended United States capitalism and democracy in his Moscow ""kitchen debate" with Khrushchev .
 Freedom Riders rode interstate buses to verify segregation wasn’t happening . May 1961, Freedom Riders organized by CORE (Congress of Racial Equality) Rode interstate buses . Freedom Riders were the first Freedom Riders in the U.S.
 Police commissioner Eugene ""Bull"" Connor used cattle prods and ordered police dogs on demonstrators and used fire hoses on children as world watched in horror . i. ii. Connor was a police commissioner who used cattle prodding on demonstrators . Connor ordered police officers to use cattle pro
 Khrushchev delivered new ultimatum on Berlin; saw U.S. weakness in Bay of Pigs weakness . USSR would give Berlin to East Germany, stripping western access to Berlin . USSR also saw weakness in the Bay of the Pigs Pigs invasion; saw US weakness in USSR .
 USSR announced increase in defense; Kennedy asked for a $3.2 billion increase as well . USSR announced increased in defense as well; Kennedy requested $3 billion increase .
 Unbeknownst to Kennedy, Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba could have destroyed invading American army . Also rejected a United States invasion of Cuba (many in cabinet & military favored this) i. ii. Also rejected United States .
 November 22, 1963, Kennedy assassinated in Dallas while on a southern tour to drum up support for his policies . - ""Magic bullet theory"" stated that one single bullet went through Kennedy’s back, out his neck, and inflicted several wounds to Texas governor Connolly. - ""
 President Lyndon B Johnson and the Election of 1964 A Pledged to continue Kennedy’s policies 1. A. Pledged To continue Kennedy's policies . 1. President Johnson was elected to continue his policies in 1964 .
 Johnson was one of few southern Democrats in favor of civil rights . Rammed Kennedy’s stalled Civil Rights and tax cut bills through Congress .
 Began his ""War on Poverty"" by pushing bills through Congress costing billions . Began pushing through Congress by pushing billions of dollars worth of legislation . Begun his "war on Poverty" by pushing through bills costing billions .
 Democrats nominated LBJ on the platform of ""The Great Society" Sweeping set of New Deal-type economic and welfare measures aimed to transform America . LBJ was nominated on a platform of "Great Society"
 Public sentiment aroused by Michael Harrington’s The Other America which showed 20% of U.S. population and over 40% of blacks lived in poverty . Michael Harrington's book showed that 20%  of United States population and 40%  of blacks lived  in poverty.
 Republicans nominated Barry Goldwater, senator from Arizona . Attacked federal income tax, Social Security System, the TVA, civil rights legislation, nuclear test ban treaty, and the Great Society .
 Reagan's platform in 1980 very similar to Goldwater's in 1964 . Considered by many today as the ""father of the modern conservatism"" -Reagan’s platform .
 Suggested United States field commanders be given discretionary authority to use tactical nuclear weapons . i. ii. Suggested U.S. field commanders should be given discretion to use nuclear weapons. i.ii. U.J.
 Democratic president and Congress now had a mandate for unprecedented passage of legislation in the next four years . President Obama now has a mandate to pass legislation through Congress .
 Congress allocated $1.1 billion to redevelop isolated mountain Areas 3 . Appalachian Regional Development Act of 1966 . Appalachian regional Development Act was passed by Congress in 1966 .
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 - Over $1 billion given to elementary and secondary education . Act was passed in 1965 and 1965 .
 Head Start prepared educationally disadvantaged children for elementary school . Head Start is an early education program for disadvantaged children in the United States. Head Start was established in 1973 .
 Millions of Americans are being pushed to poverty by skyrocketing medical costs . Supported by millions of Americans being pushed into poverty by soaring medical costs.
 Immigration now based on first-come first-serve basis . Immigrants with families already in U.S. had precedence . Immigrant families had precedence.
 Immigration on things such as skills and political asylum . -Artists, scientists and political refugees given preference . Artists and scientists given preference for immigration .
 Act more than doubled number of immigrants coming in each year, mostly from Asia and Latin America . Act more likely to be followed by Asian and Latin American immigrants in coming years .
 National Endowment for the Arts and Humanities aimed to promote culture in U.S. (e.g. music, art, educational programs and documentaries) 2.2.3.4.5.5 . National Endowments aimed at promoting culture in United States (e
 Federal gov’t could set clean water standards for states to force industry to clean up the nation’s lakes and rivers . Public Broadcasting System created G Water Quality Act .
 Provisions Forbade segregation in hotels, motels, restaurants, theaters, and sporting arenas that did business in interstate commerce . Segregation was banned in hotels and motels .
 Federal government now responsible for discrimination complaints . Relieved individuals of responsibility for bringing discrimination complaints to court themselves . Federal government is responsible for the decision .
 Civil rights leaders in Selma announced a climactic protest march from Selma to Montgomery . After 2 months of beatings, arrests, and one murder, civil rights leaders announced the march .
 Johnson promised on TV March 15 to send a bill to Congress that would extend voting rights to African Americans in the Deep South . Johnson promised March 15 that he would send the bill .
 If local registrars would not enroll African Americans, the president could send federal examiners who would . Result, 740,00 blacks registered to vote within three years .
 Southerners now began courting African American votes and businesses . iv. iv. southerners were courting black voters in the South . iv., iv. southerners counciled African-American votes in the 1960s .
 For first time since Reconstruction, African Americans migrated into the South . African Americans have lived in the South for more than a decade .
 Allan Bakke, a white medical student, was unfairly turned down to medical school because of admissions program that favored minorities . Bakke case was the 1978 Supreme Court ruling that Bakke was unfairly denied admission to school .
 Court declared preference in admissions could not be given to members of any group based on ethnic or racial identity alone . Only if the minority applicant was equally qualified could race be used as a factor .
 Jesse Jackson became a leading advocate in the 1970s and 1980s for affirmative action . Jackson was an advocate for the continued of affirmative action and the furthering of civil rights .
 Court ordered school districts to bus children from all-minority neighborhoods in the center cities to achieve integration of schools . School districts bused children from minority neighborhoods in cities .
 Years between 1954 and 1968 seen as ""2nd Reconstruction" -Equality before the law largely achieved . Years between 1953 and 1968 see as ""Second Reconstruction"" - .
 Blacks continued to experience poverty and discrimination in the nation’s inner-cities . Blacks still continued to be discriminated against in the inner-city .
 Inspired by ideas of Marcus Garvey (leader during ""Harlem Renaissance"") who had advocated a back-to-Africa movement Nation of Islam most notable and well-organized 2.0.0 . Inspired by . ideas of . Marcus Garve .
 i. Advocated use of weapons for self-defense believing nonviolence encouraged white violence . Advocated using weapons in self-defence thinking nonviolence was a form of violence against white people . i. Admitted nonviolence against nonviolence, but said it encouraged white people to use
 Many in the white community were alarmed His views softened after his pilgrimage to Mecca . He soon left Nation of Islam Feb., 1965, assassinated by three members of the Nation . He was assassinated in 1965 by three other members of Islam .
 Malcolm X’s ideas became foundation for the Black Power movement later in the decade . Malcolm X's ideas were the inspiration for the movement . The movement was founded by Malcolm X in 1964 .
 Carmichael later became a leader of the Black Panthers, based in Oakland, and founded by urban revolutionaries Huey Newton and Bobby Seale . Carmichael was a member of the original Black Panthers .
 Revolutionary social movement organized to organize African American men in northern and western cities to fight for liberation . -In effect, became a para-military organization to protect blacks from white violence .
 Empty promise of racial equality in the North ignited rage in many African American communities . Poverty, unemployment, & racial discrimination common in major inner-cities . 2.5 million Americans live in the U.S.
 Approval and encouragement of violence both by white terrorists and by black protest groups led to violence . Blacks felt powerless in a society dominated by whites . Approval of violence by terrorists and protest groups contributed to the violence .
 King working to increase wages for Memphis trash collectors . King was shot while standing on a balcony with friends in Memphis . King says he was shot in the head with a broken leg .
 Rise of the ""New Left""and Counterculture A Impact of the baby boom generation . 1950 -1 million went to college; 1960 -4 million went into college . 1950-1960s: 1.1 million college students; 1960s: 2.4 million in college .
 Student protest movement only a minority of student population . New Left 1. 1. B New Left .
 Students for a Democratic Society called for ""participatory democracy"" in universities . Students for the Democratic Society headed by Tom Hayden called for participation in universities' democracy . Students called for 'participatory democratic'
 Berkeley started sit-ins in 1964 to protest prohibition of political canvassing on campus . Sit-ins were started to protest the prohibition on canvassing in campus .
 Police broke up a sit-in in December and protests spread to other campuses 5.5 years ago . Criticized the impersonal bureaucracy of American society . 5.4 years ago, President Obama was elected to the Senate of Representatives .
 Charles Reich: The Greening of America iv. iv. ""flower children"" Most unable to establish sustaining lifestyle. Timothy Leary, Theodore Roszak . Theodore Roskak: Most unable . to establish . sustaining lifestyle .
 By early 1970s, counterculture was shrinking as a result of either its excesses or its members re-entering the mainstream . Woodstock, August, 1969 - featured Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, Santana .
 Chief Justice Earl Warren appointed to the Supreme Court by Eisenhower in 1953 . Chief Justice Warren was appointed in 1953 by President Dwight Eisenhower .
 John Marshall's Court considered one of the two creative periods in US history . John Marshall is considered to be the first of the great creative periods . His Court is considered the most creative period in American history .
 Warren’s court stressed personal rights , placing them in a preferred constitutional position . Warren's court stresses personal rights, placing them a preferred position .
 Required states redraw their voting districts for the U.S. Congress according to population . Each district had roughly the same number of people . The districts were redrawn according to the population of each district .
 Birth control pill and antibiotics encourage freer sexual practices beginning in early 1960s . Promiscuity increased among younger Americans 2.2.3.5.5 .
 Eleanor Roosevelt’s Commission on the Status of Women highlighted inequalities women faced . Commission endorsed improvements in education, equal employment, child care, and governmental opportunities for women . Commission was created in 1903 .
 Feminine Mystique considered a classic of women's protest literature . Criticized plight of women with domestic duties (cult of domesticity) who also had to work full-time jobs that paid women less than men .
 With other feminists founded the National Organization for Women in 1966 . The organization was founded by feminists in 1964 .
 Sought legalization of abortion 1967, began advocating and Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution extending the same guarantees contained in the 14th Amendment for racial and religious minorities . Argued for changes in divorce laws to make settlements more fair to women . Sought legalized abortion in 1967, sought legalization of
 Passed in Congress in 1972 but failed by early 1980s to get required 38 states necessary for ratification . i. ii. Passed in 1972 . Failed in 1980s but passed in 1972; failed by 1980s without 38 states needed to ratify .
 Failed to pass as movement limited to middle class women and prolife groups argued against it . Failed to get enough votes to pass . Pro-life groups argue against it as it was a middle class movement .
 Roe Wade -Legalized abortion in 1973 . -Hitherto states had the right to determine legality of abortion . Roe Wade legalizes abortion in Roe Wade .
 Several corporations forced to provide back wages to female employees who had not received equal pay for equal work . -Also had to abolish hiring and promotion practices that discriminated against women . 4 companies forced to abolish practices that discriminate against women 4.
 Since 1970s, a number of Mexican-Americans elected to prominent political positions . Mexican-American politicians have been elected to top positions .
 Gay rights movement emerged later using civil rights laws to win discrimination cases . Gay rights activists used civil rights law to fight discrimination cases in the 1960s and '90s .
 No president had shown more compassion for the poor, the ill educated, and minorities . President Lyndon Johnson’s legacy will be remembered as a compassionate president .
 No president since Lincoln had worked harder or done more than Lincoln had done more for civil rights . B No. B no president since Abraham Lincoln worked harder than Abraham Lincoln did more . B no. B
 C ""Great Society" programs were heavily criticized by conservatives in subsequent years . C.C. C. programs were later criticized by conservative Republicans .
 Most programs were extremely costly and eventually required increased taxes to fund them . Most programs extremely costly . Eventually required increased . taxes to pay them .
 Dubbed Great Society as ""social engineering"" that could not be solved simply by allocating billions of dollars . Dubbed 'social engineering' that could be solved by social engineering . Great Society was created by President Lyndon Johnson in 1964 .
 A Vietnam War spread across 5 presidencies and spanned 25 years . Vietnam War spanned across 5 presidents, spanning 25 years.
 B France lost control of Vietnam after the battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954 . Direct U.S. involvement from 1964-1973 . B France was involved in Vietnam from 1954 to 1973 .
 Geneva Conference, 1954 -Agreement reached to divide country into north and south along the 17th parallel until a 1956 unifying election . Agreement was reached at the Geneva Conference .
 Ho Chi Minh accepted based on assurance that Vietnam-wide elections would occur within two years . Ho Chi-Minh accepted the deal based on assurances that the elections would take place within the next two years.
 Domino Theory – determined Eisenhower’s policies in Southeast Asia in the 1950s and continued into the 1960s . If one country in Indochina fell to communism, other surrounding countries would also fall, one right after the other . Pertained to Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia
 Nationalist and fiercely anti-communist Ngo was an aloof and aristocratic Catholic autocrat . Ngo ruled over a nation of poor Buddhist peasants .
 U.S. supported him; was afraid of Ho Chi Minh winning the election . ii. United States supported him . i. was afraid he would win the election. ii. Was afraid of losing the election in Vietnam .
 Eisenhower promised economic and military aid to Ngo’s regime in return for social reforms . Most money went to the military Southeast Asia Treaty Organization created by U.S. in order to prop up the regime . Only the Philippines, Thailand & Pakistan signed on ii. -Only the
 Vietcong were communist insurgents in the South supported by Ho Chi Minh and the Vietminh in the North . Vietcong was a communist group supported by the South and supported by both sides .
 NLF assassinated 2,000 gov’t officials during 1960s . NLF assassinated more than 1,000 officials during that period .
 Kennedy had to choose between abandoning Ngo or deepening U.S. involvement in Vietnam . Kennedy had a tough choice: "I'm not going to abandon Ngo. I'm going to go to Vietnam"
 Buddhist monk set himself on fire to protest Ngo Dinh Diem's regime . Photos changed world opinion overnight . Buddhist monk was protesting Ngo’s regime .
 The question of whether or not Kennedy would have pulled out of Vietnam still remains unanswered today . The question remains unanswered .
 Robert McNamara, Sec. of Defense: In effect, the architect of United States escalation policy in Vietnam 2. Dean Rusk, Secretary of State: Major proponent of domino theory . Robert McBannon: The architect of U.S. escalation policy .
 Johnson rejected any settlement in Vietnam not guaranteeing a non-communist gov’t. He rejected any deal with the government not guaranteeing it would be a communist government .
 North Vietnamese torpedo boats attacked two U.S. destroyers on international waters off the coast of North Vietnam in the Gulf of Tonkin in August 1964 . Congress almost unanimously passed the resolution . -""Attacks were unprovoked""
 Johnson ordered a ""limited"" retaliatory air raid against North Vietnamese air bases, stating he sought no ""wider war"" - LBJ used episode effectively during 1964 presidential campaign .
 i. ii. He sought to protect his Great Society programs by keeping the war’s decision-making secretive . i. i.i.i . He sought the secrecy of the war's decision making by keeping it secret . ii.i: 'He sought to keep the
 As situation unravels, initial objective in South Vietnam stabilization was no longer viable . Initial objective in Vietnam was to stabilize the country's stability . Escalation Escalated as situation unraveled .
 United States military demanded more bombing & escalation - Key cabinet officials advised escalation; Ike also advised escalation . Ike also ordered escalation in response to U.S. military’s request for more bombing and escalation. Ike also demanded escalation;   IKE also ordered more bombing;
 LBJ ordered the 1st bombing of N Vietnam which went nonstop for 3 years . Operation Rolling Thunder was the U.S. response to Pleiku . The bombing was nonstop and lasted nonstop .
 Also targeted the ""Ho Chi Minh Trial,"" network of trails along which soldiers and supplies flowed from N Vietnam through Cambodia and Laos into South Vietnam . i.ii.iii. Also targeted a network of trail-riding trails along . which . led to the "Ho Chi
 Fighting the Vietnam War A United States forces in Vietnam led by General William C Westmoreland B Air War 1. A U.S. Air Force One .
 Vietcong dug 30,000 miles of tunnels to ship supplies and escape bombing . The tunnels were dug by the Vietcong to escape bombing and escape from bombing .
 Agent Orange used as a defoliant to kill jungle vegetation . Many U.S. soldiers exposed and later developed cancer . Agent Orange was used in Vietnam .
 The guerrilla wins if he does not lose, the conventional army loses if it does not win’; by definition, United States was losing . Search & destroy missions against guerrilla tactics were common .
 Westmoreland & other officials had been claiming the war’s end was ""coming into view"" 2.2.3.4.5.5 . The war's end had been claimed to be coming into view by officials .
 SDS became more militant, used violence & turned to Marxism for its ideology . SDS used violence to become more militant and used Marxist ideology .
 New Left lost political influence after it abandoned its original commitment to democracy and non-violence . New left lost political power after abandoning its commitment to non-violent action .
 Small campus ""teach-ins"" in 1965 escalated to enormous public protests . Draft perhaps the biggest cause for protest . Protests in 1965 led to protests against the draft .
 Poor were twice as likely to be drafted than the middle class who used college deferments . Thousands of draft dodgers fled to Canada; others burned their draft cards 5.5% of draft darlings were drafted .
 It seems now more certain than ever that the bloody experience in Vietnam is to end in a stalemate . It seems more certain now that the conflict in Vietnam will end in an end to the conflict .
 Editorials in Newsweek, Time, and Wall St. called for negotiated settlement .
 Body counts of total enemy kills had been used to show the U.S. was killing far more Vietcong and Vietminh . Body counts did not account for guerrilla war; McNamara defended them since United States was fighting a war of attrition .
 Held widely viewed televised hearings in 1966-67 during which prominent commentators aired their largely antiwar views . Held widely seen televised hearings during which . prominent commentators air their largely . antiwar . views in televised hearings .
 Public came to feel it had been lied to about the causes and ""winnability"" of the war . -Increase in antiwar ""doves"" resulted E Hawks and Doves argued over United States role 1. - Increase in anti-war "doves" resulted in increased
 An ultra-conservative organization that sought to combat what was perceived to be communist infiltration into American life . The organization was founded in 1950s .
 Argued South Vietnam’s gov’t not democratic, opposed largescale bombings, chemical weapons, and killing of civilians . Argued S.V. gov. not democratic and opposed largesale bombings and chemical weapons. Argued that South Vietnam's go
 Rejected the domino theory pointing out increased losses of American lives and the economic cost of the war . Also rejected the idea of a domino domino effect .
 Most Americans were neither hawks nor doves but disturbed by the war and protests . Most Americans are not hawks or doves, but disturbed about the war, protests .
 Tet Offensive changed public opinion dramatically -Hawks decreased from 62% to 22% from Jan 1968 to March 1968; Doves from 22% to 42% F Democratic party challengers for 1968 nomination 1 .
 Johnson’s popularity dropped from 48% to 36% after the departure of his former boss .
 Eugene McCarthy, liberal from Minnesota, ran an antiwar campaign in New Hampshire and nearly got 1/2 the vote . Eugene McCarthy inspired Robert Kennedy to run for president as well .
 Robert Kennedy assassinated after winning California primary . -Assassin was a Palestinian named Sirhan Sirhan Assured Vice President Hubert Humphrey of the nomination . -Riot occurred in Democratic convention in Chicago between police and anti-war activists; the nation and the world watched as the riot
 Republicans nominated Richard M Nixon’s ‘Southern Strategy’ Spiro Agnew was vice presidential running mate, aimed to appeal to Southern voters . Agnew's 'Southern strategy’ aimed at appealing to the South .
 Gov. Agnew tough on African Americans and dissidents in his state of Maryland . Agnew was tough on black people and dissidents . He says he is proud of his legacy in Maryland .
 Nixon committed to continuing war until enemy settled for ""honorable peace."" -Similar to Humphrey’s position 3. Nixon also committed to ending war until enemies settled for an honorable peace . Humphrey's position was similar to that of President Nixon .
 Nixon a minority president with no clear mandate -Owed his victory to the divisions caused by the war and protests against the unfair draft, crime, and rioting . Nixon was elected president of the White House in 1968 .
 Nixon publicly claimed he had secret plan for ending the war -He didn’t; it continued 4 more years; cost 1000s of U.S. lives . Nixon and Vietnam A. 1969, Nixon claimed to have secret plan to end the war .
 Beginning in Dec.69 the new draft method for men between ages 18 and 25 will be used to draft men . The draft method will be available to men aged 18-25 . Men between ages 25 and 18 will be drafted in December .
 Nixon called for gradual withdrawal of U.S. troops from Vietnam 2.2.3.5 years ago . Nixon called on gradual withdrawal from Vietnam from Vietnam . Nixon: "I want to go back to Vietnam"
 Asians and others would now have to fight own wars without support of significant numbers of U.S. ground troops . Asians and other nations would now need support from the United States ground troops.
 Doves wanted an immediate withdrawal that was complete, unconditional, and irreversible . Large-scale protests continued against the withdrawal .
 Calley convicted of murder in his court martial & sentenced to life in prison . Calley was convicted in court martial and sentenced to a life sentence . i. Calley's wife was also convicted in the court martial .
 Calley claimed to follow direct order; sentence later lowered to 10 years iv. Calley claims to have followed direct order . Calley said he followed order and sentenced to 15 years in prison .
 By October 1969, 2 million people across the U.S. protested Nixon’s policies . Public outraged and hundreds of thousands protested . Nixon's policies led to a series of protests .
 Nixon televised his appeal to the great ""silent majority,"" who presumably supported the war . November 3, Nixon's appeal was televised on November 3 . Nixon said he was appealing to the silent majority of Americans .
 Nixon denounced doves and protesters One of most important political speeches of late 20th century . -Symbolized the rise of the conservative backlash against liberalism and the acrimonious divisions that resulted Politically divisive as Nixon and Agnew verbally attacked the protestors and media for not supporting go
 Talks had begun in 1968 between US-supported Thieu gov’t and the North Vietnam-supported Vietcong . Talks had been started in 1968 .
 U.S. troops withdraw; coalition gov’s including Vietcong should replace Thieu 2 . United States troops withdraw from Vietnam . Coalition gov. includes Vietcong, including Viet Cong to replace U.N. 2.
 Secretary of State Henry Kissinger began secret negotiations with North Vietnam F Cambodia F Cambodia 1. 1. F Cambodia . F Cambodia Cambodia 1: Cambodia 1 . Cambodia 1 Cambodia 1, Cambodia 1 F Cambodia 2 Cambodia .
 April 1970, Nixon announced on TV he was sending troops into Cambodia to clear out communists who ignored Cambodian neutrality and disrupt Ho Chi Minh Trail . Invasion would be limited to 60 days .
 Students at Kent State protested; burned the ROTC building ii. Students also burned a building in Cambodia . New wave or protests over Cambodia Kent State incident .
 National Guard fired into crowd killing 4 (innocent bystanders) &wounding 11 (in innocent bystanders) National Guard fire into crowd killed 4 (inocent bystanders), &wounded 11 . 11 people were wounded .
 One week after Kent State, rioting in downtown Jackson prompted National Guard to be called out . ii. dead, 12 wounded; both dead were innocent bystanders . i. killed in May 1970, 12 injured .
 Several hundred colleges closed down by student strikes; moderates joined radicals . Students took to the streets to protest against students' demands .
 The government misled the Congress and the public regarding its intentions in Vietnam during the mid-1960s . Revealed that the government had misled the public about its intentions .
 White House tried to block publication; -Supreme court overruled Nixon . Nixon tried to publish the book, but Supreme Court overruled him .
 South Vietnam gov’t proved unable to defeat the communists B United States withdrew from Cambodia in early 1972 C Spring 1972 . North Vietnam equipped with foreign tanks burst through the DMZ separating the two Vietnams .
 North Vietnam drops demand that a coalition gov’t replace Thieu in the South . North Vietnam dropped demand that Thieu be replaced by a coalition government .
 Draft agreement included a cease-fire, return of American POW’s, and United States withdrawal from Vietnam . Draft agreement also included return of POW's, and U.S. withdrawal from the Vietnam war .
 With election of 1972 approaching, Nixon wanted a settlement . -Kissinger announced ""peace is at hand"" 5.5.5 .
 Nixon ordered intense bombing of North Vietnam’s major cities with the most massive bombing of the war . Aimed to force N Vietnam back to the negotiating table with the Paris Accords .
 March 29, 1973, the last American combat troops left South Vietnam . Fall of South Vietnam to communists occurred in April 1975 1. Fall of Vietnam to communist Vietnam occurred in 1975 .
 58,000 dead Americans, 300,000 wounded; MIA -2,583 2,583 . Not until 1995 did United States formally recognize Vietnam (President Clinton) G Costs of the War 1.58,000 killed Americans, 3,500 wounded .
 In 1973, Nixon abolished the draft and established an all-volunteer army . A large percentage of Americans came to distrust their government . The draft was abolished in 1973 .
 Evaluate the success of U.S. Cold War policies between 1945 and 1975 in Europe, Asia, the Middle East and Latin America . Evaluate success of Cold War policy in Europe and Asia between 1945-1975 .