 Most of those who study public international law do so out of a belief that international law can make the world a ""better" place . Most people who study international law believe it can make world a "better place"
 It is less obvious that it is in the best interests of a state to take international law seriously at a time of heightened danger to national security, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond says it is to the advantage of a . state to comply with the more ""mundane" dimensions of international law
 This paper finds that international law was important to U.S. decisionmaking in ways much more subtle than can be understood from the perspective of the dominant paradigms pertaining to the impact of international law on foreign policy .
 Lawyers attempting to demonstrate that governments should always comply with international law have referred to the importance of precedent and reciprocity,1 of reputation,2 and of legitimacy, but have as yet offered no convincing antidote to realism which assumes that power, rather than international law, is what needs to be
 This paper demonstrates that the question of how to show that it is in the best interests of a state to act in accordance with international law even when that does not appear to be the case is ultimately not answerable . It incorporates an ontology of international law that has meaning only within posit
 A theorisation of international law as ideology will be presented which can account better than existing approaches to foreign policy decision-making . From which practical suggestions can be drawn as to how international law can best be reconciled with considerations of national security, the theory can be presented .
 US reconnaissance photography first provided evidence of the Soviet deployment of medium range ballistic missiles in Cuba on 16 October 1962 .
 President Kennedy, Vice-President Lyndon Johnson; Dean Rusk, Secretary of State; Llewellyn Thompson, former Ambassador to the Soviet Union; Aldai Stevenson, US representative to the UN . Robert McNamara, Robert Kennedy's brother and Attorney General; Theodore Sorensen
 Excomm was important mosdy for its role in reinforcing and validating decisions reached by President Kennedy outside Excomm . Elizabeth Kohn has suggested that Excomm reinforced and validated President Kennedy's decisions .
 Military planning for a blockade had begun as early as October 1, 1962, well before the Excomm had convened . She notes that military planning for the blockade began in 1962 .
 The CMC has given rise to a vast literature, both during the Cold War and as part of the ""new Cold War historiography"" that emerged in the post Cold War decade . Widely regarded as one of the most serious incidents of Cold War, the CMC is considered
 A considerable amount of the writing on the CMC has focused on U.S. crisis decision-making . The CMC is focused on the United States .
 While most of the literature on the Crisis has not had as its objective furthering theoretical understanding of the role played by international law in foreign policy decision-making, each empirical study is nevertheless underpinned by certain assumptions regarding the political utility of international law .
 Re-assessing the validity of the empirical literature by comparing the place it accords international law against the historical record, as can be found in the transcription of tapes of US decision-making, is also a way of reassessing alternative theoretical approaches .
 Copies of the memorandum were sent to President Kennedy and Secretary of State, Dean Rusk . The memorandum was sent to the president and secretary of state . The memo was signed by President Kennedy .
 Despite planning and decisions made pre-Excomm, examination of this body's decision making during the actual crisis period when real evidence for the deployment of Russian missiles to Cuba was found serves as an important primary source on internal debates involving international law .
 The deal to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba involved a quid pro quo by which the Americans would remove their missiles from Turkey . The deal was part of a deal with the U.S. to remove the Soviet missiles .
 The Turkey missiles had been deployed under Eisenhower as part of a NATO protection promise . The missiles were deployed under the promise of NATO protection from Turkey .
 Those claiming the legal validity of the quarantine have emphasised that the quarantine was a new legal development for the nuclear age and a legitimate use of force as broadly construed . Some have considered it a legitimate act of self-defence .
 Those disputing its legality have generally maintained that there is no such thing as a ""quarantine"" in international law and that what die U.S. referred to as a "quarantine" was really a belligerent blockade .
 The literature assessing the legality of the quarantine does not try to explain the relationship of international law to state behaviour . Instead it focuses on assessing United States actions in terms of a legal categorisation of behaviour .
 This reflects the outlook of legal positivism, which, assumes that international law does have a positive role to play in world affairs, and excludes political considerations from its analysis .
 Some international lawyers have sought to go beyond a positivist analysis of the United States actions . Some have consciously adopted a ""functionalist"" approach to investigate the contribution of international law to the resolution of the Crisis .
 This literature can be situated within a broader functionalist literature on international law . This literature is situated in a broader literature of international law on international matters .
 The best known and most sophisticated of the functionalist literature is that by the New Haven School . The New Haven school was founded in New Haven .
 Abram Chayes referred to law as having been a constraint on action, and a basis of justification or legitimation for action, as well as having provided organisational structures, procedures and forums .
 U.S. decision-makers rejected air strike or invasion option for the ""lesser"" measure of quarantine . Article 2 of the UN Charter prohibits the use of force diat .
 Die Crisis has explicitly addressed the question of the political role played by international law . It has not rejected the positivist tradition as evidenced by its acceptance of the possibility of an objective determination of the legality of state action .
 Chayes reasoned, diat ""f die conduct complies ..., there is at least a prima facie argument that the norm operated in its intended sense," he said . In ascertaining international law had served as a constraint on action, he reasoned .
 The Continuing Relevance of the Legal Adviser and International Law, 2 Chinese JIL, 424.2 Chinese Jil , 424.1 . China's legal adviser and international law, is a Chinese law .
 Some 'revisionists' interpret the crisis as irresponsible, that Kennedy risked war for domestic political gain, and that the good outcome was just luck . Some "revisionistists" interpret the war as irresponsible .
 Other writers have referred to international law but done so in such a way as to down-play its influence . Other writers refer to law but do so in a way to downplay influence .
 Allison, for example, suggested that the blockade was euphemistically called a ""quarantine" in order to circumvent the ""niceties"" of international law . Allison suggested that a 'quarantine' could circumvent the 'niceties' of the law . The blockade was called a "qu
 According to James Nathan, Cuba epitomized the decline of international law in the face of threats to the national interest . According to Nathan, the decline in international law is to blame for the decline .
 This body of literature reflects a realist understanding of the relationship of international law to the behaviour of states . No matter whether international law is not mentioned, or whether it is referred to in order to be dismissed as an important ingredient of U.S. policy or the Crisis outcome, this
 Realism has been the dominant paradigm in the study of International Relations since World War Two . It regards power as the ultimate determinant of foreign policy and political outcomes . Realism is the dominant theory of international relations .
 This study was re-published in 1999 with several updates, taking into account the criticisms of the book over the last 25 years, and in light of the greater availability of primary documents .
 The three basic models in the original study remain albeit with further elaboration, clarification, and re-evaluation in light of criticisms . The study was originally published in 1996 .
 Realist authors on the CMC assumed that the task for US decision-makers was primarily that of determining how best to pursue the American national interest . The task of US decision makers is to pursue national interests, authors say .
 At its most extreme, realism deems international law irrelevant . A state should comply only where the behaviour required of the state by international law corresponds with what would be in any case be in the power interests of state .
 The findings of such an analysis can be expected to reflect on the empirical literature of U.S. decision-making and crisis manoeuvring . The findings can also reflect the utility of the theoretical perspectives on the relationship between international law and foreign policy .
 President Kennedy was in mid August 1962 considering warning the USSR against installing long-range missiles in Cuba . Kennedy was reportedly considering a warning to the Soviet Union against installing such a missile .
 President Obama sought legal advice on whether the U.S. could take action to prevent long-range missiles from being installed in Cuba . He sought the legal advice as a matter of international law .
 A memo by Norbert Schlei, Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, emphasised that international law relating to the use of force centres about the polar concepts of aggression and self-defense .31 .
 A state may, though, use force in self-defence, in certain circumstances . A state can use force against a person in self defence, but not in any circumstances .
 Where resort is made to self-defence as justification for action, the action used must be proportional to the threat . The action used in self defence must be proportionate to the threats, says the PM .
 Legality under International Law of Remedial Action against use of Cuba as a missile base by the Soviet Union . In Chayes, Chayes described the Soviet Union's use of Cuban military bases as bases in Cuba as bases .
 Schlei stressed that the level of threat would need to be much less strong were self-defence to be collective rather than unilateral . The level of the threat would have to be less strong to defend themselves .
 Both the UN and OAS Charters embodied provisions for collective security . Both the U.S. and the Organization of the World Security Councils (UN) and the O.A. Security Council (UNSC) have been in place for decades .
 Action proposed in the Security Council was subject to veto by any one of the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council . Schlei advocated justification of the US position via the Organ of Consultation in the Organization of . American States .
 Copies of the memorandum were passed to various people in the government, including Dean Rusk, Secretary of State and later to be a member of Excomm .
 No option was dismissed during the early stages of deliberation, although diplomatic consultation was regarded as least desirable . Diplomatic consultation was considered least desirable, with no option dismissed during early stages .
 Rusk emphasized that the United States needed to appear strong in the face of this challenge . Rusk said the U.S. needs to appear as strong as possible in the fight .
 Were the U.S. to be seen to be ignoring or down playing the threat the Soviet hand would be free to intervene in other parts of Latin America and weaken the inter-American alliance as well .
 Excomm members initially favoured an air strike although there were differences of opinion as to whether it should be broad or limited . Excomm was initially led by excomm members who wanted a broad strike .
 Kennedy favoured a direct strike rather than what he considered to be the more hazardous option of a broad strike . If there were to be an air strike, Kennedy favoured the direct strike .
 Law of Remedial Action against use of Cuba as a missile base by the Soviet Union, in Chayes, Ibid, at 108. Legality under International Law was found in the case of the Cuban missile base .
 Article 51 permits collective self-defence only in the event of an armed attack . Article 51 per cent of Article 51 is allowed to defend against armed attack in case of an attack .
 It was around this time that evidence for deployment of medium-range ballistic missiles had been uncovered .
 President Kennedy did not seem keen on an invasion because United States allies might perceive it as resulting from a fixation Untied States and not a serious military threat . A blockade was also considered, but while this might stop more missiles coming into Cuba it would not eliminate, nor give the Soviet Union
 Reference was made to die law pertaining to blockades although understanding appears to have been very cloudy at this stage . Reference was also made to death law pertaining .
 Dean Rusk also favoured a blockade; he believed that it could be announced by a ""straight declaration of war"" which would bring ""certain legal advantages"" Llewellyn Thompson, who was the United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union, also favoured the blockade option .
 By Friday 19 October 1962 Excomm members were choosing between air strikes and a blockade . Excomm had to choose between air strike and blockade . Air strikes and blockade were the only option .
 Most Excomm members favoured a blockade, despite the possibility of it being disliked by some . Air strikes could neutralise the chance of danger of danger to die United States of missiles being used, but most favoured blockade .
 While not infallible, it was the most secure legal position of the alternative actions available . The decision was made to take action against the government .
 A blockade is regarded as an act of war under customary international law . A blockade was regarded as a blockade of China under customary law .
 Members of Excomm wanted the United States to board but did not wish to instigate an act of war . Excomm was eager to use, and to be seen to be using, minimum force .
 The defensive quarantine, a hybrid of the two blockade types, was designed to permit the U.S. to take action without it being characterised as war .
 President Kennedy favoured the quarantine over the air strike option . It is unclear as to exactly when President Kennedy began to favour the quarantine option .
 The defensive quarantine was to be justified to the USSR and the broader world community as a new legal development for the nuclear age . The quarantine was justified to Russia and the wider world community .
 Given that nuclear brinkmanship had not historically been the concern of international law, new legal developments were necessary to fill the gap . New legal developments are needed to fill that gap .
 Excomm members came gradually to the consensus view that the quarantine action would be used as the first option . Despite reservations as to how strong it would appear in the eyes of the ""free world"" and domestic constituency as well as the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 The argument was not explicitly detailed in the transcripts or the Editors additions . It was this legal justification that was presented to the Excomm and to the world .
 Articles 6 of the Rio Treaty provided for collective action against aggression that is not armed attack . Article 6 of Rio Treaty provides for collective actions against aggression not armed attacks . Articles 6 provided for the collective action .
 Article 3 of the Rio Treaty provides for collection action in the case of armed attack . Article 3 provides for collecting action in case of an armed attack. Article 3 also provides for collect action against armed attack in the country .
 Legality under International Law of Remedial Action against use of Cuba as a missile base by the Soviet Union, in Chayes, at 110.5 .
 U.S. officials did not seek to prevent the matter being discussed in the UN Security Council . Instead, they sought to ensure that the forum was used to full advantage to argue their case .
 More ships from the Soviet Union were nonetheless still heading to Cuba . More ships were still heading toward Cuba .
 The U.S. Ambassador to the UN, Adlai Stevenson, asked U Thant to send a private message of concern to Khrushchev . Stevenson asked him to hold his ships away from Cuban waters while efforts were made to reach a negotiated outcome .
 US decision-makers did not want the case brought to the UN by the Soviet Union since this might give the impression that the U.S. was the aggressor . The Soviet Union did not bring the case to the United Nations .
 The United States went on to introduce a resolution based on article 40 calling for the withdrawal of all missiles and other offensive weapons from Cuba . The resolution was passed by the U.N. resolution .
 Stevenson accused the Soviet Union of creating a threat to international peace and security by installing weapons in Cuba . This condemned American action, calling for an end to the quarantine measures .
 On 26 October, one day after what was a heated debate in the Security Council, the quarantine threat was tested for the first time as more ships headed to the quarantine line . More ships were headed to quarantine line as a result of the debate in Security Council .
 U.S. personnel boarded the ship Marucla, which was found to contain various cargo but no missiles . The ship was subsequently allowed to proceed to Cuba .
 The seriousness of U.S. intentions to enforce die quarantine had been demonstrated, the U.K. had demonstrated .
 Khrushchev demanded as quid pro quo for removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba the removal of American missiles from Turkey . The following day a second letter arrived from the Soviet leader, demanding the removal from Cuba .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff were pressing for a strike and invasion within 48 hours . Kennedy convened a smaller group of the Excomm to discuss in more detail the issue of the missile swap .
 Thompson hypothesised that the changed tone of the second letter represented the pressure of those inside the Soviet Government pressing on Khrushchev for a more forceful tone . Thompson theorised that this was the result of the pressure from those in the Soviet government to change the tone .
 Dobrynin's account seems to back this hypothesis, noting that Khrushchev anticipated an American air strike on missile sites in Cuba and was fearful of complicating any setdement by insisting that the U.S. remove Jupiter missiles in Cuba . Dobrynins' account suggests Kh
 Khrushchev sent the second, more demanding letter calling for removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey . Khrrushchev's letter was only after pressure from Presidium members that he sent it .
 Kennedy's letter to Khrushchev on 27 October made no mention of the missile swap . Only pledged not to invade Cuba on the condition that missiles in Cuba be dismanded and rendered inoperable under a scheme of UN observation and supervision .
 Group audiorised Robert Kennedy to tell Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the US, that the missiles in Turkey would be removed but required that the deal would be kept secret so that it would appear as if they were being removed for factors other than those related to the Cuban crisis .
 The next day Dobrynin informed Robert Kennedy of Khrushchev's intention to accept the deal for the missile swap and the dismantling of rocket bases in Cuba under international control .
 On Sunday 28 October the ship Grozny, en route to the interception area, stopped . The ship was stopped in the area .
 Khrushchev issued a message announcing that die Soviet government would dismande and remove its missiles from Cuba and was willing to assist the acting SecretaryGeneral and representatives of the Soviet Union .
 Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, Robert Kennedy, George Ball, Roswell Gilpatric, Llewellyn Thompson, Theodore Sorensen, and McGeorge Bundy . This smaller group consisted of Robert Rusk and Robert Kennedy .
 Letter from Kennedy to Khrushchev, October 27 1962, The Kennedy Tapes, at 603604. The Kennedy Letter is published in The Kennedy Archives .
 President Kennedy had resolved to make a public overture in favour of such a trade to resolve the crisis . In the event the private deal was rejected President Kennedy made a public offer .
 It should be noted that while the dangerous period of the crisis had ended there were several months of negotiation regarding the details for UN supervision, the schedule for removing the missiles etc had to be worked out .
 This phase simply worked out the details (albeit in a long and drawn out process) of the accepted agreement, which concluded the period of tensions that had gripped much of the world for 13 days . This phase of the negotiations was simply a long process .
 Realist assumption that international law did not have a role to play in US decision-making or implementation is not correct, says Julian Zelizer .
 Historical evidence has revealed that what can broadly be classified as realist writers are missing an important consideration in virtually ignoring international law . Decision-makers did take legal factors into consideration alongside questions of realpolitik and public opinion, says historian .
 Excomm members were not prepared to do anything that was categorically illegal . But they were prepared to take a strategically less decisive action for which some relatively plausible legal justification could be found . Excomm was prepared to go on a 'strategic less decisive'
 The legality or otherwise of the quarantine does not appear to have been a decisive factor in the outcome of the Crisis, as evidenced by the very fact that opinions on the question have differed .
 The United States invented its own legal term by which to describe its chosen course of action . Positivists assume that states should comply with international law and yet even the term ""compliance"" is of tangential relevance to a scenario in which the U.S. invented itself .
 The United States used international law as part of its approach to the Crisis . The U.S. was able to achieve its policy objective of having the USSR remove the missiles despite its spurious legal position .
 Functionalist writing has usefully taken us beyond the positivist-realist, politics-law, divide to illustrate the inter-relationship between international law and politics . International law played a constructive role in the outcome of the crisis, says the writer .
 Functionalism cannot explain how it is that international law can be used strategically by a state . And yet, in not eschewing positivism, functionalism can't explain how such a move is possible .
 Functionalists still assume a division into legal or illegal behaviour and in this scenario were looking at the overall resolution of the crisis rather than at the capacity of the United States .
 The question with which advocates of international law have long been grappling is that of how to demonstrate that a state should act in accordance with international law even when the national interest is under threat . But that may not be the most appropriate question to ask .
 This suggests the need to reconcile theoretically power and international law so as to provide a basis on which to account better for the role that international law does, at least sometimes, play in the formulation and implementation of foreign policy .
 This would accord with one of the conclusions of John Lewis Gaddis who concluded that ""old Cold War history" had not sufficiended to appreciate the diversification of power .
 Reconciling international law with power requires rethinking the ontology of international law, integral to legal positivism . The world of power must be reconciled with the world of law and law .
 The image of international law conveyed by existing theoretical approaches did not hold up when measured against the case study in question . The study was published in the International Law Journal .
 Realists, positivists and functionalists assume a body of law that can dictate appropriate foreign policy . Realists assume that law can dictate what foreign policy is appropriate . But functionalists and realists say that law should not dictate foreign policy.
 International law did not of itself provide the solution to the U.S. foreign policy dilemma of how to respond to the deployment of missiles on Cuba, a solution with which the United States could either comply or not . But an examination of the historical record has demonstrated that . international law did
 It was not even preordained as to which rules and principles of international law were to be of most relevance to the decision, and, as evidenced by the subsequent body of positivist analysis, it was neither unequivocally legal, nor illegal .
 The indeterminacy of international law rhetoric, illustrated in the CMC by the unresolved difference of opinion as to the legality of the quarantine, is something that has been stressed by the ""critical"" movement .
 The writings of critical theorists of international law can be understood in terms of their having pointed to a discrepancy between international law and political reality . More recent than most of the literature on the Crisis, the writings of . critical theorists have pointed to the discrepancy between the image of international . law integral
 Critical theorists have not explained the significance, in political terms, of the discrepancy . And yet, despite their political awareness, critical theorists have still not explained it .
 Gaddis suggested that the USSR was weaker than its rival superpower in terms of economic, ideological, cultural, cultural and moral power . He suggested that international law should be taken into consideration in our understanding of the nature of power .
 His reference to ideology as a form of power does, however, accord with a theoretical approach to the relationship of international law to world politics which posits that there is an ""ideology of international . law"" integral to the international political order, he says .
 A theorisation of international law as ideology is able to reconcile power and international law . Ideology theorists claim that there is an ideology, in the sense of a particular principle or small group of inter-related principles .
 It is not that these principles are ""wrong"" or ""bad"" as sometimes implied by die term ""ideology"", but rather diat none is wholly true . The principles are not ""wrong" or "bad"
 It is not clear-cut as to whether the quarantine was legal or illegal . Concerning the diird principle above, it is unclear whether it was illegal or legal .
 International law provides a guide as to how the system of international law plays an integral role in world politics . It is hypothesised that the discrepancy . between the image of . international law as conveyed by the ideology of international . law, and ""reality"" provides an insight into how international law
 An ideology upholds a structure of power relations so long as the component principles of the ideology are, in turn, upheld by members of that power structure . An ideology is an ideology that upholds the principles of that ideology, but it also upholds members of the power structure of that
 It is therefore a requirement of members of die system of world politics that they uphold the constituent principles of the ideology of international law . The international community must uphold the principles when engaging in discourse with each other .
 A state will, for example, virtually always present its own position as legal and that of another state widi which it is in conflict, as not legal . State will, however, present itself as legal, or as not .
 This reinforces the assumption that international law can distinguish between legal and illegal behaviour, as well as the principle that a state must comply with its international law obligations . This reinforces assumption diat international law .
 The trick is that it is easier to uphold the ideology in explaining some actions dian others . The trick was that it was easier to keep the ideology .
 In diose areas where the law is clear and/or appears readily to support one's desired course of actions it is relatively easy to take action .
 Where the law is not so clear or where it is clear but does not support one's desired actions it may be more difficult . But where the law isn't so clear, the law may be even more difficult to take action .
 A state may be able to justify a course of action in terms that uphold the ideology . Even here, however, a state may justify a state's actions in terms of ideology .
 This usage of the term ""ideology"" is distinct from that which suggests that an idea that constitutes an ideology is necessarily ""false"" or evil, an assumption found particularly in the writing of those ideology theorists influenced by Marx . There may, for example, be alternative principles, rules,
 An ideology is upheld weakly where the difference between the ideology and reality can be readily recognised through the actions of a state that contradict its rhetoric . An ideology should not be upheld by an ideology where it is seen to be weakly .
 A theorisation of international law as ideology moves us beyond the ""all or nothing"" approaches of realism and positivism . It accepts the interrelationship between international law and politics as has been acknowledged by functionalist authors . It endeavours to explain the political significance of the discrepancy between the
 A theorisation of international law as ideology locates the source of the power of law in a small set of ideas about the nature of law . The theory locates source of power of international international law in small ideas about international law .
 States may use the ideology of international law as a source of power that they can draw on to further their political objectives . It would be expected that, in a dispute, states would compete to uphold the ideology most strongly . States would compete with each other to uphold international law most strongly,
 A theorisation of international law as ideology cannot be ""proven';86 ultimately it can only be assessed according to whether or not it offers a better explanation of phenomena and events than other theoretical approaches . Situated as it is within a ""post-positivist"" paradigm, a theor
 A small set of ideas about international law is a source of power in world politics, a theorisation of international law as ideology . A state is able to use international law to its political advantage because of a small idea, it says . International law has been referred to as an ideology,
 We would expect the U.S. to have taken international law into consideration during the process of policy formation .
 Excomm members did, in fact, attempt to reconcile international law with other policy considerations . As we have seen, Excomm .
 Excomm members took account of the likely perceptions of its allies and of the USSR, as well as the degree of military risk associated with each of the five possible options .
 A theorisation of international law goes further to point to the distinction between compliance and upholding international law . A positivist believes that, even if it is not, it should be .
 The role of international law in the Excomm deliberations was not one of working out how to act legally or to comply best with international law . International law was not the issue of how to deal with international laws, it was how to comply .
 This is particularly important to our understanding of the relationship between international law and foreign policy . It may be possible to uphold the ideology more strongly than one's rivals despite being in the weaker legal position and vice versa .
 A theorisation of international law as ideology would suggest that, during a crisis, each side would do well to seek to draw more strongly than its rival on the power of the ideology of law, while recognising the discrepancy between the ideology and reality and using that to its advantage .
 In order to assume the possibility of distinguishing between legal and illegal behaviour a state will seek to establish a binary distinction between its own actions and those of the other state . A state will want to establish the distinction between the actions of the two states .
 The United States never overtly accused the Soviet Union of illegal action . This was problematic for the United States during the CMC . Abram Chayes has acknowledged the dilemma faced by the U.S.
 The United States stressed the legality of its own actions under the Rio Treaty and contrasted them with the Soviet actions that threatened the ""peace and security"" of the hemisphere . The U.S. stressed that its actions were legal under the treaty .
 The United States implied the illegality of Soviet actions, assuming a dichotomy between legality and illegality . The U.S. implied the illegalities of Soviet military actions, the author says .
 Soviet statements, at least initially, claimed that the ""actual blockade of Cuba by the United States""88 was illegal . U.S. claims that the blockade was illegal, but Soviet statements were made in response .
 Khrushchev referred to the actions of the U.S. government as ""piratical"" in other correspondence . The actions were also referred to as 'piratical' in other letters .
 Several statements of die USSR did, however, suggest a discrepancy between the ideology and reality . Several statements in die USSR suggested a discrepancy .
 Khrushchev maintained that the missiles were of a defensive nature . Referring to the assertion of die U.S. that die missiles in Cuba were ""offensive"" weapons, for example .
 Khrushchev went on to argue against the possibility of categorically distinguishing offensive from defensive capability . But, radier dian draw more strongly dian die United States on ideology of international law .
 Khrushchev understood that Soviet actions in Cuba had ""no less grounds"" than those of US weapons in Turkey . This is all the more surprising given that Khrushche understood that the Soviet actions had no less grounds" than that of the US .
 Zorin failed to present an affirmative defense of the Soviet position, failing to point to its own legality or to the illegality of the U.S. action .
 Die US chose to question authenticity of the authenticity of United States photographic evidence .
 Zorin suggested a discrepancy between the ideology the USSR had appealed to in the defense of its position on other occasions, and the stark reality present in the Security Council chamber which seemed to contradict such arguments .
 Khrushchev claimed that the U.S. was attempting to legislate in questions of international law . The idea that it might be possible Thant, 26 October 1962, UN Press Release SG/1357 .
 The Soviet statements can thus be regarded as upholding less strongly than the US the ideology of international law . This suggests a potential discrepancy between the image and reality of the law .
 A theorisation of international law as ideology hypothesises that it will be in the interests of the state if it not only upholds the ideology as strongly as possible but also recognises the discrepancy between the ideology and reality and uses that to its advantage .
 Excomm. says existing international law does not support the sort of action favoured by Excomm . Excomm: "In this case, existing law did not obviously support this type of action"
 US legal officers recognised that, despite the image of international law as stable and in existence ahead of policy choices, international law necessarily evolves in tandem with political processes . U.S. legal officers therefore recognised that despite image of stable international law, law evolves with political process .
 "quarantine" is a new term of international law . It has been used to strengthen the purported legality of the United States position .
 The United States was in a position to engage in rhetoric which assumed the obligation to comply with international law while acting in a manner quite close to that apparently dictated by international law .
 There was no obvious discrepancy between the assumptions on which the U.S. actions were to be based and reality . There was thus no discrepancy in the assumptions made by the United States .
 Kennedy did not suggest that the new term was something that the U.S. had just made up . Kennedy justified it by reference to another principle in the ideology, that of the universality of international law, he said .
 The quarantine is explained as being a necessary development for the nuclear age . The quarantine was explained as necessary development .
 The U.S. gave no indication of not believing in the principles that constitute the ideology . The United States thus gave . no indication . not . believing in . principles .
 The USSR, on the other hand, protested the new term as ""made up"" thereby, somewhat ironically, demonstrating the discrepancy between the ideology and reality . The USSR protested the idea of the term as "made up"
 Khrushchev went on to use the term ""quarantine"" in his correspondence with Kennedy,100 demonstrated acceptance and hence added legitimacy to the U.S. actions . The fact that the term "quarantine" was used in the context of the United States actions .
 In reality, those charged with the responsibility of implementing the quarantine knew very well that the maneuver they were undertaking was that of the traditional naval blockade .
 Admiral George W Anderson, Jr., Jr., in Eubank, above60, at 66 . See comments by Admiral Anderson in his memoir, "Eubank"
 The United States was able to set up a situation such that if the USSR did not act as the United States wanted it to, the U.S. could act in its policy interests . The strategy also left open to Khrushchev the option of negotiating an end to the crisis .
 Skilful use of legal rhetoric was not a factor separate from US military power in the resolution of the Crisis, but an integral component of its crisis strategy, says Julian Zelizer . The US used legal rhetoric in resolution of crisis, Zelizer says .
 The United States had taken the legal initiative, presenting the argument which upheld the ideology and which placed the USSR on the defensive in terms of the rhetoric of international law . The U.S. presented the argument .
 USSR tried to point to U.S. tactics but failed to indicate the discrepancy between the image of international law and political reality, thereby making a weaker reference to the ideology .
 International law does not prescribe a binary choice of action to national decision-makers . A theorisation of international law as ideology suggests that a state may well benefit from referring to its own actions or those of a state with which it is in dispute as if international law does do so .
 The USSR had not done anything that was unequivocally ""illegal" in establishing a missile base in Cuba . In the case of the CMC it was not going to be easy for U.S. legal advisers and decision-makers to set up the requisite binary distinction .
 US legal advisers and Excomm members were nevertheless able to describe Letter from Khrushchev to Kennedy, 24 October, The Kennedy Tapes, at 390.5 . US legal adviser and ExComm members were able to . describe Letter . from Khushchev to . Kennedy, which was
 It is unclear whether the next U.S. move would have been a military response, or whether other strategies on a scale of escalating behaviour leading up to military responses .
 Excomm debates indicate that, should the first round threat of quarantine action fail, action could be stepped up to embargoes on petrol, oils, and lubricants . Air strikes could also be launched at a later time .
 See comments by President Kennedy, Monday, 22 October, 8pm Cabinet room meeting, The Kennedy Tapes, at 257 .
 The effectiveness of this strategy relied on the perception of threatened military force, as consistent with the ideology of international law . Whatever the reality of the next response, this strategy relies on a perception of threatening military force that might eventuate .
 The skill with which US legal advisers facilitated die United States reconciling its political and strategic interests widi die desirability of upholding as strongly as possible die ideology of international law may have been an important ingredient in die U.S. success .
 The Role of the Judiciary, 1, 1; Mireille Delmas-Marty, Present-day China and the Rule of Law: Progress and Resistance, 11.3 . The role of the judiciary in China is key to the rule of law in the country .
 Chimni, Third World Approaches to International Law and Individual Responsibility in Internal Conflicts, 77. Chimni: "Individual responsibility in internal conflicts is individual responsibility" Chimni says.
 China and Taiwan have a separate Customs Territory of Taiwan within the WTO . The WTO is the body of the World Economic Forum .
 China's WTO Accession on its Approach to the Trade-Environment Balancing Act, 227 . Amin M Husain, who is the Legitimate Representative of the Palestinian People?
 International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in 2002, 365 days, 365 pages . The Tribunal was founded in Yugoslavia .
 HUANG Jin & DU Huanfang, Private International International Law in the Chinese Judicial Practice in 2001, 387. In 2001, they were published in China's first edition of the law journal, "China's First International Law"
 A Critical Appraisal under International Standards of Internal Movement and Residence, 519.519.6.5 . The author of the book, "Critical Appraisals of Internal Movements"
 LING Yan, The Work of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in 2002, 655. Yan. Yan . Yan: The Work was the work of the ICC in Rwanda . Yan.