 The actions of the Soviet Union, Cuba, and the U.S. in October 1962 brought those nations to the verge of military conflict . The events occurred in Cuba and the United States in 1962 .
 What was not known then, and not fully recognized today, was how close the world came to the brink of nuclear disaster . The world came close to a nuclear disaster in the 1950s and '60s .
 The missile crisis was a dramatic demonstration of human fallibility . Political and military leaders are so often captives of misinformation, misjudgment, miscalculation .
 In our daily lives, mistakes are costly, but we try to learn from them . In our lives, we try and learn from our mistakes, but try to avoid them .
 "In conventional war, mistakes cost lives, sometimes thousands of lives," says U.S. President Barack Obama . "I'm not going to give up on the war," says Obama .
 If mistakes were to affect decisions relating to nuclear forces, they would result in the destruction of nations . But if mistakes were made, they will result in nations' destruction, experts say .
 The authors acknowledge the helpful comments of Peter Feaver, Nancy Gallagher, Thomas Graham, Richard Ned Lebow, Scott Sagan, and Melissa Williams . The authors also acknowledge the generous support of the Rockefeller Foundation .
 There is a broad and deep consensus among policymakers in most capitals of the world that resisting the spread of nuclear weapons is a goal worthy of considerable time, effort, and money . There is also a deep consensus that resisting nuclear weapons should be a priority .
 A few states are actively seeking a nuclear capability of their own . None advocates as a matter of policy a general diffusion of nuclear technology around the globe .
 The essence of these arguments is that when adversaries have reliable and survivable nuclear arsenals large enough to establish a condition of mutual assured destruction, they would be deterred from initiating wars against each other .
 At first glance, the history of the nuclear age seems to bear out this logic . At first, it seems to be a good idea that nuclear power is a good thing for the world .
 John Lewis Gaddis notes that not a single crisis in SovietAmerican relations since the end of the Second W orId War led to war between the superpowers . He strongly suggests that nuclear deterrence is responsible for this remarkable fact .
 These include Iran, Greece, 1947, 1947; Berlin and Czechoslovakia, 1948; Korea, 1950; East Berlin riots, 1953; Hungarian uprising, 1956; Berlin again, 1958-59; V-2 incident, 1960; Cuban missile crisis . The Yom Kippur
 "Elements of Stabilit.¥ in the Postwar International System,"" International Security 10, no. (spring 1986): 121. "The Postwar international system" is a reference to the Cold War era .
 What proliferation pessimists cannot do is point to historical examples of nuclear wars to demonstrate that their concerns are well-founded . What they can't do is to point out historical examples to demonstrate their concerns, they say .
 In this paper we seek to provide historical justification for the proliferation pessimists' case . We seek to . provide historical propositions pundits proportions prospectors' case. We seek . historical justification .
 Few critics have challenged optimists purely at the theoretical level or on methodological grounds . Relatively few critics challenge optimists on theoretical grounds .
 Criticisms of rational deterrence theory that challenge its axioms, assumptions, inferences, hypotheses and hypotheses, and ""tests"" serve only to buttress the pessimists' case .
 We do not consider abstract theoretical issues directly in this paper . We are persuaded, however, by the analysis of Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein . They conclude that assumptions as the rational decision maker, perfect information, and a politically neutral environment are idealizations that lack any empirical
 Scholars of the Cuban missile crisis have benefited enormously in the past few years from declassification of documents and the opportunities for dialogue with Soviets which began with Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost .
 The fact that a wide variety of considerations may conspire to defeat the optimists' confidence in a single encounter should cause us considerable alarm . In our own research program we have made use of a method we call ""critical oral history,"" in which scholars and policymakers engage each other .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were not willing to place their faith in nuclear deterrence . They did not attempt to practice it in order to force a favorable resolution to the crisis . Kennedy did not place his faith in using nuclear deterrence and did not .
 We suggest that the Cuban missile crisis represents a ""critical case" for proliferation optimists, and that if the pessimists have the better of the argument here, their contentions are all the more compelling with respect to other cases, we say .
 The lesson of the Cuban missile crisis for new and aspiring nuclear states is that nuclear weapons jeopardize, rather than enhance, their national security . We suggest that the perils pessimists identify generally are not foreseeable, avoidable, or susceptible to technical fixes .
 We begin by outlining the major arguments suggesting that proliferation optimism is unfounded . We also outline the reasons why proliferation optimism should be optimistic .
 We use recent analyses of the Cuban missile crisis to illustrate each of these arguments . We then use recent analysis of recent analyses to explain each of the arguments .
 We discuss some of the implications of our discussion for new and aspiring nuclear states . Finally, we discuss the implications for the nuclear arms race in the world .
 Political leaders, senior military officers and academics in Third World states often point to the use of nuclear weapons as examples of successful deterrence .
 "We aim to show that this is an inaccurate and dangerous interpretation of the event," says CNN.com.com .
 Optimists acknowledge that for nuclear proliferation to have beneficial effects, spread of nuclear weapons must be managed . Proliferation must avoid provoking preventive wars by potential proliferants' adversaries . proliferants must acquire invulnerable second-strike nuclear forces .
 In order for nuclear weapons to have the desired deterrent effect, leaders must value survival of their nations or regimes above all else . Leaders must make decisions on the basis of the prospective costs and benefits of the op12 tions available to them .
 There is considerable ambiguity in the scholarly literature on whether ""rational"" deterrence theory assumes substantive rationality, procedural rationality, and/or instrumental rationality . There is also considerable ambiguity on whether "rational" deterrence theory takes on substantive rationality .
 These are logically independent notions, although the latter two may be correlated empirically . These are logical independent notions . The latter two are thought to be correlated .
 There are many reasons to doubt that the transition to a world of stable deterrent relationships is likely to be smooth and peaceful . There are also many reasons for doubt that it will be smooth, peaceful .
 It is highly unlikely that two adversaries will acquire nuclear capabilities on the same timetable . Under certain circumstances this might generate powerful incentives for a state facing a rising nuclear 14 challenger to wage preventive war .
 Emerging nuclear states are unlikely to acquire safe, robust, and invulnerable nuclear arsenals owing to constraints on their expertise and financial resources . We also do not address directly arguments which suggest that emerging nuclear states .
 There are grounds to worry about the safety and robustness of nuclear arsenals even in countries not so constrained . These are serious concerns, but there are grounds for concern .
 The Cuban missile crisis illustrates the weaknesses of the proliferation optimists' position, writes Peter Bergen . The U.S. has been in the throes of a nuclear war with North Korea .
 In October 1962 the relevant actors did not face significant resource constraints and possessed what at the time were state-of-the-art nuclear arsenals . The relevant actors were not facing resource constraints in October 1962 .
 We briefly survey each of these arguments before turning to the Cuban missile crisis for illustrations of each of each .
 proliferation optimists abstract away from the inner workings of states and governments . They treat them as unitary rational actors for the purpose of explaining and predicting their behavior .
 The Soviet Union contemplated a preventive war against the People's Republic of China in 1969 remarkably, despite the fact that Cliina had nuclear weapons at the time . According to Bruce Blair, the Soviet Union considered a pre-emptive war against China in the 1970s remarkably .
 Organizational pathologies and dilemmas can lead states to behave in ways not predicted by rational deterrence theory . Organized pathologies can lead state to behave differently than predicted by deterrence theory, author says .
 When we "look under the hood" and examine the organizational determinants of state action, things look much less tidy and predictable than the optimists assume . Things look less tidy than they assume, and things look less predictable .
 Organizational critiques of proliferation optimism make four crucial points . The proliferation optimism is a key part of the organization .
 Military and civilian leaders often have different interests, preferences, risk propensities, and attitudes toward the use of force . First, military and civilians often have very different interests and preferences toward force .
 Military leaders are not necessarily more willing than civilian leaders to use force in pursuit of the state's foreign policy objectives . Evidence suggests that on balance they are less inclined than civilians to . use force, although they are inclined to use higher levels of force once a decision has been made .
 There are reasons to believe, however, that soldiers and politicians see the world and see it differently .
 Military and civilian leaders must try to satisfy a number of competing values and manage trade-offs . Second, civilian and military leaders must attempt to satisfy competing values, he says .
 The nature and the degree of nuclear danger in any given circumstance will vary depending on the situation . Exactly how they do so will affect the nature of the nuclear danger, experts say .
 Organizational variables may influence the relative likelihood of accidental or inadvertent wars on the one hand, and deliberate escalation on the other . Organizational factors could influence the likelihood of an accidental or accidental war, or deliberate escalation .
 Complex systems such as military organizations are vulnerable to a variety of failures and breakdowns, notwithstanding elaborate efforts to build in redundancies and fail-safe mechanisms . Military organizations such as the U.S. military have to inculcate an ethos of reliability and safety in military personnel,
 Like most of the other members of the junta, his education had been narrowly technical . His professional experiences entirely within his own branch of the service, and his political horizon limited to Latin America .
 The junta as a body was poorly equipped to understand the differences between the political systems of Argentina and Britain . 'Put itself in the position of its adversary in order to see the world through his eyes,' the junta said .
 Arguably, countries with unstable civil-military relations may have nuclear arsenals more accident-prone than others . This may be because of professional military preferences for readiness over safety, writes Peter Bergen .
 Nuclear accidents are particulary dangerous in times of an acute international crisis, when opposing forces may be tightly coupled . Accidents could lead to serious misjudgments about adversaries' actions and intentions .
 The dangers of such accidents may rise abruptly in a crisis because of the premium on rru'1'rtary rea diness ness im sueh a context . Moreover, the dangers of . such accidents . may rise sharply in an economic crisis, experts say .
 The complexity of modern military organizations makes it unlikely that leaders will even be aware of let alone control the behavior of all of the units and individuals under their nominal authority . Finally, the complexity of military organizations means it is unlikely leaders will be aware .
 This may encourage blind adherence to routines, or lead to the breakdown of routines either of which can jeopardize successful crisis management . This can also lead to a breakdown of routine, or a failure of routine .
 Organizational complexity constitutes a constraint on rational action because it generates ""no noise"" and results in behavior of which national leaders may be unaware, which they cannot control, and which they do not intend . National leaders may also be unaware of behavior that they cannot .
 Psychologists have identified a number of factors that make it difficult for national leaders to gauge threats accurately . Psychologists identify factors that prevent national leaders from gauging threats accurately, such as human perception .
 The design of nuclear weapons and procedures may depend lieavily upon organizational learning over time . Significant reductions in the dangers of handling nuclear weapons may depend on organizational learning .
 New proliferants, of course, will have little or no opportunity to learn from experience in the short run . New proliferantants will not learn from short run, but they will learn from history .
 There are reasons to fear that they can conspire to defeat deterrence even in what proliferation optimists would regard as stable deterrent relationships .
 Psychologists call ""cold"" cognitive errors of this kind ""unmotivated biases,"" and most people exhibit them much of the time . Psychologists say they are not motivated by their biases .
 Misperceptions and misjudgments may also reflect motivated biases that is, errors triggered by decisional dilemmas that generate psychological stress . The errors are triggered by decisions that generate stress .
 Psychologists have paid careful attention to the performance of decisionmakers under stress . Moderate levels of stress may enhance performance in the short run, but prolonged or intense stress magnifies errors .
 Psychologists and economists have begun to explore the effects of motivation on decision-making .
 People motivated by a concern for justice as they perceive it exhibit a variety of behaviors that appear pathological from a rational-actor perspective . For example, people motivated by an interest in justice appear to be pathological .
 In particular, actors motivated by a sense of justice value goods that they conceive as entitlements more highly than their strategic or economic worth warrants . This is particularly true in the case of entitlement goods .
 They exhibit insensitivity to new information and value trade-offs, and are less amenable to negotiation and persuasion through the application of carrots and sticks . They are more likely to exhibit cognitive errors because of the affective potency of the justice motive and its simplifying effect on cognitive structures .
 Actors motivated by the perceived demands of justice are more difficult to deter . Actors motivation for justice are harder to deter than those motivated by it, say experts .
 The assumptions of rational deterrence theory have been undermined by psychological experiments demonstrating that people routinely violate the necessary assumptions that rational choice is rational choice .
 The justice motive may be especially salient in territorial conflicts, the author says . This should cause particular alarm in view of the many territorial disputes between recent and likely future proliferants .
 Leaders conceive ""home"" territory in terms of entitlements, according to Diehl and Goertz . Diehl: Conflicts involving transfers of home territory are significantly more violent than those of other territories .
 Changes in value, rather than final assets, are criti32 cal to peoples' calculations . Changes are based on value rather than actual assets .
 Prospect theory renders intelligible behavior such as people's willingness to take poor gambles to avoid losses, and escalating commitments to losing courses of action, neither of which is rational in a classical sense . Prospect theory makes people take gambles in order to avoid losing losses .
 Even a fully rational decisionmaker would challenge a commitment in the face of a clear and credible deterrent threat . Nevertheless, there are certain situations in which even a fully . rational decisionmakers would challenge the commitment .
 Proliferation optimists generally dismiss or are insensitive to this possibility . Proliferation optimismists are generally unaware of the possibility of a nuclear bomb .
 Deterrence can fail to dissuade a rational challenger in three different ways . Deterrence is not the answer to the question: How do you dissuade your opponent?
 First, strategically-clever rational challengers may design around a deterrent threat, confront deterrers with faits accomplis, and take bold gambles if they believe they can control the risks .
 A challenge may be rational in a situation where a challenger has no ac32. Second, a challenge is rational in the situation where the challenger has . Second, the challenger may challenge the president in a similar situation .
 In all three ways, a challenge to a deterrent threat may have a higher subjective expected utility than alternative courses of action . Challenge to a deterring threat may be better than alternative course of action, experts say .
 CUBAN missile crisis provides ample evidence for the proliferation pessimists' concerns . U.S. missile crisis provided ample evidence of proliferation pessimism .
 In this section we discuss some of the more dramatic illustrations of the organizational, psychological, and situational pressures that made crisis management so precarious in 1962 . In 1962, the U.S. faced a series of crises that required crisis management to be managed .
 Scott Sagan has documented a number of very serious mishaps and breakdowns in American alert procedures, safety mechanisms, and 35 nuclear operations during the Cuban missile crisis . The United States and the SOVIET UNION WERE NOT UNITARY DECISIONMAKERS .
 While this particular missile did not carry a nuclear warhead, the air force had mated 34 of its own missiles . The missile was not carrying a nuclear weapon, but 34 of the 34 missiles were attached to the missile .
 Had the Soviets detected the launch and been aware of the status of most of the American missiles at Vandenberg, they might easily have misinterpreted the launch as part of a nuclear attack .
 Soviet MiG fighters scrambled to intercept it; U.S. F102s from Eielson AFB in Alaska scrambled to escort it back to base . Soviet MiGs intercepted it; American F103s escorting it home safely .
 The Alaskan F-102s were carrying live nuclear anti-aircraft missiles . Because of the heightened military alert, they were equipped with live nuclear missiles .
 In the event of a dogfight, American planes might have detonated nuclear weapons in or near Soviet airspace . U.S. planes may have detonated nukes in or around Soviet airspace, experts say .
 Radar operators at Moorestown, N.J., erroneously reported a missile launch from Cuba . Fortunately, the Soviet MiGS failed to reach thez, Fortunately,
 The error was the result of a training tape mistakenly feeding into the Moorestown monitors . Training tape mistakenly fed into the monitors mistakenly .
 Sagan discusses in detail how each of these events might have happened under plausible circumstances . Sagan discusses the events that might have led to a fatal misstep . Sagan also discusses how each one might have done so under the circumstances .
 Military organizations are vulnerable to failures and breakdowns notwithstanding elaborate technical and organizational-cultural safeguards . They clearly demonstrate that military organizations are susceptible to failures, breakdowns .
 The complexity of modern military organizations frustrates civilian oversight and control, the authors say . They further demonstrate how the complexity of the military organization frustrates civilians, they say .
 Sagan's discussion should give pause to prospective nuclear states who are unlikely to be so favored . Sagan: The American and Soviet armed forces in 1962 were among the most advanced technologically in their day .
 New information suggests that all parties exhibited potentially catastrophic tendencies and behaviors on these dimensions . While information on the U.S. side of the crisis is most plentiful, it's most plentiful .
 Military and civilian leaders often have different interests, preferences, risk propensities, and attitudes toward the use of military force . Military and civilians have different views on how to use military force in war .
 Professional militaries display strong proclivities toward behaviors that lead to deterrence failures . The U.S. military has a history of misbehavior that leads to failures in deterrence .
 Hawks favored a more aggressive response to the Soviet deployment of missiles to Cuba . Hawks favored issuing ultimata and resorting to force in the event of noncompliance, they say .
 Doves favored a more cautious and less confrontational policy, including, if necessary, negotiations and reciprocal concessions . Doves also favored a less confrontatic policy, such as negotiations .
 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Maxwell Taylor, Air Force Chief General Curtis LeMay, and Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George Anderson were all hawks . His military advisors, however, were hawks, and his military advisors .
 "There were tremendous political and military pressures to do something," says President Obama . "There are tremendous political, military pressures," says Obama .
 Max Taylor was one of the wisest, most intelligent military men ever to serve . He called himself a ""double hawk"" at the time, but he was a dove among the military people .
 President Kennedy invited the Chiefs to the White House so he could thank them for their support during the crisis . Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles, and the scene was one hell of a scene .
 Khrushchev also recalled coming under tremendous pressure from his military to take a tougher line during the crisis . We ought to just go in there today and knock 'em off!,,37 .
 In particular, his military advisors strongly opposed withdrawing the missiles . President Barack Obama is expected to withdraw missiles from the region .
 Khrushchev recalls that when he asked them whether they could guarantee that a refusal to withdraw the missiles would not result in global nuclear war, 36.6 million people answered 'yes' to 'Yes' 36.5 million people were killed in the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Khrushchev: 'To hell with these maniacs,.,,38, I said to myself, 'to hell with them maniacs' Recently, the spirit of the memory was confirmed by Gen. Gen. Eisenhower . Gen. Dwight Eisenhower: "To hell, I don't
 Anatoly I Gribkov was the mastermind of Operation Anadyr, the code-name of the secret deployment to Cuba . He was one of the masterminds behind the operation .
 Gribkov said that Khrushchev lacked the capacity for clear-headed strategic thinking . He said that the Soviet General Staff regarded him as an 'ignorant peasant' who lacked a capacity .
 Gribkov claims that the Soviet military in Cuba deliberately interpreted their command authority liberally . The military feared Khrushchev did not understand strategic and operational imperatives, and worried that he would buckle under American pressure .
 Soviet military leaders in Cuba preferred informing Khrushchev of actions they had taken to requesting his permission to take them . When this was not possible, they tried to manipulate him into authorizing their preferred courses of action .
 Soviet efforts were partially successful, according to Soviet commanders in Cuba . These efforts were (from the perspective of the Soviets in Cuba) partially successful .
 Soviet nuclear weapons were dispersed from their central storage facility near Havana in or40 der to reduce their vulnerability to American attack . They did not succeed in securing permission to fire at will ons reconnaissance planes .
 The dispersal was therefore a provocative act that Khrushchev might well have forbidden had he been more fully briefed (or better advised) on its costs and benefits . It was therefore the dispersal of the Soviet Union in the 1960s was provocative .
 The Soviet military's unwillingness to bend under American pressure is instructive and important . The Soviet government's willingness to defy the U.S. is instructing and important for the future .
 At the time of the Cuban missile crisis, the U.S. enjoyed a massive strategic 38.2 percent of the strategic investment in Cuba . It is interesting to note that at the time, the United States had a massive 38.4 percent of its strategic investment .
 Remarks at the Woodrow Wilson Center for Scholars, Washington, D.C., 5 April 1994, and in personal conversations with the authors .
 Anatoly Dokuchaev, ""100-dnevnyi yadernyi kruiz ,"" Krasnaya zoezda , 6 November 1992, 2.2 November 1992 . Anatoly . Dokuchov: "100,000 yad
 Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union were aware of the rough numerical imbalance . The Soviet Union and the United States knew each other well .
 Both American and Soviet military leaders felt confident in taking a hard line . Yet both U.S. and Soviet leaders were confident in their actions .
 It is easy to imagine that the confrontation would have escalated quickly had military leaders been making the decisions in the two nations' capitals . It would have been in the capitals of many new nuclear states, either de facto or de jure .
 U.S. and Soviet military leaders in Cuban missile crisis regarded military logic as more salient than diplomatic, moral, or domestic political concerns .
 This stands in stark contrast to 43 many civilian leaders, especially Kennedy and Khrushchev . This stands a stark contrast with 43 civilian leaders such as Kennedy . This is not the first time the U.S. has seen a change in the direction of foreign policy .
 The crisis amply supports Betts's finding that military leaders prefer to err on the side of employing too much force rather than too little .
 Tactical Air Command resisted the idea of a small ""surgical"" air strike to knock out Soviet missiles in Cuba . Advo45 cated instead a much bigger air strike with a larger target set .
 In planning for the invasion of Cuba,s. military leaders requested permission to . equip invasion forces with tactical nuclear weapons, in case the Soviets had tactical nuclear . weapons of their own in Cuba .
 American military leaders believed their advantages in numbers of deliverable strategic nuclear weapons were a decisive factor, and that the Soviets would be forced to back down .
 Soviet military leaders in 1962 may have believed their relatively small nuclear arsenal combined with their conventional might in Europe was adequate to deter an American attack against Cuba .
 Two nuclear states whose arsenals are not precisely numerically equal could underestimate each other's confidence, leading directly to deterrence failure .
 U.S. military leaders' preference for military action over non-military options in the Cuban missile crisis contradicts Betts's general finding that military leaders are less likely than civilians to favor the use of force . Betts: Military leaders were less likely to favor force than civilians .
 U.S. military contingencies illustrate the danger that incremental planning will heighten escalatory pressures . The danger of incremental planning is that it heightens the risk of escalation .
 Generals T aylor and Walter C Sweeney insisted that an initial air strike against Cuba would have to be followed by further strikes, and, inevitably, an invasion .
 The invasion plan itself carefully mapped out a prolonged and intensive air and ground campaign that would have resulted in hundreds of casualties on all sides . Hundreds of thousands of casualties would have been on the sands .
 American military leaders were willing to commit themselves to an escalatory process that would have resulted in direct combat between U.S. and Soviet forces on a major scale .
 This is a good example of the extent to which incremental planning desensitizes military leaders to the long-term consequences of their actions . This is one of the best examples of how incremental planning can be affected by military planning .
 Soviet action in particular the unauthorized shooting down of an American u-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba at the height of the crisis on 27 October provides a sobering illustration of a circumstance in which purely military considerations drove local commanders to act against standing orders from Moscow .
 Central Intelligence Agency History Staff, 1992), 1992),208; ""Supplement 7 to Joint Evaluation of Soviet Missile Threat in Cuba, 27 October 1962,"" in ibid., 325. "Joint evaluation of Soviet missile threat in Cuba in October 1962"
 It now appears that Soviet FROG tactical rockets in Cuba were equipped with nuclear weapons . The FROGs are believed to have been Soviet tactical rockets with nuclear warheads .
 Blight, Allyn, and Welch, Cuba on the Brink; . Blight and Welch . The film "Kramer vs. Kramer" is about Kramer .
 Perhaps the best-known case of this tension on the American side was the confrontation between McNamara and Chief of Naval Operations Adm. George W. McNamara . McNamara was assassinated in 1968 .
 George Anderson over interception procedures on the quarantine line . Anderson did not appreciate that the diplomatic signal was a diplomatic signal rather than a military action . As McNamara recounts it, Anderson .
 The United States Air Force sought permission to respond to such attacks as a matter of course . Early in the crisis, the U.S. Air Force was asked to respond .
 Military commanders in most new and aspiring nuclear states are likely to have much greater operational autonomy . Military commanders will likely be able to control their own military operations, experts say .
 Civilian and military leaders must attempt to satisfy a number of competing values . How they do so will largely determine the nature and the degree of nuclear danger in any given circumstance .
 There are inherent tensions between readiness and the safety of nuclear weapons; between central control and invulnerability to decapitation; and, in some circumstances, between secrecy and accountability .
 Scott Sagan provides ample evidence of the first trade-off in U.S. operations during the Cuban missile crisis . Sagan discusses the associated dangers in great detail .
 At least one Soviet General Staff officer has recently made the claim that the Strategic Rocket Forces received an order in the middle of the crisis to go to maximum combat readiness . This apparently called for mating nuclear warheads to strategic missiles .
 First, such an emergency alert action might be picked up and perceived by u .s. intelligence as evidence that 'the USSR was preparing to initiate general war', which would have significantly increased pressures for a preemptive attack .
 "Such actions would have significantly increased the risk of a nuclear accident at the missile site," he said . ""54 closely guarding that authority for himself for himself, or for the secretary of defense if he were unavailable"
 Soviet authorities may have intended the alert to preserve Soviet retaliatory capability in case of an American first strike .
 Pliyev ordered Soviet warheads in Cuba out of their central storage facility and closer to their delivery vehicles . The move was ordered by Soviet President Vladimir Putin on 26 October .
 Soviet nuclear forces at the time did not have permissive action links mechanical or electronic devices to prevent unauthorized use of the weapons . Therefore, dispersing the nuclear warheads increased the danger of unauthorized use even as it reduced the danger to the arsenal from an American attack .
 The Cuban missile crisis provides ample evidence of the trade-off between secrecy on the one hand, and safety, accountability and oversight on the other .
 The secrecy surrounding the Soviet attempt to sneak nuclear weapons into Cuba resulted in a number of serious mistakes and miscalculations . The secrecy led to a series of serious errors and mistakes .
 The complexity of modern military organizations militates against the possibility that civilian or military leaders can monitor and control the behavior of all of the units and individuals under their nominal authority .
 This can result in significant misunderstandings between different branches of the government, or between leaders and subordinates, permitting blind adherence to routines to pose serious threats to successful crisis management .
 It is clear that President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev were unaware of, and did not control, all the potentially relevant actions of 55.5 .
 In some cases branches of their military establishments failed to communicate and coordinate with each other, posing serious hazards to crisis management . In addition, in certain cases, the military establishments did not communicate and coordinated with eachother .
 Organizational complexity may mean that information and directives from the top do not reach all their intended targets . The Cuban missile crisis was perhaps most strikingly illustrated in the failure of Soviet troops to camouflage the missiles in Cuba .
 The stray v-2 incident of 27 October provides a telling example of how organizational complexity can hinder crisis management . The stray incident was the result of an organizational complexity .
 The plane was on a routine mission that simply escaped high-level scrutiny . Plane was on routine mission with no need for scrutiny .
 Almost certainly U.S. leaders would have canceled the mission had they known about it . Almost certainly American leaders would not have canceled it .
 An almost identical incident occurred just two months ago . It is interesting to note that they did not do so, in view of the fact that they didn't do so .
 The CIA had not located warheads in Cuba, it continued to report increasing numbers of Soviet missiles as 58.62 .
 In this particular case, no one seems to have thought to give the word in the first place .
 Many believed that if the missiles were operational, the risks of a launch from Cuba, either during or after an American air strike, would be unacceptably high .
 The term had a technical meaning in the intelligence community, the CIA says . The CIA was using the term correctly in its briefs, the agency says .
 The fact that different organizations speak different languages constrained decision making in this instance . The decision was made by different organizations speaking different languages .
 CIA did have information to suggest that warheads were in transit, aboard the freighter Poltava, but never communicated this important information to the ExComm . The CIA, in fact, did not communicate this information .
 The sheer size and complexity of thes.s. and Soviet military forces suggest that new proliferants provided they have smaller governments and military forces should not be as constrained by organizational complexity as were superpowers in 1962 .
 The degree to which organizational complexity constitutes a threat to stable deterrence in a new nuclear relationship will be a complex function of size, communications and monitoring capabilities, bureaucratic structure, factionalism, and other factors not dependent on size .
 The fact that new nuclear nations may have smaller and simpler armed forces than did the superpowers in 1962 may not, in many cases, bring immunity from organizational mishaps . New nuclear powers may not be immune from organizational problems .
 It now appears that some nuclear warheads had already reached Cuba, although the CIA did not realize this at the time . Some nuclear warheads were already reaching Cuba .
 Breakdowns or failures to communicate can extend very far from the centers of decision making . Two episodes involving American allies during the crisis illustrate the point .
 The causes of these breakdowns are complex, and information currently available on them is incomplete . The causes are complex and information is incomplete, experts say .
 One does not know whether to blame communications failure or insubordination . The U.S. military says it is not clear what caused the departure of the U.N. forces .
 The closer one looks ats.s. and Soviet decision making in October 1962, the . less unitary the two states appear .
 Leaders on both sides experienced difficulties gauging threats accurately, discriminating between situations that called for deterrence (as opposed to reassurance) or mixe . d strategies; . ) 67 commurucatmg• • cIearIy; and interpreting statements and actions of the adversary correctly
 They did not calculate the costs and benefits of alternative courses of action in the manner required by rational deterrence theory . Nor did they calculate the benefits and costs of alternative course of action, the authors say .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev, and their advisors performed within the normal range on all of the tasks . These are extremely demanding cognitive tasks, and Kennedy and his advisors performed well, says historian .
 Tracing the causes of cognitive errors to specific psychological phenomena and processes is difficult, because such inferences have extremely high information requirements and the available record is limited .
 We are unable to infer with confidence that Soviet decisionmakers exhibited particular cognitive biases or errors in particular instances .
 Written and oral testimony, coupled with the available documentation, enables us to identify with confidence several clear examples of misperceptions and misjudgments . Nevertheless, written and oral . testimony, combined with . documentation, can be identified with confidence .
 "World Politics 44, no. 44, is published in World Politics. Expanding and Refining the Spiral and Deterrence Models,"" World Politics . No. 44 is published on October 8, 2013 .
 In our view, the groupthink"" hypothesis is not well enough specified to be useful analytically, and any deviations from ideal rationality displayed by President Kennedy and his advisors may as easily be understood through oilier lenses as through groupthink .
 The Cuban missile crisis was itself the product of misperceptions and misjudgments . It was itself itself itself, writes David Frum .
 Cuba began to turn toward the Soviet Union for support, which in turn reinforced American perceptions that Cuba represented a hemispheric threat, and led to further efforts to isolate Castro . Feeling threatened, Cuba stepped up its revolutionary efforts in Latin America, and turned toward Soviet Union .
 Cuba and the United States each viewed its own actions as defensive and warranted by the seemingly offensive actions of the other . The U.S. and Cuba viewed their actions as justified by the other's .
 Cuba's courtship of the Soviet Union and embrace of Marxism-Leninism generated strong fears in Washington . Washington feared Castro would turn Cuba into a Soviet military outpost in the Western Hemisphere .
 Of particular concern was the possibility that the Soviet Union would deploy nuclear weapons to Cuba . The Cuban government was worried about the possibility of deploying nuclear weapons .
 The U.S. flexed its muscles in the region in order to demonstrate to Castro his vulnerability to American military might . The United States also wanted to deter any significant Soviet military presence .
 It was, however, precisely the misperception of these essentially defensive measures as signals of offensive intent that provoked Soviet concern, leading ultimately to the vett .
 Khrushchev made a number of other serious errors in judgment in the period leading up to the crisis . The former Soviet leader made a series of errors in judgement in the years leading to the collapse of the USSR .
 He appears to have been confident that the Soviets could deploy the missiles secretly . He failed to appreciate the uproar the U.S. would cause in the United States, and thus the difficult position in which it would place President Kennedy .
 We explore this dynamic in detail in Blight, Allyn, and Welch, Cuba on the Brink, passimim .
 Khrushchev projected his own concerns, and his own perspective, onto President Kennedy . Kennedy overestimated the transparency of his motives, leading him to overestimate his motives . It seems plausible, for example, that .
 As tensions began to rise in August and September of 1962, Khrushchev began to exhibit classic symptoms of defensive avoidance and motivated misperceptions and misjudgments . As tensions begin to rise, tensions became more intense .
 Kennedy came under increasing pressure from Congress and the media to do something about Soviet military shipments to Cuba . As prominent Americans such as Sen. Ted Kennedy and Sen. Joe Kennedy were pressured to act .
 Kenneth Keating began to claim that the Soviets were deploying nuclear missiles to Cuba . A Cuban delegation traveled to Moscow to propose that Moscow and Havana go public with the deployment .
 The Cubans believed they might seize the diplomatic initiative by emphasizing the legality of the deployment, forestalling an adverse American reaction . In this way, the Cubans hoped to seize the diplomacy initiative, he says .
 Khrushchev abruptly dismissed their concerns, declaring confidently that the secret deployment would succeed . He also risks to 7 send the Baltic Fleet if the United States caused trouble .
 Khrushchev wrongly judged that the U.S. would accommodate itself to the deployment of nuclear missiles . The United States sent increasingly blunt signals that any deployment of nukes would be unacceptable . The U.N. had been warned that any nuclear missile deployment would trigger a 72-hour
 This was an assurance which the Cubans instantly recognized as ludicrous as ludicrous . This was the assurance which was made by the president of the United States .
 He passed up several op~ortuni­ 74 ties to reassess the course of action to which he was committed . He therefore passed up . He passed on several op ~ortuni~ 74 ties .
 President Kennedy and his advisors were likewise insensitive to Khrushchev's motives and concerns . President Kennedy's advisors were similarly insensitive to the concerns of the Soviet leader .
 The fact that Berlin was in the forefront of the minds of many ExComm members may account for their erroneous judgment that the deployment was intended to give Khrushchev leverage on the Berlin issue .
 The ExComm may have been correct to infer that Khrushchev's motivations were at least partly strategic . But they entirely overlooked the possibility that the deployment might have been intended to forestall an American invasion of Cuba .
 Knowing that they did not intend to invade Cuba, perhaps it was difficult for them to imagine that Khrush78 chev might conclude they did . It is not the first time the U.S. has invaded Cuba .
 The most significant of Kennedy's deterrent threats came too late, coinciding with the arrival of Soviet SS-4 mis siles in Cuban ports . Kennedy's most significant deterrent threat came after the Soviet-era Soviet Union arrived in Cuba .
 There is no indication in any of the available records that the Kennedy Administration realized that it might have attempted to practice deterrence too late .
 They concluded that a full-scales invasion of the island was inevitable . They concluded, following the Bay of Pigs episode in April 1961, that a . full-scale invasion was inevitable, and as 1962 wore on, that it was imminent .
 The weight of evidence and testimony suggests that Kennedy and his closest advisors did not want to invade Cuba . Kennedy only entertained the possibility after the discovery of Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in mid-October 1962 .
 Castro was wrong to assume that an invasion of Cuba was inevitable, says George W. Bush . The US military build-up in the Caribbean kept an invasion alive as a possible option .
 There is room for debate as to why Castro accepted the Soviet offer to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba . Castro insists he did so as a favor to the Soviets; we are inclined to think his motives were rather more selfish .
 President Kennedy announced his intention to impose a naval quarantine of Cuba on 22 October he triggered powerful moral reactions in both Moscow and Havana . President Kennedy's decision to impose the naval quarantine triggered strong moral reactions .
 The fact that Khrushchev saw the deployment of missiles to Cuba as legal and reciprocal (that is, analogous to American deployments on the Soviet periphery) contributed to the failure of deterrence, it also complicated crisis management, writes Peter Bergen .
 Even with the benefit of hindsight, it is difficult for U.S. analysts to appreciate the deterrent motivations of the Soviet deployment .
 Paul Huth and Bruce Russ ett do not even count the deployment as an attempt at extended deterrence in the data set they created to explore the effectiveness of such attempts .
 Hershberg's argument is contradicted in the strongest possible terms by surviving members of the Kennedy administration (Blight and Welch, On the Brink, passim).
 Khrushchev's outrage appears to have subsided after a 36 hour delay . Kennedy's announcement of the quarantine was crucial to subside, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Castro fully shared Khrushchev's 83 moral outrage; but his outrage did not subside . Castro's outrage didn't subside, but he continued to share his outrage . Castro was not satisfied with the idea that he had been forced to resign from the government .
 In short, moral outrage rendered them incapable of cost/benefit calculation . The moral outrage has left them unable to make a decision on what to do .
 The American noninvasion pledge was conditional upon UN inspection of Soviet missile sites in Cuba . The agreement to withdraw Jupiter missiles from Turkey may also have included the withdrawal of Jupiter missile sites from Italy .
 Soviet intelligence and Khrushchev's advisors--erroneously concluded that Kennedy intended to announce the beginning of military action against Cuba during this speech . This assessment, combined with other dire warnings (including warnings from Castro from Castro), convinced Khrushche to bring the crisis to an end .
 Kennedy's and Khrushchev's misperceptions led them to overestimate each other's resolve rather than to underestimate it . There is no reason to believe that this is a general tendency . Kennedy and Khruschev overestimated each other to underestimate their resolve, but this is not a
 Even decisionmakers immune to misperceptions would make serious errors on the basis of inaccurate or incomplete information . Even decision makers would make errors based on inaccurate information, experts say .
 Recent investigations of the Cuban missile crisis strongly suggest that the Kennedy administration was unaware of crucial details about the Soviet military deployment to Cuba .
 American intelligence at the time of the crisis dramatically underestimated the number of Soviet troops on the island . American intelligence failed to detect the presence of nuclear warheads in Cuba;90 and was completely unaware of Soviet standing .
 There is reason to believe that the letter that arrived first had been drafted second . There is even reason to think that it was drafted first .
 American estimates of the strength of Soviet forces in Cuba ranged from 4,500 to 16,000 over the course of October and November, 1962 . The total number of Soviet military personnel deyloyed to Cuba now appears to have been closer to 44,000, of which approximately hal
 There are reasons to believe Khrushchev invested the Soviet commander in Cuba with the authority to initiate the use of tactical nuclear weapons in the event of an American invasion .
 American analysts and officials considered it unlikely that the Soviets would have deployed tactical as well as strategic nuclear weapons to Cuba, and therefore did not intend to equip American forces with tactical nuclear weapons .
 There seems little doubt that if American forces had invaded Cuba, they would have been met with tactical nuclear fire, requiring a nuclear response of some kind and courting escalation to nuclear war .
 The history of the Cuban missile crisis permits us to belabor these points by multiplying illustrations further . The history . permits us . to . multiply illustrations further.
 We believe this sample adequately demonstrates a variety of important misperceptions and misjudgments . We believe, however, that this sample demonstrates a number of important issues .
 Whatever their causes, they are antithetical to the requirements of rational deterrence theory . Whatever the causes, these are antitheses to rational deterrence theories . The U.S. has not been able to rely on rational deterrence .
 The recent reawakening of scholarly interest in the missile crisis has demonstrated how pervasive these mistakes were . The re-evaluation of these mistakes was a major mistake, the author says .
 A popular early 1970s docudrama on the crisis called ""The Missiles of October,"" emphasized the steely gamesmanship required of Kennedy and his advisors to get Khrushchev to remove the missiles from Cuba .
 Scholars have gained access to declassified u .s. documents, and to Soviet and Cuban sources . A comparable film made today might justifiably be called ""The Misperceptions of October,""
 In the event of an American invasion of Cuba, it is likely that Pliyev's communications with Moscow would have been severed . In the case of a U.S. invasion, communications with Russia would be severed .
 Soviet commanders in Cuba probably would not have hesitated to use the weapons available to them . Having already dispersed the nuclear warheads to reduce their vulnerability, they had no prospect of successful defense without employing tactical nuclear weapons . Having once been invested with predelegated authority to use nuclear weapons in the
 It now appears more plausible then ever that nuclear war could have been the inadvertent result of a series of mistaken perceptions, judgments, and decisions . As Robert McNamara later put it, the key players in the drama were ""captives of misinformation, misjudgment, miscalculation
 We noted that there are circumstances under which even a fully rational decisionmaker would challenge a commitment in the face of a clear and credible deterrent threat, and that proliferation optimists dismiss, or are insensitive to this possibility .
 Strategically sophisticated rational challengers may design around a deterrent threat, attempt to confront deterrers with faits accomplis, and take bold gambles if they believe they can control the risks .
 A challenge may also be rational in a situation where a challenger has no acceptable options, or if he or she expects inaction to lead to disaster, even though the chances of success are slim . A challenge is rational in such a case where the candidate has no other options or expects inaction will
 A challenge will be rational in the face of a deterrent threat where a challenger does not value survival or security above other goods such as honor, glory, revenge, or martyrdom-that may be attained only via the challenge . Finally, a challenge will not be seen as a threat where
 Castro would not have been deterred from launching a nuclear attack against the U.S. had he possessed nuclear weapons of his own in 1962 . The United States's massive nuclear superiority and the certainty that American nuclear forces could have devastated his country, he says .
 Castro's calculations and behavior during the crisis are especially instructive for evaluating the arguments of proliferation optimists and proliferation pessimists . It's not difficult to imagine leaders of other countries might be similarly situated geopolitically, and that they would have similar attitudes, beliefs, and preferences .
 During the missile crisis, Castro exhibited behavior that seems at first glance difficult to understand through the lens of rationality . Saddam Hussein's Iraq; Hafez Assad's Syria; and Moammar Qaddafi's Libya, to name but a few .95 During the .95 missile crisis Castro exhibited
 He adopted a posture of defiance from the first moment he received word that President Kennedy had discovered Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy's son was killed in the Cuban missile strike .
 Castro was delighted with Khrushchev's first communication to him following Kennedy's announcement of the blockade of Cuba . Castro expressed a clear and firm determination to resist the ""piratical, per96 fidious, aggressive"" actions of the United States .
 Castro concluded that the superpowers had adopted irreconcilable positions that would inevitably lead to a war, beginning in Cuba, and resulting in the destruction of his country . Castro concluded he would be destroyed in a war .
 Castro took supreme comfort in the role he believed a martyred Cuba was about to play in the destruction of the U.S. Instead of working to avoid a fatal confrontation, he worked to avoid the confrontation . Castro believed he was going to play a key role in the United States
 Castro drafted a message to Moscow intended to bolster Khrushchev's resolve . Castro feared that the Soviet leader was beginning to weaken and waver . The message was drafted by the Soviet ambassador .
 When the message arrived in Moscow the following morning, Khrushchev interpreted it as a call for a preemptive nuclear strike . The Soviet Union knew such a strike would be suicidal both for Cuba and for the Soviet Union . The message arrived the next morning, and the message was interpreted as
 Castro did not ask Khrushchev for a preemptive strike in the strict sense . Castro didn't ask for a pre-emptive strike, he says .
 He asked Khrushchev to launch his nuclear arsenal after thes.s. invasion of Cuba had begun in effect, to make Cuba a martyr for the cause of socialism . Instead of launching a nuclear strike, he asked Khruschev to make it a martyr .
 We started from the assumption that if there was an invasion of Cuba, nuclear war would erupt . Now, we started from an assumption that . if . there was a . invasion of . Cuba, Cuba, it would have caused a nuclear war, the government says .
 If the invasion took place in the situation that had been created, nuclear war would have been the result . The situation would have led to nuclear war if it had happened .
 Castro's resignation, however, was typically of the most active and provocative kind . In any case, we were resigned to our fate. Castro's resigning was typically an act of defiance .
 Castro instructed anti-aircraft forces to open fire on low-flying U.S. reconnaissance planes . The slightest incident could spark a military confrontation, Castro said .
 When he received word of the Kennedy-Khrushchev deal on 28 October, he re-opened his eyes on the Soviet Union .
 By October 1962 Castro appears to have become convinced of thes. unrelenting hostility and its determination to destroy him . Castro was convinced of his enemies' unrelenting . hostility and determination to kill him .
 He faced a stark choice between annihilation with dignity, and annihilation with ignominy . Given his understanding of the available options, and whether or not he valued survival above all else, he believed that he faced the choice .
 "His grounds for holding this belief were, we believe, not unreasonable under the circumstances," the judge said . "We believe, given the information on the basis of which he was operating," he said .
 Annihilation with dignity required refusing to bend to U.S. demands, and willingly accepting nuclear conflict . Annihilation of dignity required refusal to bend American demands, she says .
 Castro ""rationally"" would have chosen nuclear war to surrender, notwithstanding the high likelihood that the U.S. and the Soviet Union faced mutual assured destruction . Castro may have preferred survival above all else and merely did not foresee any possibility of it .
 If he were operating on the basis of such values, then he may not have been susceptible to coercive threats or actions by the U.S. If he had operated on such values then he could not have faced coercive threats .
 There is room for debate about Castro's preferences, but there can be little doubt about the preferences of at least one of his closest associates . Castro is known for his preference for women in the past .
 Ernesto "" C h en Guevara, in October 1962 the third-ranking member of the Cuban leadership, provides a rather chilling example . Ernesto was the third ranking member of Cuban leadership .
 Compare the contrary interpretation in die foreword by Jorge Dominguez, ibid., xii-xiii. Compare the opposite interpretation in the foreword .
 Verde Olivo, 10 October 1968; quoted in Carla Anne Robbins, The Cuban Threat ,47. Verde . Olivo .
 It is possible to argue that the wealth of illustrations purporting to demonstrate how organizational, psychological and situational factors conspired to bring the world to the brink of nuclear war in 1962 merely serve to demonstrate the robustness of mutual deterrence and its resilience .
 First, proliferation optimists cannot explain why the Cuban missile crisis happened in the first place . First, they can't explain why, they say, why it happened .
 Under MAD, rational Soviet leaders should not have challenged an important U.S. commitment . The United States is committed to a NATO mission in Afghanistan .
 Any attempt to argue that the deployment was required in order to buttress mutual deterrence owing to the Soviet Union's acknowledged nuclear inferiority t 04 directly contradicts the proliferation ofctimists' claim .
 The Kennedy administration believed that the Soviet Union had a second-strike nuclear capability . The Soviet Union did indeed have a few strategic nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet deployment of nuclear weapons to Cuba constituted a failure of deterrence that should not have happened if proliferation optimists are correct about the determinants of state behavior .
 The world was fortunate in 1962 that only two of the three central figures in the drama Kennedy and Khrushchev commanded nuclear forces . Second, the world was lucky in 1962, that only one of the key figures in Kennedy's nuclear war drama was in charge of the nuclear program .
 The two exhibited a horror of nuclear war, suspicion of military advice, a growing sensitivity to the possibility that the confrontation could spin out of control . Iraq during the 1991 Persian Gulf war if Iraqi SCUD missiles landed in Israel had carried chemical warheads .
 Cuban leaders such as Fidel Castro and Che Guevara showed no such reticence about military operations or even any trace of horror at the prospect of nuclear war .
 Third, organizational and psychological errors during the Cuban missile crisis did not cascade, or interact synergistically, in such a way as to generate escalatory pressures .
 Serious breakdowns of systems, routines, and procedures and errors in perception, judgment, and inference for the most part represented isolated events . Serious breakdown of systems and routines was not serious breakdowns, systems breakdowns were isolated events.
 Technical mishaps could have combined with misperceptions and/or personnel breakdowns in such a way as to lead to disas107 t er . It is easy to imagine, for example, that technical mishaps may have combined .
 If the U.S. and the Soviet Union had not had nuclear weapons in 1962, there would have been no nuclear crisis . Fourth, and finally, it seems worth mentioning the obvious fact that if the United States and the . Soviet Union hadn't had . had not . had nuclear
 The existence of nuclear weapons was very much a cause of the crisis, in a variety of ways . Indeed, the existence of such weapons was a cause for the crisis in Iran .
 Khrushchev's numerical inferiority in strategic nuclear weapons may have been one of his reasons for deploying nuclear weapons to Cuba . Correcting the Soviets' numerical inferiorities in strategic weapons may be one of the reasons for deployment .
 American nuclear deployments on the Soviet periphery caused him great indignation, and spurred his desire to reciprocate with a nuclear deployment on the U.S. periphery . The Soviet Union responded by deploying a nuclear weapon on its periphery .
 Without nuclear weapons, Khrushchev might never even have thought to deploy Soviet forces to Cuba, exposed and vulnerable as they would be to U.S. conventional might .
 One way for states to avoid such intensely dangerous confrontations is to foreswear the kinds of arms that trigger them and render them so dangerous . States should avoid such confrontations by foreswearing the weapons that trigger the trigger them .
 In October 1962, so-called rational deterrence did not prevent the Cuban missile crisis . The crisis had little or nothing to do with its management and resolution . So-called "rational deterrence" didn't prevent the crisis in October 1962 .
 The world was fortunate that John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev so quickly learned the lessons of their folly in October 1962 . The world learned the tenuous control they exerted over the massive organizations they nominally commanded .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were unwilling to practice deterrence or compellence during the crisis . Some of their advisors advocated aggressively practicing deterrence and compellency .
 They prudently refused to put their faith in nuclear weapons to solve a problem nuclear weapons had largely created, they say . They say .
 The various factors that brought the world to the nuclear brink in 1962 and that greatly complicated crisis management may be expected to be present in other contexts . In 1962, the world was on the brink of nuclear disarmament .
 New and aspiring nuclear states should be suspicious of view that nuclear weapons will enhance their national security . Due appreciation for organizational hazards and the dangers of misperceptions and misjudgments should incline new and aspiring .
 Far from solving acute security dilemmas, nuclear weapons may only make them more severe . Nuclear weapons may not solve acute security issues, but they may make them worse .
 It would be naive to expect all states to renounce their nuclear arsenals, or to expect those determined to acquire nuclear weapons to terminate their nuclear programs . Nevertheless, it would be naïve to expect that all states will renounce nuclear weapons, or that they will acquire them .
 The rest of the world must decide how to deal with such states, says President Obama . The world must also decide how it will deal with these states, he says .
 Practically speaking, organizational and technical dangers are partly tractable, but they're not all the same thing .
 Certain dangers may be reduced if new proliferants make strenuous efforts to enhance the safety and reliability of their arsenals, of their nuclear operations, and of their personnel .
 Psychological dangers are far less tractable than physical dangers, according to the author of the book .
 The ways in which human beings make sense of the world around them are mysterious and difficult to manipulate . The ways of making sense of world around is mysterious and hard to manipulate, says CNN.com .
 There are circumstances under which nuclear arsenals may exist at lower levels of danger . Nuclear arsenals could exist under certain circumstances, such as in the Cold War .
 In some cases, it may be feasible for the international community as a whole (for example, through the International Atomic Energy Agency ), or for third parties, to provide expertise, advice, and equipment .
 Measures such as these, over time, may in certain circumstances help reduce tensions and mistrust between two or more countries that led them to seek nuclear arsenals in the first place . Measures such a move could help reduce the tensions between two nations that led to them seeking nuclear weapons .
 Where new proliferants are amenable to such policies and practices, the world community as a whole has a strong incentive to play a supporting role . The world community should play a strong role .
 Not all states will be willing to cooperate in safe proliferation programs . Some states may be wary of such programs because they fear they would undermine their nuclear capability .
 Iraqi and North Korean nuclear programs pose the most severe challenges to counterproproliferation policies . These states pose the greatest challenges to anti-nuke policies, writes Peter Bergen .
 In extreme cases, the world community may be justified in taking drastic measures to reduce or eliminate the danger . World community may need to take drastic measures in order to reduce the danger of terrorism, experts say .
 Coping with a world of proliferating nuclear weapons is a daunting task, in part because we have so little experience upon which to draw for insight and guidance . Copinging with the world's proliferating nukes is a difficult task, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Only a few states currently possess nuclear arsenals, and only a subset of those have come close to contemplating having to use them .
 The United States deliberately shared PAL information with Britain, France, and the USSR apparently to good effect . It is worth noting that the U.S. deliberately shared information with British, French, and USSR .
 While ""non-weaponized"" deterrents may reduce some elements of nuclear danger, they may increase uncertainty and have the unfortunate effect of disinclining leaders to confront nuclear issues until they are in the midst of a serious crisis, experts say .
 The Cuban missile crisis provides a number of important realworld correctives to this tendency . But we do not claim that the crisis is fully understood, nor that it is the only event of the nuclear age upon which we might draw .
 Nonproliferation policy must support studies that hold out some hope of illuminating palpable real-world problems through the exploration of real-life experiences, writes Peter Bergen .
 In the meantime, we should pay careful attention to the experiences of those who have actually had to contemplate the possibility of nuclear war . Those who have borne the responsibility for making decisions that affect its likelihood .
 This small group of men and women in positions of high political office are the only ones who have had the opportunity to test the propositions of proliferation optimists in the laboratory of real-world decision making .
 They alone have the experiences that would enable them to make judgments about whether nuclear weapons contribute to, or detract from, national security, they say .
 Some, like Robert McNamara, are profoundly pessimistic, and believe that a full appreciation of October 1962 points clearly in the direction of nuclear abolitionism . Some believe that October 1962 is a good sign for nuclear abolition .
 McNamara's experience of the missile crisis inclines him toward strong antiproliferation measures, coupled with deep cuts in great power nuclear arsenals . Surely this must lead to the conclusion that, insofar as achievable, we should seek to return to a non-nuclear world .
 As with the five holders of larger arsenals, so for India, Pakistan, and Israel there is good sense in moderation as well as openness . Israel, India and Pakistan have the five largest arsenals in the world .
 All these wanted the bomb for deeply defensive reasons to deter or repel a possible mortal assault on their own land . The bomb was designed to deter a possible attack on their land .
 There may be differences of opinion in other capitals on the gravity of the threat faced by the three countries . But what their neighbors should understand is that for each of the three, in its own way, the bomb is a defensive weapon .
 Openness about their defensive reasons for possessing nuclear arms can be helpful in limiting fearful responses of others . Openness may be helpful to limit fearful responses from others, experts say .
 It can hardly have escaped his attention that he and his colleagues did not so engage either the Soviets or the Cubans in the period leading up to the missile crisis . He said: "It's hardly surprising that he didn't so engage"
 At least as instructive as former U.S. policymakers are the experiences of the Cubans in 1962 . The people most often left out of the analysis of the Cuban missile crisis are Cubans .
 The leaders of new or aspiring nuclear states should take little comfort in the outcome of the near miss of October 1962 . If so, then the leaders of these or other new . or aspiring . nuclear states . should take no comfort in October 1962 near miss .