 It's questionable whether foreign policy experience is essential for anyone aspiring to the presidency, columnist Anne Applebaum writes .
 In word, deed, and appearance, he had been completely loyal, airing all of his private differences over policy with the president alone .
 Hardened Washington columnists were keenly aware of the indignities and humiliations Johnson suffered as vice president . Hardened D.C. columnists had known Johnson for decades, some had known him .
 Johnson may have been sticking to his “general policy of never speaking unless the president asked,” and behaving as he thought a vice president should . Johnson was to agree in public with whatever the president decided .
 In two months’s time, The Saturday Evening Post would publish an ‘exclusive’ account of the missile crisis . In that article, LBJ would not be mentioned in the article at all .
 LBJ recognized, undoubtedly, that Adlai Stevenson had been unfairly and maliciously depicted as advocating a ‘Munich” Stevenson . Stevenson's only sin was that he had dared to suggest a missile swap .
 Alsop’s remark sparked outrage in Johnson, whereas if he had been privy to the truth, the column might have been received with a shrug, or a caustic remark about the ignorance .
 "That’s a question for you to decide, and you decide on your own judgment," she says . "You decide without emotion, and without emotion," she adds . "I decide without fear. That's the answer to that question."
 Johnson revealed that he was still hoping against hope for some slight movement on Hanoi’s part, anything that might give him a pretext to extend the peace offensive . But in the conversation with Humphrey, Johnson said he still hoped against hope that he could extend the offensive .
 Beginning on January 28, Fulbright had initiated a series of hearings, some of which would be televised ‘gavel-to-gavel’ over the three national networks .
 All we ask is just proudly—if you want to—walk into a meeting hall with us, and to reason, and talk, and be prepared to give and take, and we'll try to do the same thing .
 More knowledge would have served him better than what he was allowed to know . But more . would have indisputably served . better than . what he knew .
 Max Holland is the editor of Washington Decoded . Tara Marie Egan is the editorial assistant to Max Holland . She is also the author of the book, "Washington Decoded"
 On October 15, McCone had been proven right and everyone else wrong . But more importantly, since the missiles were still discovered before they were operational, it gave the administration precious time to collect itself .
 The ‘Photo Gap’ that Delayed Discovery of Missiles in Cuba,” Studies in Intelligence, Vol. 1, is published by the U.S. intelligence community .
 LBJ's first impulse was to launch an attack against the sites rather than impose a blockade . Dallek suggested in his LBJ biography that since Johnson’s first impulse . was to attack the sites, that his confidence in his own judgment was subsequently undermined .
 Bartlett was JFK’s friend, dating back to the 1950s, and Alsop was known for having top sources of information . The article was thought to reflect the administration's preferred account .
 Even Theodore Sorensen, one of the chief myth-makers, began to have reservations about its impact . By the late 1960s, the “eyeball” mythology had burgeoned to a point .
 LBJ was referring to news reports about Goldwater’s October 9 luncheon address in Los Angeles . LBJ said Goldwater's October 9 address was a mistake . Goldwater was a Republican presidential candidate .
 The only other administration official who knew about the Cordier ploy was Secretary of State Rusk . Secretary Rusk was the only other official to know about the ploy .
 JFK would have been willing to accept something like the Laos settlement if it was offered . Arguably, JFK would likely have accepted such a deal .
 It's hard to understand why LBJ wouldn't have tried to work for something like that in Viet Nam . LBJ would have worked for something similar to LBJ's success in Vietnam .
 The Missile Crisis analogy seems inapt precisely because it involved a threat of total nuclear war . The analogy is inapt because of the threat of nuclear war, the author says .
 One could argue that fighting in Viet Nam was necessary precisely to prevent situations like Cuba from arising . The conflict in Vietnam was necessary to prevent similar situations from occurring .