 For thirteen days in October of 1962, the two most powerful nations in the world were staring each other down ""eyeball to eyeball"" in one of the most dangerous crises the world has ever seen . For 13 days, the U.S. and Russia faced each other in
 On October 14th, 1962, American U2 planes caught sight of Soviet missile sites being built in Cuba . American planes captured the sites in Cuban territory .
 President J.F Kennedy and his advisers deliberated on how to react to Khrushchev's actions . President Kennedy blocked Cuba in order to prevent missiles from reaching their intended destinations . The world held its breath for the next thirteen days .
 It was and is the nearest the world has ever come to nuclear war, having the possibility of multiple sides employing the use of nuclear weaponry . It was the closest to a nuclear war having multiple sides using nuclear weaponry, with multiple sides .
 The building of missile sites in Cuba levelled the field between the two superpowers . The U.S. was compelled to deal with the Soviets with a greater degree of caution and wariness .
 The Soviets were in a position to negotiate in terms of arms control because of their elevated status due to the Crisis . This meant that the Soviets were able to negotiate arms control with the Soviets .
 Khrushchev's main ambition of closing the missile gap failed . However, the U.S. was still clearly ahead of the Soviets in quantity of weapons in terms of quantity .
 The crisis was brought to a head on October 27th, 1962, where the beginning of a nuclear war seemed entirely possible . The beginning of the nuclear war was seen as possible .
 Kennedy raised the United States military's Defensive Condition status to DEFCON 3 on October 22nd . Kennedy had raised the U.S. military's defensive condition status to DeFCON 4 .
 Soviet MiG fighters attempt to intercept U-2 plane over Western Alaska . The plane left the airspace in time to avoid a conflict with Soviet MiGs .
 He believed the Soviets would interpret the U-2 plane as a recon mission precluding a nuclear first-strike, and act accordingly . The U.2 plane was shot down by the U.S. during the Second World War .
 Kennedy's advisors believed the shooting to be an act of planned escalation of the situation of the Soviets . It was not known the the command to shoot was given by a Soviet commander in Cuba rather than Moscow .
 Kennedy's advisers pressured him to attack and invade Cuba . However Kennedy chose to wait for further hostile action on the part of the Soviets .
 Had Kennedy not chosen to wait out the situation, the Cold War would have turned into a ""hot war"", a nuclear one . Kennedy chose to wait until the situation was over .
 The situation was further intensified by the Chiefs of Staff and their respective commands and their statuses . For the first time in history, the United States had raised their Strategic Air Command forces to the Defensive Condition DEFCON 2 on October 24th .