 Americans across the Nation will conduct various activities aimed at making this Sixth Observance of Captive Nations Week the most impressive and instructive one yet . As in the past five years and in accordance with the spirit and content of this law, Americans .
 The Johnson proclamation is not substantially different from the one released by Pres. Kennedy last year, and in one respect it is even weaker . It's even weaker than last year's version of the proclamation .
 President Kennedy 1 s proclamation at least specified the time -honored American principle of national self-determination for all the captive nations .
 The proclamation repeats a serious error of omission found in the previous Kennedy declaration . Moreover, the current proclamation repeats the same mistake of omission .
 Evidently for the purpose of accommodating M good"" Communists as against ""bad"" ones, no mention is made of Communism as a tool of ideologic deception . The ultimate and determining reality of Soviet Russian imperio -colonialism is completely overlooked .
 Since 1959, some elements in the Department of State have attempted in a variety of ways to play down the resolution and, indeed, the whole captive nations issue . It is no secret that since 1959, when Khrushchev denounced Congress 1 action, certain elements have attempted to play it down
 Down to the present, * they have succeeded in influencing our Chief Executives to issue relatively weak proclamations that bear only a general similarity to the resolution . The resolution is expected to be signed by the end of next week .
 In large measure they have also been responsible for the late timing of the successive proclamations which gives inadequate encouragement to our citizens in preparing for the observances .
 He is the author of the Captive Nations Week Resolution which was passed by Congress in 1959 .
 This resolution provides that the third week of July be set aside each year to remind the world of the nations y held in bondage by Russian imperialism .
 At the beginning of each year, the National Captive Nations Committee turns to the White House for an early presidential proclamation . Every year the grand stall is initiated .
 The Johnson Proclamation was issued three weeks in advance of the Week . However, such as it is, the record has been broken by the record .
 The proclamation was released at 4m. on a Saturday when . few or no reporters are regularly about* the White House . Few or no journalists regularly report on the president's actions .
 Our appeasing policy of sile nce was proJPgrl y served,. Why the Captive Nations are de -emphasized.
 These facts are intertwined with the Government's policy of silence regarding the captive nations . The Government has been silent on the issue of captive nations for years .
 The Administration's dominant political desire not to irritate Khrushchev with any recital of truths that would keep our citizens and the world mindful of the fate of the long list of captive nations .
 In the spirit of ""peaceful coexistence, "" while the Russian dictator freely speaks out in Egypt against "" United States imperialism"" and ""bourgeois nationalism" in Scandinavia . In Scandinavia, Scandinavia attempts to justify the enslavement of the non-Russian Baltic nations,
 Russian fables will be believed by millions all over the world . Heard often and long enough without refutation, they will never be refuted . Russia's fabled fables are heard often and often without refutations .
 Another reason offered for the de-emphasis on Captive Nations Week is the need for improving relations and reducing tensions with the Soviet Union .
 Some in our Government would like to oblige the Soviet Russian imperio -colonialists on this score . Some in Britain would rather oblige them on this .
 Khrushchev has already found outspoken supporters for this unilateral psycho-political disarmament in our -county . For example, George F Kennan, who enjoys a brilliant reputation for success through successive error, severely criticizes the Captive Nations Week Resolution .
 He makes the observation that the resolution ""has freed no captive nations, nor is it likely to do so," he says . He says it has not freed any captive nations nor is likely to .
 By its very nature, a resolution is an ideological commitment that necessitates action and implementation . This requires not only reason but also will. Resolution is ideological . Resolution is a commitment that must be followed by implementation .
 In our failure to garner the necessary .will to defeat Moscow in the Cold War, we have . arrived at the irrational position of believing that world tensions will evaporate . The less we say or do about the captive nations, the less we . say .
 In fact, many in our Governmen have begun to indulge in the self-hypnotism of imputing nationalism to Communist re-nomenomenalism . " 3 i gimes in Europe and Asia with the wishful hppe of weaning them away from colonialist Moscow
 The Gomulkas, Kadarsy and Gheorghiu-Dejs are foolish enough not to be aware of this basic reality of ultimate dependence on Moscow . What's more, there is a marked strain of naivete in this selfhypnotic position, namely that
 The survival of the Russian regimes depends on the Russian imperium . Regardless of how long their leashes may be, the survival of their regimes depend on the Russia .
 This won't be the first time we have contributed heavily to the preservation and growth of the Soviet Russian Empire to our own national detriment, says the British ambassador .
 Americans are dedicated to the ideals of the resolution passed by Congress in 1959 . Fortunately, in all sections of our country Americans are committed to the resolution .
 They seek implementation of the policy of silence, accommodation, and illusory interdependence with the Soviet Russian Empire . They seek its implementation .
 The captive nations movement has grown so that the majority of our States formally proclaim the Week . Every major city holds an annual observance of the week .
 In Congress, support for the resolution's implementation steadily increases . The resolution was passed by the House of Representatives .
 Many citizens are unfamiliar with the long list of captive nations . Still, many of our citizens are unaware of the list of nations .
 It is a misconcepti on to thi nk that the only captive nations are in_C_entral -Europe . The majority of them are in the Soviet Union and Asia .
 It is this valid image of the Soviet Union, as a prison house of captive nations, that horrifies Khrushchev . On the psycho-political front in the Cold War, we could with relatively little effort demolish Soviet Russian propaganda by concentrating on the captive non-Russian nations in
 Editor-in-Chief John M Fisher, Loyd Wright and Karl Baarslag. National Security Council members of the U.S. Senate will vote on the next year .
 Anthony T Bouscaren Intelligence Editor . Major General Garrison B Coverdale, USA USA Anthony Harrigan Economics Editor Dr. Anthony T. Harrigan economics Editor . Dr. Garrison B. Anthony Houscara is the editor of this article .
 Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Admiral Felix B Stump, U.S. Dr. Gerhart Niemeyer, US Navy Admiral Felix Stump .
 National Editor William Gill, Edward Teller Duane Thorin and William Gill . Strategy and Military Affairs Editor Dr. T L Shen and Dr. William Teller .
 Kenneth M Piper Henry Duque Hughston M; McBain o5 Vice President Stephen L Donchess Wade Fetzer, Jr. Ernest Loebbecke Senior Vice President . Kenneth Piper: "Piper, Piper, Duque, Hughston, Jr., Jr. is
 It reports on national and international developments affecting the nation's security served except that permission is granted for reproduction in whole for the information of the Council's over 3500 member companies and institutions .
 Special subscription rates available to educators, students, clergy and members of the American Security Council .
 Additional copies available at 25(1 each postpaid for non-members) and 10^ each (postpaid for meml>ers) Additional copies of the book are available at the end of the year .
 Serious questions are being raised about the nation's internal security programs* These questions have far-reaching implications, not only for Government, but for private industry as well .
 The United States insists on riding both horns of the dilemma . But schizo-like, the U.S. insists on using both horns .
 Nikita Khrushchev waives inspection rights on a nuclear test ban, the orbiting of nuclear weapons, and the production of enriched plutonium and uranium . Negotiators place child-like faith in the word of Nikita Khrushchev .
 We profess a deep and abiding suspicion regarding the minions Khrushchev assigns to ferret out our armament secrets . On the other hand, we continue to profess a strong suspicion of the minions assigned to our armaments .
 An article published in the May issue of THE BULLETIN OF THE ATOMIC SCIENTISTS points unmistak ably in that direction . TS5Brre~db servers are now showing that they are working on a new system .
 The article was written by Washington attorney Harold P Green, a Washington attorney with impressive credentials in the field of security .
 Mr Green drew up the statement of charges in the most famous of them all - the Oppenheimer Case . While with the Atomic Energy Commisx sion's legal division he handled a number of security cases .
 In 1955, he authored the measure which led to the creation of the Commission on Government Security . Subsequently, he was counsel for the Senate Subcommittee on Government Reorganization . In 1955 he wrote the measure that led to creation of a Commission .
 Since then he has specialized in defending persons accused of being security risks . He says he has yet to lose one of these cases .
 Using statistical data on the history of the AEC's Q-Clearance program, Mr Green contends in his article that; "The overall attitude of security officials has changed"
 Six years ago, most would have described their basic mission as keeping subversives and security risks out of sensitive positions . But now, they say their mission is to protect the nation's most sensitive people .
 Mr Green claims that a person with substantially derogatory information in his background has a much greater chance of obtaining an AEC Q-Clearance than a 'secret' clearance .
 AEC security program -has acquired a-greater degree of sophistication, understanding, compassion, and courage, says AEC . Security program has acquired a greater level of sophistication .
 In a recent interview, Mr Green told me that he had not intended to single out the AEC in his article . He said changes he said were made by the BULLETIN'S editors after he approved the proofs .
 There are no blacks and whites in security cases, only varying shades of gray . However, from his point of view, there are no black and white in security .
 Fy ou can tell from a person's past behavior whether he is apt to indulge in espionage . Fyou can also tell from the past behavior of a person who is likely to indulge espionage .
 The AEC's Division of Security, and Robert E Tharp, Director of Personnel Security, respectively, do not subscribe to Harold Green's thesis . We interviewed the AEC director and assistant director of personnel security .
 All of us recognize that Communism is an even greater threat today than it was in the past . "We are just as much concerned about Communist affiliations today as we were in 1955," says CNN.com .
 If the government has indeed let down its security guard, the ramifications in private industry are obvious . The government has been accused of letting down security guard .
 Many times that many are, of course, employed by industry on classified work for the Department of Defense .
 Traditionally, industry has relied heavily on government security officers . Traditionally it has relied on government officers to guard against attacks .
 Access to secret or top-secret data cannot be granted unless the government first provides clearance . Access to top secret data can only be granted if the government provides clearance to the data .
 If derogatory information is turned up on an applicant or employee the case must be turned over to the government . Yet even then even then the case is turned over .
 Much of the day-to-day implementation of security measures falls to industry . Under DOD regulations the private contractor is held responsible for safeguarding all classified information .
 "It is difficult for me to think of any more foolish economy. It is difficult ... for me, I'm not sure what kind of a foolish economy ..."" 4 Obviously, in the field of internal security the government should set both the standards and the pace .
 Top-notch security executive: 'It is particularly difficult to get a clearance denied, or once granted, to get it revoked' But today, according to one security executive with a major aero-space firm, "it is particularly hard to get clearance denied"
 Dr. Edgar Morris Edgar Ansel Mowrer International Law & Dr. stefan p ossony Dr. Robert Morris . Dr. Morris was born in New York City .
 Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Jd™™ 1 ^""j fStum PUSN {Ret ) OrT L Shen National Editor William Gill Dr E d ward Teller Duane Thorin Strategy and Military Affairs Editor Dr. Gerhart Niemeyer .
 Kenneth M Piper, Henry Duque Hughston M McBain, Jr. Vice President Stephen L Donchess yVade Fetzer, Jr., Jr. Kenneth Piper was the President of the U.S. President George W. Bush, President Richard Nixon, Secretary of State
 Annual subscripor in part if context is preserved, credit given and two copies are given . Two copies are available at the rate of $12.99 .
 Special subscription rates available to educators, students, clergy and clergy and meml>ers .
 Additional copies available at 25tf each postpaid for non -members and I0<t each post paid for meml>ers . Additional copies of the book are available for non-members .
 The Urban League and The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People were well aware of the early threats to infiltrate their ranks . The older Negro organizations were able to oust the Communists and dissuade others .
 In observing picket line demonstrations at the Board of Education and at the site of temporary classroom construction, several local Communists were identified .
 Charles McCord identified as head of 42nd Ward Communist Club . McCord was a long time associate of CP vice chairman, Claude Lightfoot .
 Eugene Felcirtian, a writer and one time Daily Worker e ditor, was one of two writers to write for the paper . Another writer was Eugene Firtian who wrote for the site .
 Lightfoot, himself/ later took part in a demonstration ""for food and jobs"" on January 31, 1964 at the offices or the Illinois Public Aid Commission in Chicago . Lightfoot later took to the streets of Chicago to take part in the demonstration .
 Ehrlich was back again trying ing to lead a ""hunger -rharch"" on Governor Otto Kerner's Chicago office . In Cleveland, racial tensions have centered around schools .
 Tension reached a peak in February when a white minister was accidentally killed during a demonstration at a school construction site . Tension has been high since the death of the white minister who was killed in February .
 Eric J Reinthaler was named on the list of possible candidates for mayor of Cleveland, Ohio, for mayor . The Cleveland mayoral candidate was named in April .
 The article identified Reinthaler as a co-chairman of CORE's Cleveland finance committee . Police say he played a ""major role 1 ' in demonstrations at the School Board .
 On July 19, 1962, he was released from the Federal Prison at Milan, Michigan where he had served 15 months for violation of the noncommunist affidavit section of the Taft-Hartley Act . He was released in July 1962 .
 Civil rights demonstrators have engaged in sit-ins directed against several downtown banks in the St. Louis area . Demonstrators claim racially biased hiring practices .
 The demonstrations have been conducted by CORE but a non-member of CORE, William S Massingale, attracted the attention of Denny Walsh, a St.CORE member . The demonstrations were conducted by . CORE .
 Massingale was active in sit-ins at the St. Louis Globe -Democrat's headquarters . He was a member of the National Socialist Party of Germany .
 The rent strikes have been organized by the Community Council for Housing, a local group headed by Jesse Gray . The rent strike is the latest in a long line of rent strikes .
 Jesse Gray was called to testify before the House Committee on Un-American Activities on February 3, 1960 . Jesse Gray testified before the committee on the House of Representatives . Gray was a member of the Democratic Party .
 Gray was arrested on June 30, 1964 by police in Chicago during a demonstration of ACT, a new militant giroup . Gray was a member of the ACT .
 The most spectacular demonstration of Communist efforts to infiltrate the civil rights movement occurred in one of the world's most spectacular cities .
 "The number of arrests testify to the fact that the demonstrations we re neither peaceful nor law abiding," says protester . Demonstrators say they are not peaceful or law abiding . "We're not law abiding. We're not peaceful," says one protester .
 Rosanne Forest was among the people arrested on March 11 at the Cadillac showroom demonstration . Forest was one of the demonstrators arrested at the demonstration .
 Mark Comfort, son-in-law of Robert Black, an Oakland, California printer, identified in 1953 testimony as a CP member . Nora Lapin, daughter of Adam Lapin and Bettina Aptheker, were CP members of the Daily Worker . Bettina and Carl Gran
 The founding convention of the new Communist youth group was hastily transferred from Chicago to New York City . Rev. Rev. Jesse Jackson was the keynote speaker at the convention .
 Among those who issued the call to the convention were Tracy Sims and Michael Myerson of the ""Ad Hoc Committee to End Discrimination""", the group which organized the San Francisco racial demonstrations .
 Also listed in the youth group's press release were Robert Baum, idenJiftgias^a^ha^^ chairman of the Bridgeport CORE chapter, Edward Reftwich, a ""CORE activist"" in Bridgeport and Michael Sheidrick from Paterson,
 Yellow Springs, Ohio, is a small Midwestern college town just east of Dayton . The quiet village of Yellow Springs is one of the nation's smallest towns .
 Antioch College is the site of Antioch College, an institution which has frequently become embroiled in controversy . The institution has been accused of racial discrimination and sexual violence .
 On March 14, 1964 several hundred students from Antioch and other nearby colleges engaged in a mass picketing protest aimed at a local barber who had refused to cut Negroes 1 hair . The picketing took place in the town of Antioch, Antioch .
 The students rocked and nearly overturned the car of a doctor trying to gfet through . The crowd, a&A in violation of an injunction against mass picketing, defied police requests to disperse .
 4fc had to resort to tear gas after repeated warnings from the local police . The local police, reinforced by sheriff's deputies and officers from neighboring towns, had to use tear gas . 4fc: "After repeated warnings, after repeated threats, the police finally resorted to using tear gas
 Red-eyed but still defiant, the crowd returned and finally hac^^ to be moved by a police skirmish line with nightsticks held at chest level . The crowd returned to the streets, but were eventually forced to be cowering under the police line .
 On the following Monday, most of the stud&rfts were released to the Deans of their respective colleges . Several ringleaders were required to post bond .
 Some opponents of the civil rights movement have denounced it with the sweeping charge that it is all a Communist plot . At the same time, some opponents have denounced the movement as a communist plot .
 Both attitudes are equi-distant from reality and represent a refusal to face up squarely to difficult problems . Both attitudes should be seen as an attempt to solve the problems of the world's most serious problems .
 Both attitudes s erve the Communist cause by' inhibiting reasonable discussion of the entire question, permitting the Communists to continue their present efforts and intensifying emotional attitudes capable of producing the bitter harvest most desired by the Communists .
 James Atkinson Intelligence Editor Major General Garrison B, Coverdale, USA Economics Editor Dr. James Atkinson . Atkinson is the Editor of the Intelligence and Economics of the United States .
 Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN National Editor William Gill Strategy and Military Affairs Editor Dr. Lev E Dobriansky Foreign Editor Frank J Johnson Internal Security Editor Lee R Pennington .
 President John M Fisher Senior Vice President Kenneth M Piper Vice President Stephen L Donchess Vice President John G Sevcik Vice President Russell E White Secretary-Treasurer Cyri) W Hooper NATIONAL STRATEGY COMMITTEE Loyd Wright Lieutenant General Edward M Almond
 Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN General Albert C Wedemeyer, USA SENIOR Bennett Archambault Lloyd L Austin Charles S Craigmile, Robert Donner Henry Duque Wade Fetzer, Jr. Edward Teller, Jr., Rear Adm. Chester Ward and General Albert
 Dr. Robert W Galvin, Fred M Gillies and Karl Baarslag are the co-authors of the book . The book will be published by Dr. Galvin .
 Snen Duane Thorin Stanley J Tracy ADVISORY BOARD . Clifford F Hood Wayne A Johnston William H Kendall. Stanley J
 Washington Report is published four times monthly by the American Security Council . It is published by the council .
 The Council reports on national and international developments affecting the nation's security for the information of the Council's over 3500 member companies and institutions .
 Special subscription rates available to educators, students, clergy and meml>ers .
 Additional copies available at 25^ each postpaid for non-members and 10^ for members . Additional copies of the book are available for free .
 All rights are granted to reproduction in whole or in part if context is preserved . U.S. Security Council Executive Offices are responsible for the content of this article .
 Join me is thanking you lor your thoughtfaiaess. It was good of you to make these copies avail* a&le to us and they join us . Join me in thanking you for your support. Join me for your thoughts .
 J. Tavel Trotter ‘Tels. Tels. Mr Callahan... m Mr Gale . Mr Gale: Mr Gale, Mr Gale and Mr Rosen . Mr Rosen: . Mr Suilivan .
 President John M FISHER is the president of the American Security Council . Motorola, Inc. is a Motorola subsidiary of the U.S. intelligence community . Motorola was founded by Motorola in 1996 .
 This has been prepared on a non-partisan basis . This is the Washington Report from the U.S. Navy .
 National Strategy Committee devoted its main attention to developing affirmative recommendations for the consideration of government and of our members .
 We are most interested in any suggestions you may have for improvement of this study . Thus, ^since^ thisstudy will be the prime reference point in our next studies .
 Letter acknowledgedjby Director 8/12/64. V Captioned book forwarded Assistant to the Director Belmont ;8/5/64 by John M Fisher, PresidentpA®£g| .
 Sets out guidelines for strategy-bringing together liberal, moderate, and conservative thinking . Sets out strategy- bringing together liberal and moderate thinking .
 Recommends that we use tougher approach in dealing with communists; that U.S. wage counterwar, measure for measure, and change our ""defensive"" position; that we work to effect internal transformation within Soviet State, that we demonstrate will to win .
 Study recommends updating internal security programs in accordance with recommendations in 1957 of Commission on Government Security established by Congress . Study also recommends updating security programs with updated internal security .
 ASC financed and operated by private industry as national research and information center on subversive activities . ASC financed, operated by . private industry, as national . research center on . subversive activities. ASC financed .
 ASC indicates readiness to identify its members publicly as formers with Bureau . ASC indicates that it is ready to identify members of the Bureau of Standards .
 Captioned book was forwarded to Assistant to the Director Belmont on 8/5/64 by John M Fisher, President of the American Security Council .
 Its purpose is to bring together the best thinking (liberal, moderate, and conservative) that will enable this country to win the cold war . The purpose of the organization is to help the U.S. win the Cold War with Russia .
 In encouraging Soviet moderation and eventual change of heart, we adopt a fallacious policy of moderation and conciliation . In Soviet policy, we encourage moderation, conciliation and moderation, writes Andrew Hammond . In Russia, he says, "We are not going to go to war"
 The study indicates our foreign policy frees no one and actually results in less rather than more freedom throughout the world . The study was published in the New York Review of Foreign Policy .
 In the meantime, we must demonstrate the will to win and mount psychological and economic offensives . We must demonstrate that we can win, and we must mount psychological, economic and economic attacks . We need to show the will and show that we are committed to winning .
 It is essential we improve our relations with NATO nations, reappraise neutralism, which is incompatible with victory . We need to formulate a new policy which will defeat communism in Latin America, he says .
 On 6/8/62 John M Fisher, President of ASC, wrote to the Director and requested he participate in this study . The study was conducted by the Director of ASC .
 His services were satisfactory and he is on the Special Correspondents 1 List . He was on a Special Correspondent 1 List for his services .
 The files disclose ASC is an organization financed and operated by private industry . ASC is a national research and information center on subversive activities for its members . ASC was founded by the American Security Council .
 Past inquiries indicated that sonie people believe ASC is closely related to the Bureau . Past inquiries have indicated that . people think ASC is related to . The Bureau .
 The organization 1 steadiness to identify its members as being formerly associated with the Bureau. This is probably attributable to the organization's steady steadiness .
 Among the ""experts"" on the Strategy Staff are four former agents of the Bureau and one former Assistant Director . For instance, in the extensive lists of participants in this study, among the "experts" among the participants are former agents .
 All references to the Director and the FBJ are favorable . References to Director and FBI are favorable. References to director and FBI .
 The study begins with a quotation from Mr Hoover's address to the Brotherhood of the Washington Hebrew Congregation on 12/4/63 .
 President of American Zinc, Lead & Smelting Company . President of Motorola, Inc. Senior Vice President KENNETH M PIPER Motorola . Retired USMC Retired Presidenl American Library of Information .
 The Nafck Strategy Committee devoted' its main attention to developonfg recommendations for the consideration of government and of our members .
 The American Security Council is organized as the means through which its member companies and institutions 'work together and cooperate with the government' The council was organized as a means of working together and cooperating .
 If you'd like, we'd be pleased to send you a working draft of our next study ""The Role of Business in the Cold War"" when it's ready for review and crittcis; John M<fj Fisher President of the U.S.
 President of the U.S. Library of Information, American Zinc, Lead & Smelting Company President, American Security Council Senior Vice President John M FISHER and Motorola, Inc. KENNETH M PIPER Motorola Inc. President Howard I YOUNG, President
 The National Strategy Committee devoted its main attention to developing afo officers firmative recommendations for the consideration of government u and of our members .
 The American Security Council is organized as the means throu^t which its member companies and institutions work together and cooperate with the government . O a
 This study will be a prime reference point in our next studies, we are -most-in-terestedin any suggestions you may have for improvement of this study .
 Top-level civilian National Strategy Committee of the American Security Council today recommended the adoption of a victory strategy in the Cold War .
 President of the American Security Council described the study as M a synthesis of the best liberal, moderate and conservative thinking-on-ht>w""w 7 e-^^ — — — .
 The proposal was drafted by 28 national figures on the National Strategy Committee of the American Security Council . It was drafted in cooperation with representative colleges, universities and organizations .
 The chairman of the Committee is Robert Galvin, Chairman of the Board of Motorola, Inc. , and the co-chairman is Loyd Wright, former president of the American Bar Association who headed the Commission on Governmore .
 Never before have so many opinionmaking groups participated in the development of national strategy recommendations . The U.S. Senate will hold a series of hearings on the issue of national security .
 Study concludes that unless the U.S. adopts an affirmative Cold War policy, it will continue to lose the Cold War in the same way a football team would lose if it were prohibited from crossing the 50-yard* line .
 If any one of the elements of this formula equals zero, the total power of a nation equals zero . If any element in the formula is zero, a nation's power is zero . The formula is based on the fact that the power of the nation is zero.
 The National Strategy Committee finds this national goal ""utterly irreconcilable"" with the Communist goal of total victory through the overthrow of all non -Communist societies and institutions .
 In place of the present policies which encourage the Communists in their drive for world rule, the U.S. must develop a strategy of victory which will provide real inducements to the Communists to call off the Cold War .
 "We aim at a true reconciliation and peace between free.peoples.pe.org. Rather, we aim to a true . reconciliation" rather than peace between the two sides of the world .
 Our national power should be applied peacefully and effectively by utilizing the centuries-old principle of declaration of contraband . The use of the centuries old principle of declaring contraband is a key part of national security .
 Itisrecommended -that-t-he-President apply this principle by declaring the entire Western Hemisphere to be a peace zone . With all Communist war material, including fuel, declared to be contraband, should be declared contraband .
 We must give concrete evidence of our willingness to extend our own war of liberation into the enemy camp. We must be willing, and give concrete proof of our willingness, to extend ourselves into enemy camp . We must extend our war of liberate into enemy camps.
 The cheapest and quickest way to win the war in South Vietnam is to begin with one or more of the privileged sanctuaries like North Vietnam and Communist -held parts of Laos . The cheapest way of winning the war is to start with North Vietnam or Communist-held Laos .
 If these countries were cut off as a base of supply and sanctuary for the Viet Cong, both the-military situation and the all -important psychological atmosphere in South Vietnam would be transformed . The situation would be dramatically transformed .
 "We have no offensive psychological action policy to match that of the Communists," says Communist Party leader Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not going to tolerate any offensive psychological actions"
 A psychological offensive offers us the best chance to win the Cold War without nuclear conflict without nuclear war, says Dr. Peter Bergen . He says a psychological offensive is the best way to win without war without conflict .
 Those who live under the miseries of Communism, who know it first hand, are the most fertile target for psychological warfare . Those who know first hand are the subject of psychological warfare.
 A massive effort directed at these people is the best way to bring maximum internal pressure on the Communist regimes, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 This effort should embody a full-scale ideological offensive to open the closed Soviet society, a program to place major stress on Soviet imperio -colonialism, and a special program to rally .
 The latter program should not incite these people to outright revolt unless there is a solid basis to believe that such revolts would succeed . Such revolts should not be seen as likely to succeed .
 Mr Galvin stressed that the individuals, organizations and institutions who officially cooperated in this study do not necessarily agree with all specific recommendations . He emphasized that the recommendations were the sole responsibility of the National Strategy Committee .
 The 28 -member National Strategy Committee of the American Security Council is made up of 18 present or former heads of ASC member companies and 10 men who have played important roles in the nation's history . However, he said that the study fairly represents the consensus viewpoint of these participants .
 The latter 10 men include the Chief United States strategist in World War II, a former Commander-in-Chief, Pacific, former Chief of Staff to General Douglas MacArthur, the ""father of the 'H 1 bomb"", the Commander of jthe World . War II_allied
 Douglas MacArthur Bennett Archambault was Chairman of the Board, Stewart -Warner Corporation Lloyd L, Austin and General Mark W Clark were also on the board of the Citadel .
 William Kendall was President of Illinois Central Railroad . William H Kendall was president of Louisville & Nashville Railroad Co. President, Illinois Central . Kendall was the president of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad Company . Kendall died of a heart attack in 1903 .
 Ernest J Loebbecke President, Title Insurance & Trust Company . Hughs ton M McBain Retired. Hughston M Mcbain Retire. Hugh Mcbains Retired .
 Dr. A, B, McKee, Jr President, Forest Lumber Company Imperial Valley Lumber company . Admiral Ben Moreell Former Chairman of the Board, Jones 6c Laughlin Steel Company . Dr. Moreell was President of the Laughlin steel Company .
 The American Legion, American Farm Bureau Federation, American Society for Industrial Security, International House, Association of American Physicians and Surgeons . The Veterans of Foreign Wars, many other national organizations and a number of local and regional civic and business groups .
 Charles Malik, former president of the United Nations General Assembly; Mrs. Charles Malik . Charles Malik was the U.N. General Assembly's first female leader . Mrs. Malik is the wife of former U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Senator William F Knowland of California; author more 9 Russell Kirk . Benjamin Gitlow, former member of the Praesidium of the Communist Internationa; Dr. Dr. William F. Knowland, former U.S. senator, author more .
 Dr. Stanley K Hornbeck, former director of the State Department's Office of Far Eastern Affairs, will speak at 9 p.m. ET . Dr. Hornbeck is also a former State Department director of State Dept. Office of Foreign Office .
 Emilio Nunez Portuondo is the former chairman of the United Nations Security Council . He is a former member of the U.N. Security Council member . He says he has been in contact with many of the world's top diplomats .
 The ASC was the U.S. Army -Intelligence Corps and now-administratwe . The ASC is now the Army's largest intelligence agency .
 Mr Fisher stated that the American Security Council is a non-profit, non-partisan association operated by 3500 businesses and private institutions to meet their Cold War responsibilities .
 The Free World and the Communist Bloc are locked in a final war to determine whether the world will live under dictatorship or under freedom . August 12, 1964 is the 50th anniversary of the first World War of the Cold War .
 If we lose this war the lights of freedom will go out all over the world, possibly not to be relighted for centuries . "If we lose the war the light of freedom would go out," says George W. Bush . "The lights of free speech will not be rel
 Standing between America and its goal is the Communist empire* s drive for world dominion . Standing between U.S. and world domination is America's failure to achieve its goal .
 The Communist goal, restated again and again, is the overthrow of all non-Communist societies and institutions . "The Communist goal is. to overthrow all nonCommunist society and institutions," he said .
 Although the Communists have clearly declared war on us, the U.S. has failed to decide that it, too, seeks victory in the present conflict . Yet, despite the Communists' declared war against us, America has not decided that it too seeks victory .
 For nearly two decades the United States has patiently pursued the policy of containment . Instead of containment, the U.S. has pursued a policy of non-intervention .
 The United States is softening its policy of containment and shifting to the far more conciliatory strategy of interdependence . Nonetheless, the U.S. is today softening . It is shifting .
 The basic assumption in the strategy of interdependence is that by helping the Soviet Union overcome its economic difficulties, by seeking areas of common action, and by working toward a ""convergence"" of values and purposes, we can gradually bring about the fundamental alteration of Soviet purpose which containment
 The idea of convergence is based on the belief that as the U.S. becomes more socialistic and the Soviet Union adopts more Western methods, there will soon be no differences between the two systems and, therefore, no conflict .
 Every act of moderation or compromise, every retreat or concession on our part, has led not to reciprocity on the part of the Communists, but to new pressure . Not toward peace, but toward war, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The strategy of interdependence has already been the basis for the no-inspection Nuclear Test Bah Treaty, the credit sale of wheat to Russia, and the recent moves to develop even more trade with Communist nations . The new strategy has already led to the reduction of enriched uranium and plutonium
 The net effect of policy of conciliation and accommodation is to affirm the Soviet leadership in its view that world Communism and its own hegemony are practical goals which do not involve undue risk, writes David Cameron .
 "Instead of preserving peace, our present strategies immeasurably increase the danger of nuclear war," says Putin . Putin: "Instead, instead of preserving ... peace, we increase the risk of war"
 A policy of conciliation and accommodation can never be effective in dealing with a dictator -aggre s sor . History shows that this can't be no more effective in . dealing with Khrushchev than it was in dealing . with Hitler . History . shows that . this can be no
 Is a defensive policy, with all this implies strategically and psychologically and psychologically. Is it a policy? Is it really a strategy? Is this a strategy or strategy? We need to find out .
 It abandons the initiative to the Communists and allows them to choose the field of battle . The U.S. has been in a state of war with the Communist Party .
 It weakens the belief of ""fence-sitters" in our ultimate victory and dismays some of our most loyal friends . It saps our will to make sacrifices, raises false hopes and encourages national complacency. It sape our will .
 The belief that the U.S. will never take the offensive assures the Reds that they can pursue their objective without risk to themselves . The United States never takes the offensive .
 They have the world to win and nothing to lose by continuing to wage the Cold War against us, their passive adversary . The U.S. should not be engaged in a Cold War with the West, they say . The Cold War is over and over, but the world has nothing
 "Our military, economic, industrial and technological capabilities exceed those of any country on the face of the globe," says President Obama .
 While the United States has the military capacity to win a hot war, no aggressor will dare start a war . The U.S. has the ability to win the war, however, it is unlikely that any aggressor would want to do so .
 It is urgent that we win the Cold War befor the Communists achieve a technological breakthrough which may reverse this balance of power . Thus, it is urgent to win this Cold War .
 Unless the U.S. adopts an affirmative Cold War policy, it will continue to lose the Cold War . The United States would lose if it were prohibited from crossing the 50-yard line, a football team would lose .
 There can and must be a strategy not merely to deter aggression, but to transform aggressors into peaceful governments . The U.S. should try to change the Communist strategy of aggression, the author says .
 In place of the present policies which encourage the Soviets in their drive for world rule, the U.S. must develop a strategy of victory which will provide real inducements . to the Communists to call off the Cold War .
 We do not advocate a conquest by the United States of the peoples of the Communist Bloc, Rather, we aim at a true reconciliation and peace between free peoples . We aim at peace between the two sides, rather than a conquest .
 Such a reconciliation will not be possible until there is a basic change in the nature of their government-until their government stops trying to conquer the rest of the world . Such a change in government is not possible, says the author .
 Once a national objective of victory is adopted, it is imperative that we demonstrate that we have the national will to accomplish this objective . We need to show that we are capable of accomplishing this objective, he says .
 A quarantine should be instituted to keep more contraband from being moved into or between the countries of the Western Hemisphere . A quarantine is needed to keep contraband in or between Western Hemisphere countries .
 It must be made clear to the Asian Communists that the U.S. will not allow them to limit so-called ""wars of liberation"" SUMMARY -7 to our side of the line .
 If these countries were cut off as a base of supply arid sanctuary for the Viet Cong, both the military situation and the all -important psychological atmosphere in South Vietnam would be transformed, 3.3 .
 "A psychological offensive offers us the best chance to win the Cold War without nuclear conflict," says Vladimir Putin . "They war against us continuously; we do not war against them," says Putin . Putin: A psychological offensive is the best way to win Cold War .
 This effort should embody a full-scale ideological offensive to open the closed Soviet society, a program to place major stress on Soviet imperio-colonialism, and a special program to rally democratic forces in Eastern Europe into an effective opposition .
 In place of trade deals which strengthen economies of Communist countries, we recommend a limited trade embargo against them .
 This does not mean that all trade with the Soviet Bloc should necessarily be stopped . Instead, it means that trade with Russia should not be allowed to continue .
 It should be severely curtailed in those products which the Communists need most to continue the Cold War. But it should be curtailed .
 This would include not only military equipment, but all articles which increase the industrial potential of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union would also include all articles that increase its industrial potential . This would be the first time a Soviet Union has been allowed to open a Soviet factory .
 Economic aid programs must be coordinated with America's objective of victory in the Cold War, says George W. Bush . U.S. must also coordinate economic aid programs with Cold War objectives .
 The U.S. should gradually terminate economic aid as we have practiced it since the end of World War II . Priority should be given to deserving allies and nations, but we must cut off aid to all countries which are hostile or are aiding or abetting Communist expansion . i
 To restore the confidence of our NATO allies and build a . permanent and satisfactory unity in the Western.alliance . The combined European NATO nations should be treated as a full partner rather than as a satellite. To restore . confidence, the combined European . NATO . nations should . be treated
 The combined European NATO nations should be granted possession and control of nuclear weapons for joint defense against air, missile and ground attack . The weapons should be used for defense, and for deterrent and retaliatory purposes, the authors say .
 It is precisely this change in strategy which must be considered the first step toward a constructive evolution of the Soviet regime . The change of strategy is a first step to a constructive development of Soviet regime, writes David Cameron .
 The Alliance for Progress, of itself, is not enough to combat the spread of Communism in Latin America . It is not the only way to combat Communism in the U.S. and Latin America, it says .
 "We are not opposed to an intelligent economic aid program for our neighbors to the south," says President Barack Obama . "We're not opposed ... but we're very proud of our neighbors," says Obama .
 U.S. must recognize that the real cause of Communism is Communists --not poverty per se. Communism is Communism . But the U. S. must also recognize that poverty is not poverty .
 America must do all it can to encourage and strengthen its friends among the intellectual, political and military groups in Latin America . America must also strengthen its friendship with Latin American groups, says President Obama .
 Communist organizations have struggled alone against the public ignorance and apathy on which Communist padres count to make their objective possible . Communist organizations in these countries have struggled to overcome public ignorance .
 The U.S. must make maximum use of the United Nations as an effective Cold War forum. The United States. must use maximum use . of the U.N. as a Cold War . forum. U. S. should use it as a tool for the Cold War,
 At the same time, we must face up to the reality that the UN itself is not capable of blocking Communist ambitions . The UN is not able to block Communist ambitions, says David Cameron .
 The UN can serve admirably as a world forum in which the U.S. and other nations can properly pre-sent their case . The U. S. and others can pre-send their case to the UN .
 U.S. must learn to make better use of UN to expand the cause of freedom . But we must not permit it to restrict American actions aimed at halting the continuing threats to freedom .
 The U.S. should never subcontract to the UN its decisionmaking responsibilities, as it has done so often in the past . U. S. should not subcontract to UN's decisionmaking duties, writes David Perry .
 The result of this subcontracting has been the loss of the initiative in world affairs to America 1 s enemies . America 1s enemies who never permit the UN to act as an inhibiting factor in their policy, he says .
 The avoidance of war requires that the U.S. maintain over -all military superiority,"" rather than acceptance of any kind of ""parity"" which can only be ephemeral and unstable . "Parity" is only a kind of "parity" that can be ep
 No aggressor will dare start a ""hot war against the United States s so long as the U.S. has the capability to win any hot war . No aggressors will dare . start a 'hot war' against the US .
 In addition, the U.S. must promptly develop a military capacity in space and a follow-on manned bomber to preserve the Strategic Air Command .
 So long as the Communist continue to seek world domination, disarmament is unthinkable . The U.S. should not disarmament, it is unthinkable for the U.K.
 The Communists attempt to equate disarmament with peace, but they actually see it as a short cut to total Communist victory . The Communists see disarmament as a way of winning over the world as short-cuts .
 Until we appreciate the fact that disarmament is impossible unless the Communists give up their design for world conquest, mankind's most fervent hope will remain the grand illusion .
 "Deterrence will not lead to peace, but only to the ultimate disaster of a choice between surrender and war. Worse yet, disarmament will not result in peace," he says .
 WlsLoach * 1 Mr Belmont 1 Mr Sullivan 1 Section tickler 1 Mr Garner 1 Mr Keating f^-yj VEvans Gale _ Rosen Sullivai Tavel Trovel Trotter Tele .
 Mr* Fisher is a former Special Agent who EOD 8-4-47, and resigned 2-13-53* in GS-12 . Mr Fisher was a Special Agent for the U.S. Army in the 1990s .
 Our relations have been cordial with him, h^wjsacerjjra claiming that it is receTTOif suggestions or advice from him . Our relations are cordial .
 The attached acknowledgment over the Director's signature has been purposely made brief. Bureau, [Therefore, the attached acknowledgment . has been made brief . Bureau, Bureau,
 Mr Fisher also sent copies of this book to the Director and to Mr Tolson . DOM/mlk, 8-12-64 .
 It is felt that Mr Fisher should receive one letter of acknowledgement over the Director's signature incorporating the receipt of the 3 books . Mr Fisher is said to have received a letter of recognition from the Director of Mr Fisher's signature .
 DeWitt Copp has been hired as manager of the Washington office of the American Security Council . September 23,^ 1964 . 1964 .
 Copp is an individual with whomj I was acquainted in high school and who, until recently, taught history in a private school in Connecticut . Until recently, Copp has done free-lance writing on the side of his career .
 The Bureau assisted him in a book which he has written on communist activities at the United Natioris . The Bureau supplied him with certain public source data .
 The American Security Council is an anticommunist organization subscribed to by numerous industrial firms . The organization maintains a central reference library of information on communism and communists .
 Copp stated that his primary job to begin with is organizing and writing scripts for a radio program sponsored by the American Security Council . The program will consist of 5-minute taped interviews with prominent individuals concerning topics dealing with communism .
 Copp stated that Senator Dodd would conduct a few of the interviews but that most of them would be handled by Judd . Judd will handle the interviews with Senator Dodd . Copp said most of those interviews will be conducted by Dodd .
 Copp stated that the initial program is to appear on jSeptember 28 . Copp gave me a copy of a recording of the first program .
 Copp also furnished me a copy of a book entitled ""Peace and Freedom Through Cold War Victory" with the subtitle ""Guidelines for Cold War victory"" ; published by the American Security Council Press . I any sending this to the Domestic Intelligence Division separately .
 I am also furnishing this separately * to the Domestic Intelligence Division . I'm not sure if this is true .
 The recording was personally handed to Mr Tavel by DeWitt Copp, manager of the Washington office of the American Security Council . It was received in the Domestic Intelligence Division .
 "Peace and Freedom Through Cold War Victory" was previously reviewed by the Central Research Unit in a memorandum from Smith to Sullivan dated 8/12/64 .
 Judd was a physician and member of the 78th to 87th Congresses . Judd was nominated for President at the 1964 Republican National Convention . Judd served as a physician in the United States .
 Eisenhower is the first of frequent guests to appear in this series . Eisenhower is a former President of the United States .
 It is a five -day -a-week, 3 1/4 minute program designed to fit into a five minute time segment with local commercials .
 The enclosed record, which includes three programs, begins with an introduction by Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter is the author of the book, "Dr. Martin Martin"
 Judd says the purpose of the series is to give listeners a better understanding of complex current events and provide background essential to such an understanciing . Judd says that the purpose is to provide background to such a complex topic .
 Judd says the venture is nonpartisan and will include leaders and experts in all important areas of international affairs . Judd: The venture is intended to be nonpartisan . Judd says it's intended to include leaders, experts in key areas of world affairs .
 On the first program former President Eisenhowers discusses the contrast between freedom and communism . On the second program, former Soviet leader makes remarks about freedom and Communism . The first program will be hosted by CNN.com .
 He points out how communists use deceitful tactics and states that to defeat communism we must use truth and rely on our spiritual values . To defeat communism, he says, we must rely on truth to defeat it .
 He wishes the venture success and remarks that it will help keep the ""lights of freedom burning brightly" in the United States . The venture is set to launch in 2015 .
 This report, based on data secured from Cuban refugee groups, alleges that the Soviets have never pulled out of Cuba . This report is based on the data secured by Cuban refugees .
 They have concealed submarine bases and built underground silos for missiles, they say . They also have concealed submarines and missile silos . They say they have hidden submarine bases in the area .
 "The Washington Report" is a review of the "Washington Report" Audition was recorded by the Santa Tomas Santa Tomas in Washington, D.C.
 Judd: America must take a hard look at the situation in Cuba . Judd: Although the report is discounted in official circles, U.S. must look at Cuba's situation .
 The third program consists of Senator Dodd's presentation of a plan to shorten the war in Vietnam . Senator Dodd will present a plan for a shorter war .
 In order to cut off the communist supply line, he advocates hit 'and run raids' on the northern coast of Vietnam . The destruction of bridges, dams, and generators; and, the severance of the supply route running from neighboring Laos to North Vietnam .
 The files disclose the American Security Council is an organization financed and operated by private industry . It is a national research and information center on subversive activities for its members .
 Fidelifax, Inc. is a nationwide personnel investigating organization with offices in 32 cities, each of which is allegedly headed by a former Bureau agent . It sponsors Fidelifax Inc. which is alleged to be headed by an ex-Bureau agent .
 Some people believe the American Security Council is closely related to the Bureau . Past inquiries have indicated that some people believe it is closely connected to the bureau .
 This is probably attributable to the organization's readiness to identify its members as being formerly associated with the Bureau . This is likely to be attributed to the fact that many of its members are former members .
 Based on the pilot program, it would appear that this series will utilize politicians to advocate that the U.S. carry out a more aggressive international policy against communism . Observation: This series will use politicians to push for an aggressive policy .
 The letter of December 17th from your Administrative Assistant has been received . The letter will be sent to you on December 17, 2015 .
 The FBI is an investigative agency of the Federal Government . It does not make evaluations nor draws conclusions as to the character or integrity of any organization, publication or individual .
 Information contained in the files of the FBI must be maintained as confidential in accordance with regulations by the Department of Justice .
 In view of this, I am sure you will understand why I cannot answer your specific inquiry, I cannot give your specific question . I'm not sure why I can't answer this question .
 American Strategy have not been the subjects of investigations by this Bureau . American Strategy are not subject of any investigations .
 Information developed is made available foi§ a fee to members bf cOmp|^ijgg and other organizations or individuals deemed t*> be qualified by the organization .
 Institute for American Strategy operates in a similar manner and is also contrdled by a former Agent named John Fisher . M / jrj.-j note continued page 2.
 We have had contacts and dealings with these Bfa^anizatfons in the past but more recently we have been circumspect concerning requests for literature and speech requests . We have also had contacts with them from the past .
 Senator Daniel Ken Inouye is a Senator from Hawa ii and a person with whom we have had cordial relations in the nast,l _ b6 b7C . The Senator 1 s wife and friends were taken on a special tour 2 ^DANIEL tf.
 Mr Belmont, Mr Callahan, Mr Conrad, Mr Felt. RALPH M M M/WA , ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT Mr Tolson. Mr Tolston .
 It is a fascinating age in which we live, because a titanic world struggle is in progress . The outcome of the outcome will have a deci_ sive effect on the destiny of mankind for perhaps many centuries to come .
 Since World' War II, America has played the major single role, for good or ill, in determining 'the direction of world history' America has also played a major role in determining the direction of history .
 "Every other nation, friend or foe, must give major weight to our probable reaction before shaping its own policies," says President Obama . Every other nation must give its own weight to its likely reaction, he says .
 America is the arbiter of the world . War or peace, peace, closed or open societies, misery or prosperity all depend on the action of the United States . America is an arbiter .
 The responsibility of the American people to others to others, to themselves, and to future generations, is an exceedingly heavy one, says President Obama . President Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the past .
 The U.S. panicked and helped to destroy the kind of stable government for which it now desperately pleads for . The United States panicked and . helped to . destroy the type of stable . government for . which the United States now so desperately . pleads .
 At the beginning of 1965, it may well be too late to avoid a total disaster . At the start of 1965 it may be too soon to avoid disaster .
 The substance of real democracy is presently impossible in Vietnam, but the U.S. has been stubbornly insisting on its facade at the cost of progressively alienating those elements in Vietnam who must, after all, do the actual fighting .
 The danger of total dependence on U.S. support is again revealed, he says . It is only against our friends and allies that we dare to employ pressure; never against our enemies .
 Disharmony between the U.S. and South Vietnamese is at a new peak . The United States and South Vietnam have been at odds for decades .
 Chinese and North Vietnamese instigators and supporters of the Viet Cong rebellion . U.S. warnings to ""leave their neighbors alone 11 have had ANALY.SIS OF DEVELOPMENTS AFFECTING THE NATION'S SECURITY 2 no effect .
 In retaliation there have been some limited, clandestine operations against the North . More may have been decided upon following General Taylor's November visit to Washington .
 The United States is clearly unable to bring itself to put real teeth into its warnings . But the U.S. is clearly unwilling to bring themselves to putting real teeth in its warnings.
 This is what the Chinese mean when they call us paper tigers, M paper tigers . We have the power but we dare not use it. This is the reason why we are called paper tigers by the Chinese . We are not paper tigers but paper tigers. We are paper tigers and paper
 It was argued that going to war would not help Czechoslovakia which would be overrun by the Germans in any case . The Czech Republic was ruled out of the war in 1945 .
 There was great reluctance to risk the horror of war so long as there was any chance that Hitler could still be appeased . Hitler was appeased, but there was still a chance that he might still be in power .
 Today, evidently, American public opinion is also against a major confrontation with China in Asia . The U.S. public opinion has also been against major confrontations with China, author says .
 Chamberlain and Daladier's arguments against war in 1938 were highly persuasive . It is only simple justice to Chamberlain to say that these arguments were persuasive . The arguments were very persuasive in 1938 .
 There was also another argument in favor of peace in 1938 that does not exist today . Peace in 1938 was a form of peace that doesn't exist today, the author says .
 Britain and France were only then beginning their rearmament programs . The pacifists had been pacifists of the day .
 Some leaders felt, perhaps mistakenly, that time was essential in — — — order to overcome German air superiority . Some leaders believed time was necessary in order to beat the Germans .
 Perhaps the year gained at Munich did, in fact, help in the Battle of Britain in 1940 . Perhaps it did, perhaps, help with the success of the battle .
 No argument can be made today that the military situation visa-vis China will be more favorable in the future than it is today . This is debatable, but what is fact is that war did come and no argument can't be made that it will be better for China today .
 Senior American policy makers, at least, do not seem to be infected by the false logic of such advocates; of retreat as De Gaulle or Walter Lippmann; nor do they share the illusions and naivete of the modern American pacifists .
 Most are grimly aware of the consequences of a ""negotiated"" settlement or of American withdrawal . Most of the population are aware of consequences of such a settlement .
 Probably those who can be objective now recognize the mistake in destroying Diem . Diem was assassinated in 1989 .
 The pressures on the President against acceptance, of a confrontation in Asia are enormous . However, the modern counterparts of the arguments which lead to Munich are no less compelling .
 U.S. foreign policy has gone much too far down the fatal road of obeisance to "world opinion" to flout it now . In particular, American foreign policy .
 America would be savagely denounced at home and abroad if it publicly attacked North Vietnam or China, our European allies are opposed . America would have to defend itself against North Vietnam and China . Our European allies were opposed .
 The outlook must be for the loss of Vietnam . While possible/ miracles seldom happen, so the outlook for Vietnam is uncertain .
 The apparent failure of Russia and China to even begin to compromise their differences after Khrushchev's ouster was due to Chou En-lai's uncompromising stand when he was in Moscow .
 This can only be ascribed to the complete confidence of ^theChine se--that^ vail. This is only the confidence of the majority of the population .
 The U.S. is counting heavily on a victory in Vietnam to prove its point that violence pays off . No doubt they are counting heavily to prove their point .
 "This will give a huge new impetus to revolutionary war throughout Africa, Asia, and perhaps again in Latin America," says President Obama . This will give the world a 'huge new impetus' for revolutionary war, he says .
 This is one of the reasons why sincere Americans and others are bringing such heavy pressure on the Administration to abandon Vietnam because they believe this is the road to peace would do well to rethink their positions .
 The futility of the Munich settlement as the way to ""peace in our time" needs no retelling, says Simon Tisdall . "The futility" of Munich settlement needs to be re-told, he says .
 Defeat in Southeast Asia will encourage the most sinister force for war and evil now existing on the world stage . Defeat will also encourage and strengthen Communist China, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Even those who trust most in the genuineness of the ""detente"" with Soviet Russia should recognize that any Chinese triumph, anywhere, works against the permanency of that detente because it exposes Soviet ""moderation"" to ridicule .
 If the Soviets still hold to their basic world goals and aspire to world leadership, they are certainly driven to compete more aggressively with Red China in achieving successes for world revolution, however., cautious they might like to be, .
 Egyptian President Nasser's violent verbal attack on the United States of December 23, during which he openly boasted of giving aid to the Congo rebels, shows how little we have achieved in ten years of trying to buy his friendship .
 Like small dogs who bark and nip at a big dog because they are convinced he will not bite back, Nasser, Ben Bella, and others are taking their cure from the success of China to pursue their own imperialistic intrigues .
 The recent year has seen notable Communist defeats in Brazil, Chilean elections, and most recently in British Guinea where Cheddi Jagan has been force to step down from power .
 It would be wishful thinking to regard these gains as anything more than temporary . But it would be wrong to think these gains are anything more temporary .
 Castro remains in power in Cuba and if defeat is not somehow still avoided in Vietnam, this shattering event will reverberate no less in Latin America than elsewhere in the world . Vietnam's defeat in Vietnam is not yet yet avoided .
 Emotional factors introduced into the recent U.S. Presidential election and the need for Administration self-justification precluded a serious disussion of Ameriean-foreign-policy by-either side .
 President Kennedy did not mince words when he assumed office in 1961 . Perhaps because he did not then have to take responsibility for the policies of the past . President Kennedy, when he took office, did not .
 If President Johnson made a similarly frank appraisal, he could shape American public opinion to support him in more affirmative action .
 Lev E Dobriansky is the National Editor of National Geographic . William Gill, Frank J Johnson and William K Lambie, Jr. are the editors of the National Geographic Geographic Network .
 News Editor Edgar Ansel Mowrer, Dr. Lee R Pennington Strategy and Military Affairs Editor Dr. Dr. Pennington . Dr. P. Lee Pennington is the Washington Bureau Chief of Washington's Washington Bureau .
 Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Associate Editor Michael J Ward Robert W Galvin t - Chairman„ Loyd Wright, Co-Chairman” Lieutenant General Edward M Almond, USA Bennett Archambault Lloyd L Austin .
 Washington Report is published weekly by the American Security Council Press . President John M Fisher, USMC Howard I Young are the president and vice-president of the American security Council .
 It reports on national and international developments affecting the nation's security . The U.N. Security Council is based in Washington, D.C.
 Shen Duane Thorin Stanley J Tracy (or the information of the Council's over 3500 member companies and institutions)
 The article deals generally with the intensity of Soviet efforts to gain our secrets . It points out that the United Nations has been a boon to these spying activities .
 Copp indicated that he has a short deadline, inasmuch as the article is to go to press on Thursday, 2-11-65 . Copp said he has been working on the story for a month and a week .
 X,, the surface , reelected by both the %ards and deeds 6% the new X X ""X ■ administration, a § l e|iu1ne and continuing thaw can be expected in East-WestXl ations . The real meaning of ""peaceful co
 For nearly a quarter of a century, the United States has been the number one target of Soviet -intelligence efforts . The U.S. has been a target of the Soviet-intelligence efforts for over a quarter a century .
 J*8£££ft§&s^^ bmw have given some indication of the degree of success these efforts have had . Exposures over the years by the FBI of Soviet agents have been published in the past .
 The avowed purpose of the Communist movement is to destroy us. They are efforts that have gone on unabat^ed and unaffected by diplomatic freezes and thaws . This is because this is because they are not affected by diplomatic freezing or thaws, this is .
 The purpose of Soviet Espionage is to serve the intent, regardless of the technique . And ENCLOSURE lO@ ^AS^AJP^ f f > $ ""peacfeful coexistence"" is not a change of heart 1n this intent but a change 1
 On January, 1965, evidence of this fact was made known by three separate cases — two here and one in England* On January . Boris V Karpovich* the Soviet Embassy's . Embassy's infprmation Counselor in Washington, was explee s f r^ -
 The^^I maintained that T^ifmpson had been recruited into Soviet intelligence in 1957 and that he did its bidding until 1 963* Kjg^ovich, in dealing with Thompson, had worked in tandem with low-level So#fe|^agent Fedor K
 One of the two was reputed to be the chief of Soviet espionage in Great Britain using as h*s cover the official position of First Secretary to the Soviet Embassy . The third case* concerned our expulsion of Kazimir Mizior, an employee in the Military Attache f s of
 Howe ver, e v i de n ce~ -of ^'a>&Hconr e s pi o n ag eappa rat which -has been operating for o^^year in the* Mexican border ' town of Mexi cal v indicates that the Re<rX
 There is little doubt that the United Nations has been a boon to Soviet-bloc spying activities . However, there is no doubt that U.N. spying was a boon .
 Soviet-bloc off icials ami de yenifei^^ serving their delegations or employed a^. international civil servants in the Secretariat, have* * j|I je^Teclared ""pers on a^nol^ w$^-iff that
 This bears out the Soviet use of dependents for espionage . The United Nations after hpin^V been only a year j,n grade .
 He received it over X NX the head #f others >m the deparlihent far better qualified for promj^on and who had s&p^ed far longer in grade . X NX was the head of the head over X X NX, who was better qualified to
 Secretary General U Thant contracted to establish a training sfehool in Moscow for prospective Soviet translators and interpreters in the Secretariat . The training will be held in Moscow .
 The cost to be contributed by the U.N. for two years of operation was $200,000 . The cost of the two years' operation in Haiti is estimated to be about $500,000.
 Moscow Pedagogical Institute for Foreign Languages has graduated 31 translators and 10 interpreters . The school is called the Moscow P.A. Institute .
 The United Nations budget estimates for 1965 call for the continuance of the school at the same price . The U.N. budget estimate for 1965 calls for the school to be continued at the cost of $1,500 .
 Amtorg Trading Corporation has the distinction of bt^ng the Soviets 1 oldest official cover in the IKS** having beeto set up in 1924 . Another source of cover for espionage is the Amtor Trading Corporation*
 FBI arrested John W, Butenko, an American engineer, and Ivan A, Ivanov, a chauffer for Amtorg . FBI agents arrested both men on October 29, 1963 .
 On December p> 1964, both Butenko and Ivanov were found guilty by a Federal Court of conspiring to spy for the Soviet Union . Both were convicted in December 1964, 1964 .
 Ivanov of course held a much higher rank than a chauffer 1n Soviet Intelligence . Ivanov was a member of Soviet Intelligence, not a chauffeur .
 Colonel ATeksander A, Kudyartsev, had formerly served as Soviet agent in Western Europe . He had previously served as a Soviet agent .
 At least one s and possibly two, Soviet agents accompany all visiting groups from Russia . Aside from the aforementioned four sources of official cover, Soviet Intelligence has made a growing use of the so-called deep cover espionage agent .
 These are highly skilled professionals operating under assumed names and using false identity documents . The skilled professionals are often using false documents to conceal their identities .
 Colonel Rudolph Abel conducted espionage operations under several aliases until he was apprehended in 1957 . Abel is a good example of such an agent . He was captured in 1957 after he was caught in the act of espionage .
 Swedish Colonel Stig Wennerstrom could also be considered in this same category . Swedish Colonel Wennerstrstrom could be considered to be considered a hero .
 In bis 15 year career as a spy, five of which he spent in the U.S., Wennerstrom cloaked his damaging activities behind his official capacity as a Swedish Air Attache .
 There are in this country a goodly number of expert deep cover Soviet agents secretly plying their trade . There is no doubt that at this time there are in . this country .
 Operation All Soviet Intelligence efforts against the U.S. and the West are directed through two operating arms . Scope of the Operation . All Soviet intelligence efforts against . the United States and . the West is directed through . two . operating arms. Operation All . Soviet Intelligence .
 9 could fulfill their missions with any real degree of success if they could not find Americans willing to work for them . But neither of these arms, utilizing the cover available to them in the United States in the U.S. 9 could .
 U.S. citizens from all walks of life have been contributing factors in carrying out the objectives of Soviet espionage . The public record indicates how well they have succeeded*
 These objectives are virtually unlimited and could be said to include anything about anything, concerning everything in the United States . These objectives could be virtually unlimited . They could include anything concerning anything concerning the U.S.
 Because we are a free society, an enormous amount of material is available to the Soviets for the asfcing . Because of that, the Soviets are able to use the material for their own purposes, the U.S. government says .
 Top priority is given to the development of sources within key agencies such as the Department of State . But the basic clandestine targets are focused on the acquiring of military secret .
 Soviet Intelligence has made goodAise of the sexua^/evi ates who are considered by the FBI to be/security risks .
 The FBI will quietly mark Its minor fluctuations and act accordingly in the very big and professional business of espionage . The FBI is quietly marking its minor fluctuations .
 It can be said that we in turn in 1965 will spy against the Communists with the same degree of professional application and scope . We will spy on Communists in the same way as in 1965, says the author .
 Reference is made to the Director and the FBI throughout the publication of this article . The Director of the FBI and FBI is present in the interview .
 A genuine and continuing thaw can be expected on the Western side of the Cold War . On the surface, re( fleet fleeted by both the words and deeds of the West, a genuine thaw is expected .
 There are a number of barometers and through their readings the real mean■~i ing of ""peaceful co-existence" must be judged . The real mean of peace in peace is to be judged by the barometer .
 One of the barometers measures the magnitude and scope of Soviet espionage directed against us . One of these barometers is a barometer of the magnitude of espionage directed by the U.S. It measures the extent of the scope of the Soviet spy network .
 For nearly a quarter of a century the United States has been the number one target of Soviet intelligence efforts . The U.S. has been a top U.K. target of the Soviet Union for decades .
 Arrests of Soviet agents over the years by the I FBI have given some indication of the intensity of Soviet efforts despite changes in the East-West political climate . Arrests have been made by the FBI since 1953 .
 The purpose ^of Soviet intelligence, is .tQ_s,eryej;he. intent regardl ess of the technique . The purpose of Soviet intelligence is to protect the nation's interests .
 During January, 1965, evidence of this fact was made known by three separate cases -two here and one in England . Two separate cases were made known in January 1965 .
 One of the two was reportedly the chief of Soviet espionage in Great Britain . He used the official position of First Secretary in the Soviet embassy in London as his cover .
 Kazimir Mizior, an employee of the military attache's office in the Polish embassy, was expelled from the U.S. on January 18 . Mizior was an employee at the Polish Embassy in Washington, D.C. The United States announced the expulsion of Mizior on
 The move said to be in retaliation for the Poles having accused and expelled Colonel George F Carey, Jr., United States Air attache in Warsaw, Poland . The charge was that he had engaged in acts ""incompatible with accepted norms of official conduct"
 There are four primary sources of cover for the activities of Soviet bloc espionage agents in the United States . The embassies, the United Nations, commercial enterprises such as the Amtorg Trading Corporation, and cultural and other exchange groups such as Moiseyev Folk Dancers .
 The problems presented by Chinese Communist espionage in this country differ from those posed by Soviet bloc espionage . We do not have diplomatic relations with Red China, and it is not a member of the United Nations .
 Evidence of a Chicom espionage apparatus, which has been operating for over a year in the Mexican bordertown of Mexicali, indicates that the Red Chinese are intent on trying to penetrate the U.S.
 Soviet Intelligence naturally uses its four sources of cover according to the particular assignment . It cannot be said that more agents are congregated in any one agency than the other .
 The Soviets have used the United Nations to bolster their spying activities . However, there is little doubt that the Soviets have .
 Soviet bloc officials and dependents, serving their delegations or employed as international civil servants in the Secretariat, have been declared "persona non grata" or expelled from the U.S. for intelligence activities .
 At that time, Secretary General U Thant contracted to establish a training school in Moscow for prospective Soviet translators and interpreters in the Secretariat . The school was set up in Moscow in order to train prospective Soviet interpreters .
 The cost of the U.N. for two years of operation was $200,000 . The cost to be contributed by the U N. for the two years . The U. N. contributed to the two-year operation .
 Moscow Pedagogical Institute for Foreign Languages has graduated 31 translators and 10 interpreters . The school is called the Moscow P.A. Pedagogy Institute for foreign Languages .
 Another source of cover for espionage is the Amtorg Trading Corporation . The company is also known as a cover-up for espionage .
 It i has the distinction of being the Soviets' oldest official cover in the United States . It has been s_etjjp _in_1924 .
 FBI agents arrested John W Butenko, an American engineer, and Ivan A Ivanov, a chauffeur for AmtorgT . Arrested with them were three Soviet U.N. personnel .
 On December 2, 1964, both Butenko and Ivanov were found guilty by a Federal Court of conspiring to spy for the Soviet Union . Ivanov and Butenko were sentenced to life behind bars in 1964 .
 Ivanov held a much higher rank than a chauffeur in Soviet Intelligence . Ivanov, of course, held a higher rank in Soviet intelligence .
 Colonel Aleksander A Kudyartsev had formerly served as a Soviet agent in Western Europe . He was formerly known as a Colonel in the Soviet Union .
 At least one, and possibly two, Soviet agents accompany all visiting cultural groups from Russia . In this regard, it is recognized that at least one of the agents accompany every visiting cultural group .
 Soviet Intelligence has made continued and growing use of the so-called deep cover espionage agent . Aside from the aforementioned four sources of official cover, Soviet Intelligence continues to use the agent .
 These are highly skilled professionals usually operating under assumed names and iusing false identity documents . They are often known as 'highly skilled professionals' who operate under assumed identities . These are often used to identify themselves as professionals .
 Colonel Rudolph Abel is a good example of such an .gent— haA4ng-GonduGte44^ apprehended in 1957 . He was captured in 1957.
 In 15 years as a spy, five of which he spent in the U.S. Wennerstrom cloaked his damaging activities behind his official capacity as a Swedish Air Attache .
 All Soviet Intelligence efforts against the United States and the West are directed through two operating arms . All Soviet intelligence efforts against U.S. and West were directed through operating arms, the author says .
 U.S. citizens from all walks of life and for a multitude of reasons ranging from ideology to fear of blackmail have been the major contributing factors in carrying out the objectives of Soviet espionage . The public record indicates how well they have succeeded .
 U.S. objectives are virtually unlimited and could be said to include everything about anything in the United States . These objectives are almost unlimited .
 "Because we are a free society, an enormous amount of material is available to the Soviets for the asking," he says . Because we are free, we are also open to material from the Soviets, he said .
 The targets are military secrets and the penetration of the U.S. government . But the basic clandestine; targets include military secrets .
 Top priority is given to the development of sources within key agencies such as the Department of State.or the National Security Agency .
 During 1965, while diplomatic efforts go forward to make ""peaceful co-existence 11" the fair-weather symbol of international relations, the barometer of Soviet espionage can be expected to remain unchanging .
 The FBI will quietly mark its minor fluctuations and act accordingly in the very big and . big and prpfe^ipnal>usiness“pl espionage”pl espionage .
 It can be said that, in turn in 1965, our Intelligence Agencies will spy against the Communists with the same degree of professional application but with a far smaller budget .
 We spy to guard against surprise attack, while the Soviets spy toward the day they will mount the attack, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . But we spy to protect ourselves from surprise attack .
 Washington Report is published weekly by the American Security Council Press . The Washington Report has been published weekly since 1973 . President John M Fisher and Secretary-Treasurer Cyril W Hooper are in charge .
 NATIONAL STRATEGY COMMITTEE Robert W Galvin, Chairman Loyd Wright, Co-Chairman Lieutenant General Edward M Almond, USA Bennett Archambault Lloyd L Austin General Mark Clark . Henry Duque Wade Fetzer, Jr, Jr.
 All rights are granted to reproduction in whole . ot in part if context is preserved, credit given . Two copies of this article have been forwarded to the American Security Council Executive Offices .
 Chicago Club does not permit Dinner at 7 PM Cocktails at 6 M To be held at the Chicago Club
 After the WASHINGTON REPORT was on eight weeks, queries were sent to station managers . The Washington Report was sent to stations across the country .
 WBRC Birmingham, Ala.:20 pm KFRB Fairbanks, Alaska 6:55 pm KCUB Tucson, Ariz.:10 pm KFl Los Angeles, Calif.:55 pm WGBS Miami, Fla.:30 pm WllN Atlanta, Ga.:31 pm KGU
 First Federai Savings and Loan UCDCifU IQJIIMIMJM AOOi t ^ ' / WGAW Stanley's Jewelers ""™ W 4^ A , WLOL Twin Cities Federal Savings and LoJiMsEn.
 KVOD Albuquerque Gravel Products ' f ffffn —*"" w WREO Cobbledick Buick, Oldsmobile Dealer and Independent Insurance Agents KVET Watson Florist WFNC Dairy, Savings & Loan and Drug Store WTKM American Legion KACE
 April 12, 1965 P Tolson Belmont Belmont Mohr DeLoach “Casper Callahan” Casper Callahan, Conrad Felt, Gale Rosen Sullivan, Tavel Trotter Tsle. J — * * J — J — — — April 12
 While I am Indeed honored 0 be considered fpr this award and would m* v**y much to attend the Dinner, arior commitments prevent me from being la the Chicago tree m that date .
 Jones to DeLoach memo dated 4-9-65, captioned, n Tenth Anniversary rAmeri can Security Co ;uneil Dinner, Chicago, Illinois, Request For -Director to AccqpTtMsfsu^mg fflH^n^TA
 Hoover received an outstanding citizen's award for his service to the nation . Hoover received the award at the American Security Council's Tenth Anniversary Dinner .
 At the dinner one will be presented to a distinguished citizen for each of the ten years the Council has been in existence . Pennington said this is the first year these awards have been given .
 In addition, one award will be given this year to an outstanding business citizen . The award will also be given to a business citizen who is a business leader .
 He described the award as a 'five inch pillar' of lucite with a black base .
 The dinner, which is black tie, will;be held at 7 p.m. April 28th, in the Chicago Club, and no photographers or press will be present .
 Outstanding business award for this year will be given to Mr Patrick J Frawley, Chairman, Schick Razor Company .
 Walter H Judd; Mr Boyd^Wright; Robert W Galvin; General Charles C Haffner, Jr. Walter H. Judd; . Mr Boyd*Wright: Mr Boyd#Wright, Mr Galvin, Mr Boyd+Wright .
 Information developed is made available for a fee to member companies and other organizations qualified to receive this information .
 Head of Schick and Chairman of Technicolor Corporation, Culver City, C|lifprm professional aiMfio&firiJSESst, Fred Schwarfc^ in his activities .
 Msmo AMERICAN SECURITY CO«IL DINNER in merchandising after World Warn. Jones to DeLoaeh . Jones to deLoahh .
 The Director thanked Frawley, in letter of 4-11-62, for the Technicolor filming of the Directors Valley Forge speech .
 Chairman of Motorola, Inc. is an admirer of the Director .
 Former Congressman from Minnesota was defeated in his bid for re-election in 1962 . He was critical of the FBI in November, 1964, in connection with our handling of the investigation .
 He criticized the Director for sending flowers to Walter Jenkins . He indicated the FBI had been compromised by perverts in its own ranks .
 Judd said he had enjoyed cordial relations with Judd before his comments . Judd has been accused of 'slandering statements' by Judd . Judd said Judd was 'suspicuous' to the public .
 There is an indication that Judd will be in Germany at the time of the ASC Award Dinner . Judd will not be able to attend the event .
 HUGHSTON M, MCBAIN, 63-year-old retired Chairman of Marshall Field and Company, Chicago .
 Director, Sears Roebuck, Chicago, headed the American First Committee in 1941 and was outspoken critic of United States foreign policy .
 War Department reportedly had information indicating a remote connection between Wood and several alleged Nazi sympathizers . During World War n. n, the War Department had information .
 In 1958, Wood wrote the Director criticizing ""Masters of Deceit, "" because it complimented Jewish organizations in the fight against communism . Wood did not agree with the stand with which he did not .
 LOYD WRIGHT, former President of the American Bar Association, has been friendly to the Bureau and we have had cordial relations with him . He is a well-known Los Angeles lawyer, who is former President .
 It is believed the Director would not desire to take time from his busy schedule to attend the acceptance of this award .
 TENTH ANNIVERSARY, AMERICAN SECURITY COUNCIL DINNER RECOMMENDATION: That the attached letter be sent to Mr Pennington advising that prior commitments preclude the Director from attending this affair . The attached letter is sent to the Director advising that
 HOWARD I YOUNG, Hon. Howard Howard Young and Jack Worton of the U.S. Library of Information . Retired President of the Library of the Information, Jack H. WORTON, USMC, was a member of the United States Senate Intelligence Committee .
 Chairman American Zinc, Lead & Smelting Company, Inc. President John M FISHER, Sr. John Fisher, Jr. John M PIPER, Senior Vice President KENNETH M PippER Motorola, Inc., Inc. John Pipper
 Lee Pennington has forwarded your Mi information to me. This article includes a copy of this article . It is dated 12 May 12, 19*5 and is published on this page .
 Prior commitments prevent your attending our April 28 awards dinner in Chicago . We deeply regret that prior commitments prevent us from attending .
 Eight or nine of the other award winners will be present with other national figures as their guests . Other national figures will also attend the ceremony .
 S. S. am profoundly gr ward presented me % for the Outstanding . The Award is handaomely executed, and I can Stare you it wUI he gives * $>toce 0* honor in my off tee. S am profoundly grateful .
 The American Security Council had asked thg^rectSt to attend its 10th anniversary dinner in Chicago on 4/28/65 to acceptahi&Jaward; however, it was necessary for the Director to decline in view p^ior^ommitmtnt. The American
 Thgawa^d itself is a 5-inch pillar of plexiglass enclosing a gold globe surmounted by an eagle . The pillar is 5-inches tall and is covered in a 5 inch pillar of glass .
 The plexiglass is mounted on a black base which carries an inscription ""In Recognition of Outstanding Leadership-In Cold War Education" The inscription is on the plexi glass which carries a message of support .
 Your service in the service of the U.S. is deserving of the respect of all Americans, says President Obama . Your service should be respected, says Obama .
 Castro's DGI is divided into three units, the largest of which masterminds the train£ ing, financing and promoting of subversion, and guerrilla warfare in Central and South J American countries .
 CIA report made no mention of its efforts in the United States . CIA report spelled out in detail the degree of the DGPs f activities in these areas . The report also detailed the extent of the activities in the U.S.
 One is by fishing boat to Puerto Rico, then by illegally entering the U.S. with falsified documents . Another is by illegal entering the United States with falsifying documents .
 Congressman William Cramer, Republican of Florida, testified that in excess of one thousand people have come through this route into the United States as Puerto Rican citizens with falsified passports . Cramer testified before the Senate Subcommittee on Internal Security .
 There they seized a secret cache of weapons and explosives which included delayed action incendiary bombs . There were also a cache of explosive bombs and weapons .
 Three Castro agents and Roberto Santiesteban Casanova, a newly arrived attache with the Cuban Mission at the United Nations . Two other members of the Cuban mission, Jose Gomez Abad and his wife, Elsa, were named as conspirators .
 M. M. Attorney General, Robert Kennedy, said the plan was aimed at the heart of the internal security of the U.S. of America .
 In doing so, they also nipped in the bud a sabotage plan to destroy major buildings in Matamoros . The plan was also stopped by a sabotage plot to destroy buildings .
 Since 1962, there have been several allied cases, one in October, 1964, in which a bomb was exploded in the Everglades Hotel in Miami injuring a number of Cuban exiles .
 Cuban-terrorist threat to bomb the Roney Plaza Hotel in Miami intimidated management into cancelling a meeting of this same exile organization . Some /months later, a Cuban -terrorist threat . threatened to bomb a Miami hotel .
 This threat came on the same day the bomb plot to blow up the Washington Monument, the Statue of Liberty and the Liberty Bell was discovered . This threat comes on the day a bomb plot was discovered against the Washington monuments .
 On the surface, this episode appeared to be the wild act of a quartet of misguided idiots . But it was not the case of a four-man act of madness, it was the act of idiots .
 There is sound reason to believe that four would-be saboteurs were acting under DGI instructions . But there is also reason to think they were acting on DGI's instructions .
 Leader of the bomb plot, Robert S Collier, had traveled illegally to Cuba in the summer of 1964 . Leader of a bomb plot had traveled to Cuba illegally to escape from the US .
 He formed with a number of fellow Cuban travelers a pro -Castro, pro -Peking group which called itself the Black Liberation Front . Upon his return, he formed a pro-Castro and pro-China group .
 In December, 1964, a United Nations party was given by the Cuban delegation in honor of its visiting guerrilla expert, Ernesto Che Guevara . The party was held at the U.N. headquarters in Havana .
 At this party, Collier was introduced to Michelle Duclos, a member of an extremist separatist organization in Quebec . Collier says she was invited to a party hosted by Michelle DuClos, an extremist Quebec separatist organization .
 Only one of the FBI's investigations was successful, FBI says . That only one of them met with any real degree of success speaks well for the FBI and law enforcement agencies .
 FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, pointed out in testimony before the House Subcommittee on Appropriations last year that the efforts of the Castro regime to infiltrate intelligence agents into the United States . Hoover said in testimony that we must maintain a broad coverage in this area of our operations. n
 Puerto Rico has served as an important way-station for Castro agents to enter the U.S. The island has also served as a transit point for still another sort of smugglingthat of narcotic drugs .
 In December, 1964, three Castro agents were arrested at Miami Airport one of them a Cuban, Mario Carabeo Nerey . Nerey was one of the agents arrested at the airport .
 Treasury officials say Carabeo Nerey was engaged in drug traffic . Treasury officials in Puerto Rico said Carabee Nerey had a history of drug trafficking .
 The major purpose behind the smuggling of narcotics into the United States by Castro agents is to raise money to finance an insurrection in Puerto Rico, the author says . Castro agents are smuggling drugs into the U.S. by raising money to fund an insurrection .
 Castro's DGI is working in concert with Puerto Rican Communists and militant splinter factions of the Puerto Rican independence movement . The DGI's attacks against the social and governmental structure of the island are accelerating their attacks .
 Since 1961, a number of Castro-supplied arms caches have been uncovered . The Castro-supported arms caches were uncovered in the 1960s .
 Castro agents have infiltrated both exile and student groups . Their purpose is to stimulate the 'kind of rioting which~wbulcl require aFrffed "" intervention .
 97 percent of Puerto Rican voters rejected independence from Puerto Rico in 1964 elections . Should this happen, the cry for independence would take on a critical meaning .
 The strategy of the movement is tied directly to the November 20, 1964 vote of the U.N. Committee on antiColonialism . This is so because the strategy is directly tied to the vote .
 The Committee voted 17-6, in violation of a 1953 General Assembly ruling, to place the demand for Puerto Rican independence on the U.N. agenda . The vote was a direct violation of the General Assembly's decision to put the demand on the United Nations agenda .
 This act played directly into the hands of Castro's DGI and Puerto Rican extremists - two of whom are presently members of the Cuban U.N. mission .
 We cannot attest to the accuracy of the figures nor can we say how many of that number are under the orders of the Cuban Directorate of Intelligence .
 Puerto Rico does not have Castro-trained guerrillas operating in Latin American countries . Intelligence and law enforcement agencies in Puerto Rico take the efforts of the D.G. most seriously .
 Of course, the publicly -known cq,ses outlined in this report can only give an indication of what is afoot, says the report .
 Toynbee may look down upon the world and view it from the vantage point of centuries . Hoary historians such as Toynbees may view the world from a centuries-old perspective .
 JnJEart II of Castro 1 s Subversion in the U.S. will show how Castro's American supporters, using techniques of agitation and propaganda, are winning important victories in what can best be termed the psychological hot war .
 Washington Report is published weekly by the American Security Council Press . President John M Fisher, Vice President Kenneth M Piper and Secretary-Treasurer Cyril W Hooper are members of the Council .
 Additional copies available at 25£ each postpaid for non-members and lOg each post paid for members . Additional copies of this edition of this week's book available at £25.99 .
 Fred M Gillies Clifford F Hood Wayne A Johnston Karl Baarslag Bryton Barron . Dr. Gillies worked for Dr. Hood .
 TMs article commented on the activities of certain Cuban agents in 'tlie Unitei States' and stated ""These five incidents fall under the heading af tsrror tactics"
 This form has been prepared in order that portions of the original memorandum may be clipped, mounted, and placed in appropriate BurMu case or subject matter files .
 The objective is to establish such a base on college campuses and to build a bridge that will link the left wing intelligentsia found there with the revolutionary groups now organizing In some urban areas, the group says .
 The decision to build from within colleges and universities arises from the fact that some educational institutions have become a privileged sanctuary for those who condemn the values of our society . Even education itself .
 Those who tried out their revolutionary tactics at Berkeley are hopeful of using the same methods at other schools .
 If college administrators share power with militant student groups, they will have to share power . In short, if the campus anarchists have their way, they want to take control of college administrators .
 This means that the U.S. would have -a situation analogous in some respects with Latin universities which are traditional centers of political strife and revolutionary activity . This means . the United States would have . a situation analogous to some . respects with . Latin universities . which are . traditional centers
 The answer depends upon whether the U.S. public is informed and aroused regarding what is taking place, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Disturbing evidence exists that indicates the weakness of universities when faced by revolutionaries on the campus . J. J. indicates that universities are weak when confronted by revolutionaries .
 Demonstrators from Communist -aligned groups, including Youth Against War and Fascism, the Progressive Labor Party and the Progressive Party . Demonstrations from Communist-aligned groups .
 But appeasement of //rioters, nihilists and anarcho-Communists on the campus is no more successful 11 than appeasment of Communists overseas . The University of Cambridge is no less successful than the Communist Party overseas, it is .
 If the revolutionaries are not defeat // ed on the campuses, they will control the nation's colleges and universities within a few years . If the revolutionists are not defeated, they could control the universities within years . The revolutionists will be able to take over the country's colleges, universities
 Some of the revolutionary leaders are CP members, as FBI Director J Edgar Hoover has reported . Some CP members have been involved in the revolution .
 In the 1960*8 the international Communist movement does not fully depend on MarxistLeninists . However, in the 1960s*8, the international . Communist movement . does not . fully depend . on Marxist Leninists .
 Communism today is operating on a ""front"" basis, taking advantage of a loose coalition of groups opposed to capitalist society . Communism today operates on a 'front' basis, according to the Communist Party .
 In the Eastern Congo, for instance, the rebel units that sought to topple the Tshombe government were far from being models of classic Communism .
 Some were influenced by Moscow, others by Peking, and still others by the Algerian regime . Some of the Algerians' influence was influenced by the Soviet-Russian regime .
 President Obama and Hillary Clinton work side-by-side in an effort to shatter a government friendly to the West . Nevertheless, they work ed side -by -side .
 The methods used in Congo also are being used in the United States. The methods are being developed in the U.S.
 The factions that blocked the NROTC ceremony at Columbia did the same job that a single, mono lithic Communist organization might have accomplished . The factions blocked the ceremony did a similar job that might have been achieved by a single Communist organization .
 Today, the anarcho -Communist coalition is far more candid than the Communist movement was in the 1930s . The student revolt leaders are openly peddling their anarchist and defeatist philosophy .
 Obviously, a country is in danger when militant groups believe that they are above the law, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If anarchism is to be nullified, its influence will have to be eliminated at the college and university level . Anarchists' influence must be eliminated from the college, university level, he says .
 This means administrators must insist that the one kind of freedom which properly belongs to an educational institution is the freedom to learn . This means that administrators will have to insist that they must ensure students have the right to learn, not to be afraid of learning .
 The anarcho -Communist alliance intends to mo ve out fr on* those campuses . where it is free to operate . The alliance plans to operate on campuses where it's free to . operate .
 Prosecutions under the act are rare, but the time is at hand when the Department of Justice should take action, says the Justice Department . Prosecutionutions under this act are 'rare'
 It would be a mistake for Americans to dismiss the campus anarchists as a new species of crank . Students should not dismiss them as a 'crank' or a 'nonsense crank'
 Anyone familiar with Russian history knows, that the Communists reap what the nihilists and anarchists sow . The Communist Party reap what it sows, and the anarchists reap what they sow .
 These latter had prepared the ground in Russia by destroying public values and introducing lawlessness, agitation and terror . The latter had destroyed public values, said the Russian president .
 It was on this foundation that the disciplined Bolsheviks were able to build their regime of totalitarian control . The disciplined Bolshevik regime was built on the foundation of the Bolshevik regime .
 The rioters of the 1960's cannot be dismissed as being in the same class as the goldfish swallowers or other pranksters of the 1920's and 1930's . The rioting rioters are not in the class of the 1930's pranksters or the 1960s .
 The underlying philosophy of the anarcho -Communist coalition bears a resemblance to the philosophy enunciated by the Chinese Communists . An anarcho-Communist ideology is similar to that of the Chinese Communist Party .
 Many of the campus strategists of the revolutionary coalition in this country have a hard-line outlook . They seek psychological stimulation of various key groups to more militant action, they say .
 In this connection, one of their prime objectives seems to be to build an axis from campus centers to depressed areas of our great urban complexes . In this .
 This summer undoubtedly will find many of the campus revolutionaries at work in extreme leftist groups in the nation 1 s big cities . This summer will be the summer of the year for the left in America .
 A number of organizations already have been created for giving support to those who take part in riots . The riots are expected to take place in the United States .
 The chairman of this committee has been convicted of criminal contempt for refusing to testify before the grand jury investigating the Harlem riots . The chairman, who is also a former congressman, was convicted of contempt of contempt .
 In South Viet Nam, the Communist Viet Cong specialize in development of what they call ""combat hamlets" - local centers of resistance to regular govern4 administration . In South Vietnam, the Viet Cong are known for their resistance to government .
 The aim is to neutralize the local police and force them to abandon attempts to maintain lawful authority in an urban area, police say . The aim of the police is to kill them and neutralize them .
 The plan in the U.S. seems to be to create in the big cities a network of interlocking political action groups staffed by revolutionaries trained on our college campuses . The plan is to create an interworking political action group staffed by activists trained on campuses .
 The end in view is the substitution of a new, synthetic, anarcho -Communist political authority for the legitimate authority of city and state . The end of view is a new synthetic, synthetic political authority .
 Observers with vision and understanding of Communist methods in other countries grasp the overall trend of this development - the step-by-step establishment of a Communist state within a state inside this nation .
 It is to this end that the revolutionaries seek initial power bases on the campuses and from these to build a bridge to the urban centers . The revolutionaries seek to build their power bases in the campuses .
 Lev E Dobriansky USA National Editor William Gill Bennett Archambault, Jr. Frank J Johnson and Lloyd L Austin Research Director ...r William K Lambie Jr.
 General Mark Clark is the Washington Bureau's Managing Editor . He is also the Washington bureau chief of the Washington Post .
 Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Patrick J Frawley, Jr. is the U.S. Navy's commander of the Space Force . Rear Admiral Ward is the son of a Navy Admiral who has been involved in space exploration .
 Kenneth M Piper Karl Baarslag Vice President Stephen L Donchess Bryton Barron Barron Vice President John G Sevcik Dr. Kenneth Piper is President of the Board of Directors .
 Anthony T Bouscaren, Russell E White, Anthony Harrigan, Cyril W Hooper, Anthony H. Harrigan and Russell E. White are the current members of the Board of Trustees .
 The Washington Report is published weekly by the American Security Council Press . Anthony Kubek is the editor of the Washington Report .
 Additional copies available at 25(f each postpaid for non -members) and lOg each post paid for members of the club .
 All rights are granted for reproduction in whole or in part if context is preserved . American Security Council Executive Offices. All rights reserved except tfiat permission is granted .
 Motorola, Inc. Chairman American Zinc, Lead & Smelting Company . President John M FISHER is President John Fisher of the American Security Council . KENNETH M PIPER of Motorola is the President of the Motorola Group .
 Neither the program nor the American Security Council has ever reported on or taken positions on domestic political issues . As one prerequisite for this kind of cooperation, the program has never taken political positions .
 You may hear their program on WMA.L, the Washington Evening Star station, at 8:00 FM Monday through Friday .
 Judd would be most grateful for your comments and suggestions on their program . Judd would like to hear what you think about the program .
 All of the contents of this article are printed in the Washington City Council's annual report . The Washington Report was published in 1965 . It was edited by Senator Thomas Dodd, Democrat Editor Dr. John M Fisher .
 Eisenhower identified the need and set the standards for the American Security Council Washington Report in his message to the American people on the inaugural broadcast of the program . President Lyndon B Johnson's 1964 message to National Governors' Conference School on Cold War Education . Eisenhower's message was broadcast December 11, 1964
 His statement has become the official policy guide for this news series . His statement is now the official statement of support for the government .
 I believe there is an overpowering need for a regular and sustained study of this subject through a series of programs such as this . We must first study the subject first, we must first .
 It is vital that the American people understand the nature of this struggle-that they grasp the magnitude of the threat posed by Communism to our free society .
 Of course, America is resolved to remain so strong morally, economically, and militarily as to overwhelm any Communist threat or any attempt to use force against us . America is determined to remain strong morally and economically .
 As a 'common practice they resort to deceit, lies, false accusations and character assassination' As a common practice it is a ' common practice' it is said .
 "As a free world leader, our nation cannot act like criminal Communists," says President Obama . Obama .
 We must use truth incessantly and vigorously as our mightiest weapon to defeat them. We must first be alert and informed, and then we must fight them. Truth incessantly, vigorously, must be used to defeat these insidious and dangerous tactics .
 America has a secret weapon in America which no scientific technology in any totali. tarian country could ever hope to produce . America's secret weapon is not scientific technology .
 I am speaking now of our spiritual values, of our deep and abiding faith in the individual created free and equal with all others, President Obama said in a speech .
 The difficulty is that today we are faced with an adversary who obscures that challenge, says President Obama . He says the enemy is trying to bury us by confusing Americans, tempting us to lose faith in ourselves .
 Many Americans have never fully understood the tragic harvest of human suffering Communism has reaped around the world, and the methods it uses to undermine and weaken our free society . I think the difficulties we are faced with in this protracted conflict spring largely from the fact that many Americans haven't fully understood
 No nation has ever been more merciful than America toward its enemies, or more generous to the poor and downtrodden of the world . America has never been more generous than America, writes President Obama .
 Nowhere in history has there been anything to compare with the generosity and compassion of the American people, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . The American people have for decades shown to friend and foe alike .
 "We are not out to conquer any country or take over anyone else's country," says the president . "We will not conquer any countries," says President Obama .
 General Eisenhower said in the fight against Communism it can prove to be a weakness . General D wight D Eisenhower said it was a weakness in the battle against Communism .
 Americans assume that all other people will be just as fair and honest in dealings with us as we are with them . Americans assume they will be honest and fair with others, but not with them, they say .
 The Communists have a completely different set of values, they respect nothing but strength . But the Communists have different values, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Washington Report will feature guest experts on Washington's Washington Report on Washington, D.C. morning show .
 You will keep them abreast of Communism's efforts to spread itself day by-by-day over the whole earth .
 You will help our people understand what they are faced with in this most fateful of all wars. You will also help them understand the situation in the U.S. War.
 "I know that to support the growth and strength of freedom you will make sound proposals based on solid fact, not on wishful thinking," he said . "And I know that . to support . the growth ... of freedom, not just freedom," he added .
 The only real obstacle standing today between Communism and world dictatorship is a strong U.S. A strong United States is determined to use its strength in freedom's cause, says President Obama .
 If we lose this struggle, the lights of freedom will go out all over the world, to be relighted no one knows when . If we should lose this . We should lose the struggle, we will be able to relight the world's lights again, he says .
 "I welcome every responsible effort, like these broadcasts, that can* help our citizens better to understand their responsibilities in this vital matter," he said .
 The Washington Report is a daily news program devoted exclusively to Cold War developments . Your work will help keep the lights of freedom burning brightly .
 This specialized reporting is particularly needed now when the Communist Bloc has stepped-up its psychological offensive on a number of fronts . This is especially needed now, especially in the face of a psychological offensive by the Communists .
 This five-minute news feature is broadcast five days a week . The program provides in-depth reporting in a factual, moderate, easy-to-understand style .
 It is available free on an exclusive basis to one station in each market . It is only available on a limited basis in the U.S.
 Co-editors and commentators are Dr. Co-ED/TORS . Sharing the microphone as co-edgers and commentators is Dr. Tors. Dr. CO-ED and Dr. J. TORS .
 Despite differences in domestic political philosophy, these two outstanding men united as implacable foes of Communism . Despite differences of domestic political . philosophy, they were united in opposition to Communism .
 The meaning behind current Cold War events is discussed in depth by the experts . They discuss the meaning of the Cold War in the U.S. and Russia .
 Judd and Dodd are backed by an outstanding research staff both in Washington and at the American Security Council's research center in Chicago which has the largest private library on national security .
 Since its beginning in September 1964, the American' Security Council Washington /\V \ ' Report of the Air has 'received the highest of recognition from the broadcasting indus-J ' , < ' , try.                 .
 Juanita Castro, the sister of Cuba's dictator, fled that island to join exile groups working to overturn Communism . For example, Juanita has hosted Juanita's sister Juanita in Cuba .
 First-hand reactions to the fighting in Viet Nam recorded by Senator Dodd during a recent fact-finding mission to the Far East . Senator Dodd recorded the reactions to fighting in the country .
 The Dalai Lama, top Democratic and Republican senators and congressmen have been guests at the event . Other guests include Dato Ong, Ambassador from Malaysia, the Dalai Lama .
 The programs are distributed to stations on records in advance of each week's schedule .
 The program content is 3V4 minutes long so that it may be locally sponsored as a five-minute program . This week's show includes a special, iReporter's weekly feature on CNN iReport .
 It may be inserted into longer news programs for added dimension and showmanship . It may also be inserted within longer news shows for added drama .
 The Washington Report radio series is made possible by a special public service grant from the Schick Stainless Steel Blade Division of Schick Safety Razor Company . Washington Report is sponsored by Schick stainless steel Blade Division .
 Under this grant, the American Security Council Press will make the programs available until at least September 1966 .
 'Washington Report' has proven to be a most interesting and provocative program . Arthur L Robertson, General Manager KFML & KFML-FM, Denver, Colorado, is a radio station .
 The Washington Report was broadcast 4 times daily at 4 different newscasts . Morton J Victorson, Sales Manager WCHS , Charleston, West Virginia .
 Washington Report is a stimulating program which every news conscious American interested in our Country as well as current World problems should hear. Michael G Davis, Manager of KBGN-AM & FM, Caldwell, Idaho .
 The program has been well received in Louisiana and we are happy to learn it will be continued . Jay Perry, General Manager of KFQD, said the program was well received by viewers .
 WGBS is a Washington-based radio station . The station is located in Miami, Florida, and Washington, D.C.
 Mr Fisher is President and Chief Executive Officer of the American Security Council . Judd and Senator Dodd are both on the sidelines of the debate .
 He has served as consultant to the Chairman of the Committee on Cold War Education of the National Governors Conference, member of the Civil Defense Advisory Council for Illinois . World War II combat pilot; a special agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation .
 His research experience includes organizing and heading a national research organization with 32 branch offices . He has also been involved in organizing and leading national research organizations .
 He was Director of the Psychological Warfare course conducted for the armed forces by the Georgetown Graduate School . He was director of the psychological warfare course conducted by the military .
 He has been a consultant to the Psychological Strategy Board, the Operations Research Office, the Department of the Navy and other government agencies . He has also consulted with the psychological Strategy Board and other agencies .
 Marx to Present Day. Betrayal at the U.N., Communist-Nazi Relations in World War Two, and Communist Exiles— Marx to present Day.
 As a prizewinning radio and television writer, he has also written over 1,000 radio programs . He has 40 film and TV credits for dramatic shows, including documentaries for the U.S. Air Force and Army .
 He is a frequent contributor to the ASC Washington Report and serves as its Managing Editor .
 He has received tribute in Congress, the Freedoms Foundation award, and many other honors .
 National Editor Award-winning free-lance journalist William Gill has over 18 years' experience in news reporting . Gill has assignments for Time, Life, Fortune, Fortune and National Geographic .
 He is National Editor of the ASC Washington Report and a recognized expert in the fields of international security and disarmament . He says the U.S. should not be allowed to engage in military action in Syria .
 Research Director Mr Lambie heads the American Security Council's Library and Research Center . He is the director of the library and research center .
 Mr Lambie is a former special agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation . He was a special agent for the FBI .
 The American Security Council's research staff has handled more than 60,000 research requests from ASC. member companies, the press and government agencies. In the four years he has been Research Director, he says .
 John Lewis began his career as a newsman 22 years ago with the Associated Press covering government and politics . John Lewis is a Washington producer for the Washington Post .
 He was an editor and publisher of several weekly newspapers . He later entered broadcasting as an analyst of political and economic affairs .
 A Pulitzer Prize winner Mr Mowrer was the Chicago Daily News chief foreign correspondent for twenty years .
 He predicted in 1922 that Mussolini meant war; in 1933 that Hitler meant war and in 1936 that the Japanese meant war . In 1936 he predicted the Japanese would mean war . He predicted that Hitler and Hitler would be at war .
 He watched the first skirmishes of the Spanish Civil War and covered Europe, China, North Africa and the Middle East . He also covered China, China and North Africa .
 He has written ten books in the field of political science, the most recent of which is An End to Make Believe .
 Mr Pennington is Chief of the Washington Bureau of the American Security Council . He is the editor of Internal Security .
 He has also served as Director of the National Americanism Commission of the American Legion . He has been Director of National Americanist Commission .
 Mr Pennington plays a key role in gathering facts for the ASC's Washington Report . With his extensive background in national security matters and his long service in Washington, he is key to gathering facts .
 A leading political and military scientist, Dr. Steffan T POSSONy is a leading political, military scientist . Dr. T. Possony is the author of a book, "The First World War," "The Battle of the Cold War" and "The Cold War
 Si i While 1 indeed would like to be of service to you, as you may know, it is contrary to my long-standing policy to comment on literature or programs not prepared by personnel of this Bureau .
 X am certain you will understand why we cannot comment as you suggested . Therefore, X am . certain you . will understand . why we . cannot comment on the matter .
 I have been emphasizing to those citizens who communicate with me that the problems facing many of our communities are those which should be met by legally constituted authorities with the steadfast cooperation of every loyal citizen . I have, however, been emphasizing .
 We must unite as a people, we must understand our basic American heritage under law, and we must face the issues confronting us with deliberation, quiet courage, and knowledge . i loover. We must unify as a nation, and face our issues with deliberating, quiet
 Mr Conrad Mr Felt, Gale Mr Gale Mr Rosen Mr Sullivan and Mr Sullivan . Mr Sullivan, Mr, Tavel Mr Trotter and Mr. Trotters .
 For this reason, responsible Americans must put aside domestic political considerations and cooperate on national security matters . The nation's national security is at risk of losing control of the White House .
 As one prerequisite for this kind of cooperation, neither the program nor the America^ Security Council has ever reported on or taken positions on domestic political issues .
 You may hear their program on WMAL, the Washington Evening Star station, at 8:00 PM Monday through Friday .
 In response to your inquiry, this Bureau has never investigated the American Security Council . The Bureau has not investigated the matter .
 The American Security Council is financed and operated by private industry . It is a national research and information center on subversive activities for the use of its members . Bufiles reflect the American Security council .
 Data developed is furnished to individuals and organizations deemed appropriate to receive such information for a fee . Data developed by the company is available for use in the U.S. and abroad .
 Correspondent communicated with the Director to inquire if the age of a letter written in pencil could be scientifically determined .
 Frank spoke before the Grandview Terrace Association in Clearwater, Florida, in 1958 . Frank spoke to the group in 1958 during a visit to Clearwater in Florida .
 The substance of his re marks was furnished by one ~| of that city, and the Bureau is aware of comments made by Frank ridiculing the Government .
 In view of this, the above reply on black letterhead stationery appears appropriate, and correspondent is not being addressed as honorable . Correspondent: " Correspondent is not in the position of an honorable person to reply to this."
 As businessmen, we foave both supported different organizations fighting Communism . Cal i f ornia and Cal i ornia supported different anti-communist organizations . Cali and Cali supported different groups fighting Communism.
 These fine organizations have tried hard, hut the Communists are not deterred by the efforts of these small groups . The Communist Party will not be deterred, it says .
 We need at least onie anti-Communist organization bjtg enough to get results . We need to use anti-communist organizations like bjg to help us get results.
 It was organized by business as the reasonable and responsible way to fill this need . This can be done easily if we all su$#6rt the same association „-„^oneLjwhich^h On this basis v/e ask you to join us in the
 With 3500 member companies it is already the largest organization of its type . With over 3500 members, it's already the world's largest organization .
 The program is already the largest daily radio program in the country . The program features top Republican Walter H Judd and top Democratic Senator Thomas J Dodd .
 FBI has never investigated this group, FBI says . FBI says it has never been investigated by this group .
 I thought you might like to know, however, that we have enjoyed favorable relations with it . Enclosed is the literature you forwarded. It is a piece of literature that you forwarded .
 He met the Director on 1-3-65 and discussed various points of interest about communism . He met with the Director of the Communist Party and discussed communism .
 The American Security Council has not been investigated by the Bureau . Mr Frawley is known personally to Assistant to the Director fteLioachi .
 It is selfdescribed as an organization financed and operated by priVate;:industry as a National Research and Information Center on subversive activities.
 Several former Special Agents of the FBI have been revealed to be former FBI Special Agents . The FBI has publicly announced that there are several former FBI agents in their organization .
 Lee Pennington stopped by to advise Bureau till Tom Dodd is a co-chairman of a daily radio broadcast over WJVE\L which he and former Congressman Judd,^a former doctor -missionary, sponsor, Tom Dodd .
 Securit y Cj^inciL as a public service educational program, which is financed by Schick Razor Company, dealing with current relations, primarily foreign relations . The American Security Council is particularly concerned with this program in view of recent articles which have appeared in the Washington Merry
 Penningt on states that he has learned that and both of whom formerly were employed by Tom Dodd, have been fired because of their relations with one another .
 It is alleged Dodd put locks on his doors after he fired Boyd . Dodd is alleged to have locked his doors in order to keep him safe . Dodd has been accused of putting locks on doors after firing Boyd .
 It appears that Dave Martin has furnished certain information to Dewitt Copp concerning the alleged theft of material from Dodd's office . Dodds' office is at the center of the investigation into the theft .
 American Security Council is greatly concerned about the publicity surrounding the program . They feel that this publicity will reflect unfavorably on the program. The U.S. security council is concerned .
 Especially disgusting is the villainous demagogy of the imperialistic chieftains of the U.S. I ■ ■ — ''Especially disgusting" — ''especially disgusting"
 Each year they organize the so-called Captive Nations Week, hypocritically pretending to be defenders of nations that have escaped from their yoke . This year they pretend to be defending nations that escaped from the yoke.
 These international gendarmes, stranglers of freedom and independence, would like again to enslave the free nations of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, say Lithuanians . They would also enslave Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania, Lithuania .
 Mikhail Suslov in reference to the 1965 Captive Nations Week observance, uttered on July 17, 1965 in Lithuania with reference to all captive nations . Suslov's words were uttered in Lithuania in 1965 .
 He has weathered all political storms in the Soviet Union . He has served in the highest echelon under Stalin, Malenkov and Khrushchev . He now serves under Brezhnev and Kosygin .
 Suslov was the chief thinker and ideologist under successive totalitarian regimes in colonialist Moscow . Suslov has been the chief thinkers and ideologists under successive regimes .
 He knows the psycho -political significance of Captive Nations Week, even if some of our leaders and many of our citizens have given it scant attention . He knows it's important, but some leaders and citizens have not given it attention .
 Vice President Richard Nixon's trip to Russia was part of his trip to Moscow . He merely voiced again . the . the^fear^and concern of Moscow, -which-Khrush.chev-first enunciate d-in J 9 5 .
 Mr Nixon, in his book Six Crises , stated, ""The Captive Nations Resolution was the major Soviet irritant i throughout my tour. Mr Nixon . Mr Nixon also stated, in . his book, "Captive Nations.""
 J overlooked outside of the Soviet bloc . Here are two selected ones which were generally overlooked .
 "They are beating the drums again across the sea, filling columns in CORDE newspapers and delivering long hypocritical speeches. If\££)<^~ ""They're beating the . drums again," says the British Prime Minister . If . If you or a family member, contact us
 Dr # Lev E Dobriansky is the man who conceived the idea of Captive Nations Week . He is the founder of the organisation that runs Captive Nation Week .
 The Russians seized upon the 1965 Week as an occasion for sentencing Gerald Brooke, a 28 year old British teacher to five years of hard labor .
 Captive Nations Week has been a thorn in the side of Communist psycho-political strategy toward us and the industrial West . From the very start, Captive nations Week was the target of the Communist Party .
 A cardinal objective of Moscow's deceptive policy of ""peaceful coexistence"" has been to establish our politico-moral acceptance of the Soviet Empire . A cardinal . objective of . Moscow's . deceptive policy has been established to establish . the . politico . moral acceptance of Soviet Empire
 The Soviet Russians and their collaborators insist that if we really want to coexist peacefully, we must forget about any captive nations . The Soviet Russia and its collaborators insist on coexistence peacefully .
 Moscow and its associated Communist regimes even demand that in order to achieve a real lessening of tensions we must show good faith by forgetting the whole history of Soviet Russian imperiocolonialism and Communist conquests since 1918 .
 Both the law and the annual Week stand as a major obstacle to the Red psycho-political design . By stressing the very essen1 tials that Moscow and the Red Syndicate would have us forget, both the law .
 The two are a source of grave apprehension to the cold warriors of Moscow and other Communist capitals . They persistently point to one of the Soviets 1 1 most exposed areas of vulnerability . Morej over, .
 Moscow T s ""peaceful coexistence"" strategy is a dangerous strategy . Its observance clearly outlines the perfidy, deception, and long-run dangers of Moscow's strategy .
 Repeated often enough without adequate challenge, all these blatant untruths will doubtless poison the minds of millions of millions, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 S R, as well as the oppression of all the . captive peoples-by their totalitarian governments-are reaching more than 1,000,000 .
 The White House has played down the Week in recent years . Governors, Mayors and citizens have broadened the annual observance of the Week .
 By 1965, half of our States issued official proclamations, and practically every major city did likewise . By 1965 the U.S. had issued a similar proclamation to the same city .
 The National Captive Nations Committee guides the annual observance . The U.S. Senate has become members of the committee .
 Local Captive Nations committees have sprung up in every section of the country . Captive nations committees are now being held in every part of the nation .
 The Week is now observed overseas in the Republic of China, West Germany, Turkey, Sweden, Sweden and Australia .
 Captive Nations Week is the eighth annual observance of Captive nations Week . This year marks the eighth year of the week's observance . The week is the third week of July .
 During this week Americans will again raise their voices to honor the enslaved half of the world .
 The long list of captive nations from Cuba to Hungary to Ukraine to North Vietnam is not to be extended . They will emphasize again the things that must be done if the long list is not extended .
 Week isJheJiuilto ing with the captive nations the people themselves, rather than with the illegitimate regimes that hold them in bondage and economic slavery . Building Bridges of Understanding .
 The bridge of understanding can only be one link in the mutual struggle for freedom their freedom regained and ours preserved . The bridge to understanding is only one link between the two sides .
 To believe that by arriving at ""understandings" with the Communist rulers we shall be furthering the freedom of the captive nations is not only an illusion but also an affront to common political sense . To believe we are furthering our freedom is an illusion .
 A little exercise of logic itself would demonstrate that the power center of the Red Empire is the Soviet Union . All other parts, even including Red China, depend for their survival upon this center, he writes .
 The crucial fact is that our people are not being told the full truth about people of the captive nations and their plight in the totalitarian Red states . People of captive nations should be told the truth about the plight of those held captive nations, the author says .
 Unpardonable ignorance, a morally irresponsible indifference, and restraining fears are frequently the ingredients of omission that in the long run exact a disproportionate cost . Omission is often an ingredient of omission .
 On May 26, 1966, President Johnson unequivocally stated, ""The United States cannot condone the perpetuation of racial or political injustice anywhere in the world"
 Those of us who have been active in Captive Nations Week have opposed measures which tend to perpetuate the control of Communist regimes over the Captives Nations . We oppose measures that tend to perpetrate Communist regimes .
 The 1966 Captive Nations Week is an appropriate time to stress our support of positive measures concentrating on the freedom of the captive nations . We support the R. R Consular Treaty .
 We might include the support of public and private ""Freedom Academies"", creation of a special Congressional Committee on the Captive Nations . We might also include the focus of world attention on Sino-Soviet imperio-colonialism .
 We will further the cause of world freedom by never forgetting all the Captive Nations those in the Soviet Union, in Central Europe, in Asia and Cuba, we will never forget them . The U.S. will continue to fight for world freedom .
 Dr. Loyd Wright, Co-Chairman Wayne A Johnston International Politics Editor Dr. Wayne A. Johnston . Dr. Wright is the co-chairman of the International Politics Committee of the Republican Party of the United States .
 Dr. James D Atkinson, Lieutenant General Edward M Almond, William H Kendall Economics Editor Dr. Edward H Kendall, Lt. James H Atkinson and Lt. Edward D Atkinson .
 National Editor William Gill Bennett Archambault, USN Research Director William K Lambie, Jr. Admiral Ben Moreell, U.S. research director William K. Lambie Jr. Jr.
 Robert Morris Associate Editor, John F Lewis, Robert Morris and John F. Lewis . General Mark Clark or Mark Clark .
 Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Patrick J Frawley, Jr. is the U.S. Navy's Rear Admiral of the USN .
 Annual subor in part if context is preserved, credit given and two copies ate scription rate $12.00.00 . Two copies of this article are available for purchase at the same price as the other .
 lOtf each postpaid for members and forwarded to the American Security Council Executive Offices . Additional copies available at 25^ each post paid for non-members and forwarded .
 JTMJStr aMgy of the TricontinentaL Conference . We must give the Communists credit, for thinking big .
 Communists went ahead with the creation of the Afro -Asian-Latin American Peoples 1 Solidarity Organization . The organization's principal mission is to incite, support and coordinate simul-. taneous ""wars of national liberation"" on three continents .
 They established, it in Havana, Cuba, directly under the nose of the U.S. Furthermore, they established, the Cuban government in Havana . The United States. established it in Cuba, Cuba .
 This step was taken during the first two weeks of January of this year . This is the first step in the process of changing the rules of the law .
 The work of the permanent bodies established by the Conference goes on quietly and in deadly earnest .
 The Secretariat is the full-time general headquarters for the control and coordination of violence and terror throughout the underdeveloped areas of three continents . It is located in Havana, Cuba, and Cuba, Cuba .
 It is composed of a Secretary General (Captain Osmany Cienfuegoes, the present Cuban minister of Construction) and twelve secretaries, four from each continent . The Secretary General is currently Cuba's Minister of Construction .
 Secretariat supervises Committee on Assistance'and Aid to Movements for National Liberation and Struggle Against Colonialism and Neocolonialism . Committee has as its mission ""to promote, increase, and coordinate effecti ve solidaritywith national liberation movements"
 Communist-sponsored Conferenpe v in WR 66-2 of January 17, 1966 . Colombia, Colombia .
 Venezuela, Peru, Guatemala, Panama, Panama and Ecuador appear to be in the forefront for Communist exploitation . A. "Venezuela" appears to be one of the countries most at risk of being exploited .
 This body; is made up of 27 Latin American and Caribbean ""delegations"" to the Tricontinental Conference . The body is made of 27 delegates from Latin America and Caribbean countries .
 Brazil, Cuba, Colombia, Guyana, Guillaillailla, Guatemala, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela . Peru, Peru and Uruguay are among the countries in the region .
 Two independent groups of technical experts on counter-intelligence and subversion issue renewed warnings in the form of special reports . Comment of the Experts: The continuing threat posed by these developments .
 Latin American body known as the Special Consultative Committee on Security . One of these is the Latin America body known for its security measures .
 "If we do not convince ourselves that we are at war and that therefore we are combatants, we shall succumb," says President Obama . "We shall succumb. We shall succumb" says Obama .
 Communists should not be complacent toward Communism nor fail to make every possible effort to cope with the threat posed by its revolutionary war . Only in this way will democracy truly defend . • • ■ itself .
 Cuba as the ""secure base"" or ""rear area"" from which subversive operations are launched into all parts of Latin America, assumes a special significance . Cuba's geographic importance of Cuba, as the "secure base" or "rear" of which operations are carried out, assumes
 The OAS Special Consultative Committee said the Communist threat to the Americas will continue . Reiterating a conclusion published in its December 11, 1964 report, the OAS said the regime prevailing in Cuba would continue .
 General Enrique Lister and Colonel Alberto Bayo arrived in Cuba just prior to the meeting . General Lister is an experienced Spanish Communist guerrilla expert . General Bayo is a Colonel of the Communist Party .
 These two professionals established the first of the steadily growing complex of guerrilla training camps in Cuba . The first was established in Cuba in 1953 .
 Among the first of these was the one under the command of Colonel Bayo at the Boca Ciega School in the resort town of Tarara .
 In mid-1960, the initial group of 19 young Latin American students began their rigorous training program . The first group of students arrived at the U.S. military academy in mid- 1960 .
 General Lister was building an extensive network of guerrilla warfare schools in Min^s del Frio, Oriente Province . Meanwhile, he was building a network of guerillas schools in the province .
 By early 1963, the number of these camps had reached 10; by 1 T 966, there was a total of 43, all actively engaged in turning out young, tough, thoroughly indoctrinated Communist cadre .
 A permanent command and control structure for tricontinental armed uprisings, backed up by an expanding training base . Increasing numbers of professional Communist cadre to lead the announced campaign of ""simultaneous wars"
 The Soviet Union still considers its subversive basie in Cuba worth the pride of a subsidy of over a million dollars a day . Peace Force deployments in the Dominican Republic .
 President Johnson has stated that the United States intends to continue the Alliance for Progress economic assistance programs (which come to approximately $1 billion annually) on into the next decade .
 Both sides know that they are playing for high stakes and for keeps . The magnitude of these commitments underlines the fact that both sides know they are going for a win .
 James D Atkinson, Lieutenant General Edward M Almond, William H Kendall Economics Editor. James Atkinson, Edward M. Almond and Edward D. Atkinson. Edward D Atkinson .
 Admiral Felix B Stump, USN Chief, Washington Bureau . Lee R Pennington Henry Duque * Dr. Edgar Ansel Mowrer . Charles S Craigmile ' ' ^ Admiral Felix Stump .
 Annual subor in part if context is preserved, credit given and two copies are scribed rate $12,00.00. The author of this article is published at the request of the publisher .
 In March of this year, the State Department issued a four-page warning to American citi zens planning to visit the Soviet Union during the coming tourist season . GALE: The State Department has issued a warning to U.S. visitors to the USSR .
 There have been indications of Soviet interest in exchanging imprisoned American tourists for Soviet citizens convicted of espionage in the U.S. There have also been indications that the Soviet Union is interested in exchanging American tourists with Soviet citizens .
 A year prior to this most recent warning, the State Department had issued a similar document . The document was built on the same three premises .
 In 1963, Professor Frederick C Barghoorn of Yale, taking part in the Cultural Exchange Program, was framed by the Soviets on espionage charges . He was framed in 1963 by the Soviet Union .
 In 1964, Peter Landerman, a tourist, was sentenced to three years in a labor camp following a traffic accident in which a Russian was killed . Landerman was sentenced in 1964 after a Russian tourist was killed in a car accident . In 2010, Landerman received a three-year
 In 1965, there was the Newcomb Mott case which ended in JVI&t's unexplained death while in Soviet hands . The case was the subject of a series of unsolved unsolved murders in the 1960s .
 Ex-army Lieutenants Craddock M Gilmour Jr. and Buel Ray Wortham, Jr. were arrested at the Soviet-Finnish border . Shortly thereafter, ex-armies Lieutenagers Craddock . Gilmours and Wortham were arrested .
 They were charged with exchanging money on the black market and stealing a souvenir while tourists in the Soviet Union . They were accused of exchanging money and stealing souvenir .
 Wortham recently claimed he and his friend Gilmour had been framed by the KGB . The purpose of the exercise was to exchange them for convicted Soviet spy Igor A Ivanov . The LOPMENTS AFFECTING WW s .
 Ivanov has been free on $100,000 bail pending appeal of his 20-year sentence . Ivanov was convicted in December, 1964, and sentenced to 20 years in prison . Since then Ivanov's conviction, Ivanov is free on bail .
 He is the only Soviet citizen in the United States so charged and his KGB superiors are anxious to bring him home . He is charged with espionage in the U.S.
 In November, 1966, Vladimir Kazan-Komarek was kidnapped by the Soviet-Czechoslovakia . The kidnapping took place in Prague, Czechoslovakia, in 1966 .
 In all of these cases, with the exception of Newcomb Mott, the arrested individuals came home again safely after having suffered varying degrees of economic blackmail, hardship and mental torture .
 They are unreported cases because those detained only briefly are held only briefly .
 In most instances the victim was totally innocent of any wrong doing or had mistakenly broken a Soviet regulation . In most cases the victim had been innocent of all wrong doing .
 Last year, despite the State Department's warning, at least 24,000 Americans visited the Soviet Union .
 Only infinitesimal number of American tourists who have visited the Soviet Union since 1963 have run afoul of the KGB . Senate ratification of the Consular Treaty will offer a greater measure of protection to the traveler in the future .
 Such vulnerability has nothing to do with Soviet legality, nor does ratification of the Consular Treaty protect the victim from reaping any harsh effect of Kremlin policy . Such vulnerability does not have anything to do to Soviet legality or the treaty's ratification .
 Intourist guides who squire American tourists around Soviet cities are KGBconnected . Further, all Intourists who squirre American tourists are KGB connected .
 All are required to report to their superiors on the statements and behavior of their United States charges .
 Citizen Exchange Corps. is the organization that encourages U.S. travel to the Soviet Union . The Citizen Exchange corps. is one of the most prominent organizations in the United States .
 It was formerly known as Peace Hostage Exchange Foundation, Inc. The name and original idea was taken from medieval practice of exchanging hostages between countries in order to insure peace .
 Each tour lasts three weeks, with each tour lasting three weeks . It hopes to do better this year than last year's .
 The founders of CEC set as goals a vast expansion of citizen exchanges between Communist and non-Communist nations . The founders set as . goals for a vast . expansion of . citizen exchanges .
 The total number of Soviet citizens who have visited the United States in the past five years, outside of those who came as performers under the Cultural Exchange program, was 1,509 .
 Of this number, most were able to come because American dollars paid the way . Most of this number of people came because of this American dollars .
 Those students who elect to go will receive six semester credits toward their undergraduate degree . Those who choose to go to the program will also be able to earn six semester credit toward their degree .
 There is no misunderstanding on the part of the Soviet Central Committee and the Politburo . But beneath the surface, there are no misunderstanding, says the Russian president .
 The Russian people obey Kremlin policy; they question it at their peril . The Kremlin says it's not for them to question it, but they obey it .
 "All the fun and games of people-to-people meetings cannot change that single fact," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not going to give up on the idea that I'm going to be in the same place as I was in the
 As for "peaceful coexistence,"" it is the Kremlin policy of the day . While it-may mean .the roadto detente, to some, in . the United States, it is a well defined tactic on the road to Marxian paradise .
 The Soviet Union supplies about 80 percent of the weaponry now being used by the North Vietnamese . It is supplying about a billion dollars a year at the cost of nearly a billion a year .
 SAM mobile units with Cuban crews are operating in North Vietnam . Four SAM units are now operating in the country's capital .
 In December a 10,000-ton Russian ship left that same port carrying mortars, light artillery, medium tanks, rifles, arid ammunition to Hanoi . Also in December, a Russian ship brought mortars and light artillery to the same port .
 American tourism to the Soviet Union, last year and this, bears an additional cost to the nation . In short, U.S. tourism to Soviet Union is a cost of American taxpayers .
 It helps to pay the price to kill our servicemen fighting Communist aggression in Vietnam . It pays the price for our soldiers to be killed by Communist aggression . It helps pay the cost to pay for the lives of those killed in Vietnam.
 General Bernard A Schriever, USAF S^^^i^SmW FHitnr Hr ^fln t Pnccnnu Admiral Robert L Dennison, USN Major General Dale 0.0. Schoech . Schriev .
 USMC President John M Fisher and Clifford F Hood are senior members of the USMC . The USMC is the longest-serving military force in the United States .
 Annual subor in part if context is preserved, credit given and two copies given . Two copies of this article are available at the rate of $12.00 .
 American Security Council Executive Offices, tch postpaid for members . Additional copies available at 25* each postpaid each month .
 By use of instant transmittal memorandum, all necessary recording and indexing will be accomplished . Use of instant memo to record, index and record all the necessary information .
 ASC member company executiyes Re: Megatonnage Gap . Share this vitally important study and the enclosed news release with your local editor .
 The House Armed Sevices Committee w ill ill ma ke a concurrenren t release of their Committee print of this study . The Armed Services Committee will release the study .
 18 of the nation's top experts on national defense assert that the Soviet Union is stronger than the U.S. Their report, "The Changing Strategic Military Balance -r United States A, vs. Russia," was released today .
 The United States S.R. "". was prepared with the assistance of the Library of Congress at the request of the Armed Services Committee of the United States House of Representatives .
 Bernard A Schriever, USAF , recently retired Commander, United States Air Force Systems Command, is chairman of the special subcommittee of the National Strategy Committee of the American Security Council, which prepared the study .
 Report finds that the United States has exchanged its goal of a war-winning strategic superiority for a strategy of mutual deterrence . The report was based on analysis of hundreds of unclassified sources .
 Union is driving hard toward a goal of overwhelming superiority in the decisive field of nuclear weaponry . Union ""is driving hard." toward a . goal of "overwhelming superiority" in the nuclear weapons field . Union .
 United States delivery capability is estimated to range between 6,000 megatons and 15,000 megatons . The estimated high for the Soviet delivery capability for the U.S. is 50,000 . The projection of the established Soviet range-curve indicates a low figure
 The subcommittee voices a warning that the U.S. has only one option left if it is faced with a Soviet ultimatum to surrender . The subcommittee says the United States is in the dangerous position .
 It must either fire its offensive nuclear weapons or give up its sovereignty, the South Korean president says . The South Korean government must either give up sovereignty or fire its nuclear weapons .
 An ABM would at least strengthen the hand of the President if he is confronted with such a fateful decision . It might stay a hand of an enemy at a critical moment in history .
 Adm. Paul D Adams, USA , former Commander in Chief of U.S. Strike Command; Adm . Paul D . Adams, . former Commander of Chief of the United States Strike Command, . Former President of United States. George W. Bush, . President of the
 Gen. Robert L Dennison, USN , former Commander in Chief of the United States Atlantic Fleet . Gen. Dennisons was the U.S. Atlantic Fleet's commander in charge of the Navy's Atlantic fleet .
 Dr. Thomas S Power, USAF , former Commander, Strategic Air Command, and Dr. Dr. John S. Power . Dr. Power is a former Commander of the Strategic Air Force and former President of the Air Force .
 Ben Moreell, CEC, USN, former Chief of Civil Engineers, U.S. Navy; Vice Adm. Admiral Moreell . Moreell: "I'm not a Navy engineer, I'm a Navy sailor. I'm an engineer."
 Adm. Dale O Smith, USA , former member of planning staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint chiefs of Staff; Adm . Dale O. Smith, U.S. Navy Secretary of State John Kerry, USA .
 Gen. Chester C Ward, USN , retired Judge Advocate General, U.S. Navy . Gen. Ward is a former Judge Advocate for the Navy . He is retired from the U.N. and retired from Washington DC .
 Chairman Rivers asked Library of Congress to assist in this study . Library will assist with availability of the full range of public source material . Chairman Rivers has requested the library of Congress be consulted .
 This assistance was provided by the Library of Congress's Aerospace Technology Division .
 We gratefully acknowledge this help which included reviewing a great volume of material for pertinent references, compiling the results of this review, and providing office space and other facilities for staff personnel .
 It is fully realized that in using unclassified sources of information only, much of the data used could be inaccurate .
 The same can be said for the most carefully gathered secret intelligence . However, the same can't be said to be said about the intelligence gathered by the CIA .
 Informational ""raw material"" must be evaluated and interpreted before it becomes functionally meaningful . Human judgment is predominant in these processes and a wide range of fallibility inevitably results .
 Some of the figures used so freely in classified quantifications fail to receive a unanimous vote by the principal intelligence officers involved, but a decision must be made .
 A belief by a majority does not make it a fact, and factual verification is often difficult, if not impossible . One must ever keep in mind that a belief by the majority that something is so does not mean it is so .
 The Soviet installation of missiles in Cuba came as a complete surprise to official Washington . The massive preparations which had extended over several months had been made for months .
 This study is based on analysis and evaluation of hundreds of unclassified sources published from January 1960 through April 1967 .
 The types of sources used ranged from military, nuclear-strategic, and scientific books, treatises, journals and limited-distribution studies, trade and technical journals .
 Some of the more productive sources for strategic balance specifics included testimony before Congressional Committees by Secretary of Defense McNamara and other Department of Defense officials .
 Certain of the articles reviewed were ""landmarks"" or ""breakthroughs"" in their contribution to the unclassified literature bearing upon the strategic military balance . The articles reviewed included articles that were "landmarks" or "breakthrough"
 We believe that sources such as those noted are responsible although it should be understood that their resources do not compare with those available to the U.S. intelligence community . We do believe that the ""ball park"" figures from these unclassified sources are adequate to support thoughtful evaluation .
 In reporting specifics which have come from a variety of sources, we have listed the source or sources most readily available to the general public . We have also listed the sources or sources we have most commonly available .
 Strategic weapon systems are considered to be forces designed to carry out long-range strategic missions and to carry the main burden of battle in a general nuclear war . For purposes of this study, this study includes the use of nuclear weapons .
 In this study we have used the same ground rules throughout for comparison of weapon systems . The study was carried out under the guidance of the U.S. Air Force .
 We have compared like kinds of weapons, i.e., ICBMs, IRBMs/MRBMs with their like, strategic bombers with strategic bombers, and submarine-launched missiles with submarines . We have also compared like kind of weapons with like, such as ICB
 Numbers of nuclear warheads are compared to the yield of warheads . Nuclear warheads can be used to test nuclear weapons in the United States .
 Those with access to classified information may readily make the necessary data substitutions should this be desired . Data substitutions may be made if necessary .
 In assessing the strategic military balance, we have considered both the number and yield of each strategic weapon system . The U.S. considers both the numbers and yields of each weapon system as part of the balance .
 Weapons-yield as expressed in megatonnage is the measure of firepower in the nuclear age . After all, weapons-Yield is a measure of the firepower in nuclear age, experts say .
 In this connection, it should be noted that in our classification of strategic weapon systems we have paralleled the scholarly Institute for Strategic Studies classification system . In this .
 The BADGERs have intercontinental range with inflight refueling and are classified by the Russians . They are so classified by Russia that they are classified as classified .
 The BADGER is comparable to the phased-out B-47, which was previously included in the strategic forces by the Office of the Secretary of Defense . Badger is similar to the phase-out, which is now phased out .
 The OSD groups the POLARIS missiles with ICBMs . These IRBMs are supposed to be countered by the U.S. submarine-launched IRBMMs .
 Both the BADGERs and the IRBMs in Western Russia are classified as ""strategic"" by the Institute for Strategic Studies .
 It would be short-sighted, however, not to take into account the intentions of the Soviet leaders, for certainly it takes more than weapons to start a war . It would take more than a war to start, but it would be a mistake not to consider the intentions .
 Statement of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara before a Joint Session of the Senate Armed Services Committee and the Senate Subcommittee on Department of Defense Appropriations on the 1968-72 Defense Program and 1968 Defense Budget .
 The intentions of one side certainly influence the intentions of the other, not to mention the strategic stance each side takes with its weaponry . Each side takes a strategic stance with its weapons .
 This criterion of intentions, or strategic objectives, has seemed to weigh heavily in the design of America's strategic military posture . America's military posture seems to be at odds with the U.S.
 The strategic objectives of both sides are examined in the following section . For this reason, the strategic objectives are examined .
 It should be emphasized that the purpose of this study is limited to a factual assessment and interpretation of the strategic military balance without arguing for or against, the overall policies which have brought each side to its present strategic military posture .
 USN Vice Admiral Elton Watters Grenfell, USN General Curtis E Le May, USAF Admiral Ben Moreell, CEC, U.S. Prof. James D, Atkinson Admiral Robert L Dennison and USN Prof. Elton Grenfell . Prof. Ben
 Worton, USMC as special subcommittee of the National Strategy Committee of the American Security Council . He was appointed by the National Security Council to be a special subcommittee . He has served in the U.S. military since 2001 .
 The basic frame of reference for comparing the strategic strength of the Soviet Union and the United States is an examination of their national objectives, both military and political . It is not our task here . to explore Soviet political objectives in extenso, although it must be kept . in mind that
 For a half-century, Soviet leaders have repeated that Communism's ultimate objective is world domination . But many in the Free World simply refuse to believe that the Soviet leaders mean what they say .
 In recent years, the U.S. has shown an inclination to disbelieve or discount Soviet achievements and advances . This is particularly so with respect to the new ballistic missile defenses of the Soviet Union and to Soviet boasts of an orbital bomb capability .
 Evidence indicates that the Soviet Union has a goal of strategic superiority designed to win a nuclear war rather than merely deter one . Yet, the available evidence indicates that this is not all the case .
 Once in a war-winning posture, the U.S. would be ideally situated to practice nuclear blackmail and would not even have to fight a nuclear war . Once in such a post-war position, the United States would be able to practice blackmail .
 Some analysts assert that this is the ultimate goal of the Soviet Union . It depends upon a defense against nuclear retaliation, they say . Some analysts say this is an ultimate goal .
 The United States has exchanged its goal of a war-winning strategic superiority for a strategy of mutual deterrence . The U.S. has exchanged strategic superiority with a strategy for mutual deterrence.
 The United States strategy of mutual deterrence is said to increase ""stability"" and reduce international tensions . The U.S. strategy is believed to increase stability in the world .
 American officials are trying to convince Soviet leaders that a race to build anti-ballistic missile systems would be pointless . U.S. officials are working to convince them that such a race is pointless .
 Soviet leaders, both political and military, have continuously repeated declarations that Communism's ultimate objective is world domination . During all of that time, Soviet leaders have consistently repeated declarations .
 The Communist objective is still that of world conquest, says the Communist Party . "Our own experience and current research fully confirms that . Our own experience ... confirms that."
 Kremlin agents trained by the Kremlin continue to burrow deeply into countries of the Caribbean and Central and South America . Their deadly objective is to undermine legitimate governments, foment revolution and create a Soviet Union of Latin American Republics .
 J Edgar Hoover spoke to Brotherhood of the Washington Hebrew Congregation, December 4, 1963 . Hoover was the FBI director of the Jewish Congregation in Washington, DC . Hoover died at the age of 92 in March 1963 .
 Their dispute with the leadership of Communist China is not over the ultimate objective but how it is to be achieved and who is to control the world-wide Communist movement . Their dispute is over how it will be achieved, how it should be achieved .
 He expressed belief that they had not abandoned their goal of world domination . He expressed his belief that the U.S. has not abandoned its goal of domination .
 The main thrust of the authoritative book, Military Strategy, was toward achieving superiority . Marshal Sokolovsky's main thrust was toward realizing superiority .
 In a discussion of strategic missile forces, attainment of qualitative and quantitative superiority was set as one of the ""most important problems in 6.6" In 6.5" attainment of quantity and quantum superiority was set as an important problem in 6
 Robert S McNamara, Secretary of Defense, spoke before Joint Session of Senate Armed Services Committee and the Senate Subcommittee on Department of Defense Appropriations, January 1964, 4.4. 1964 . McNamara was secretary of state of defense at the time .
 Recently-deceased Soviet Defense Minister Marshal Malinovsky made a clear-cut statement concerning strategic superiority . It was further pointed out that establishing superiority over the enemy in modern weaponry was the material prerequisite for victory .
 Soviet science, it continued, has created weapons new in principle ""secretly nurtured in scientific research bureaus and construction collectives" Additional evidence of the Soviet drive to attain strategic superiority is supplied by a January 1967 statement of the late Defense Minister 9 .
 Vigilantly Stand Guard Over the Peace, U.S.R.R., Ministry of Defense, 1962 . Vigilantly stand guard over the peace in the United States .
 He hinted at Soviet expansion of Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles emplacements . Hinted at a burgeoning Anti-Ballistic Missile program .
 If general war comes, the Soviets will try for a knockout nuclear first strike in the initial period of the war,"" 14 . In other words, if general war . comes, if . the Soviets . will try to a knockout . first strike .
 Official Communist policy statements emphasize their intention of winning world domination without a general nuclear war . Official Communist policies emphasize winning the world domination with a nuclear war without a war .
 The communists want to win this struggle with the least losses, and there is no doubt whatsoever that we shall win. But we communists want this struggle to be won, he says .
 The principal Soviet military thrust has been to develop a massive and superior capability for nuclear war . However, we can draw little comfort from such statements because, as shown hereinafter, the principal .
 Much of it borders on the sensational, and the divergence of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and of the Secretary of Defense is stated and explained far more frankly and specifically than in previous official testimony .
 The focus of much of the most significant testimony is on the strategic effects of the Soviet deployment of anti missile defense systems . Whether and when the U. S. should deploy such a system, and the level of total U.S. strategic power required to maintain sufficient security on the U
 The Secretary of Defense left no doubt that the military strategy of the United States is based on the concept of deterrence through a second strike in retaliation against a Soviet first strike . The U.S. military strategy .
 To deter deliberate nuclear attack upon the United States and its allies, the U.S. must maintain, continuously, a highly reliable ability to inflict an unacceptable degree of damage upon any single aggressor, or combination of aggressors, at any time during the course of a strategic nuclear exchange
 Hearings on SMS, Military Authorizations, Defense Appropriations, 1968, January 25-February 2, 1967 . Hearings before the Senate Committee on Armed Services and the Subcommittee on Department of Defense Appropriations were held .
 Included in the printed Hearing at the front of the report is Secretary McNamara's prepared statement on Military Poste and the 1968-72 Defense Program . The report was released on January 23, 1967 .
 Both the prepared statement and the actual testimony of the witness have been subject to deletions stated to be for purposes of national security . The statements have been removed from the testimony .
 We're approaching an era when it will become increasingly improbable that either side could destroy a sufficiently large portion of the other's strategic nuclear force, either by surprise or otherwise, to preclude a devastating retaliatory load .
 1967 was the year mentioned by McNamara as the most likely beginning of the new era . This may result in future betterment . 1967 was also the year that McNamara mentioned as the beginning of an era .
 We have leveled out our missile forces. They are building missiles very fast. You see, we have leveled them out, says President Obama . They are very fast building missiles, he says .
 "Our plans are that 5 years from now we will have just as many missiles as we have right now," says President Obama . "We will have more missiles than we do 5 years ago," says Obama .
 They have known that for a couple of years, and they keep on building. They've known that . They have . known that they have known . that they are going to be in trouble .
 We will examine key areas as development of space weapons, production of nuclear materials, strategic military budgets, attitude toward research and development and the changing strategic military balance . For this purpose we will examine hereinafter such key areas such as space weapons and production of nukes .
 On November 8, 1965, both TASS and hvestiya described it as an orbital missile . TASS: It was described as a 'space missile'
 Department of State asked Moscow whether, in the light of the Soviet display of an orbital 19.2m. orbit, it had asked if it was possible to launch an orbit around the world . State Department asked Moscow if it could launch a similar orbit .
 Senate Hearings, January 25, 26, 27, 30, 31 and February 1 and 2, 1967, p, 876, 20, 20 .
 The Soviet answer was that the agreement did not bar development of such weapons . The Soviet response was that such weapons were not banned .
 Harold Brown, then Director of Defense Research and Engineering, now Secretary of the Air Force, was asked how much money was being spent on studies of orbital bombardment vehicles . He was asked about the amount of money spent on the studies .
 I would be surprised if more than a couple of hundred thousand dollars in fiscal 1964 is being spent on this, and certainly no more than that is planned for 1965 . So that I would . I would not be surprised .
 First, it is not a very good idea — Second, there is now a U N. resolution which we subscribe to and the Soviets have subscribed to, not to put bombs in orbit . The U.N. resolution .
 The only known effective ways to assure the world that none of the nuclear-rocket powers are orbiting nuclear weapons are to inspect space rockets before launch, or to rendezvous with the orbiting rockets . Again, no provision for inspection was included in the treaty .
 Weapons in orbit could become a matter of grave consequence, particularly when utilized in conjunction with other strategic systems . Weapons in space weapons could be a serious problem for the U.S.
 President Johnson announced in January 1964, the partial shutdown of American plants producing weapons-grade nuclear materials . The partial shutdown was part of Johnson's plan to stop production of nuclear materials in 1964 .
 On January 24, 1967, it was reported that the fifth such plant was deactivated .
 The Atomic Energy Commission reported in November 1965, that there is ""no evidence"" that the Soviet Union had carried out nuclear materials cutbacks announced on April 26, 1964 .
 Hearings before the Committee on foreign Relations, United States Senate on the Treaty on Outer Space, March 7, 13 and April 12, 1967, 84. Hearings .
 By 1960, the Soviet Union had expanded its list of uses for nuclear materials to include bombs, civilian uses, surface ships, submarines and missiles . Up to then, the gross requirements of both countries, by function, grew in parallel, with the United States slightly ahead .
 The United States' testing program was notably less active than the Soviet Union's . The Soviet Union broke the undeclared moratorium in September 1961, with a massive series of tests .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara announced in December 1966, that the Soviet Union was deploying an operational ABM system . That interest was sustained over the years .
 Soviet ABM teste in 1961 and 1962 provided the knowledge which has permitted the U.S. to rush ahead with its ABM development and outstrip the United States.
 The atmospheric nuclear test ban has denied the United States the opportunity of ever catching up . The atmospheric test ban denies the U.S. the opportunity to ever catch up with Iran .
 Anti-ballistic missiles must be widely deployed in order to be effective against many attacking ICBMs . The U.S.R.'s TALLINN system covers a vast area .
 Anti-ballistic missile accuracy must still be assumed that, as in the air defense weapon systems, many defending weapons must be launched against each incoming warhead .
 ABM's task will be similar to that of conventional anti-aircraft, setting up a radioactive 27.5kg of radioactive material .
 It can be assumed, therefore, that the Soviet Union has foreseen, at least since 1961, this tremendous requirement for weapons-grade nuclear material to counter American ICBMs . The Soviet Union is expected to have a need for nuclear material since 1961 .
 The U.S. rejected the idea of producing an extensive ABM system as long ago as January 1964, when President Johnson announced cut-backs in manufacture of fissionable materials .
 U.S.R.'s military budget for 1967 to 14.5 billion rubles, up 1.1-billion rubles or 8 percent over the 1966 figure . The increase reflects the Soviet drive for military superiority .
 Soviet military spending in 1967 may approach 20-billion rubles, or 30 percent above the announced figure . While the Russians have a much larger standing army, the U.S. spends a lot more .
 Soviet tanks are hard to price accurately since they are made with heavily-subsidized coal and steel . Soviet tanks, a basic item of ground equipment, are hard-to-price accurately . And Soviet tanks can't be easily priced accurately .
 Using Mr Beecher's estimates, the Soviet strategic military budget is the equivalent of $33-billion to $40-billion a year .
 Even at the official exchange rate, the Soviet strategic budget would be $14,7-billion . Even at official exchange rates, the budget would have been $14.7 billion . The budget is estimated to be $15 billion .
 McNamara reported that the total U.S. 1967 military budget would be $68-billion . In his January 23, 1967 Posture Statement, Secretary McNamara said the total United States military budget was $68 billion .
 The budget for strategic forces was $7.1-billion or 14 percent of the total military budget . The budget is considered the largest military budget in the world .
 It should be more widely understood that science and technology provide the vital impulse in the Soviet society, writes General John P McConnel . Science and technology provides a vital impulse to Soviet society .
 The Soviet leadership views each new level of technology, each new medium for politid or military operations, as offering opportunities for furthering its objectives . Soviet leaders view each new technology as an opportunity to further their objectives .
 Unanticipated technological breakthroughs may be realized for leapfrogging America's means of deterrence . The U.S. may be able to leapfrog its means of deterring the North Korea .
 The Soviets are aggressively moving forward on the frontiers of strategic weapon tech . Space is one of the first arenas of major public interest in which Soviet industry, technology, and science gained . This is so despite the not inconsiderable United States achievements in space .
 In the public mind, apparent technological advantage in space has been readily translated into an image of military advantage . The U.S. military advantage has been seen as a key factor in space exploration .
 One of the primary strengths of Soviet research and development and production programs' is the use of scientific planning with cybernetics, This new technique is noted throughout U.8AR weapons prograins .
 An analysis of overall Soviet power must now take into account the integrated cybernetic systems . The cybernetics systems were optimized for Soviet military and national security purposes .
 Defense Department policy toward advanced research has been perceptively and most cogently stated and explained by a scientist who is in a commanding position to know the actual facts . Defense Dept. policy is "a commanding position"
 Harold Agnew declared that there appears to be a new concept of the balance of power . Agnew: There appears to have been a new idea of the power balance in the world .
 'The apparent drift in national policy on the concept of balance of power and stability is resulting in a stifling of innovation, We find ourselves being authorized ttTbuild or to consider only those systems which respond to a clearly defined threat . Yet more and more today, we see decisions
 The U.S. should not innovate new weapons because this would be destabilizing, he said . He said this contrasted with the position of some U S. committees, such as the one on arms control .
 Agnew: 'One of the greatest faults of U.S. policy makers is that they seem not to understand that technology will never be stagnant. S * ""
 'If we had required a clear-cut prior mission, we would probably have developed no airplanes, no spacecraft, or, in fact, no wheel/ "" Both Dr, Agnew and Mr Baldwin have done an outstanding job of explaining why the strategic military balance is changing .
 Study compares megatonnage delivery capabilities of the various strategic weapon systems . The study compares the numbers of delivery vehicles and the total megaton nuke delivery capabilities . The changing strategic military balance will be analyzed in the following sections .
 Figure on page 31 and the table on page 32 also show the general trend in total megatonnage delivery capability from 1962 to 1971 as delineated by the range of estimates derived from unclassified sources .
 The U.S. is cooperating with the Soviet Union by slowing down its arms race, author says . The United States is succeeding in its drive toward strategic military superiority, he says .
 In 1962, the U.S. had a total megatonnage delivery capability ranging between 25,000 megatons and 50,000 megaatons . The United States had the capability to deliver between 25 and 50 megatonons .
 The corresponding figures for the Soviet Union ranged between 6,000 megatons and 12,000 megatons . The corresponding figure for the USSR was between 6 and 12 megatonons .
 The year 1967 falls in a crossover period with the U.S.R. estimates ranging between 16,000 and 37,000 megatons, to equal or exceed the U S., estimated range of between 8,000 to 29,000 .
 It should be noted that the ""nuclear capable"" U.S. aircraft carriers are not included in the strategic balance .
 For 1971, it appears that a massive megatonnage gap will have developed . For 1971 the gap appears to have developed.
 U S. delivery capability is estimated to range between 6,000 megatons and 15,000 megatons . The estimated high for the Soviet delivery capability was 50,000 . The projection of the established Soviet range-curve indicates a low figure .
 On the basis of this projection, the U S. and the U.S. S.R. will have reversed their roles in a ten-year period . The U.N. and S&R. would have reversed roles in ten years .
 Since the U.S. is committed to a second strike-policy, we should count only those U S. strategic weapons which would remain after a Soviet first strike . The U. S. should only count those strategic weapons remaining after a strike .
 There is no solid basis for estimating the remaining U.S. strategic weapons because the U. S. has not tested very high-yield warheads .
 Some of the remaining U S. missiles would be destroyed by the Soviet anti-ballistic missile defense . The remaining U.S. missiles were also destroyed .
 This important factor was not included in the above figures because of the lack of adequate unclassified data on the numbers and yield of Soviet ABMs . The Soviet Union did not include this important factor .
 Unclassified sources for the Soviet missile count appear to be based on the number of operational missile sites without consideration of refire capability . The Soviet count appears to have been based on number of sites without considering refireability .
 The actual Soviet missile count may be substantially larger than the i 5 . The i 5 may also be larger than any other Soviet missile .
 Many of the unclassified estimates as to Soviet strategic weapons yield are low . Sources have not given the Soviets credit for their great improvement in warhead yield/ weight ratio in their 1961 nuclear tests .
 Behind-the-iron-curtain unclassified sources report that the strategic military balance has changed in favor of the U.S.
 They have at their disposal everything necessary for taming the imperialist aggressors . They have everything necessary to tame the aggressors. They have the power to tame the aggressor's aggression .
 There is still time to regain superiority but time is on the side of the one which uses it . There are still time still to regain control of the United States .
 Because of long lead times for weapon development and production, the decision to do so must be made in the year 1967 . The decision to make the decision was made in 1967 .
 The study is based on the findings of a Summer Study Seminar held in Dedham, Mass., in 1960 .
 Participants included physicists, psychologists, lawyers, economists, mathematicians, political scientists and weapons specialists . The participants included . physicists, . psychologists, . lawyers, . economists, economists and . political scientists .
 Among those who took part were Donald T Brennan, Hans A Bethe, Morton H Halperin, Herman Kahn, Thomas C Schelling, Louis B Sohn, Leo Szilard, Victor F Weiss-opf and Jerome B Wiesner . Among those to take part
 U.S.R. curve constructed on basis of above fell within projections of curve from 1962 TOTALS 2,175 1,979 ' 14,956 MT 5,894 MT tnrougn mi.
 The ""highs"" and lows"" listed above are the bases for the upper and lower edges of the U S. and U.S.R. curves representing trends of total megatonnage delivery capability-all strategic weapons systems-depicted in the graph .
 Representative sources from which these estimates are derived are listed and excerpted from infra.infra.com . Representative sources are listed below . Represents the estimates based on data from various sources .
 The ""Range of Estimates From Unclassified Sources, Trends of Total Megatonnage Delivery Capability — All Strategic Weapon Systems — "" as depicted in the graph, supra, was based upon analysis and evaluation of hundreds of unclassified sources published during the entire time period of 1960 through 1967
 Sources studied included military and scientific books, treatises, journals, journals and limited distribution studies .
 Also employed were trade and technical journals, news magazines, newspapers, and publications of general circulation .
 The graph depicts the trend of the strategic balance in the decade from 1962-1971 . To provide a ready reference for spot-checks and parameter confirmation, however, a summary is presented here .
 The selection includes sources documenting the derivation of the . highs and lows of deliverable megatonnage . presented in the table which directly follows the Strategic Balance Graph, referred to above .
 The sources summarized support the upper and lower edges of the U S. and U.S.R. curves . These curves represent trends of total megatonnage delivery capability . The sources are summarized .
 Samples from sources fall within the areas delineated by the edges of the respective curves . They include also, however, samplings from sources which fall within those areas . This is the basis for an appraisal as to the existence or absence of a consensus .
 The selection of sources for summarization emphasized publications more likely to be generally available to segments of the public not likely to have convenient access to scientific, technological, or strategic libraries . The selection was made to emphasize publications available to those who have access to libraries .
 Russia's fir/ramlff Arms Thwat. News & World Report, February 20, 1967, under title ""The Danger is Very Grave" Russia's arms arms were sold to the Soviets in 1967 .
 Our plans are that five years from now we will have just about as many missiles as we have right now . Our plans for the future are that we will be able to launch more missiles than we currently have .
 This ""retrofit"" program is to be spread over a period of years on a schedule tied to the regular overhaul cycle . The program will be spread out over the next few years .
 If 7 were converted .at a time, and the process required 2 years for each group of 7, some 12 years would be required . The deployable force would be proportionately reduced for that period . If 7 .at-a time were converted, the process would require 2 years
 Although the United States has more weapons, the U.S.R. has heavier warheads . The United States. has more warheads than any other nation .
 Effects of high-yield explosions on our ICBM systems are largely unknown because of the inability to make atmospheric tests . Effects of such explosions are unknown due to the lack of atmospheric tests.
 Mr McNamara has said he believes Soviets continue to increase ICBM deployment . USSR force continues to grow, he said .
 The 1,000th American MINUTEMAN intercontinental ballistic missile will be deployed in a site that has just been activated near Malmstrom Air Force Base, Montana .
 This site will contain 50 new MINUTEMAN II missiles, a considerable improvement over MINUTEAN I, which comprise the remaining MINUTMAN force . The site will also contain a total of 50 new missiles, which will be used to launch new missiles .
 Warheads of MINUTEMAN I are reputed by unclassified sources to yield one megaton . Unclassified sources say they could be capable of unleashing a megaton of nuclear weapons .
 MINUTEMAN II may have somewhat higher yield, or a trade-off with penetration aids . Minuteman II may also have higher yield or trade-offs with penetration aid . MINUTemAN II has somewhat higher yields, or trades-offs .
 The United States has also deployed 54 TITAN II missiles with a warhead yield of over 5 megatons . The U.S. has also deploys 54 Titan II missiles .
 The total yield of the U.S. ICBM force is estimated at 1,650 megatons . Soviet missiles can yield at least 4,000 megatonons . The United States ICBM forces are estimated to be at least 1,600 megatones .
 Unclassified estimates are probably low for Soviet missiles . However, they are probably very low for the missiles .
 Murphy was a long-established expert in the area of nuclear weapons . His article was published in Life, February 16, 1962, and its accuracy has never been challenged .
 Since 1961, the Soviets have had a 5-to-l advantage over the IL S in yield/weight ratio . By comparison, the warhead of our largest rocket, the TITAN, weighs nearly half as much as the Soviet warhead .
 It seems reasonable to assume that this improved capability has by now been used in upgrading missile warhead yield .
 Some American planners believe that the numerically larger American force is superior on the premise that a one megaton warhead is powerful enough to destroy any city and take out a hardened Soviet launching site .
 Most Soviet 'launching sites are 'soft' and extremely vulnerable to a MINUTEMAN warhead . However, the softness or hardness of Soviet launching sites has little relevance unless America strikes first, something present U S. policy would never permit .
 There is questionable value in destroying a Soviet ICBM site which has already expended its first missiles, unless the site has a reload capability . There is also questionable value of destroying the site as it has expended first missiles .
 The MINUTEMAN force, backed with a few heavy TITAN II missiles, appears to be adequate at the present time . It is argued that for logical deterrence, which is the U.S. strategy, the U S. strategy .
 Secretary McNamara in his January 23, 1967 Posture Statement estimated that in a future nuclear war about half of our missiles would be knocked out if the Soviets strike first . Even if numbers were to be considered as more important than power, McNamara said .
 Even if our remaining ICBMs were to function perfectly, it is difficult to estimate how many might be destroyed by Soviet anti-ballistic missile defense . It is impossible to predict how many may be destroyed .
 The high yield of Soviet ICBMs leads one to question the invulnerability of our own hardened ICBM sites . "High yield" of Soviet weapons leads to questions about their invulnerability .
 None of the American sites has been tested against such great explosive power as the Soviets, demonstrated in their 1961-62 nuclear tests . None of America's sites have been tested .
 The Department of Defense is confident that scaling up of the smaller underground explosions can lead to accurate prediction of the effects of massive multi-megaton explosions . The Pentagon says the scale-up of the underground explosions will lead to better predictions .
 When an explosion is scaled up beyond a factor of ten, entirely new effects can be expected, say scientists . They assert that when an explosion can be scaled up to a factor ten, the new effects are expected .
 It is conceivable that the electro-magnetic pulse or some unexpected effect of a high-yield Soviet warhead might knock out an entire MINUTEMAN complex regardless of hardening and shielding attempted . Many scientists express concern that very high .yield explosions may cause a total communications
 Under the restrictions of the atmospheric Test Ban Treaty, the U.S. can only guess what unique effects might occur when very high-yield weapons are exploded . The United States can only think about what will happen when a very high yield weapon is exploded .
 Soviet missiles might well be able to deal a first-strike knockout blow to our hardened ICBMs if not today, some time in the future as the Kremlin leaders continue to upgrade their force in quality and numbers .
 Should the Soviet Union be convinced of this capability and should it have determined a way to nullify the United States POLARIS missiles, the U.S. would be in a position to exercise nuclear blackmail .
 In such an eventuality, only an anti-ballistic missile defense or surrender could save U.S. lives . Only surrender or anti-missile defense could save American lives .
 Questions have been raised about the credibility of a strategic deterrence based solely on retaliation . Some questions have even been raised concerning the credibility .
 If the 70 million survivors prefer to remain as survivors, they might forego a retaliatory strike, so as not to invite a mop-up attack by their follow-on bombers and missiles .
 The people whom they would kill had no say in their government's decision to strike . The people who would kill would not have a say in the strike, the government says .
 We are confident that the remaining Americans would retaliate, but the key question is whether the Soviets believe this . The remaining Americans are confident they would retaliate against the move .
 Soviets have missiles deployed in western U.S.R.R., threatening NATO cities and military installations . Soviet missiles are deployed in west America, threatening NATO sites . NATO cities, military installations threatened by Soviet missiles .
 This is a stategic deployment and must be considered in context with ICBM balance and SLBM balance . This is the first time the U.S. has deployed a nuclear missile to the region .
 Many Soviet MRBM/ICBMs are mobile and will be difficult to target . Also, many Soviet MRMB/ICBM/IBMMs will be mobile, say experts .
 Union continues to upgrade IRBM/MRBMs. The latter was the st^n ^ 19 5 5 "" 8 m ° bi,e Versi0n ' which was the first of its kind .
 These missiles became operational just before the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 . They were operational during the Cuban Missile Crisis . The missiles were operational in 1962 before the crisis .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara has announced that we have 7,000 tactical nuclear weapons . Many of them no doubt capable of being carried by fighter-bombers . Most of them are tactical weapons which could be used only in the event the Soviets attacked with ground forces .
 PERSHING cannot reach into the Soviet Union from European bases, no matter how close it is placed to the Iron Curtain . The Soviet Union cannot be reached by European bases from Europe bases .
 Europe's confidence in the United States' pledge to defend it against Soviet nuclear attack has been shaken by our failure to maintain a counter-force to the Soviet IRBMs . Europe has lost confidence in U.S. commitment to defend itself against a Soviet nuclear strike .
 After the U.S. removed its THOR and JUPITER missiles, there followed the long, abortive give-and-take debate about providing NATO with sea-based intermediate range ballistic missiles .
 NATO powers believe the U.S. is no longer certain it would use its POLARIS missile and ICBMs if the Soviet Union launched its IRBM/MRBMs against Europe . Many NATO powers think the United States would not use its PolARIS missiles against Europe if
 The pull-out of THORs and JUPITERs, the failure of discussions on the multilateral nuclear force to bear fruit, the quibbling by American officials in NATO discussions of strategic nuclear retaliation have combined to raise doubts .
 Soviet military writers and Soviet publications have indicated repeatedly that Moscow policymakers consider Western Europe to be the Soviet Union's hostage because of the intermediate and mediumrange ballistic missiles poised in western Russia . Western Europe is considered a hostage to Russia because of its missiles .
 Russian IRBM/ MRBMs as strategic weapons in the same context with U.S. POLARIS and ICBMs . For this reason, in weighing the strategic balance, one must consider Russian IRMB/ MRBM/ IRBMMs as a strategic weapon . U.
 As Red China moves into a position where it has an intermediary-range ballistic missile capability, Peking may similarly view Japan, Korea, Formosa, Southeast Asia, the Philippines, Indonesia, Pakistan and India as its hostages .
 If these nations find themselves virtually defenseless against Peking's nuclear forces, they will inevitably drift— or be driven— into Communist China's power orbit .
 The sacrifices of American men-at-arms in Korea and Vietnam may ultimately prove to have been made for naught .
 U.S. has reportedly moved three POLARIS submarines to the Western Pacific area . It has been reported that the move is part of a move to the region by the United States .
 Presumably this is intended to counter the present Chinese Communist nuclear threat . Presumably this will be aimed at countering the threat posed by the Chinese government .
 China and other Asian Communist countries consider the POLARIS submarines a real threat . However, this raises the interesting question as to whether Red China and the other Asian . Communist countries . consider the Polaris submarines a threat .
 In two wars in Asia since the U.S. obtained nuclear weapons, they have not been used . In two other wars, the United States has not used them in Asia .
 American policymakers have made it abundantly clear that the U S. would never use nuclear weapons against Communist aggressors in Asia . U.S. policy makers have made clear that they would not use such weapons against aggressors .
 The U.S. credibility with its Asian allies has already been seriously damaged by its nuclear policy . It is perhaps crucial to the future of the Free World in Asia that the Communist powers respect U S. nuclear strength in the Pacific .
 For the time being, however, it is obvious that Soviet IRBM/ MRBMs constitute the greater threat to the Free World's security . Western Europe's security is at risk .
 NATO allies need reassurance that the U.S. still intends to provide them with a nuclear umbrella against a possible Soviet attack . NATO allies must reassure that the United States still firmly intends to . provide them .
 NATO has already been severely hurt, if not crippled, by the withdrawal of France from the military alliance . France has already withdrawn from the NATO alliance . NATO says it will be severely hurt by the French withdrawal .
 There is strong evidence that President DeGaulle took this drastic step, at least in part, because of France's withering confidence in the credibility of our nuclear deterrent .
 DeGaulle was not unmindful of the Soviet missiles aimed at his country when he ordered NATO forces from French soil .
 The existence of a Soviet ABM System was confirmed by Secretary of Defense McNamara in November 1966 . The existence was suspected by unofficial sources, the existence of the system was confirmed in 1966 .
 The extent of this system and its capabilities are unknown . Mr McNamara asserts that offensive penetration aids would nullify it .
 OS USA USSR NIKE-X Under develop . First displayed in Moscow in November 1965, 1963 .
 Sample source: William E Howard and James Barr, Sample sources; Jane's All the World's Aircraft, 1965 . Sample sources: Spacecraft and Missiks of the World~M6.
 Preliminary tests on Kwajalein Island of Army's NIKE-ZEUS system against ATLAS ICBMs launched from the mainland proved successful in 1962 . The Office of the Secretary of Defense did not authorize the NIKE.ZEUS program before 1957 .
 NIKE -ZEUS was not put into production even though the Soviet Union did not have penetration aids at that stage . NIKE-ZEUS did not go into production in the USSR .
 OSD believed a short effectiveness period would be impractical . ZEUS would have been effective for a limited time until the U.S. had developed penetration aids, OSD said .
 Multifunction Array Radar system would be able to discriminate and handle many targets simultaneously . It was conceived that lighter decoys would fall behind or burn up in the atmosphere . The new system was conceived to be able of discriminating and handling targets simultaneously.
 By 1966, the reports were corroborated when Secretary of Defense McNamara announced on November 10, 1966, that the United States had ""considerable evidence"" that the Soviet Union had indeed deployed at least a limited ABM system .
 Pulsed X-rays can destroy or neutralize attacking nuclear warheads . Pulsions of X-ray can cause violent reactions within materials to destroy or destroy warheads .
 The U.S. is to defer deployment of an ABM system pending an appeal to Moscow by Ambassador Llewellyn E Thompson . According to the publication, Technology Week, the shielding materials currently used to protect U S. warheads would fail to offset the X-ray effect .
 There is disagreement in the intelligence community over the extent and effectiveness of the Soviet ABM system .
 There is no disagreement over the fact that the Russians have something and the U.S. has nothing . The United States has nothing, but it's not a disagreement over what Russia has, it says .
 Administration in Washington is talking about a limited system costing from $4-to-$5-billion over a period of four or five years . Even if deployment is finally ordered, the system is expected to cost $4-$5 billion .
 This system would be specifically designed to defend against missiles aimed at the American long-range offensive system . It would probably have little effect on saving lives .
 Some of the central arguments concerning the deployment of an anti-ballistic missile system are: 1. Arguments Pro and Con . Arguments pro and con: The anti-missile system should be deployed in the U.S.
 A principal argument used by the Office of Secretary of Defense against a U.S. commitment to production and deployment of an ABM system is summed up in an ancient military rule, i.e. that the best defense is a good offense .
 The OSD contends that offensive systems are cheaper and more effective in modern warfare than countervailing defensive systems . It argues that offensive weapons are more effective than counter-defending systems .
 ABMs cannot defend everywhere because of the prohibitive cost and the terrible destructive capability of nuclear warheads . ICBMs can be targeted anywhere, but ABMs can't defend everywhere . ABMs have to defend everywhere due to the cost and destructive capability .
 Secretary of Defense argues, the U.S. should devote its efforts and resources to improving offensive systems to deter potential enemies .
 The only deterrent value in our offensive weapons is the credibility an enemy places in our will to use them in defense, U.S. President Obama says .
 There is a serious question, which probably cannot be answered; unless and until, the Soviets conclude they are ready for an all-out attack or a final face-down, as to whether U.S. credibility has not already been seriously undermined by America's adherence to a ""second
 "Second-strike" policy casts U.S. military posture in a fundamentally defensive mold . Despite our total strategic reliance on offensive weapons, the ""second-strike"" policy casts United States military .
 In the absence of an ABM, the danger of a general nuclear war is greatly increased, says author . The danger of nuclear war has been greatly increased by the lack of a ABM .
 The argument that the best defense is a good offense is not' applicable here because the U.S. has elected to take the defense . We have given the Soviet Union the first strike in the event of nuclear war .
 The expense of the ABM is prohibitive, and at the very least, would place a tremendous strain upon the U S. economy, For ABM Stretched over a ten-year period, the $40-billion which OSD now estimates is required for a comprehensive ABM
 Our total defense budget in 1967 will top $75-billion with supplemental requests for the Vietnam War . Vietnam costs alone came to more than $25-billion in 1966 . An intercontinental nuclear war would kill tens of millions of people .
 Even a $20-billion expenditure for deployment of NIKE-X, supplemented by a fallout shelter program, would save 704o-90 million lives and hundreds of billions of dollars in property . OSD's $40-billion figure represents the ""maximum feasible protection" in a
 It is argued that there is no point in guarding against one kind of attack if another type of attack can get through . It was argued that the only way to protect is to protect yourself from a terrorist attack is to defend yourself .
 If $20-billion over a period of ten years can protect 70-to-90 million lives, then the cost for each year per individual protected would amount to $67 per year, or about $5 per month .
 Should one choose the $40-billion figure, even $10 per month seems cheap insurance for such protection . Even $10 a month seems to be cheap insurance .
 It must also be noted here what several recent offensive weapons systems have cost . The cost of several weapons systems has also been high .
 ICBM system: $20-billion; POLARIS system $ll,8billion; B-52 system $8-billion . ICBM systems: $50-billion. $20 billion. $50 billion . $50 million for each ICBM .
 An American commitment to build an ABM would accelerate the arms race, thereby reducing our security, author says . The U.S. should not build ABM, he says .
 For ABM The Soviets have already opted for acceleration, not only with their current deployment of an extensive ABM system but by increasing their ICBM force . The Soviets are also developing a nuclear submarine strike force capable of delivering missiles on American cities .
 U.S. argument against deployment of ABMs was "put to the Russians at least three Pugwash Conferences ago," says Charles Herzfeld .
 Every Soviet arms development which is not at least matched by a U.S. effort reduces our nation's security, says President Obama .
 Since we have made it abundantly clear that the U.S. will maintain a second-strike policy, there is no need for the present Soviet buildup . Unless they intend to use their new strategic weapons for nuclear blackmail or a first strike, the Soviet buildup is unnecessary .
 Deployment of an ABM would be a provocative measure which would heighten world tensions, says U.S. State Department .
 It should be clearly understood that an ABM is a purely defensive system, particularly in the hands of a nation which religiously adheres to a second-strike posture . For ABM it should by now be clear .
 If a nation was preparing for all-out war, it would naturally place a high priority on an effective ABM so that it could protect itself after delivering a first strike .
 A U; S ABM effort would now tend to stabilize the strategic balance and ultimately reduce tensions . But, coupled with an offensive buildup such as the Soviet Union is now pushing, it could indeed increase world tensions, it says .
 Soviet Premier Kosygin openly defended the U.S.SJTs action in deploying an ABM on the grounds that a country has the right to provide for its own defense . During his February 1967 visit to Great Britain, Soviet Premier Kosygin .
 If this argument were used by the United States, the logic of this view would be difficult to dispute . The argument would be hard to dispute if the U.S. were a non-aggressive nation .
 Used by a leader -of a nation firmly committed to world domination, it certainly appears provocative . Used by . a leader . of a nation . committed to . world domination .
 Defense systems that cannot threaten a potential enemy will not provoke an attack unless the adversary already has designs for conquest . An effective defense system strengthens any military posture by protecting the base from which offensive forays can be made .
 Defence works and fortifications have tended to stabilize the political environment because they lend a sense of security to those behind the fortifications which makes it less demanding for them to destroy enemies .
 Only the side which intends to use its means of attack for aggressive purposes can wish to slow down the creation of anti-ballistic defense systems .
 An ABM would at least strengthen the hand of the President if he were confronted with such a fateful decision . It might well stay the . hand of an enemy at a critical moment in history .
 An ABM would be of little use without a concurrent fallout shelter program, which would also greatly burden the economy and frighten the American public . The U.S. should not use an ABM, but it would be useful to protect itself from the threat of terrorism .
 To provide a really effective fallout shelter program the DOD previously esti61.61. The DOD previously established a shelter program . The shelter program was designed to provide a 'really effective'
 Americans would be far better off knowing the facts if ultimately their lives could be forfeited through ignorance and lack of preparation . As for the argument that an accelerated shelter program would frighten the public, it would seem that Americans would rather know the facts than fear .
 For many years, the U.S. has required every Soviet citizen over 18 years of age to take intensive courses in Civil Defense . For many . years, every Soviet . citizen over . 18 years old was required to take the course .
 In 1966, General Wheeler, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, testified before the House Appropriations Committee . The Joint Chiefs favored both an ABM and a fallout shelter program .
 General Wheeler believed that a low-key approach, coupled with intelligent public education, would overcome the fears that might be associated with a shelter program . General Wheeler said a low key approach would overcome fears associated with the program .
 We are not certain how far the U.S.R. has gone with its own ABM . The ABM may only be intended as a defense against Communist China .
 ABM deployment is known to be along its northwestern borders, anchored on the Baltic city of Tallinn . ABM deploys in the region of Estonia .
 This is in the path of the known route most American ICBMs would take in a retaliatory attack on the Soviet Union . This is not in the paths of any present or likely future strike from China .
 If so, America had better look to its own defenses and build an ABM system to intercept a possible attack from China .
 The USSR had developed a comprehensive, advanced and expensive ABM system . The Soviet Union had progressed well beyond deployment of ABMs around major cities .
 The Soviet system is evidently not a 'point' defense system, but an 'area defense system . Even more important, the Soviet system was not a point-point defense system but an "area" defense .
 Soviet Defense Minister Malinovsky claimed the U.S. had already "introduced" a defense system capable of intercepting whole squadrons of attacking bombers and knocking out incoming missiles . On April 23, 1966 United Press International reported from Budapest that Soviet defense minister claimed the system had already
 A move to the sea is in progress for the Soviet Union's rocket forces as a part of the U.S.SJR.'s determination to gain domination in hydrospace, precisely as it seeks supremacy in aerospace .
 Jane's Fighting Ships 1966-1967: U.S. plans to use submarines as launching platforms tor a substantial portion of its missile arsenal . From an examination of Jane's fighting ships, it is clear that the U.K.R. plans for submarines to be a launching platform for
 Armament consists of three ballistic missile tubes for missiles with a reported range of 600to-3,000 miles . Armament consist of three missile tubes . Armaments consists of 3 missiles with reported range from 600to 3,000miles .
 The U.S. Navy's attack submarine force is in generally better overall shape than the U.SH.'s, as nearly anyone can figure .
 The U.S. knows about the Soviets nuclear submarines ""is very sparse,"" but it is possible to project certain characteristics from knowledge of submarine technology . Yet the intentions of the Soviet Union are clear .
 In appraising the Soviet seaborne missile threat, the overall Soviet effort at sea should be taken into consideration . The Soviet effort should also be considered .
 An enormous oceanographic program was launched in the 1950's and 1960's by the Soviet Union . The oceanographic effort was similar to that of Soviet efforts in the 1960s .
 Soviet naval commanders require detailed information of the sea bottom in critical areas . To conduct successful submarine missile attacks, Soviet, naval commanders need detailed information .
 The Soviets have marked the sea bottom in certain places as possible firing points, it has been reported .
 The Soviets have been studying Arctic navigation for decades . The under-ice operations of certain American submarines, notably the SKATE, have received widespread attention .
 One danger is that Soviet submarines, intent on making missile attacks against the North American continent, would enter Hudson's Bay which would enable them to make a deep penetration of the land mass .
 Any appraisal of the Soviet submarine missile threat should not downgrade the menace because of the limited range of the U.S.R.R/s submarine-launched missiles . The Soviet submarine threat is not downgraded to a threat because of its limited range .
 On the west, the Soviet Union can only be approached through narrow or arctic waters . The Soviet Union is only accessible to the west by narrow or Arctic waters .
 U.S. missiles have a greater stand-off capability, whereas the Soviets, could be expected to employ their missiles in a first strike . It should be borne in mind that the military applications of hydrospace are only beginning to be made .
 The seabed offers opportunities for launching platforms of the future . Even as 'satellites in space offer a potential for military action, the seabes offer opportunities for launch platforms .
 Advanced nations are developing deep submergence technology which will enable men to live and work at great depths . The advanced nations are currently developing deep subsea technology . The technology is being developed by the advanced nations .
 This will lead to undersea mining and oil drilling beyond the continental shelf-on submerged lands which have no sovereign claims at present .
 It also will lead, one can be sure, to the development of missile-firing bases on the seabed . The U.S. is developing missile bases in the region .
 The U.S. needs to look ahead to undersea defense zones from which Soviet submarine forces would be excluded . The United States must look ahead, both in terms of submarine technology and the law of the sea, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Armament may include more sophisticated missiles and torpedoes . 'Bomber' types may operate with drone escorts . Armaments may include sophisticated missiles, torpedoes and drones .
 The Institute for Strategic Studies has noted-missile-bearing submarines have an increasingly important role in Soviet strategy . This is all the more true in that, at this time—as noted, The Institute of Strategic Studies says .
 Many Russian submarines and surface ships carry air-breathing missiles with a range of about 30Q-to-500 miles .
 The United States is precluded from destroying Soviet submarines in peacetime . The U.S. is not allowed to destroy Soviet submarines .
 During the Cuban missile crisis we were made aware of Soviet submarines cruising near U.S. shores . We were told to expect Soviet submarines to cruise near United States shores .
 If they had been firing missiles, their mode of attack would probably have been to surface at night, fire their missiles, and quickly submerge . If they were firing missiles they would have been able to surface and fire missiles, they would then quickly subside .
 In a peacetime environment they would not have been subject to attack until they had taken the act of war by firing their missiles . In peacetime .
 Soviet SLMs are of shorter range than our POLARIS missiles . We can take little comfort in the fact that Soviet SLM is of a shorter range .
 Ours must be long-ranged to reach Russian targets, while Soviet vessels can approach well within range of the principal coastal cities of the U.S. The United States must have a long-range weapon that can reach Russia .
 Seven of the 41 boats will be assigned to the Pacific, according to latest reports . The rest of the fleet will be on duty in the Atlantic and Mediterranean .
 Thirteen submarines are equipped with A-2 missiles, and the remainder with the A-3 missiles . Thirteen of the submarines equipped with the missiles are equipped by the U.S.
 The latter is a rocket with a range of 2,500 miles, and will have superior accuracy . The latter will have a better range than the rocket with superior accuracy.
 With only 22 POLARIS submarines on station at any one time, the U.S. has a four-ocean defense responsibility . The United States has only 22 submarines on duty at any time .
 A reasonable number of POSEIDON submarines on station in the Indian Ocean would, for example, enhance U.S. deterrence of a nuclear war . It would create an additional heavy burden to the Soviet ASW effort and might force them to withdraw .
 Students of seapower emphasize need for swiftly augmenting U.S. anti-submarine, warfare forces to deal with growing Soviet undersea threat .
 In the decade since that statement, the Soviet Union has embarked on massive programs aimed at upgrading all aspects of its sea power . In the past decade, Russia has been investing in the development of its naval power .
 Aims to create a missile-firing nuclear submarine force . Massive merchant ship construction, full utilization of fisheries vessels, establishment of powerful task force in the Mediterranean .
 The Soviet Union has developed nuclear attack submarines for anti-submarine warfare purposes . The Soviets have also developed a nuclear attack submarine . It is believed to be the first of its kind .
 Typical of these new boats is the ""N ""N"" class sub— LENINSKY KOMSOMOL 270 . Typical of this new sub is a Russian submarine .
 This is a fast nuclearpowered fleet submarine designed as a hunter-killer . The submarine is designed to be a 'hunter-killer' submarine .
 It is armed with 21-inch torpedoes which are launched through six bow tubes . It is launched through the bow tubes of the submarine . The submarine is the largest submarine in the world .
 Such craft would be emplpyed against American missile-firing submarines, if the latter could be detected . Such craft undoubtedly would be . emplaced against American missiles, if they were detected .
 Dealing with the danger of Soviet submarines has long been a high priority concern of the U.S. Dealing With Soviet submarines is a highpriority concern .
 U.S. in the 1950's stepped up its oceanographic research and refined the techniques of searching for submarines by helicopter-lifted sonar and by airborne sensors .
 Navy also emphasized development of stand-off weapons as well as detection devices . U.S. Navy: Stand-off weapon development is key to success .
 The ASROC anti-submarine rocket is now in general use, and gives surface ships a nuclear punch . It is designed to give surface ships nuclear punch if the enemy submarine is located .
 A non-nuclear Mark 46 torpedo has been shown to be effective against submarine targets . However, its effectiveness today lies in the fact that it uses a non-navy torpedo .
 Other advanced detection devices and weapons include the SQS-26 Sonar and Variable Depth Sonar . New torpedoes and drone helicopters are also included in the new weapons .
 Destroyers are specifically configured for ASW, and the Navy continues to build special anti-submarine escort ships . Destroyers were specifically designed to be ASW-equipped .
 The devices available for detection of conventional diesel boats include sonobuoys dropped from carrier-based aircraft and magnetic anomaly detectors . The devices are dropped from aircraft carriers and dropped from planes .
 ASW commanders admit that these devices are, at present, grossly inadequate against fast, deep-diving, nuclear-powered submarines . In rough weather, the ""nukes"" are well able to run away from surface attackers .
 Airborne detection systems now in operation cannot pinpoint a nuclear submarine . Airborne detect systems now operating cannot pinpoint any nuclear submarines .
 The most effective means of dealing with Soviet nuclear submarines is another submarine . The U.S. has a valuable aid in fixed long-range submarine detection systems in the Atlantic .
 Seventy of these boats are of basic World War II design, with improvements . They provide excellent submerged listening platforms but cannot deal with nuclear subs on a competitive basis .
 The projected 64 SSN force would be thin in view of the multitude of Soviet missile-carrying surface ships and the large and growing Soviet merchant fleet ships all of which would constitute targets in the event of war . Even more significant, however, is the fact that the . projected 64
 These would be targets for a submarine force operating in Sovietcontrolled waters . Our submarines would be able to operate only in a war situation . And these would necessarily be targets .
 This force is meager, especially in view of the need to divide the force between the Atlantic and the Pacific . The U.S. needs to be able to do so much to protect its interests in the region .
 SKIPJACK class boats are the fastest in the world, with an estimated top speed of close to 40 knots . Skipjack class boats can reach speeds of 40 knots, but are few in number of the world's fastest .
 New passive sensors which can observe radiation in all portions of the electromagnetic spectrum may, in the future, enable reconnaissance satellites to ""see" submarines operating at current depths .
 The deep submergence of submarine forces is desirable because of the problems it raises in the enemy's ASW effort . Submarine forces are desirable because they raise problems in enemy ASW efforts, says Navy .
 With the need for true deep-diving submarine forces, there will come a parallel need for missile weapons capable of being fired from the depths . The U.S. will need to be able to launch missiles capable of firing from the depth .
 SUBROC is a nuclear rocket for use against sub-surface targets . Sub-ROC was developed by the U.S. Navy in the 1970s . SubROC could be used to attack sub-submarine targets in the future .
 Submarine commanders want to see SUBROC equipped with an airburst-nuclear warhead . Submarine Commanders would like to see a nuclear warhead attached to Submarine's submarine .
 Bomb load of each type is noted in tons of conventional bombs normally carried by that type of bomber . Bomb load is noted by weight of each kind of bomber's bombs .
 Total tonnage is that which all strategic bombers in the national inventory could carry at one time . The total tonnages is that that all strategic bomber could carry .
 Converted to nuclear yield, the figure would be higher by a factor of 1,000,000 or more . Converted to nuke yield, it would have been higher than 1,500,000 by more .
 The Soviet Union has the numerically largest strategic bomber force in the world today . E STRATEGIC BOMBERS -^^ -v** ■111 The Soviet Bomber Force .
 The U.S. has retained its airrefuelable medium bombers while the United States has scrapped a large force of over 1,000 B-47's . This is due to the fact that the U.N. has kept its air refuelable bombers .
 The BADGER is a twin-turbojet subsonic medium bomber similar to the former U.S. B-47 . Operational since 1955, the BADGER was equipped for in-flight refueling .
 The BADGERs are expected to be replaced by the BLINDER which has supersonic capability . It has a bomb load capacity of 12,000 pounds and a bombload capacity .
 The BLINDER was operational in 1962 and carries a KITCHEN air-to-surface missile . The BLindER carries a missile that can be fired at a target .
 Operational since 1956, this four-engine turbojet bomber is comparable to our long-range B-52 . Operational in the U.S. has been operational since 1956 . Four-engine, six-engine jet fighter bombers have been flown since 1958 .
 This is a huge four-engine turboprop bomber with a range of 7,800 miles . It is a four-engined turboproplane with a maximum of 7.800 miles range .
 Its commercial version, the TU-114, is the largest aircraft in the world . Its commercial commercial version is the world's largest aircraft .
 Major Arthur J Ruppert, USAF, wrote a thesis on the Soviet Long-Range Bomber Force . The thesis was published in 1966 .
 Despite pronouncements of Soviet officials that the bomber is obsolete, it appears that bombers still play a major role in Soviet strategic planning . Marshal of the Soviet Union, V D, Sokolvsky has written that the long-range bomber force would ""deliver blows"" after a first
 Air-to-surface missiles would be used first in the attack, launched from a point beyond the range of anti-aircraft fire . The attack would be carried out in the country's airspace .
 The requirements for an Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft continues to be advanced by the United States Air Force to provide strategic flexibility and optimum options for deterrence or retaliation .
 First, it is thought vulnerable to surprise missile attack when sitting on an airbase . Second, it was thought to be vulnerable when sitting in an air base .
 In order to use it at all; it must be launched before the enemy missile strikes . The missile is launched before it can be launched .
 Second it is believed that the bomber is subject to less positive control than are missiles and may attack without authority through accident or madness of its crew .
 Modern defense strategists have probably affected the objectivity of cost-effectiveness studies . These two philosophical objections to bombers may have affected cost-effective studies .
 Some point out that strip and air alerts will reduce vulnerability probably to the degree available for hardened sites or POLARIS missiles . Others argue that the ""accident"" or ""madness"" arguments, if 73.7% of the world's population is affected by the threat of a
 With a long-range standoff missile, the AMSA would become as invulnerable an IRBM launcher as the POLARIS submarines . The AMSA could be made comparable to ICBMs with SKYBOLT-type, standoff missiles .
 SAM missiles have been highly over-rated in cost-effectiveness studies, experts say . Experience over North Vietnam has indicated that SAM missiles are highly overrated in past cost-effective studies .
 SAM-2 missiles have had less than a 6 percent effectiveness against low-flying aircraft using evasive tactics and others countermeasures . SAM3 missiles now guarding Russia, but not yet in North Vietnam, may be more effective . SAM-3 missiles may also be better suited to low-
 AMSA can attack on an infinite number of unpredictable flight patterns, high and low, thus making enemy air defense extremely costly . The AMSA's broader operational flexibility will provide a spectrum of strategic options .
 It would outflank any Soviet anti-ballistic missile system and penetrate where missiles might be stopped . The U.S. missile system would be outflanking any Soviet system .
 Over friendly territory, aircraft are the least vulnerable of any strategic vehicle . They can only be attacked by long-range interceptors which do not now appear in the Soviet inventory . Aircraft are the most vulnerable of all strategic vehicles .
 AMSA would provide a reaction to crisis, short of an actual nuclear attack . AMSA can be launched on alert and recalled . ICBMs must proceed to the target once they have been launched or be destroyed in flight .
 AMSA provides a psychological tour de force in crisis management . AMSA is a strong psychological tour-de force for crisis management. AMSA also provides an excellent way to deal with crisis situations.
 AMSA can deliver nuclear weapons with greater discrimination and more last minute corrections than can ICBMs . AMSA reduces the probability of unnecessary population destruction and allows tighter, more effective crisis management .
 AMSA can carry exotic sensors and collect invaluable reconnaissance information for relaying to command posts . AMSA carries an array of sensors and collects reconnaissance information .
 The best of these sensors is the human eye backed by human intelligence and utilizing electronic and optical aids . The best is to be able to observe the world with the best of the world's best eye .
 The manned strategic vehicle is protected at all times by the infinite capabilities of human judgment . It can perceive and react instantly to unprogrammed enemy deceptions or other unforseeable events .
 The acknowledged value of a man-in-space program for overcoming mechanical malfunctions is illustrative of the validity of maintaining human control over strategic weapon systems . The value of the man in space program is illustrated by the value of its ability to overcome mechanical malfunction .
 The U.S. is being exposed to attack by Russian airbreather weapon systems as a follow-on to a first-strike missile attack . With the thinning-out of continental radar systems and air defense aircraft, the United States may be vulnerable to attack . Russian air
 The only Improved Manned Interceptors under development are F-12's built around a larger SR-71 airframe . Present flying and radar equipment is becoming obsolete and is wearing out .
 The Soviet Union is modernizing its strategic bomber force with supersonic, medium-range BLINDERs . It continues to deploy an extensive air defense system . The Soviet U.S. has a long-range bomber force and air defense systems .
 It's reasonable that they be considered in this strategic category as were the U.S. B-47s before their phase-out .
 It might be noted that perhaps all the BADGERs do not carry bombs and that some would be used for in-flight refueling . Perhaps some of the BADgers are used for refueling purposes .
 This would reduce the overall bomb payload capability of the total force . The U.S. Air Force would also be reduced to a smaller force in the region .
 The BADGER is still a formidable force to be reckoned with, but it still leaves the BADGER as formidable force . It is one that should not be arbitrarily removed from the strategic balance . The Badger is a strong force in the Middle East .
 The explosive power carried by the respective bomber forces is a more accurate measure of their respective strengths . Explosive power is a measure of the strength of the bomber forces .
 On the basis of bomb loadings measured by weight of bombs carried, the United States has nearly a 2-to-l advantage . However, the Soviet advantage in yield/weight ratio for nuclear bombs would give them parity in delivery capacity as measured in megatonnage .
 Soviet leaders have publicly noted that the United Nations Resolution against space weapons does not deny the development of such weapons . Soviets have frequently boasted of their capability to employ orbital nuclear weapons, the Scrag .
 The United States has not developed a military capability in space . The Gemini series clearly shows it could do so . Nonetheless, the U.S. has not been able to develop military capability .
 Capable of delivering a 30 MT warhead from fractional orbital or orbital trajectory . NONE SCRAG Shown in Moscow 1965 . Capable to deliver a 30MT warhead .
 The United States has avoided the development of i space weapons . The U.S. has been the leader in resolutions and agreements to ban weapons of mass destruction in space .
 Sources* j ICBMs which enter space on a ballistic curve are not SpaCe mm . The Military Bate is generally held that orbital weapons alone apply to the Military rL, November 1966, 106 .
 The United States, to date, has spent some $30-billion on its space effort . The U.S. has spent around $30 billion on space exploration .
 This does not include any space weapons systems or even their development . This includes the space weapons system itself .
 NASA's ultimate goal is to land men on the moon rather than exploit the region near earth for military purposes . NASA says it is not interested in exploiting the region for military reasons .
 The United States halted its promising DYNASOAR development in December 1963 . The DOD's position is that there is ""no requirement"" to put military men in combat .
 The military Manned Orbital Laboratory will not be launched before 1968 . The military will not launch until 1968 .
 American military satellites are for reconnaissance, for missile-launch warning, for communications, for navigation, for precise navigation, and for weather reconnaissance . U.S. satellites are also used for missile launch warnings, communications, navigation, communications and weather reconnaissance.
 As far as United States satellites are concerned, they are all defensive; none are offensive, 92 76, Associated Press dispatch dated Washington, Dec. 17, 1965 .
 The May 1965 issue of Ogonocm contained an article describing the perfection of an orbital missile capable of carrying a 100megaton warhead . This weapon has since been code-named SCRAG, Stress was laid on the capability of the new weapon .
 DYNA-SOAR, and if true, points the Soviet Union far ahead in the military man-in' space program .
 Delivery time for weapons in orbit, assuming the weapon is over the intended target area, is much less . Delivery time in orbit is also less than the time it takes to deliver a weapon .
 A large number of orbiting spacecraft might bring on a war that home-based ICBMs would not . The threat of a war would be different from a war launched by home-born ICBM missiles .
 The orbiting weapon is at a disadvantage because it must be near the target area to be a faster-firing weapon . Many officials also point out that the orbiting weapon must be at a faster firing point .
 United Press International dispatches, dateline Moscow, November 8, 1965 and November 11, 1965 . U.P.I. dispatches: Moscow, Russia, Russia .
 An orbital weapon might be half way around the world or 45 minutes plus deorbiting time from its target when ordered to fire . So an orbital weapon may be half-way around the . world or more than 45 minutes from its . target .
 ICBM, on the other hand, although it may take longer to travel (32 minutes to strike a target 10,000 Km. away) is always the same distance away and hence more predictable . ICBM is more predictable than a missile that travels 32 minutes to hit a target
 Those who counsel against development of an orbital bomb by the U.S. say it is less accurate than ICBMs . Those who say it would be difficult to use to launch an ICBM .
 This is illustrated by the de-orbiting of astronauts in their re-entry capsules . This is when they are deorbiting in their space re-entering capsules .
 The accuracy of de-orbiting American astronauts has been increasing in each of the GEMINI flights . It should be expected to continue to improve .
 Little has been publicly stated publicly about the accuracy of de-orbiting Soviet launches . It is generally conceded that the Soviet Union has a sophistication comparable to that of the United States .
 A nuclear bomb of high enough yield, detonated in space while still in orbit over a target area, could be a devastating prelude to an ICBM attack . A high-enough yield could be enough to launch a nuclear bomb in space .
 A possible effect of such a very high-yield weapon exploded in space would be the searing of a large area of the earth beneath . The weapon could be detonated in space and would be capable of destroying the earth .
 There can be little doubt that its boosters have the capacity to orbit a bomb of this size or even larger . There is little doubt there will be enough boosters to orbit the bomb .
 The Soviet BIG BROTHER booster demonstrated its ability in 1965 to put a 13. ton payload in orbit . The Soviet Big Brother booster was launched by the Soviet Union in 1965 .
 The heaviest object orbited by the U.S. was a 21,000 pound satellite launched by a TITAN III-C rocket . It was the heaviest object launched by the United States .
 It has been publicly acknowledged that the space tests by the U.S. from Johnston Island in 1957 and 1958 blacked out most communications in the Pacific for an hour or more .
 William E Howard and James Barr, Spacecraft and Missiles of the World' 1966, . 1966, , 41. 94 95 well cripple the United States ""second-strike"" capacity by disrupting communications necessary to retaliate .
 If the Soviet Union is developing the option of orbital nuclear attack, it is unlikely that launching of orbital weapons would be announced as such .
 In 1964, it was reported that the Soviet Union launched two satellites in orbits which would take each over Johnston Island and Kwajalein . This occurred shortly after the Presidential announcement of the U.S. anti-space weapons .
 A prerequisite to attacking a Soviet satellite in space, of course, would be verification that it was actually carrying a nuclear weapon . A pre-emptive attack would require verification that the satellite was carrying a weapon .
 Shooting down a peaceful manned or scientific satellite would probably be considered a provocative act of war unless it occurred over friendly territory . A shooting down of a peaceful satellite would be considered an act of aggression .
 If it were widely believed that a nuclear payload was in orbit, the country which destroyed it would be applauded by all the other countries over which the orbital bomb had traveled .
 That the Soviet Union would dare to risk the deployment of orbital bombs is at least credible in view of experience during the Cuban missile crisis . The Soviet Union had a history of using orbital bombs in Cuba .
 The United States has no way of determining if an orbital vehicle is bearing a nuclear weapon . Surprise would be complete since the U.S. can't determine if the vehicle is carrying a nuclear bomb .
 The Soviet Union could hint that certain orbiting craft were capable of immobilizing our ICBM system . The U.S. ICBM could have been immobilized by orbiting craft .
 This might be the ultimate nuclear blackmail . Combined with a means of countering|the American POLARIS missile force, this might be . The U.S. might be able to blackmail the South Korean government .
 Space offensive nuclear delivery forces are less efficiefit, less accurate, and less credible, than ICBMs. I'ln the U.S. we argue variously that space offensive nuclear . delivery forces . less efficient, less reliable, and more credible, says U.N
 If the Soviet Union is dedicated to offensive world objectives, the special effects of space-military offensive forces may appear very useful . The Soviet Union may be dedicated to attacking world objectives . But if it is committed to world objectives it may appear useful .
 Such effects are, for example, prestige, terror, pursuasion, coercion, pressure, pressure and psychological warfare, and demoralization . Such effects can be used in psychological warfare .
 The exceptional accomplishments of the GEMINI program and those expected of the APOLLO will not assure much military protection . "The exceptional accomplishments ... won't assure much protection," says President Obama .
 When we start to talk about the megatonnage we could bring into a nuclear war we are talking about annihilation . I would say when we . start to . talk about a megaton .nage . could bring . into a . nuclear war, he said. We are talking
 Oak Ridge Laboratory graphite reactor to be shut down m November after 20 years' operation . Graphite reactor was built in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, in 1983 .
 President Johnson orders cutbacks in manufacture of fissionable materials and manufacture of arms . Johnson urges U.S.R. do likewise as step toward ""eventual abolition of arms,"" State of Union Message; suggests move possible because building of arsenal is at point where it is becoming
 Two uranium-processing plants to close; operations at two others cut . Operations at two other plants also cut . November 1963 January 1964 January 1964 . February 1964 February 1964 June 1964 December 1964 .
 AEC stresses stockpile increases but at reduced rate, comment of President Johnson statement on cut . AEC stressed stockpile increases in stockpile increases . President Johnson made statement on cutting .
 Since then, two of the reactors have been shut down, one at Savannah River, S C, summer of 1964, and one at Hanford, Wash., on January 2, 1965 . The reactors were built in the 1960s and 1970s .
 The two remaining at Hanford were scheduled to be shut down in May and June of 1965 . The AEC had 10 reactors producing plutonium for atomic weapons . Hanford was scheduled to have 10 reactors in total .
 Production of special nuclear materials will decline somewhat in 1966 as a result of reduced cascade power and the first full year of operations after the shutdown of four production reactors during 1964 and 1965 .
 Operations costs for the weapons program' are estimated at OT.4-million in 1966 compared with 1965 estimated costs of $753.3-million . Work will continue on process improvements .
 November 1965 AEC reports ""no evidence"" U.S.R. has carried out nuclear materials cutbacks announced April 20, 1964 . AEC: "No evidence" U,S.S.,R. had carried out such cutbacks in 1964 .
 January 1966 President Johnson> Budget Message puts AEC appropriations and estimated expenditures below Fiscal 1966 level; expenditures down $90-million . January 1966 budget message: "AEC appropriations, estimated expenditures are below fiscal 1966 level"
 Administration announces further cut-back in production of fission* able materials for nuclear weapons . Budget-motivated gesture toward slowing the atomic arms race .
 On July 1, 1967, AEC will shut down the plutonium production reactor at Hanford, Washington . AEC: The reactor will be shut down on July 1 .
 Senator Jackson observed that the Soviet Union has been ""expanding its output"" of fissionable materials . Senator Jackson noted that the United States is expanding its output .
 Congressman Raricfc, Louisiana, aQviaect mac .jsigfctional Strategy Committee of the American Security Council lias recently . Strategy Committee . strategy committee of the . American Security . Council . strategy Committee . recently . analysed by every citizen of cur country .
 Washington, November 20, 1967 THE GROWING THREAT OF SOVIET SEA POWER . 'They've never before felt the need for carriers as contrasted to the United States, or, Bri^ tain because they didn't have many overseas commitments. The U.S
 Vice Admiral William E Ellis Chief of Staff of the Supreme Allied Command, Atlantic October 21, 1967 . Vice Admiral Ellis dropped a considerable naval bombshell on the Western world . Ellis was the first Western naval chief of staff to speak out .
 The Soviet Union, he revealed, has at long last begun to construct aircraft carriers .
 Russia is finally taking the last step toward providing itself with a fully balanced navy . Russia's navy already poses a formidable challenge to United States supremacy at sea .
 The Soviet fleet has indeed taken to the oceans of the world . In combination with a tremendously expanding merchant marine, the Soviet fleet is expanding .
 Both strategically and tactically Soviet maritime power has become a most important factor in the world's politico-military arena . Soviet maritime powers have become important factors in world's political and military arena .
 No longer can the navy be regarded as the weak sister of the Soviet military machine . Russia's navy no longer can be seen as a weak sister to the Soviet state .
 For a U.S. dependent upon control of the sea, the remarkable growth of Soviet sea power has become a matter of the gravest concern . For a United States vitally dependent upon controlling the sea .
 During the war against Hitler Soviet naval forces played only an auxiliary role . Their performance was generally undistinguished except for some daring submarine forays through the German blockade of the Gulf of Finland .
 Soviet Navy tended to be downgraded by Western military strategis""ts~as of little importance . As a result of the Soviet Navy, it was thought to be of little significance .
 Molotov announced that the Soviet Union must have a first class navy second to none . In that year he announced that he wanted to have a second class navy . The Soviet Union's navy is now the world's second most powerful navy .
 Two battleships and three battlecruisers were laid down before the outbreak of war . Besides cruisers, destroyers and submarines, two 46,000 ton battleships were laid up .
 By the time of the German invasion the Soviets were embarking on a major naval expansion program far beyond the needs of a mere suppprting^role for the Soviet Army .
 There was no doubt now who their future enemies would be — the United States and Britain — both great naval powers . The U.S. and Britain would be the future enemies of the British Empire .
 No further effort was made to complete the battleship and battlecruiser hulls, which had been largely destroyed by the Germans anyway . The battleship as such had lost its usefulness .
 The idea of large ships, particularly cruisers, was still prominent in Soviet thinking . Soviet thinking still included cruisers .
 Admiral Kuznetsov was a proponent of a balanced, high seas fleet able to challenge the West for maritime superiority . The new Navy chief said he was looking for a balanced fleet of high seas ships .
 The new Soviet Navy would comprise a huge fleet of submarines, destroyers and smaller craft to preserve Soviet hegemony over the Baltic and Black Seas . A fleet of cruisers, ""heavy cruisers"" and, eventually, aircraft carriers, for high seas operations, would be .
 The Sverdlov class of 20,000 ton ""light cruisers"" was begun in 1948-49 . The Skorry class destroyers and the first of the post-war design, long range submarines were also built .
 Two out of a programmed 4-6 ""heavy cruisers"" designated Stalingrad class had also been started . And there is evidence that two out of the programmed . heavy cruisers" were also being started .
 The final step in the program, aircraft carriers, had not yet commenced due to the lack of technical expertise in their construction . Aircraft carriers are the last step of the program .
 The most basic decision was made by 1953 at the latest, was to abandon plans for aircraft carriers . The decision to abandon aircraft carriers was made as early as 1953 .
 The Soviets calculated that it would take them another ten years before they could develop carrier power to the point where it would do them any good . The Soviets apparently calculated that they would have to wait ten more years before developing carrier power .
 By this time, they felt rapidly developing technology would make carriers obsolete . By the time they felt that would make them obsolete, they thought carriers were obsolete .
 The decision concerning the carriers made further construction of the Sverdlovs and Stalingrads pointless . The decision was made by the government .
 These ships were originally programmed on the assumption that they would have carrier support . They were programmed to be able to fly with carrier support when they were launched .
 Without such support their primary mission of high seas operations would be suicidal, arid even as surface raiders they could have only a limited usefulness . Without support they would have only limited usefulness, says the U.S. Navy .
 They could still be used in a defensive role, but this function no longer justified the heavy expenditures being made on them . The club have invested heavily in the likes of Diego Costa and Diego Costa .
 It was decided not to proceed any further with the construction of the Stalingrad heavy cruisers . The Sverdlov cruiser hulls were then put in ""conservation" after launching, pending a decision .
 The ultimate size of the submarine fleet, once planned at over 1,000, was probably scaled down at this time in favor of the development of more advanced types which changing circumstances were making necessary .
 Russia's naval strategists were more free to follow the lead of Western navies in developing the types of ships dictated by the nuclear age . With Stalin out of the way, they were more likely to follow Western naval strategies .
 It was decided to concentrate in the future on a surface fleet of small, missile armed ships and a submarine arm . The submarine arm is smaller than originally planned, but packing much more striking power .
 There is little doubt where Khrushchev stood on the question of the navy . The former Soviet Union leader's views on the matter of the country's navy have been questioned .
 He said: "I am not interested in ordinary submarines with torpedoes etc. etc. He said . He said further, he is not interested . He added that he would not want ordinary submarines .
 In a Pravda interview on 8 September 1957 Air Marshall Vershinin asserted that the submarine fleets have now become a formidable weapon . In the same interview, he said that the sub fleets had become a 'forceful weapon'
 They can bombard coastal cities with rocket weapons with hydrogen warheads . They can bomb coastal cities . . . Other objectives with rocket . weapons with . hydrogen warheads with hydrogen . warheads .
 In 1959 Khrushchev remarked to Vice President Nixon that cruisers and aircraft carriers were , ""sitting ducks"" and the U.S.R. had stopped building them . And in 1959 he said that the United States stopped building cruisers .
 Admiral Kuznetsov, who opposed the quantitative reduction in the navy, was fired in 1955 and replaced by Admiral Gorshkov, who remains Navy CINC to this day .
 The old naval building program ground to a virtual halt before the new one could be fully put into production . It was one thing to create a radically new navy and quite another to get these new ships into commission .
 The last Sverdlov hull was launched in late 1955, and perhaps five or more were ultimately scrapped . Perhaps five of the hulls have been scrapped .
 Submarine production built up to a peak of 86 in 1956 and then fell off sharply in 1957 . Submarine Production peaked at a peak in 1956, but production fell off in 1957, falling to a low in 1957.
 The 1955-58 period, now known as the ""transition phase"" in Soviet naval construction, was followed by the emergence of the modern Soviet Navy that faces us today .
 Late in 1958, the first positive confirmation that missiles had been introduced into the Soviet Navy was achieved .
 Three ""Z"" class submarines were observed to have been converted, to launch ballistic missiles, and the first conversion of a destroyer into a surface-to-surface missile ship was also spotted .
 A whole new navy of missile ships has been built from the keel up :% In. the surf ace fleet these include large guided missile destroyers of th e Kashin and Kynda classes patrol boats .
 These ships give the Soviet surface fleet tremendous conventional firepower plus a nuclear punch . If they choose to substitute nuclear warheads for conventional explosives, they could do so with conventional explosives .
 Of these the 5,600 ton E class carries six launching tubes, and a new class, with eight missile launching tubes is expected shortly .
 The Soviets may now have as many as 60 ballistic missile firing submarines, plus 50 others which carry cruise type missiles for use against shipping . The Soviet Union may have up to 60 ballistic missiles firing submarines .
 In addition, a class of nuclear submarines — the N class — is designed for anti-submarine work . The N class is designed to be able to operate in the sea .
 The Soviet merchant marine has increased from 3. million deadweight tons in 1949 to 9 million today . The fleet of 20 million tons was planned by 1980, with a fleet planned by the 1980s .
 Carriers mark shift in Soviet Policy During-the. late, fifties and . early, sixties . Carriers were carriers of the Soviet Union .
 Soviet strategists continually disparaged aircraft carriers, asserting that they were too vulnerable to missile attack . The aircraft carriers were considered too vulnerable for missile attack by the Soviet Union .
 Soviet naval exercises in the Norwegian Sea and North Atlantic seemed to be directed chiefly against the NATO carrier strike fleets . NATO carrier strikes fleets .
 Soviet guided missile destroyers and Badger bombers with air-to-surface missiles were evidently the weapons with which the Soviets planned to attack these carrier forces .
 It is too early to say whether the fall of Khrushchev in 1964 had anything to do with the Soviet decision to begin carrier construction . But in any case the Soviets have reversed themselves and have decided that these ships now have a role to play .
 The carriers now under construction are not large and do not appear capable of carrying jet aircraft . The carriers are not expected to be large enough to carry jets .
 They carry helicopters which could be used to carry troops or for antisubmarine work . Instead of carrying troops, they carry helicopters that could carry troops .
 It is highly significant also that the naval shipyards are producing quantities of large ocean going amphibious landing ships . It is also highly significant that the Navy is producing large ocean-going ships .
 The new ships in the Soviet Fleet are yet another indication that the Cold War with Russia is not over . Certainly the Soviets have been rueful observers of the usefulness of these ships to the United States in the Vietnam war, long after Soviet propagandists had scornfully written them off
 Secretary McNamara's revelation that the Soviets are developing the Fractional Orbital Bombardment System should come as a sobering reminder that we face a continuing and deadly contest with Moscow across the whole spectrum of power .
 Soviet seapower is an often overlooked but integral and growing part of the Soviet-challenge to America . The U.S. has never been able to reach the Soviet Union .
 Admiral Ben Moreell, USN. Associate Editor, U.S. associate Editor, John F Lewis Bennett Archambault, Dr. Dr. Bennett . Dr. Moreell is the USN’s Chief of Staff .
 Dr. Stefan T, Possony Chief, Washington Bureau Lee R Pennington Lloyd L Austin General Thomas S Power, USAF Strategy and Military Affairs Editor Dr. Thomas S. Power . Dr. Pennington is the U.S. Air Force Commander of the Air Force .
 Rear Admiral Chester Ward, USN Charles S Craigmtle and Major General Dale Dale 0.0. Schoech . Rear Admiral Ward is the U.S. commander of the USN. Commanding Commanders of the United States.
 Dr. Smith, USAF Admiral Robert L Dennison, USN Admiral Felix B Stump, U.N. Henry Duque, US Navy Admiral Felix Stump . Dr. Stump was killed in the sinking of the Titanic .
 It reports on national and international developments affecting the nation's security served except that permission is granted for reproduction in for the information of the Council's over 3500 member companies and institutions .
 Annual subwhole or in part if context is preserved, credit given and two scription rate $12.00.00 . Subwhole of the book or part if . context is . preserved .
 American Security Council ExeculOtf each postpaid for members . Additional copies available at 25^ each post paid for non-members . Copies are forwarded to the American security Council Executives .
 The long-awaited report on the Otepka Case has at last been issued by the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee . Washington, January 22, 1968 DATE / WR 68-3 The true MEANING of the OTEPKA Case has been released .
 In midJanuary, after five interminable years of abortive attempts to settle the matter amicably with a defiant Dean Rusk and his obdurate Department of State, the patience of the Subcommittee finally wore out .
 Report praises Otepka and seven other security officers sent into exile with him . Report also had high praise for the seven other officers in exile . The report also praised the seven others in exile during the massive purge .
 Senator Everett McKinley Dirksen said the problem was quite simply stated by one Subcommittee member . That problem was stated by a year ago by one of the subcommittee members, Senator Everett .
 The ultra-Leftists in the Department of State saw Otepka as an obstacle to their plans . The ultra left-wingers in the department of State wanted to oust him from the post .
 All the disarmament measures, treaties and decisions restricting U.S. development of new strategic and space weapons, all the limitations placed upon American forces to bring a quick and successful end to the Vietnam War . All the tenuous bridges being built to the Soviet Bloc — in short,
 From the outset, Otepka made it plain that he would refuse to issue security clearances to people who could not stand the test of Executive Order 10450 . He said he would not issue clearances for people who "could not stand" the test .
 Eisenhower's 1953 directive required that whenever there was any reasonable doubt as to a Government employee's, or applicant's, loyalty or suitability, that doubt was to be resolved in favor of the national security, rather than the individual . The directive was handed down by Dwight D Eisenhower in 1953
 It was recently disclosed that Otepka outlined his position to Dean Rusk and the incoming Attorney General, Robert F Kennedy, in a confidential meeting soon after the I960 election .
 Otepka denied Rostow security clearances in 1955 and 1957 . Rostow today holds what Lyndon Johnson calls ""the most important job in the White House, aside from the President"
 Rostow was then appointed to the White House staff as an assistant on national security to President Kennedy . Rostow served as a national security assistant to Kennedy in Kennedy's first term .
 Rostow was brought into State as chief I of the policy planning committee . Rostow served until returning to the White House in April 1966 .
 He was placed in charge of a special project far removed from the day-to-day business of issuing clearances to incoming presidential appointees . The project is far from the job of issuing security clearances .
 To be sure, investigations were conducted after the appointments were made .
 It's virtually impossible to make a questionable official walk the plank once he is on board, security experts say . But as everyone in the security field knows, it is virtually impossible .
 In the eight preceding years of the Eisenhower Administration only five security waivers were issued at State. It is worthy of note that in the entire eight . preceding years, only five . Security waivers were given to State.gov .
 With the State Department thoroughly repopulated at the policy level, the New Breed moved forcefully to effect what amounted to a revolution in U.S. foreign policy . The New Breed of State Department has taken over from the Obama administration .
 An ersatz ""reduction-in-force"" demoted Otepka from Deputy Director of SY to Chief of the Evaluations Division, a position he held years before .
 The apparent purpose of this move was to force Otepka to quit in disgust . The apparent aim of the move is to force him to quit, according to the report .
 Otepka uncovered all manner of malpractices effected during the year he had been gone . He was back in the critical Evaluations Division where security clearances originate .
 Nearly a third of the security ""waivers"" signed by Dean Rusk had been redated to make it appear as if full field investigations had been made prior to the employment of the officials in question .
 State Department officials attempted a cover-up via a stream of evasions, half-truths and outright lies . Otepka exposed these questionable procedures before the Senate Subcommittee .
 Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for State for Security questioned Otepka's sanity . John Francis Reilly, the deputy assistant secretary of state for security, also questioned the sanity of the man .
 Even before this he had been placed under close surveillance by his superiors . Even before that, he had already been under surveillance .
 His telephone was tapped, his office safe cracked, and the contents of his ""burn bag"" traslP regularly examined, and he was surrounded by the New Breed's spies . His office safe was cracked, his phone was tapped and his office was cracked .
 The FBI could find nothing to substantiate the espionage charge . The State Department ordered Otepka's dismissal and he appealed . In the meantime, the Senate Subcommittee unearthed evidence that Otepkas's phone had been tapped .
 Reilly and Hill were permitted to resign in November 1963, although Belisle remains on State's payroll even now . L.nin, and beatnik who had been placed in charge of SY's electronic counter-espionage division, were allowed to resign from State .
 After the 1964 election, Reilly had been given a plush job in the Federal Communications Commission, which continues to afford him a privileged sanctuary today . Reilly won a job in 1964 election .
 Otepka was forced to wait until June 1967 for his departmental hearing on the 1963 dismissal charges . Otepska was allowed to return to the force in June 1967 . Otepkas was forced by the Army to wait for his 1967 hearing .
 Otepka says classified documents were planted in his burn bag in a deliberate attempt to frame him . On the very first day of the hearing the Department dropped the ten ""criminal"" charges relating to ""mutilated"" classified documents .
 Three charges relate to alleged violation of President Truman's 1948 directive, issued on the eve of the Alger Hiss case, forbidding Government employees to divulge information from personnel security files . All that remained were three charges relating to alleged violations of the directive .
 In December 1967, Secretary Rusk upheld the remaining charges against Otepka, reprimanding him severely and de moting him still fu rther to a job co mpletel y outside the security field . Otepko was already barred from his chosen profession for nearly five years .
 The American Defense Fund, operated on a voluntary basis by James Stewart of Wood Dale, Illinois, is still seeking donations towards Otepka's legal defense .
 As the case drags on year after year, Mr Stewart finds it increasingly difficult to raise funds . The case has been going on for more than a decade .
 He recently borrowed money to pay the bulk of his attorney's latest bill of $8,500 . Despite his new demotion, he recently borrowed $5,000 to pay attorney's bill .
 The people who saw in Otto Otepka ""an obstacle to their plans"" continue to formulate the foreign policy of the United States. Meanwhile, the people who . saw in . Otto OtEPka continue to . formulate foreign policy . continue to do so .
 D.C. won't be restored until sane internal security practices are restored in Washington . Nor, one might add, will the trend of recent history be reversed until sanity is restored .
 Vice President Stephen L Donchess Kar , Baars, Baars . Baars: The Baars have been in contact with the U.S. government for more than 30 years . The U.N. has been in touch with the world’s largest stakeholder group
 R/"" has confinlJed to be the subject of news and feature articles'in publications throughout the country .
 I think that two of the most recent items to have appeared are of particular in-t-er es t-s-ine e-toget-he-F-they-p-Fe sent-an-a-G&u-ra-te-u-
 We're pleased with the continuing coverage being given to the study and I wanted to share the two items with you . Needless to say, we're pleased that the study is continuing .
 I think you'll find them interesting and I hope that they will serve as a reminder that the present trend can be reversed if an informed and enlightened public clearly expresses the belief that it must be. I think they will be a reminder .
 Crispus Attucks, hitherto obscure Negro stevedore, stopped a bullet during the Boston Massacre . His sole claim to fame — he chanced to stop a bullet — has gained him a place among the ""Founders of Our Nation "" series"
 There is also an equally extravagant appraisal of net worth of the former Secretary of Defense .
 The quick-march of time has made a shambles of the Secretary's service record . By the same token, barely eight weeks after the lawgiver's salute appeared in print, it has been eight weeks .
 Great Britain dropped its option on the controversial TFX, a command decision which the U.S. Navy is maneuvering adroitly .
 By pulling out of the Middle and Far East, the British have exposed the folly of a U.S. strategy in Europe based heavily upon their crumbling strength . The British are exposed not only the weakness of their own position, but also the folly .
 Under McNamara the civilians in the Pentagon overridden unanimous decisions of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, undercut the authority of field commanders . Under Mr McNamara, the Pentagon has subordinated strategic and tactical imperatives to the dictates of dubiously programmed computers .
 Some Whiz Kid decided to substitute a cheaper powder for the M-16 rifle, thereby causing repeated malfunction . A House Armed Services subcommittee later condemned as ""bordering on criminal negligence""
 The vulnerable Pueblo, operating 13 miles off North Korea, had standing orders to ignore harassment and not to fire . It was operating just 13 miles offshore of North Korea .
 Secretary of Defense has come dangerously close to tipping the balance of terror against his own country . He urged the doctrine of nuclear parity between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, refusing to deploy an effective anti-ballistic missile system .
 Unlike the fraudulent missile gap of 1960, which helped him to office, what the American Security Council flatly labels the ""McNamara gap"" today looms perilously real .
 The gulf between image and reality shows up perhaps most starkly on the fighting fronts of the Middle East . The gulf from image to reality is often starkly starkly shown on the battlefield .
 McNamara apologists like to boast of their man' s~skttr""at~cb st-e ff ectiWne-ne-ss-sndthe ""far-reaching managerial re volution' '.which he brought to the Pentagon. McNamara .
 To all of which we say ""Tell it to the Marines"— and to the Army, Navy and Air Force. To all the Marines, we say "Tell it" to all of the Marines."
 Dozens of M-13 military personnel carriers, for example, have been red-lined for lack of parts . Dozens of military vehicles have been ordered red-lines for parts .
 U.S. forces have run dangerously short of combat aircraft, to the point where the Pentagon reluctantly had to authorize the re-opening of shut-down assembly lines .
 Air support wasn't available for the Pueblo because the few planes close enough to help were rigged to carry nuclear bombs . Air support was not available because of the lack of air support . The few planes with nuclear bombs were equipped to carry them .
 Enterprise, now cruising off Wonsan, remains tied to a slowmoving conventionally powered j fleet . Enterprise is still tied to the slowmoving conventional fleet .
 Further flare-ups anywhere in the world will find the United States defense posture dangerously strained . The U.S. defense posture will be dangerously strained in the coming years .
 For decades the i North Atlantic Treaty Organization j served the Western world as' shield; t TJ. for decades the U.S. nuclear power was -the sword. For decades, the i N.A. Treaty Organization had served the world as 'shield'
 Under McNamara, both shield and sword have fallen into disrepair . However, under Mr McNamara he really hates to waste money on ""*arras and~~should be'KappleFTadling it out at the World Bank"
 The United States in 1961 began a unilateral retreat from the policy of massive retaliation, and toward a new doctrine of graduated response, which envisions the use of nuclear power only as a last, and long-deferred, resort .
 In mid-December, as he was emptying his desk at the Pentagon, Mr McNamara had the satisfaction of seeing his brainchild promoted to official NATO strategy .
 An Expert Gives Some FriendlyAdvice on Conglomerates on 5 AGGRESSIVE SWISS . Brown, Boveri & Co. is based in New York and London .
 France withdrew its forces from NATO's military command . Charles de Gaulle saw the move as a softening of U.S. resolve to defend the Continent .
 The security of Europe thus has come to rest on a dwindling band of U.S., British and miscellaneous troops, which, instead of reinforcements, as official reliance on conventional weaponry might seem to demand, are getting transportation home .
 This winter, Washington and London withdrew some 40,000 men, or over 10% of their total contingent, from the Continent . Canadians and Belgians soon may follow suit .
 Manpower aside, graduated response, as the bloody stalemate known as McNamara' s War suggests, simply is no substitute for victory . * * * rarely speaks in such terms .
 The Soviet Union remains the would-be architect of U.S. destruction . The United States is seeking to disarmament and detente with the Soviet Union .
 Time after time he has shown an otherwise inexplicable willingness to give the Communist world the benefit of the doubt long after grounds for reasonable doubt had vanished . He has shown that he has never given the world the chance of reasonable doubt .
 Last summer, in a grim appraisal titled "" The Changing Strategic Military Balance. The changing Strategic Military . Balance. Last summer .
 It concluded that by mid-1968, if not before, a dangerous ""megaton gap"" would begin to open in favor of the Reds . Hence, it concluded .
 Last week, however, in a significant statement to the Senate Armed Services Committee, it struck a different note . The White House made a statement to a key Senate panel .
 The U.S. urged modernizing the Minuteman missile force . It also urged defending all Minutemen emplacements with Sprint antimissile systems . It urged developing a deadlier successor .
 After seven years of appeasement, retreat and defeat, maybe even the icy Secretary of Defense has lost his cool . After 7 years, perhaps even even he has lost cool .
 Because the hour is late, an informed citizenry must act— now . "n 1962 the U.S. had the actly the reverse of what it was in I* capability of delivering two and a half to ten times as much nuclear firepower as the Soviet Union .
 By 1967, the estimate is that the Soviets had drawn roughly equal to us, possibly even ahead in terms of deliverable megatonnage, that is, the explosive power of the warheads . The Soviets may have been ahead of us, perhaps even ahead, with the power of their
 Present indications are that the Soviets, with their larger rockets and more powerful warheads, will have a clear lead by 1969, and will open a massive gap by 1971 . The capability to deliver from twice as much to perhaps ten times as much nuclear megatonnage .
 The situation by 1971 will be almost ex-1962, when our strategic supremacy was such that the Soviets had no 1 choice but to accede to our demands during the Cuban missile crisis . In other words, by 1971, the situation by that time will be .
 L Mendel Rivers is chairman of the House Armed Services Committee . 17 military and weapons experts of the American Security Council weigh in on Rivers' decision .
 Panel confined itself to study of unclassified sources, obviously drawing on those it knew to be sound . Bernard A Schriever, USAF, was the officer most responsible for development of our intercontinentahballistic-missile force .
 "It was inevitable that the Soviets, having mastered their own nuclear and missile technologies, would gain on us," says Peter Bergen .
 If they score breakthroughs in the offensive or defensive technologies we know that they are developing, or come up with highly reliable new strategic systems, it could overnight shift the balance of strategic power to the Soviet Union .
 It would mean an end to the cold war, with victory to the Soviet Union . In short, it would mean a victory to Russia .
 Congress is charged by the Constitution with the maintenance of the armed forces . Armed-services committees of Congress have been pleading with the Defense Department to proceed with the development of strategic-weapons technologies .
 Congress' armedservices committees need the support of an informed American public . Congress needs to be informed of the need for an informed public, says Sen. Tom Coburn .
 The decision to retain military supremacy still rests with the people, but the hour is very late . The decision is still in the people's favour, but it is still very late, says President Obama .
 I am certainly not opposed to helping reputable organizations in their effort to swing us back some from the so-called liberal or left-wing course on which our country has been apparently heading . Just this week I have received such-requests from the Young Americans for Freedom and the American Security
 The Federal Government is strictly an investigative agency of the Federal Government . We are not making evaluations nor draws conclusions as to the character or integrity of any organization, publication, or individual .
 Mr Fisher is a former Special Agent and is — on the Special Correspondents List . He is on the special Correspondents list .
 The Young Americans for Freedom is selfcharacterized as endeavoring to provide the public with educational material regarding threats upon Anerican institutions by socialist and communist groups .