 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations .
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data . Roberts, Priscilla Mary. Roberts. Roberts . Roberts was a pioneer of cataloguing in the 1930s .
 Adlai Ewing, II McCone, John Alex McNamara, Robert Strange Taylor, Maxwell Davenport Mikoyan, Anastas Ivanovich Thompson, Llewellyn Military Balance Edward, Jr. Mann, Thomas C Sorensen, Theodore Chaikin
 From the early 19th century, successive U.S. governments held it almost axiomatic that their country should rightfully be predominant over the rest of the Western Hemisphere . The United States has long been dominant in the Americas .
 The Monroe Doctrine was an 1823 declaration that no other power should acquire any further colonies in the Americas nor seek to regain colonies that had become independent . It was also declared that the U.S. should not acquire any more colonies .
 Roosevelt Corollary to Monroe Doctrine: U.S. had right to intervene to restore order in any Latin American nation that failed to conduct its affairs to United States satisfaction . In 1904 President Theodore Roosevelt took this still further, announcing that the United States had the right to intervention .
 U.S. officials treated Latin America as a de facto sphere of influence . Latin America has been a major source of influence in recent years . U.N. officials say Latin America is now a model of democracy .
 Roosevelt had been among the strongest advocates of war against Spain to end unrest and rebellion in Cuba, then a Spanish colony . Six years earlier, Roosevelt had supported war to end continuing unrest in Cuba .
 In 1898 the United States finally declared war on Spain, winning a quick victory over the European power . The U.S. won the war in 1898 .
 The United States Navy obtained a permanent lease on a base at Guantánamo Bay in Cuba . The U.S. Navy has been stationed at the base since 2001 .
 Cuba was also forced to accept the Platt Amendment, whereby the U.S. retained the right to intervene in CubaÊs economic, military, and political affairs . The amendment was also inserted into Cuba's constitution .
 American troops returned again in 1906 for three years, and once more in 1912 to suppress domestic unrest . The U.S. troops returned in 1906, 1907 and 1912 for three more years .
 In 1933 the new government of Ramón Grau, brought to power by a military coup, nullified the Platt Amendment, whereupon U.S. president Franklin D Roosevelt denied diplomatic recognition to Cuba for a year .
 Fulgencio Batista served as president from 1940 to 1944 and again from 1952 to 1958 . Batista aligns himself with U.S. policies in both World War II and the Cold War .
 Cuba remained heavily commercially and financially dependent on the United States . American-owned firms dominated the Cuban economy during the U.S. occupation .
 From the late 1940s onward, U.S. foreign policy was dominated by global competition between the United States and the Soviet Union . The United States was the standard-bearer of liberal, democratic and capitalist values .
 In 1947 the Truman Doctrine made containment, the effort to prevent any additional nations becoming communist, the guiding principle of U.S. foreign policy . The Truman Doctrine was made containment in 1947 . In 1947, containment was made the focus of containment .
 By the 1950s, the Soviet Union and the United States each possessed horrifically destructive thermonuclear weapons, which meant that unless they exercised great caution conflicts between them had the potential to spiral into devastating war .
 Soviet and U.S. leaders sought to win the loyalties of developing countries in what was termed the Third World . They supported political groups they considered broadly sympathetic to their own ideological viewpoint .
 U.S. has tried and tried to overthrow leftist governments while supporting political regimes, however authoritarian, that professed themselves reliably anticommunist . Across Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East, in such countries as Guatemala, Iran, and Vietnam, the United States has tried
 In 1958 an indigenous revolutionary movement led by Fidel Castro seized power from Batista . In 1958, Fidel Castro led a revolutionary movement that led to his overthrow of the Batista government .
 Castro initially declared that he was not a communist . From spring 1959 he covertly sought Soviet aid and military protection . Castro sought military protection from the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 American pressure and boycotts quickly impelled him to move openly into the Soviet camp . American economic pressure forced him to join the Communist Party .
 Central Intelligence Agency planned to assist Cuban exiles to attack the island and overthrow Castro . Agency believed to have been working to overthrow Castro in Cuba . CIA planned to help exiles overthrow Castro with Cuban exile funds .
 Kennedy and McNamara continued to develop plans for invasion . CIA and military advisers also devised various ingenious schemes to overthrow or assassinate Castro .
 In mid-1961, as the concurrent Berlin Crisis intensified and culminated in the building of the Berlin Wall, military hard-liners in the Kremlin succeeded in implementing a 34-percent increase in spending on conventional forces .
 Both the Bay of Pigs and KennedyÊs bellicose inauguration rhetoric that his country would ‘pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe,” may have energized them .
 Despite claims of a missile gap between the Soviet Union and the United States, the U.S. had at least eight times as many nuclear warheads as its rival . The United States had eight times more nuclear warheads than its rival, experts say .
 Even U.S. leaders were unaware of just how lopsidedly the nuclear situation favored them, believing the ratio to be only about three to one .
 The 1961ă1962 United States deployment of 15 intermediate-range Jupiter missiles in Turkey, directly threatening Soviet territory, further angered Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev, making him eager to redress the balance .
 Khrushchev also hoped to pressure the U.S. into making concessions on Berlin . "It seems that [Krushchev] also hoped that [the United States] would make concessions"
 The move rebutted charges from China that the Soviets were only paper tigers, unwilling to take concrete action to advance the cause of international revolution . Additionally, installing missiles rebutting charges from the PeopleÊs Republic of China, increasingly the Soviet Union's ideological rival within the communist
 Khrushchev apparently felt a romantic sense of solidarity with the new Cuban state . The emergence reassured him and other old communists that their movement still possessed international vitality .
 Khrushchev offered Soviet nuclear-capable missiles, controlled by Soviet technicians and troops, to Castro . Castro accepted and oversaw their secret installation .
 Khrushchev apparently believed that these would deter U.S. plans to invade Cuba . The Soviet Union hoped to use the tactic to deter the invasion of Cuba .
 President Kennedy calculated that once the missiles were in place Kennedy and his advisers would find the prospect of nuclear war over them so horrifying that they would accept their presence in Cuba .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco, followed by KhrushchevÊs June 1961 summit meeting with Kennedy at Vienna, apparently convinced the Soviet leader that Kennedy was weak and could easily be intimidated .
 Kennedy administration officials warned from July to September 1962 that the U.S. would respond strongly if the Soviets deployed nuclear or other offensive weaponry in Cuba . Khrushchev implicitly denied any intention of doing so .
 By this time the missiles had already been secretly dispatched and their installation was at least a partial fait accompli . Admittedly, by this time, by . this time they had already dispatched .
 At this stage of his career, KhrushchevÊs behavior tended to be somewhat erratic . At this time, he was a leader of the Soviet Union, but his behavior was erratic .
 Instead of treating the Cuban missiles as deterrent weapons, the Kennedy administration regarded them as evidence of Soviet aggressiveness . The Kennedy administration refused to tolerate their presence .
 On October 16, 1962, Kennedy was provided with photographic evidence, obtained by U-2 reconnaissance planes, that Soviet officials had installed intermediate-range nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 President Kennedy summoned a secret Executive Committee of 18 top advisers . Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman Maxwell D Taylor, CIA Director John McCone, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, Treasury Secretary C
 President Kennedy also included senior members of the broader foreign policy establishment, including former secretary of defense Robert A Lovett and secretary of state Dean Acheson .
 Adlai Stevenson, U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, and John J McCloy, KennedyÊs disarmament adviser, occasionally joined its deliberations . Other top officials, such a U.N. envoy to the UN, sometimes joined deliberations .
 For 13 days ExComm debated how best to respond to KhrushchevÊs secretive tactic . ExComm was a committee of the National Security Council . The committee debated for 13 days on the subject .
 KhrushchevÊs behavior would have been almost impossible for any U.S. president to accept the situation . Whatever the logical justification for KhrushvicÊS. behavior, politically it would be almost impossible to accept it .
 Hard-line Republicans in Congress were eager to attack Kennedy if he showed himself weak on Soviet or communist expansion, especially so close to United States shores .
 The United States military calculated that the missiles would increase Soviet nuclear striking force against the continental United States by 50 percent . The U.S. military said the missiles could increase Soviet missile strikes by 50 per cent .
 Kennedy considered the missiles less a genuine military threat than a test of his credibility and leadership . Kennedy, however, considered the missile threat less than a genuine threat . Kennedy: "The missiles were a test for his credibility"
 Taylor, speaking for the U.S. military, initially favored launching air strikes to destroy the missile installations . A scenario that would almost certainly have killed substantial numbers of Soviet troops, was unlikely to eliminate all the missiles, and might well have provoked nuclear war .
 An invasion of Cuba by U.S. ground forces might also provoke a full-scale war . An invasion by United States ground forces could provoke a war . The Cuban government has been accused of corruption in Cuba .
 Kennedy publicly announced the presence of the missiles in Cuba, demanded that the Soviet Union remove them, and proclaimed the imposition of a naval blockade around the island . The blockade was intended to prevent the delivery of any further Soviet weaponry or military personnel to Cuba .
 Several tense days ensued, during which Soviet ant-ircraft batteries on Cuba shot down a U.S. U-2 reconnaissance plane . The incident alarmed the Kremlin, which had no specific authorization from Kremlin leaders .
 Kennedy rejected TaylorÊs advice to retaliate militarily and he deliberately refrained from action . Kennedy: "I want to avoid further escalation, and I'm not going to do it"
 Khrushchev decided not to challenge the naval quarantine and acquiesced in the removal of the missiles . After some hesitation, he decided to withdraw the missiles from the sea .
 Robert Kennedy promised to remove Jupiter missiles in Turkey and Italy . Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin secretly obtained an unpublicized pledge from Robert Kennedy . Dobrynins secretly obtained the pledge from his brother .
 The United States also promised not to mount another invasion of Cuba . Provided that the Soviet missiles departed and were not replaced, the U.S. also promised to keep out the threat of another invasion .
 President Kennedy was prepared to make even greater concessions to the Soviets, including taking the issue to the United Nations and openly trading Turkish missiles for those in Cuba . Recently released tapes of conversations among President Kennedy and his advisers reveal that .
 In so doing, he parted company with some of his more hard-line advisers . President Obama parted with some hard-liners in order to win the White House .
 Kennedy deliberately refrained from emphasizing KhrushchevÊs humiliation . Other administration officials were privately less diplomatic and celebrated their victory to the press .
 Newly opened Soviet documentary evidence has demonstrated that the Cuban situation was even more menacing than most involved then realized . Newly opened documentary evidence shows that the situation was very menacing .
 Forty-two thousand well-equipped Soviet soldiers were already on the island, far more than the 10,000 U.S. officials had estimated . The island nation was invaded by the Soviet Union in December .
 The bellicose Castro also hoped to shoot down additional U-2 planes and provoke a major confrontation . Castro also wanted to provoke a confrontation with the U.2 planes .
 The potential for a trigger-happy military officer to spark a full-scale nuclear conflagration almost certainly existed . It was retrospectively chilling evidence of the dangers inherent in these weapons .
 On Kennedy it had a certain salutary maturing effect, making the once-brash young president a strong advocate of disarmament in the final months before his untimely death in 1963 .
 His stance induced the Soviet leadership to agree to establish a hotline between Moscow and Washington to ease tensions during international crises . The hotline was established to facilitate communications and ease tensions .
 From then onward both superpowers exercised great caution in dealing with each other, and subsequently they never again came so close to nuclear war . The two superpowers exercise great caution .
 Soviet officials felt that they had come dangerously near to losing control of the actual employment of nuclear-capable weapons in Cuba . Soviet officials feared that they may have lost control of Cuba's nuclear weapons .
 Humiliation at U.S. hands was among the factors that propelled Soviet leaders into an expensive major nuclear buildup . The Soviet leaders reached parity with the United States in 1970, reaching parity in 1970 .
 KhrushchevÊs fall from power in 1964 was at least partly due to the missile crisis . The missile crisis was a major factor in Khrushchi's downfall in the fall of power .
 Politburo colleagues criticized him for recklessness in originally installing the missiles and weakness in subsequently yielding to U.S. pressure . He has also been criticized for his weakness in responding to pressure from the West .
 KennedyÊs Cuban policies may also have indirectly caused his own assassination . Cuban policy may have directly led to Kennedy's assassination .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was an unpredictable leftist who had spent some time in the Soviet Union . Oswald sympathized strongly with CastroÊs Cuba, and opposed KennedyÊ's efforts to overthrow Castro . Oswald was arrested for JFK's murder .
 Others have suggested that Cuban exiles who resented KennedyÊs failure to do more to assist them may have been involved in his death . Others have also suggested that Cubans resented his failure to help them .
 Western European leaders felt some discomfort that they had not been consulted on decisions of great importance to the survival of their own countries, which were likely to be prime targets for Soviet nuclear missiles in any major war .
 Kennedy administration ignored the North Atlantic Council when deciding to remove Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey, even though these weapons were supposedly under NATO control . The Kennedy administration was equally high-handed in removing Jupiter missiles .
 U.S. behavior confirmed de Gaulle's decision to take independent foreign policy line, he says . Such behavior confirmed his decision to become independent in subsequent years .
 Castro felt humiliated and resentful that the superpowers had settled matters between themselves without consulting him . The U.S.-Soviet settlement effectively ensured his regimeÊs survival . Castro, meanwhile, felt deeply humiliated .
 Before KhrushchevÊs fall from power, the two men were reconciled . Cuban-Soviet relations remained close until the end of the Cold War .
 Castro remained in power into the 21st century, eventually becoming the doyen among world political leaders . To the chagrin of successive U.S. presidents, most of whom would have welcomed his overthrow, he stayed in power until 2008 .
 Robert KennedyÊs memoir Thirteen Days, posthumously released in 1969, a year after his assassination in June 1968, confirmed rumors of a U.S.-Soviet understanding on the removal of missiles from Turkey . For the first time, this was confirmed by Robert Kennedy's memoir
 Aging Kennedy administration officials gradually released new information . Initial depiction of the crisis as published early on in works by such Kennedy associates as Arthur M Schlesinger Jr. and Theodore Sorensen .
 The release of secret tapes of the deliberations of ExComm, made without the knowledge of any participants except the two Kennedy brothers . President Kennedy was willing to be far more conciliatory than earlier accounts had suggested and highlighted inaccuracies .
 From the late 1980s onward, several international conferences brought together Cuban, American, and Soviet participants in the crisis took place in the U.S. and Cuba .
 Attendees let slip much new information, including how many Soviet troops and nuclear-capable missiles were already installed on Cuba in October 1962 . Accounts of a confrontation between U.S. warships and a nuclear-armed Soviet submarine were also revealed .
 Additional documentary evidence continues to fill in missing information on aspects of the Soviet-U.S.-Cuban imbroglio . Documentary evidence gives historians a far fuller, accurate, and more nuanced understanding of Soviet dealings .
 More is also becoming available from the archives of Western European allies of the U.S. of the United States, illuminating once-obscure episodes .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt named him undersecretary of the treasury in 1933 . He entered public life in 1933 when he was appointed as treasury secretary . He died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 Acheson resigned soon thereafter, however, over a disagreement concerning gold and currency policies . He resigned soon after, but it was a disagreement over gold and the currency .
 In 1940 he authored a key legal opinion that led to the Lend-Lease program . In 1940, he wrote a key opinion that helped pave the way for the program . He is credited with leading the development of the Navy .
 He was assistant secretary of state in 1941 and then undersecretary of state . He became assistant secretary in 1941 . He was also under secretary of states in 1945 .
 In 1949 President Harry S Truman appointed him secretary of state, a position he held until 1953 . In 1953 he was appointed Secretary of State by Truman .
 Acheson initially favored a policy of postwar cooperation with the Soviet Union . But he quickly reversed his view and became one of the chief proponents of the Cold War containment policy .
 Acheson stressed the military dimension of the conflict with the Soviet Union . Unlike Kennan, he believed that the contest with the Soviets was primarily political .
 Acheson advocated a policy of developing military strength before negotiating with the Soviet Union . He was inspired by the failure to halt the Axis powers in the 1930s .
 Acheson also played a critical role in implementing major Cold War initiatives in Europe, including the Truman Doctrine program of assistance to Greece and Turkey, the Marshall Plan (a program of economic aid to Western Europe), and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization security pact .
 Eisenhower administration committed itself to a policy of massive retaliation that emphasized nuclear responses over conventional responses to crises . The former secretary of state reacted with utter disbelief to what he termed “defense on the cheap”
 Acheson hoped Kennedy was not ‘serious‰ and warned him that ‘1,500 Cubans weren t as good as 25,000 Cubans, he later recalled . Told by Kennedy in early 1961 of the projected Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba .
 In the 1961 Berlin Crisis, he counseled Kennedy to take a firm stand, and he privately believed that Kennedy should have dismantled the Berlin Wall . In the 1960s, he was critical of Kennedy's handling of the Berlin crisis .
 ExCommÊs discussed air strikes against missile installations, brushing aside fears of Attorney General Robert F Kennedy that bombing them without warning would constitute another Pearl Harbor . He brushed aside fears that bombing the missile installations without warning of another Pearl Harbour .
 On October 21 President Kennedy dispatched Acheson to Europe to brief President Charles de Gaulle of France, Chancellor Konrad Adenauer of West Germany and North Atlantic Council on the situation . President Kennedy had a brief with the French President and West German Chancellor .
 Acheson again advocated air strikes against the missiles in Cuba . He returned after implementation of the U.S. naval blockade of Cuba .
 Acheson died of a heart attack on October 12, 1971 in Sandy Spring, Maryland .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Berlin Crises; Containment, Doctrine and Course of; Kennedy, Robert Francis; United States Allies References . Beisner, Robert L Dean Acheson: A Life in the Cold War.
 McMahon, Robert J Dean Acheson and the Creation of an American World Order. McMahon . McMahon and Robert J. Dean Aideson . McMahon . The creation of a World Order .
 Alekseev was Soviet diplomat and KGB intelligence officer, Soviet ambassador to Cuba, June 12, 1962 . He died January 15, 1968, in Havana .
 Alekseev was born Aleksandr Shitov on January 8, 1913, in RussiaÊs western Komstromskoi Oblast . He was born in 1913 and died in 1994 .
 Later that year, Shitov took the cover name Alekseev, planning to remain in Moscow as an espionage operative if German forces capture the city . Shitov was planning to stay in Moscow to remain as an operative if the city was captured .
 From 1941 to 1943 he worked in the Soviet mission in Tehran, Iran, and in French North Africa . From 1944 to 1951 he worked for the Soviet Information Bureau in Paris . He returned to Moscow in 1951 to work for the Information Bureau .
 On January 10, 1959, the Soviet Union recognized the new radical government of Cuba established under Prime Minister Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was the prime minister of Cuba's radical government . The Cuban government was established nine days earlier .
 Alekseev requested assignment to Havana to establish contact with the new Cuban leaders . Aleksander Aleksandandov was assigned to Havana, Cuba, to set up contact with new leaders there .
 Alekseev was the first Russian granted a visa to Cuba in 1959 . He arrived in Cuba on October 1, 1959 and was granted a permanent visa to the island .
 Castro initiated radical land reform and nationalized U.S. property in Cuba during 1959 and 1960 . Relations with the United States deteriorated after Castro initiated land reform . Castro's government nationalized property in the U.N. property during the 1960s .
 On September 2, 1960, Fidel Castro made a major public proclamation of 4148-493-00A. The Declaration of Havana was made by Fidel Castro .
 The following month, the United States imposed a complete economic embargo on Russia . The U.S. imposed the embargo on the island .
 In early January 1961, the United States broke all diplomatic relations with Cuba . The U.S. broke diplomatic ties with Cuba in January 1961 . Cuba was the last nation to have diplomatic relations between the U.N. and Cuba .
 AlekseevÊs efforts to broker a rapprochement between Cuban leaders and the Soviet Union . These circumstances facilitated AleksanderovÊt's efforts .
 In February 1960 Anastas Mikoyan, a top Soviet Presidium member, visited Cuba and concluded a Soviet-Cuban trade agreement . The Soviet Union purchased Cuban sugar in exchange for oil and other goods . At his urging, in February 1960 Mikoyans visited Cuba .
 Kudryatsev never developed good relations with the Cuban revolutionaries . He never had a good relationship with them .
 In September 1960 Castro told the ambassador that Alekseev should handle all meetings with top Cuban leaders . Castro told him to delegate meetings to the ambassador in September 1960 . The Russian-born diplomat is now Russia's ambassador to Cuba .
 Fearing that the U.S. was planning military intervention, Castro turned to Alekseev in a quest for Soviet arms . Castro also sought to supplement existing Cuban purchases from Czechoslovakia and several Western European countries .
 In July 1960, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev publicly stated that if necessary his country would intervene with nuclear weapons to protect Cuba . Nikita said in July 1960 he would use nuclear weapons if necessary to protect Cuban citizens .
 Soviet Union gave Cuba increasing quantities of weapons . Soviet Union announced major military aid program during Raúl CastroÊs July 1960 visit to Moscow . Cuban President Castro visited Moscow in 1960 .
 41 military aircraft (MiG-19 and MiG-15 fighter jets and reconnaissance planes) were promised to Cuba, together with enhanced quantities of other weapons . Soon afterward, as rumors of a forthcoming U.S. invasion attempt on Cuba circulated internationally, a total of 41 aircraft were
 The Soviet Union also began training 17 Cuban intelligence operatives for espionage against the U.S. and the Cuban émigré community . The Soviets trained 17 Cuban agents for espionage .
 Alekseev supported Fidel Castro's request for additional KGB operatives and assistance in training Cuban intelligence agents . Castro asked for help after the U.S.-backed April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion attempt on Cuba .
 On April 16, 1961, Castro announced that he himself was a communist . He confirmed his adherence to Marxism-Leninism on December 1, 1961 . Castro was born in 1961 .
 Alekseev had little if any input into the Soviet decision to base nuclearcapable missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union decided to base its nuclear missiles in the country .
 In May 1962, Khrushchev and the KGB summoned him to Moscow and informed him that he was to be appointed ambassador to the island . He was to supervise the deployment of substantial Soviet forces equipped with conventional weapons .
 Khrushchev enhanced this plan by including substantial numbers of short-, medium-, and 4148-493-00A missiles .
 Alekseev unavailingly suggested that Castro would refuse the offer of armaments . Khrushchev: Castro sought to expel the Americans from their Cuban base of Guantánamo Bay by demanding the removal of all foreign outposts in Latin America .
 Alekseev served as CastroÊs principal Russian confidant, warning Khrushchev early on October 27 that Castro believed U.S. intervention to be inevitable . He translated a cable from the Cuban leader to the Soviet leader that apparently urged a nuclear first strike against the United
 Kremlin sought to use AlekseevÊs privileged access to Castro to persuade Cuba's prime minister to endorse Khrushchev's proposal that the U.S. trade Turkish for Cuban missile bases and assure the United Nations that all work on Soviet missile installations had ceased .
 On October 28, Alekseev was instructed to deliver a letter from Khrushchev to Castro, explaining the Soviet position, but Castro refused to meet him .
 Alekseev is a textbook example of an ambassador who had gone native, largely embraced CastroÊs defiant attitude toward both superpowers . He questioned the good faith of U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba and warned his Kremlin superiors not to pressure .
 His cordial relationship with Cuban officials, Castro included, made him too valuable to sacrifice to political expediency . His relationship with Castro and other officials, including Castro, was too valuable .
 Alekseev successfully encouraged Castro to visit the Soviet Union and repair his relations with Khrushchev and others . In spring 1963, Castro was allowed to visit Russia and repair relations with the Soviets .
 Alekseev remained ambassador to Cuba until January 1968 . Weathering KhrushchevÊs fall 1964 ouster by Leonid Brezhnev, he remained ambassador until 1968 .
 He subsequently served as an adviser to the leftist President Salvador Allende of Chile . He died following a military coup in 1973 following a coup in Chile .
 Alekseev retired in 1980 and then became an official adviser to the Soviet embassy in Cuba . Aleksieev retired from Soviet politics in 1980 . He was an adviser to Soviet Embassy in Cuba and later became a diplomat .
 In 1992 he attended a major conference in Havana marking the 40th anniversary of the missile crisis . 30 prominent Cuban, Soviet, and U.S. official participants in crisis pooled their recollections .
 A financial aid program devised by the U.S. in March 1961 to promote social reform in Latin America . Alliance for Progress was created by the United States in 1961 .
 The programÊs architects hoped to curb violence and prevent communist-inspired revolutions in the region .
 When dealing with Latin America after World War II, the U.S. emphasized security imperatives at the expense of social and economic concerns . The United States generally emphasized security concerns at the time of the war .
 The U.S. endorsed private investment and free trade as the keys to Latin AmericaÊs socioeconomic development . Rejects pleas for a Latin American plan similar to the 1947 Marshall Plan that revived the Western European economies .
 EisenhowerÊs efforts to eschew direct aid, often conflicted with the prevailing economic climate in Latin America . While this approach meshed well with President Dwight EisenhowerÉs efforts, it often clashed with economic climate .
 In May 1958 Vice President Richard M NixonÊs goodwill tour of South America provoked hostile demonstrations and major rioting in the cities of Caracas in Venezuela and Lima in Peru .
 Fidel Castro seized control of CubaÊs government in January 1959 . By 1960 he was becoming increasingly anti-American and pro-Soviet, he was increasingly pro-Russian .
 Eisenhower administration directed more attention to Latin AmericaÊs economic and social problems . In the late 1950s, the Eisenhower administration began to direct more attention .
 Latin Americans have long sought United States support for a regional development bank . Latin Americans had long sought U.S. support for the regional bank . The bank is based in Latin America's poorest region .
 In August 1958 the United States dropped its long-standing opposition to the bank . In October 1960 the U.S. supported the establishment of the Inter-American Development Bank . The bank was established in 1959 .
 U.S. policy continued at Bogotá, Colombia, in September 1960 at a special meeting called by the Council of the Organization of American States .
 Eisenhower administration pledged $500 million for economic development and social reform in Latin America . Eisenhower administration laid the groundwork for the Alliance for Progress . Eisenhower signed the Act of Bogotá .
 Latin American nations agreed to implement sound economic policies and to eliminate obstacles to social and economic progress . In return, the Latin American countries agreed to adopt sound economic and social policies . The deal was part of a deal between the nations to improve their economies .
 Kennedy criticized Eisenhower administration for ‘losing” Cuba and failing to align U.S. policy with Latin AmericansÊ rising aspirations . Kennedy criticized the Eisenhower administration and Republican candidate Richard M Nixon .
 Kennedy called for an ‘alliance for progress‰ between the U.S. and Latin America in his inaugural address . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . He was the first president of the United States to be assassinated .
 The Kennedy administration committed itself to an Alliance for Progress with Latin America in March 1961 . The long-term program of U.S. aid linked to social and structural reforms, economic development and democratization .
 Inter-American program took official form at inter-American meeting at Punta del Este, Uruguay, in August 1961 .
 The conference proclaimed a lengthy list of objectives for the program, including democratization, acceleration of social and economic development, promotion of education and fair wages .
 To achieve its goals, the program would need $100 billion during its first decade . $20 billion of that would come from external sources, with the United States pledging to provide a major part of that funding .
 The remaining $80 billion is expected to come from Latin American sources, both public and private sources . The rest of the money will come from public sources .
 When launching this program, the U.S. preoccupation with containing the communist threat was greatly in evidence . The program was designed to provide peaceful alternatives to violent social revolution .
 The objectives of the Alliance for Progress soon collided with the harsh realities of international economics and growing domestic pressures in both Latin America and the U.S. The objectives soon collide with the realities of economic and domestic pressures .
 The program assumed that most Latin American elites would support reforms to avoid violent revolution . The program implicitly assumed that the reforms would be supported by most of the country's elites .
 Many elites were reluctant to implement major reform, realizing that such changes might strip them of power . Many of the elites, however, were reluctant .
 With Latin America already experiencing high levels of political instability, U.S. officials hesitated to apply too much pressure for reform . They feared that this would only enhance regional political uncertainty .
 Should the program promote growth but not structural reforms, traditional elites would naturally reap most of the rewards of increased growth . Traditional elites would benefit from increased growth if the program was successful .
 Alliance for Progress for Progress aid went to pay off earlier loans rather than promoting social modernization and development .
 Rapid population growth in Latin America also undermined potential advances in social and economic reform, says President Obama .
 Domestic U.S. politics also hindered the success of the Alliance for Progress program . Domestic politics also hampered the program .
 KennedyÊs assassination in 1963 removed the leader most closely connected to the program�És fate . The programÊ's fate was never fully known .
 Projected funding for the program was based on capital needs for a decade . But the annual U.S. congressional appropriations process prevented presidents from guaranteeing long-term aid levels .
 In the U.S. from the mid-1960s onward a series of problems undercut the Alliance for Progress . In the United States, from the . mid-60s onward, the . Alliance for . Progress was founded in the 1960s .
 Johnson, was primarily interested in domestic issues, while in foreign policy he became increasingly preoccupied with the deteriorating situation in Vietnam . Johnson was primarily focused on domestic issues .
 The ability of the program to uplift Latin America was oversold from its inception . The program's success in Latin America has been oversold since its inception, says author .
 These exaggerated hopes for the program made later disillusionment with it all the easier . The program was a success story for many of the world's most successful politicians .
 Latin American governments were often unwilling or unable to implement the programÊs structural reforms . Latin American government was often unwilling to implement reforms, experts say .
 The U.S. Congress cut funding for the program, which quickly lost its reform content . The program evolved into a conventional aid program .
 The Alliance for Progress became subsumed by political pressures and broader Cold War imperatives and thus never fulfilled its original goals . Although there was no officially declared ending of the program, like many other programs of its time, it was subsumed into political pressures .
 Khrushchev decided to station a large force of troops with nuclear-capable arms as well as conventional weapons on Cuba in 1962 . The Soviet premier decided that the best way of preventing the U.S. from overthrowing Fidel CastroÊs communist regime on Cuba was to station
 This would have the additional advantage of reducing the massive nuclear imbalance in strategic weapons the United States enjoyed over the Soviet Union . The U.S. enjoyed a massive advantage of having a nuclear advantage over the USSR .
 Khrushchev hoped that an enhanced sense of nuclear vulnerability might make the U.S. more accommodating toward Soviet efforts to expel the Western powers from West Berlin . The Soviet leader hoped that the United States would be more accommodating to his efforts .
 In mid-May, Castro also expressed concerns about CubaÊs security from the United States attack . Castro feared that the substantial conventional military assistance the Soviet Union had already offered him earlier that month was inadequate to meet the threat .
 The United States destroyer Barry pulls alongside the Russian freighter Anosov in the Atlantic Ocean, November 10, 1962, to inspect cargo as a United States patrol plane flies overhead .
 Khrushchev dispatched a delegation to Cuba to inform Castro of this offer . Aleksandr Alekseev, Sharaf R Rashidov, Marshal Sergei Biryuzov, head of Soviet Strategic Forces, were among them .
 Castro agreed to accept the proffered military units and equipment, all of which were to be moved to Cuba and installed under conditions of strict secrecy . Rashidov and Biryuzov erroneously reported that CubaÊs tropical forests provided ample cover to conceal missile installations from U
 In July 1962 Raúl Castro arrived in Moscow to negotiate a draft treaty between Cuba and the Soviet Union defining the terms on which Soviet troops would be based on the island . The Cuban leader arrived in July 1962 to negotiate the terms .
 The Treaty on National Cooperation for the Defense of the National Territory of Cuba in the Event of Aggression was finalized in August 1962 . It was signed by the Cuban Interior Minister Ernesto “Che” Guevara and Soviet Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky .
 Fidel Castro wished to announce the treaty openly immediately, in which case he would have traveled to Moscow himself to sign it in August, but he deferred to KhrushchevÊs wishes . Fidel Castro wanted to announce it openly, which case would have been announced in August . Khrush
 Khrushchev planned to visit Cuba in November 1962, after the politically sensitive U.S. midterm congressional elections, by which time he expected all the missiles to be installed and operational . He expected to then publicly announce the defense treaty and the presence of Soviet nuclear-capable weapons on
 By June 1962 the Soviet General Staff, following MalinovskyÊs instructions, had drawn up plans to send nearly 51,000 troops to Cuba .
 The group would include five nuclear missile regiments, three equipped with a total of 36 R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles with a range of 1,100ă1,400 miles, based at 24 launch sites . Two with 24 R-14 intermediate-range 
 Soviet forces would have a substantial naval contingent of 2 cruisers, 4 destroyers, of which 2 would have missile launchers . 12 „Komar‰ ships with 2 conventional R-15 missiles apiece; and 11 submarines, 7 carrying nuclear-capable missiles .
 The presence of MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba would double the number of Soviet warheads capable of reaching the continental U.S. It would double that number of warheads .
 Between June and October 1962, Soviet troops and equipment were shipped in great secrecy to Cuba, where, under the command of Army Gen. Gen. Ivan Ivan Ivan, the Soviet Union sent troops to Cuba . Ivan Ivan was the first Soviet Union to arrive in Cuba .
 Construction of missile installations and other facilities began . Issa Alexandrovich Pliyev: "Construction of the missile installations began. Construction of missiles began"
 Khrushchev requested that as a goodwill gesture United States aircraft should relax their surveillance and harassment of Soviet shipping . The move was meant to minimize and deflect United States scrutiny .
 The massive buildup gave rise to intelligence reports from Cuba that attracted considerable press and political attention in the U.S. Despite Soviet claims that these forces were specialized agricultural and technical advisers, the massive buildup drew considerable press attention . The buildup attracted considerable political attention .
 Kennedy warned that the U.S. would not tolerate the presence of Soviet nuclear-capable weapons in Cuba . Kennedy warned publicly that the United States .
 Kremlin responded by seeking to accelerate the pace of construction of the project . The Kremlin has sought to speed up the construction of new buildings in Russia .
 Khrushchev also added six Il-28s modified to carry atomic bombs, and three detachments of Luna short-range missiles . But he canceled the naval squadron, apart from four Foxtrot submarines .
 Soviet officials decided that one torpedo on each of these submarines should be nuclear-armed . Soviet officials also decided to arm each submarine with a nuclear weapon . The submarine was the first to be armed with nuclear weapons .
 All loading was expected to be completed by October 20, and the final cargo would arrive by November 5 .
 On October 4 the Soviet freighter Indigirka delivered 45 R-12 one-megaton nuclear warheads, 12 tactical warheads for the Luna weapons, six 12-kiloton bombs for the Il-28s, and 36 12 kiloton warheads for FKR cruise missiles . The
 On October 22, President Kennedy publicly announced that the U.S. would not tolerate the presence of Soviet nuclear-capable weaponry in Cuba . The R-12 MRBM sites had been completed, but those for R-14 IRBMs were still under construction .
 After KennedyÊs speech, construction of missile sites continued at full 4148-493-00A.indd 11 2/18/2012 .
 One Soviet ship, the Alexandrovsk, was carrying 24 nuclear warheads for R-14 IRBMs and 44 warheads for FKR land-based cruise missiles . Four other Soviet vessels carrying F-14 missiles turned back .
 By that time, around 41,900 Soviet military personnel were present on the island . The island was invaded by the Soviet Union in 1941 .
 On October 16, Kennedy learned of the presence of medium-range nuclear-capable missile installations on Cuba . Over the following two days U.S. reconnaissance planes also identified intermediate-range missile sites .
 Short-range tactical nuclear-capable weapons and nuclear-armed Il-28s were deployed on Cuba . U.S. officials initially assumed that the warheads had not yet reached the island .
 U.S. leaders estimated the number of Soviet troops on Cuba to be only around 10,000 . In addition, United States leaders estimated that 10,500 Soviet troops were on Cuba .
 Until October 22 Pliyev had verbal authorization to use the tactical nuclear-capable weapons in combat situations without necessarily consulting Kremlin officials . Khrushchev and Malinovsky in Moscow sought to maintain operational control over all the missiles .
 Whether distant Soviet leaders in Moscow could have reined in military officers in Cuba from using these weapons under battlefield conditions when facing U.S. air strikes or invasion was never tested .
 Khrushchev ultimately yielded to KennedyÊs demands that the nuclearcapable missiles be withdrawn from Cuba, in exchange for an open promise that the United States would not invade the island . Kennedy�Ãs demand that NATO missiles in Turkey would also be removed within six months
 In November and December 1962 all the missiles were dismantled and returned to the Soviet Union . Despite efforts by Castro and Malinovsky to retain the cruise missiles and Il28s, the missiles and I28s were dismantled .
 By February 1963 only around 18,000 Soviet troops, armed with conventional weapons, remained on Cuba . The Cuban government was overthrown in February 1963 .
 Khrushchev indicated to Kennedy administration officials that eventually he hoped to withdraw all Soviet military personnel, but Kennedy's assassination in November 1963 and the fall from power in the following year aborted such plans . Kennedy: KennedyÊs assassination in 1963 and fall of power in 1966 aborted such an
 A substantial Soviet military contingent remained in Cuba until the late 1980s, when Mikhail Gorbachev drastically reduced his countryÊs overseas commitments .
 Aleksandr Ivanovich; Bolshakov, Georgi Nikitovich; Castro, Raúl; Gribkov, Anatoli Ivanovich, Kennedy, Robert Francis .
 Vasili Arkhipov was born into a peasant family in the town of Staraya Kupavna, near Moscow, on January 30, 1926 . He was the son of a Russian peasant family .
 In August 1945 he served against Japan in a minesweeper . He was educated at the Pacific Higher Naval School, in August 1945 .
 Arkhipov graduated from the Caspian Higher Naval School in 1947 . He saw submarine service in the Soviet Black Sea, Northern, and Baltic fleets .
 Arkhipov was deputy commander of the Hotelclass submarine K-19 . He helped prevent a mutiny when there was a major problem with the submarineÊs nuclear reactor . In July 1961, he helped prevent mutiny .
 Each submarine had had its designation number scraped off its conning tower, to hamper identification . Each submarine carried 22 torpedoes, one of which was nuclear-armed, and one was nuclear .
 On October 24, the United States imposed a naval blockade (or quarantine, as it was called) around Cuba . U.S. officials informed their Soviet counterparts of their intention to drop practice depth charges to force submarines .
 Kremlin failed to transmit this information to its submarine commanders, it says . The Kremlin, however, failed to send the information to the Russian submarine commanders .
 On October 27, a group of 11 U.S. destroyers and the aircraft carrier USS Randolph located, harried, and trapped B-59 in the West Atlantic . They dropped practice depth charges to persuade the vessel, whose batteries were running low, to surface .
 The submarine's captain, Valentin Grigorievitch Savitsky, 4148-493-00A.indd 13 2/18/2012 8:26:49 PM 14 | Arkhipov, Vasili Alexandrovich concluding that war had already begun .
 Arkhipov refused to endorse the launch and eventually persuaded his comrades to surface the submarine and request further orders from Moscow . He eventually persuaded them to surface and request more orders from the Moscow government .
 The United States naval vessels surrounding the submarine had been unaware it was carrying any nuclear-capable weapons . The U.S. naval vessels around the submarine were unaware it had any nuclear weapons .
 A jazz band was playing on the deck of one ship when the Soviet submarine surfaced . To indicate that their intentions were not hostile, the U.S. vessels had a jazz band playing there .
 The Americans suspected that B-59 was suffering some mechanical problems, but Savitsky declined their offer of assistance . The Americans believed that the plane was suffering mechanical problems . Savitsy declined their assistance .
 B-59 eventually turned around, heading east, accompanied by U.S. naval vessels until it submerged late on October 29 . The plane turned around and turned back to the east .
 The other three Foxtrot submarines received orders to also abort their voyages to the island . The other four Foxtrots submarines were also ordered to abort their trips .
 Professor Thomas Blanton of the Washington-based National Security Archive said, ‘a guy called Vasili Arkhipov saved the world.” The event was organized by the National Security . Archive .
 He rose to vice admiral in 1981, retiring in the mid-1980s . Promoted in 1975 to rear admiral, when he became head of the Kirov Naval Academy .
 During World War II he took government positions with the Lend-Lease Administration and the Foreign Economic Administration . He also served in government positions during World War Two .
 Ball moved to Washington, where he helped found the international law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen, and Cox . Ball died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 Ball prepared foreign policy position papers for the Democratic candidate in 1960 . Ball prepared position papers in the run-up to the 1960 presidential election . Ball is credited with helping Sen. Richard Nixon in the 1960s .
 Ball rose to undersecretary of state for economic affairs in November 1961 . Ball was second only to Secretary Dean Rusk within the State Department .
 Ball was not involved in planning the unsuccessful April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion and had no foreknowledge of it . Ball was excluded from top-level meetings on political and military strategy . Ball did not know about the April 1961 invasion .
 With hindsight, he hoped he would have opposed this enterprise but said he wasn't confident enough to do so . He said he was uncertain whether he'd have been sufficiently confident to oppose this enterprise .
 Ball forcefully advised the imposition of a naval blockade or quarantine around Cuba, which he believed would give Soviet leaders time to back down . Ball opposed the more drastic option .
 He also strongly opposed any unannounced air strike against missile installations, arguing that this would jeopardize the U.S. moral standing and alienate its allies .
 Ball wrote a legal justification for the Kennedy administrationÊs position and made arrangements to inform United States allies of this . After the crisis, Ball wrote to the U.S. to inform allies of his position .
 Throughout his tenure, he argued forcefully but unavailingly against the steady expansion of U.S. commitments in Vietnam, first under Kennedy and then under Johnson .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Rusk, Dean David; United States Allies References Ball, George W. The Past Has Another Pattern: Memoirs.
 DiLeo, David L George Ball, Vietnam, and the Rethinking of Containment. Ball, George Ball and David L. George Ball . Ball, Ball and Ball are the authors of a new book, "Vietnam", on Vietnam .
 Fulgencio Batista was born in Banes, Cuba, on January 16, 1901 . He joined the army in 1921, eventually becoming a military stenographer . Batista died in 1961 .
 He emerged on the national scene during the 1933 revolution that deposed the dictator Gerardo Machado . He was first seen in the country during the revolution that overthrew the dictator .
 During the short-lived Ramón Grau San Martín government (September 1933ăJanuary 1934), Batista was the military strongman behind the scenes and was ultimately responsible for the governmentÊs collapse . Batista's government collapsed in 1934 .
 Batista provided the U.S. with access to naval and air bases and sold it nearly all CubaÊs sugar production . Batista also gave the United States access to military bases and gave it access to nearly all sugar production.
 Batista was succeeded by another democratically elected leader, Ramón Grau San Martín . Batista helped overthrow the man he helped overthrow in 1934 .
 The increasing corruption of the Grau government and its successor facilitated BatistaÊs return to power in March 1952, when he and elements of the army seized power . Batista Ês returned to power after a coup by the army .
 The new regime suspended the constitution and declared its loyalty to the United States . The new government declared its allegiance to the U.S.
 Batista repudiated his earlier reformism and consolidated his predecessorsÊ anticommunist measures . Batista now largely repudiated reformism, consolidating his predecessors' anticommunity measures .
 In the mid-1950s, with support from the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Batista established a repressive anticommunist political police force . The force was a repressive anti-communist police force in Cuba .
 Anti-Batista movements, including Fidel Castro's July 26 Movement, brought BatistaÊs fall in late 1958 . Rapid successes by students, especially among middleclass students, helped push Batista out of power .
 On January 1, 1959, he fled Cuba for the Dominican Republic as CastroÊs forces closed in on Havana . He fled Cuba in 1959 . He was one of the Cuban leaders of the 1950s .
 Castro, Fidel; Eisenhower, Dwight Eisenhower, Eisenhower . Argote-Freyre, Frank. Argote Freyre .
 U.S. economic pressure and boycotts quickly impelled him to join the Soviet camp . United States economic pressure forced him to move openly into the camp .
 In March 1960 President Eisenhower authorized the Central Intelligence Agency to devise a scheme to train Cuban exiles based in Guatemala to invade the island and overthrow Castro . In response, in March 1960, President Dwight D Eisenhower approved the scheme .
 Eisenhower had no schedule for such an invasion, but he did want a plan ready to execute at his decision . Eisenhower wanted a plan to be in place when he made his decision to invade .
 In early January 1961, shortly before leaving office, Eisenhower took the measure to end U.S. recognition of CastroÊs government . Eisenhower ended recognition of Cuba's government in January 1961 .
 EisenhowerÊs successor, John F Kennedy, inherited this projected invasion operation . Kennedy inherited this project from EisenhowerÉs successor .
 In March 1961 the newly elected president approved its implementation, with two important modifications . Perhaps fearing to appear soft on communism, the new president approved it . The Joint Chiefs of Staff had warned of the risk of failure .
 Kennedy insisted that no American troops or pilots participate in the operation . Kennedy was seeking to maintain deniability of any U.S. contribution to the Cuban exiles .
 Second, in order to facilitate an unobtrusive clandestine night-time landing, the invasion site was moved a hundred miles west, from Trinidad, on CubaÊs southern coast . It offered an escape route into the nearby Escambray Mountains, where fighters could live as gu
 These changes jeopardized the invasionÊs chances of success. These changes, unfortunately, jeopardized . The changes were made in the hope of success, the author says .
 Kennedy wished the invasion force to recruit only liberal Cubans . However, in practice it included many reactionary Batista supporters .
 Initial air strikes against CubaÊs air force bases launched on April 15, 1961 . Cuban pilots flying surplus U.S. B-26 bombers inflicted damage but failed to destroy the entire Cuban air force . The Cuban Air Force was attacked by exile Cuban pilots .
 Kennedy refused to authorize a scheduled second air strike, which had been expected to eliminate the remaining Cuban airplanes . Alarmed by news reports exposing the deceptive U.S. cover story that, as United States ambassador Adlai Stevenson publicly stated in the United Nations, defectors from Castro�
 On April 17, 1961, 1,400 Cuban exiles, known as Brigade 2506, commenced their invasion of Cuba . The invasion was the first invasion of the island nation since Cuba in 1961 .
 CastroÊs swift incarceration of one to two hundred thousand potential domestic opponents effectively precluded any internal uprising to support the invasion . CastroÉs quick incarceration of 1 to 2.100,000 potential opponents effectively prevented an internal uprising .
 Cuban ground forces, tanks, and artillery wreaked havoc on the invaders . Meanwhile, ground forces and tanks were wreaking havoc with the invasion .
 U.S. provided Cuba with $53 million of food and medicine in exchange for imprisoned fighters . With Kennedy administration backing, 18 months later private sources in the United States provided $53million of food, medicine .
 The Bay of Pigs represented a humiliating international failure for the United States, vindicating critics who considered that nation an overbearing, imperialist state that backed unpopular right-wing forces around the globe .
 Kennedy took full responsibility for the operation . The following year he replaced both Allen W Dulles and Richard Bissell, the head of its Clandestine Service, as CIA director .
 From then onward the CIA placed greater emphasis on intelligence collection as opposed to flamboyant but risky covert operations . The CIA became a major intelligence agency in the 1960s .
 KennedyÊs reckless authorization and half-hearted implementation of this operation may have helped convince Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev that he was a lightweight without the resolve to confront the Soviet Union .
 renewed Cold War tensions transformed the city into one of the worldÊs potential flash points during 1958ă1961 . Then, following a period of relative . if tense·if tense·calm, renewed . tensions transformed city into a potential flash point .
 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev revived the issue of Berlin in 1957 . Soviet prestige boosted by the launch of Sputnik 1 in 1957, Soviet premier decided to revive the issue .
 On November 10, 1958, he sought to end the joint-occupation agreement in the city by demanding that Great Britain, France, and the United States withdraw their 10,000 troops from West Berlin . He also demanded that the British, French, and U.S. withdraw their
 He declared that the Soviet Union would unilaterally transfer its occupation authority in Berlin to the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) if a peace treaty were not signed with both East and the Federal Republic of Germany .
 None of the Western powers formally recognized East Germany, viewing it as a mere subsidiary of the Soviet Union . The West did not recognize East Germany as a country under Soviet rule .
 Allied proposals would have given the Soviets and East Germans some degree of power in West Berlin . West Berliners considered such a measure a step toward neutralization and abandonment .
 Allies issued a North Atlantic Treaty Organization declaration rejecting Soviet demands in December 1958 . It said no state had the right to withdraw unilaterally from an international agreement .
 United States overflights of the Soviet Union by U-2 reconnaissance planes indicated that the West had an accurate count of the comparatively small number of Soviet nuclear missiles . The Soviet leader obviously feared starting a war that he could not win .
 The Soviets now envisioned a gradual crowding out of the Western powers without bloodshed . The Soviets envisioned gradual crowd-out of the West without bloodshed.
 East GermanyÊs economic situation continued to deteriorate, with vast numbers of refugees continuing to flee to the West . The East German economy continued to suffer in the 1990s .
 In 1961, John F Kennedy abandoned the demand for German unification that had been United States policy since the 1940s . Kennedy's foreign policy team concluded that this position was not only impractical but might actually provoke a U.S.-Soviet war . In 1961 the newly elected United States president,
 GDR leader Walter Ulbricht decided to close the East Berlin borders in an attempt to exercise control over all traffic to and from Berlin, including Allied military as well as German civilian travelers . The decision was made in a bid to control all traffic from East Berlin .
 On August 13, 1961, East German authorities began construction of the Berlin Wall . The Berlin Wall essentially sealed off East Berlin from West Berlin and permanently bisecting the city .
 Ulbricht sought to control both what went into East Berlin and what came out, including thousands of East Germans who sought refuge in West Berlin . Thousands of West Berliners sought to flee to West Berlin in the 1980s and 1990s . The former East Berliner wanted to control what
 The Soviets and the East Germans had wagered that the West would not react to the wallÊs construction . The wallÉs construction was the first to be built in the Soviet-East Germany zone .
 Bissell, Richard Mervin, Jr. Jr. In a symbolic incident on 4148-493-00B.
 Khrushchev and other Soviet officials apparently had no wish to expand the confrontation by taking such action . The Soviet Union did not want to expand its confrontation with the West .
 Khrushchev offered to install missiles in Cuba, hoping to intimidate Americans into abandoning West Berlin . He also hoped that, once these were in place, the Americans would be intimidated into abandoning the West Berlin.
 Eisenhower, Dwight David; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; Military Balance; U-2 Overflights; U.S. Allies; Warsaw Pact References Ausland, John C Kennedy, and the Berlin-Cuba Crises .
 Head of Central Intelligence AgencyÊs Directorate of Plans from 1958 to 1962 . Head of the CIA's Directorate of Planning from 1958-62 .
 Richard Mervin, Jr. was born on September 18, 1909, in Hartford, Connecticut, 4148-493-00B.
 During World War II, Bissell served in the Office of Strategic Services . Bissell began his career in intelligence, beginning his career with the CIA .
 Bissell was head of the Directorate of Plans (or covert operations) in 1958 . Bissell worked in the Department of War Mobilization and Reconversion and the Economic Cooperation Administration .
 The operations of the Directorate of Plans were soon dubbed ‘Black Operations‰ for their clandestine mandate to eradicate world leaders unfriendly to the U.S. The operations were later dubbed „Black Operations'
 Bissell and his deputy, Richard Helms, engineered the ouster of GuatemalaÊs Jacobo Arbenz in 1954 and later became obsessed with overthrowing Cuban leader Fidel Castro after his 1959 revolution . Bissell: "I'm not sure what I'm doing, I'm
 Bissell was also instrumental in developing the U-2 reconnaissance plane and the Corona spy satellite . BissellÊs CIA tenure was also responsible for the U.2 plane and Corona satellite .
 The unsuccessful 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion was Bissell's greatest notoriety . Bissell is credited with the success of the unsuccessful 1961 invasion of Cuba .
 The invasion force landed at CubaÊs Bay of Pigs on April 17, 1961 . It was trained and armed by the CIA .
 CastroÊs forces quickly routed them, blowing the cover on the operation and greatly embarrassing the Kennedy administration . The operation was a major embarrassment for the administration and for CastroÉs forces .
 Bissell begged Kennedy to allow intervention by U.S. airplanes and naval forces, but Kennedy refused . Kennedy refused to intervene .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco effectively ended BissellÊs CIA career, as he was forced to leave the agency in February 1962 . Bissell Ês left the CIA in 1962 after the CIA was caught in the act of Pigs War II .
 Formerly worked for a think tank and then held positions in a number of private corporations . He subsequently worked for think tank think tank, then worked for private corporation .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Castro, Fidel; Central Intelligence Agency; Containment, Doctrine and Course of; Dulles, Allen Welsh; Eisenhower, Eisenhower, Dwight David; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; U-2 Overflights References Bissell, Richard M. Jr. Bissell .
 He joined the United States Foreign Service in 1929 . He was one of the small initial group of U.S. diplomats trained as Soviet specialists . He served as a Soviet diplomat .
 Bohlen was one of three Russianlanguage officers in the United States embassy in Moscow in 1933 . Bohlen became one of the three Russian language officers at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow .
 Bohlen became assistant chief of the Russian Section of the State DepartmentÊs Division of European Affairs in 1942 . Bohlen was promoted to chief in 1944 . In 1944 Bohlen died of a heart attack .
 He attended the Moscow Conference of Foreign Ministers in 1943 and the Tehran and Yalta summits of the Allied leaders in 1944 and 1945 . He was a member of the Moscow and Tehran summits .
 Bohlen in fact had reservations as to the wisdom of U.S. policies . Bohlen was criticized by McCarthy for acquiescing in the decisions at Yalta . McCarthy was a member of the Wisconsin Republican Party .
 He advocated firm diplomatic pressure in an effort to win Soviet concessions on Eastern Europe . Deeply suspicious of Soviet actions and intentions, he advocated firm diplomacy .
 Bohlen helped develop Cold War containment policy . Bohlen was political adviser to the secretary of state in 1946 and State Department counselor in 1947. Bohlen died in 1968 .
 Bohlen spent 1953 to 1957 as U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union and two further years as ambassador to Philippines . Bohlen also spent three years in the Philippines as ambassador .
 In 1959 he became special assistant to Secretary of State Christian A Herter . In 1959, he was the secretary of state Christian Herter's special assistant .
 Eisenhower to remain resolute over West Berlin, then under considerable Soviet pressure . West Berlin was under pressure from the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 Bohlen accompanied Eisenhower to this meeting, which was cut short by the U-2 Affair . Bohlen was a member of the U.2 team in the early 1950s and '60s .
 BohlenÊs expertise helped Kennedy and Rusk during their first 18 months in office . Bohlen Ês was a key adviser to President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk .
 Kennedy consulted Bohlen on plans inherited from Eisenhower administration to mount invasion of Cuba . Bohlen's plans were intended to overthrow the anti-American and pro-communist Cuban government .
 Bohlen did not inform Kennedy and other officials of his private reservations over this venture . Bohlen believed revolutionary fervor in Cuba was still strong and the Cuban people were . therefore unlikely to support the invasion .
 The Soviet Union was unlikely to intervene militarily, though it might provide Castro with arms and supplies and would undoubtedly exploit any invasion for propaganda purposes . Bohlen merely stated that, given the islandÊs strategic insignificance to the Soviet Union, the Soviet U.S. was
 BohlenÊs belief that professional diplomats should function primarily as technical experts rather than policymakers . His failure to oppose the invasion plan forthrightly, perhaps because he believed its momentum was now unstoppable, revealed his occasional limitations .
 Bohlen advised Kennedy to ignore Bohlen's advice when Soviet missiles were discovered in Cuba . Bohlen suggested that Kennedy first corresponded sternly but privately with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev . Then declared a naval blockade of Cuba, the course the president ultimately chose .
 Bohlen urged that an ultimatum demanding the removal of the missiles should precede any air strike . Bohlen warned Kennedy in writing that an air strike “will inevitably lead to war”
 Bohlen retired in 1969, warning President Richard M Nixon not to try using China against the Soviet Union . Bohlen warned against using China as a weapon against Soviet Union in China .
 Bohlen was skeptical of both the emerging U.S. policy of détente and West German chancellor Willy BrandtÊs Ostpolitik opening to East Germany . Bohlen died in 1945 at the age of 65 .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Castro, Fidel; Containment, Doctrine and Course of; Eisenhower, Dwight David; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; Rusk, Dean David; U-2 Overflights; U.S. Allies .
 From 1941 to 1943 Georgi Bolshakov served in the Red Army as a Finnish-language interpreter and then a division-level intelligence officer on the northwest front . He was born in 1922 and died in 1943 .
 In 1943 he joined the GRU, the army intelligence service, spending three years at the General Staff High Intelligence School and four in the Soviet ArmyÊs Military-Diplomatic Academy .
 From 1955 to 1957 Bolshakov worked in Moscow as an officer for special missions on the staff of Marshal Georgi Zhukov, the Soviet defense minister, briefing him on intelligence information .
 Bolshakov's personal friendship with Aleksei Adzhubei, son-in-law of Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev, rescued him from obscurity in 1959 . In fall 1959 he returned to Washington, supposedly a cultural attaché at the Soviet embassy .
 Bolshakov socialized easily with Americans and had numerous personal contacts among the political, diplomatic, and media elite . Outgoing and gregarious, unlike many of his colleagues, he socialized with Americans . Bolshkov was a prominent Russian diplomat .
 Robert F Kennedy contacted Bolshakov in late April 1961 . The brother of President John F Kennedy, the brother of Kennedy, contacted him . Bolshakakov was a member of the Kennedy family .
 On more than 40 occasions over the next 15 months, Bolshakov served as a back-channel conduit for private messages between Khrushchev and the Kennedy administration . On the June 1961 Vienna summit meeting, the Vienna summit met, the Berlin situation, and the terms of a possible nuclear
 Bolshakov used to transmit a request to the Kennedy administration to decrease its surveillance of Soviet shipping . The request was made to conceal the dispatch of Soviet troops and weaponry to Cuba in July 1962 . In July 1962 the Soviet government requested to decrease surveillance of Russian shipping .
 Khrushchev suggested their two countries should accelerate their efforts for a nuclear test ban treaty . When the U.S. complied, Khrushche sent thanks through Bolshakov and suggested they should accelerate efforts to ban nuclear tests .
 Bolshakov met Robert Kennedy on October 5, to assure him that the weapons the Soviet Union had dispatched were “only . . of a defensive character” and could not threaten the U.S. The weapons were ‘only of a . defensive character,” Bol
 Despite Robert KennedyÊs anger over this disinformation, on October 23, at the height of the crisis, he apparently contacted Bolshakov 4148-493-00B. On October 23 .
 On November 9, when dismantling of nuclear-capable missiles was already in progress, the continued presence of Il-28 light bombers had become a sticking point . Robert Kennedy met Bolshakov in person, to request that the bombers leave Cuba in the near future . Kennedy repeated the message
 Bolshakov delivered a message from Khrushchev that Soviet officials would remove the Il-28s . Three days later Bolshakakov delivered the message to the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev complained to U.S. officials that these leaks compromised his use of such channels . He complained to United States officials that such leaks compromised him use of these channels .
 In December 1962, hostile embassy officials engineered BolshakovÊs recall to Moscow . Bolshavsky was sent to Moscow by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 Bolshakov sought consolation in alcohol and the company of women . Bolshkov was forced into a bureaucratic limbo in Russia .
 Robert Kennedy sent a close family associate, William Walton, to meet with Bolshakov in Moscow after his brotherÊs assassination . Walton was a family associate of the Kennedy family .
 Walton told Bolshakov that the presidentÊs death was due to a right-wing plot by Americans who sought to undermine his policies of U.S.-Soviet détente . Walton said that Johnson lacked Kennedy's commitment to improving relations between their two countries .
 The convivial Bolshakov survived until 1989, but his career never regained its former momentum . Bolshkov survived until the end of his career in Russia .
 Bundy was McGeorge United States special assistant for national security affairs, 1961 . Bundy was the U.S. special assistant to national security . Bundy, McGeorge, was the president of the United States in 1961 .
 McGeorge Bundy came from a prominent Boston family with a strong tradition of public service . Bundy was born on March 30, 1919, in Boston . Bundy died at the age of 98 .
 In 1961 President John F Kennedy appointed Bundy as special assistant for national security affairs . Bundy had advised during his presidential campaign . Bundy was also appointed as Secretary of State Dean Rusk .
 Bundy shared with Kennedy a strong faith in the centrality of U.S. power and the need to employ it . Bundy: "I believe in the United States' centrality in the world's most powerful institutions" Bundy died at the age of 92 .
 Bundy was known for intellectual brilliance, energy, swift assimilation of information, and wit . Critics suggested that as dean and public official these superficial qualities masked an absence of deeper reflection or any firm moral compass . Bundy accepted prevailing Cold War wisdom and accord overly high priority to pragmatic considerations of political
 Bundy thought it his function was to be a competent manager, rather than an innovative formulator of policy . Bundy played devilÊs advocate to ensure that the president was briefed on both sides of issues, he said . Bundy thought that he was more of a manager than a formulator
 Bundy controlled access of both information and individuals to the president . Bundy prepared agendas for meetings for National Security Council meetings and selected personnel for task forces Kennedy established to handle specific foreign policy problems . Bundy was the gatekeeper on foreign affairs .
 Bundy voted for the disastrous April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion attempt against Cuba . Bundy voted against the Bay of Pics invasion attempt, which brought international humiliation on the U.S. Bundy was elected president in 1961 . Bundy was the first black president to be elected .
 Bundy proffered his resignation to Kennedy, which the president refused, and conducted postmortems on the abortive operation . Bundy was the only person to offer his resignation . Bundy's resignation was accepted by Kennedy .
 Bundy initially supported air strikes to destroy missiles . Bundy then endorsed the naval quarantine option Kennedy eventually selected, yet then switched once more to air strikes .
 Nikita Khrushchev sent two contradictory responses to Kennedy's ultimatum on Cuba . Bundy suggested replying only to the first, less confrontational message . Bundy suggests replying to the second message .
 Bundy suggested Kennedy employed ‘a certain excess of rhetoric,‰ when Americans would have found more moderate language less alarming . Bundy suggested that Kennedy employed a ‘certain excess’ of rhetoric . Bundy's book Danger and Survival was published in 2007 .
 BundyÊs most controversial aspect of his government service was his responsibility for the escalation of U.S. involvement in Vietnam . BundyÉs involvement in the Vietnam war was the most controversial issue .
 Bundy acquiesced in the expansion of U.S. commitments to South Vietnam under Kennedy and Johnson . Bundy was a staunch supporter of the South Vietnam policy .
 Bundy left JohnsonÊs administration to head the Ford Foundation, which he did until 1979 . Bundy left the administration in 1966 to head Ford Foundation . Bundy was in charge of Ford Foundation until 1979, when he left in 1966 .
 The issue of U.S. intervention in Vietnam perennially dogged Bundy, effectively destroying his chances of becoming secretary of state or president of a major university . Bundy: "The issue of his responsibility for Vietnam dogged him, effectively killing him"
 Bundy refused either to defend his record or to criticize Johnson administration policies publicly . Bundy refused to defend or criticize his record, and for the rest of his life he rarely discussed them .
 After the massive early 1968 Tet offensive, Bundy and most of the other ‘Wise Men” told a shocked Johnson that victory was unattainable and recommended that the United States open peace negotiations with North Vietnam . North Vietnam's Tet offensive was the first major U.S.
 U.2 Overflights 4148-493-00B.indd 30 2:26:45 PM Bundy, McGeorge .
 Kingman Brewster, His Circle, and the Rise of the Liberal Establishment . Brewster's circle was formed in the 1920s and 1930s . He was a prominent figure in the Liberal Party .
 Here his political formation began in the action-oriented and often violent student politics of the period .
 In 1948 Castro attended a student congress in Bogotá, Colombia, where major disturbances erupted after the assassination of the popular radical politician Jorge Gaitán . Castro attended the congress in which he was a student .
 On July 26, 1953, the Cuban rebels attacked the Moncada military barracks in Santiago de Cuba, the countryÊs second-largest city . The attack was the first to take place in the country's capital, Cuba .
 Castro was ultimately imprisoned on the island of Pines . The assault failed, and Castro was imprisoned on Pines Island .
 His defense speech at his trial, titled ‘History Will Absolve Me,‰ was a powerful denunciation of social and economic injustice . It would subsequently become a rallying cry in his struggle against the Batista regime .
 In 1955 Castro was released from prison as part of a general amnesty, took refuge in Mexico . Castro was freed from prison in 1955 and later fled to Mexico .
 There he and his comrades would eventually establish the July 26 Movement . He was connected with Argentinian physician and revolutionary Ernesto ‘Che‰ Guevara .
 Castro, Fidel Castro, Guevara, and their followers sailed from Mexico on board the yacht Granma and landed in southeastern Cuba, beginning a two-year military and political campaign to overthrow the U.S.supported Batista regime .
 In the last days of 1958 Batista fled the island, and Castro entered Havana in triumph in January 1959 . Batista was overthrown by Castro in 1959 . Castro entered the Cuban capital in 1959, Cuba's first city .
 In April 1959, Castro visited Cuban president Fidel Castro, the epitome of a romantic revolutionary leader, eloquently the United States . Castro criticizes the Eisenhower administration’s radical views and uncomeconomic policies toward Cuba .
 Castro's fear of the United States led Castro to turn to the Soviet prominent U.S. officials, in union for assistance . Vice President Richard Nixon was in the forefront of Castro's efforts to get help .
 Two agrarian reforms with the United States over American investments in Cuba and United States support for counterrevolutionary movements culminating in Bay of Pigs invasion . U.S. support for anti-Cuban movements culminated in the 1961 Bay of Pagas invasion .
 He strengthened CubaÊs economic, political, and military ties with the Soviet Union steadily throughout the 1960s . The Cuban leader was Cuban President of Cuba in 1961 . He was Cuban president of Cuba from 1961 to 1989 .
 In summer 1962, Castro accepted a Soviet offer to install assorted short-, intermediate-, and medium-range nuclear-capable missiles in Cuba . The offer was intended as a deterrent against future U.S. invasions . Castro accepted the offer in summer 1962 .
 Kennedy publicly demanded that the Soviet Union withdraw these missiles . Kennedy was the first person to publicly call for them to be removed .
 Castro urged Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to refuse these demands and if necessary, defend Cuba by initiating a nuclear first strike on the United States . Khrushchchev rejected Castro's request .
 Castro was excluded from negotiations over the missiles . The fact that he learned of the eventual settlement through the media humiliated him .
 Castro turned recalcitrant as talks among Soviet, U.S., and UN representatives on the details of removing missiles and other military hardware proceeded in November 1962 . The talks were held in Soviet-U.S. and UN .
 He issued his own proposals for a settlement, including the return to Cuba of the U.S. military base at Guantánamo Bay . He also wants the return of all United States sanctions against Cuba .
 He refused to allow on-site inspections of missile bases in Cuba . He unsuccessfully attempted to retain tactical nuclear-capable missiles and several squadrons of Soviet Il-28 light bombers .
 Khrushchev hosted Castro for a month-long visit in April and May 1963 . Castro toured the Soviet Union, met top military and political leaders, received substantial quantities of armaments .
 Castro persuaded Khrushchev to station a brigade of Soviet troops indefinitely on the island . Forces were originally hoped to remove from the island, but were later removed by Castro .
 The aftermath of the missile crisis initiated a complex period in CubanSoviet relations . CastroÊs suspicion of the Soviet Union was tempered by a growing reliance on Soviet economic assistance .
 Cuba became a member of Comecon and received important Soviet military aid in the 1960s . CastroÊs foreign policy, especially in Latin America, embraced the strategy of armed revolution conducted by guerrilla movements in Guatemala, Venezuela, Peru and Bolivia .
 This challenged Soviet support for policies of peaceful coexistence with the West . This challenged the Soviet support of policies of peace coexistence .
 As the 1960s ended, the failure of the first wave of Castro-inspired guerrilla wars and the collapse of his ambitious plans to industrialize Cuba led to an accommodation with Soviet economic and strategic goals in the 1970s .
 Steady economic growth and institutionalization weakened CubaÊs commitment to continental and even worldwide revolution . CubaÉs commitment was weakened by institutionalization and economic growth, Cuban president says .
 CastroÊs commitment to socialist liberation movements did not completely erode his commitment to the Communist Party . However, adjustment to Soviet economic orthodoxy did not erode CastroÉs commitment . CastroÝs commitment was not completely erased by the communist regime .
 Castro assisted revolutionary movements and left-wing governments in the 1980s in Grenada, El Salvador, and Nicaragua . As with GuevaraÊs revolutionary expedition in Bolivia during 1967ă 1968, Castro assisted . Castro was involved in the Bolivian revolution in Bolivia .
 Castro began sending Cuban military forces to Angola in November 1975 . He helped turn the tide there against South Africa's attempt to defeat the left-wing Movimento Popular da Libertação .
 Some see the Cuban victory in the 1988 Battle of Cuito Carnavale as the beginning of the end of the apartheid regime .
 The renewed Cold War of the 1980s ended with the defeat of the Cubansupported Sandinista government in Nicaragua and a negotiated settlement ending the civil war in El Salvador . U.S.-backed governments in Nicaragua, El Salvador pitted Cuban-supported Farabundo Martí
 The collapse of communism in Eastern Europe and the dissolution of the Soviet Union itself in 1991 were serious setbacks for Castro . Castro suffered a sharp falloff in foreign aid, and diplomatically, in the fall .
 Castro announced the launching of ‘The Special Period in Times of Peace’ in the 1990s . Castro announced a shift away from Sovietstyle economic institutions toward limited tolerance of private firms .
 It also embraced tourism and encouraged investments from Europe, Asia, Canada, and Latin America .
 The end of the Cold War did not, as most observers anticipated, precipitate the demise of CastroÊs regime . Most observers thought the end of Cold War would precipitate CastroÉs regime's demise .
 The indigenous, nationalist roots of CubaÊs noncapitalist path since 1959 continued to confound predictions . Notwithstanding his adoption of many Soviet models, the indigenous . Cuban nationalism has confounded predictions since 1959 .
 On CastroÊs initiative, Raúl formally succeeded to these positions in his own right . Raúel formally succeeded in February 2008 .
 Fidel continued to write for the press and deliver occasional public speeches in his 80s . Fidel died in 1991 at the age of 65 .
 Alekseev, Aleksandr Ivanovich; anadyr, Operation; Batista y Zaldívar, Fulgencio; Bay of Pigs Invasion; Castro, Raúl; . Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; . Eisenhower, Dwight David
 Raúl Castro, the younger brother of revolutionary and longtime Cuban leader Fidel Castro, became CubaÊs second president and commander in chief in 2008 . Castro is CubaÉs second President and Commander in Chief .
 He was chosen successor to his elder brother, whose trusted confidant he had been since boyhood . A longtime fixture in the government, he was a trusted confidante of his brother .
 Raúl Castro Ruz was born on June 3, 1931, near the city of Biran in Oriente Province . He was the fifth of seven children of a Spanish immigrant father and a Cuban Creole mother .
 After returning to Cuba, he joined his brother Fidel in an unsuccessful 1953 attempt to overthrow the government of Fulgencio Batista . Fidel returned to Cuba after his brother was assassinated .
 He received amnesty, was released from jail in 1954, and fled with Fidel to Mexico to organize a second coup against the Cuban government . He was later released from prison and returned to Cuba .
 The Castro brothers trained in Mexico for 18 months and in November 1956 launched another attack, foiled by government soldiers . Castro brothers, joined by other revolutionaries, trained in the country for an 18 months .
 Thirty of the 82 rebels who had sailed in from Mexico escaped into the mountains of the Sierra Maestra . Thirty of them escaped .
 Fidel and Raúl organized a new army, which succeeded in ousting Batista on January 1, 1959 . Assisted by Oriente peasants, the new army was able to overthrow Batista .
 Fidel was sworn in as CubaÊs prime minister on February 16, 1959 . Raúl replaced him as commander of the armed forces . Fidel became Fidel Castro's prime minister in 1959 .
 In October that year, his position became a cabinet-level ministership . In October, he became a Cabinet-level ministerhip .
 His place in the government was secure from then onward, and he remained minister for the armed forces until 2008 . He remained in the cabinet until then .
 Raúl Castro was among the more radical members of the Cuban revolutionary government . By 1961, Cuba was orienting itself to the Soviet Union and adopting communist policies .
 The two men developed close ties with Aleksandr Alekseev, a KGB (Soviet espionage) agent who established himself in Cuba in October 1959 and became the Soviet ambassador to Cuba in May 1962 .
 In July 1960 Raúl Castro visited Moscow, meeting Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev and other 4148-493-00C. The Soviet Union affirmed its opposition to ‘an armed United States intervention against the Cuban republic .
 Raúl Castro was outspoken against the United States, which further disrupted Cuban relations with the U.S. He was the Cuban president of the Cuban government .
 His tirades grew in intensity after the April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion attempt . The U.S. imposed an even tighter economic embargo on Cuba .
 Raúl Castro was elated when Soviet officials offered to base nuclear-capable missiles in Cuba in 1962 . Raúal Castro was also elated at the offer .
 On a July 1962 visit to Moscow, he helped negotiate the draft Cuban-Soviet defense treaty . The treaty detailed the terms governing the operations of the new Soviet forces in Cuba . It was signed in 1962 .
 The arrival of the missiles in September 1962 gave Raúl and other Cuban leaders a new sense of invulnerability to U.S. attack . Although he would have preferred an immediate public announcement of their deployment, as opposed to their surreptitious installation .
 In the aftermath of the crisis, he tried to repair Cuban-Soviet relations . He tried to defuse his brother FidelÊs bitter resentment over Soviet concessions to the U.S.
 In subsequent years, Raúl Castro often assumed the duties of foreign minister . Castro often traveled to the Soviet Union for meetings and to Africa to offer military support .
 Castro served concurrently as minister for the armed forces from 1959 to 2008 . Castro was appointed first vice president of both Council of State and Council of Ministers in 1976 . Castro also served as first vice-premier of both the councils of state and the council of ministers in 1972 .
 At the October 1997 party congress, Fidel made it clear that Raúl would succeed him as party leader . Fidel made the clear in 1997 that he wanted to replace him as leader . At the party congress in 1997, Fidel said he would be Fidel's successor .
 The first step toward this succession was taken in July 2006, when Raúl assumed de facto control of the presidency, the party, and the military as Fidel underwent surgery . Fidel Castro was hospitalized in August 2006 for surgery to treat cancer .
 As Fidel recovered over the next two years, Raúl quietly held power in Cuba, largely avoiding the limelight . FidelÊs health remained a major story internationally and domestically . As Fidel suffered from his illness, RaÉl remained in power .
 On February 18, 2008, Fidel publicly declared that, given his poor physical condition, he would resign the presidency . Fidel said he would step down as president in 2008 .
 The National Assembly of PeopleÊs Power elected Raúl president by a unanimous show of hands . Six days later, he was the second president of Cuba since the Cuban Revolution . He is the second Cuban president since the revolution .
 He was not considered FidelÊs equal in terms of charisma 4148-493-00C. or diplomacy, which might handicap his effectiveness .
 Alekseev , Aleksandr Ivanovich; anadyr, Operation; Bay of Pigs Invasion; Castro, Fidel; Guevara de la Serna, Ernesto ‘Che‰; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich References Fursenko
 Central Intelligence Agency is a principal intelligence and counterintelligence agency of the U.S. government . It was formally created in 1947 . The agency was formally established in 1947.
 U.S. greatly expanded postwar international role demanded a much enhanced coordinated intelligence establishment . The intelligence establishment was part of the growing defense bureaucracy .
 A January 1946 presidential executive order created a Central Intelligence Group and National Intelligence Authority . The order was intended to centralize postwar intelligence activities .
 In 1947 Congress passed the National Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency . These were disbanded when in 1947 they were formally established . The CIA, CIA and CIA are still in existence today .
 The CIA's mandate included advising the NSC on intelligence activities and making recommendations as to their coordination . According to this act, the CIAÊs mandate included advice on intelligence . The CIA was created in 1973 .
 U.S. overflights continued to monitor presence on Cuba of Soviet missiles and their eventual removal . In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, American overflights monitored Soviet missiles .
 As the Cold War intensified, from December 1947 through 1948 the NSC ordered an immediate and drastic expansion of the CIA's covert operations . In September 1948 it established the agencyÊs Office of Policy Coordination, to handle such activities with overall guidance .
 The Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 exempted CIA activities from most accounting and procedural limitations on federal expenditures . The act enabled the CIA to keep its budget secret . The CIA budget is kept secret .
 CIA failed to predict North Korea's invasion of South Korea in June 1950 . CIA director Gen. Gen. Kim Jong-won was the CIA's second director in 1950s . The CIA was unable to predict the invasion .
 Walter Bedell Smith was appointed to strengthen intelligence collection and analysis within the agency . He was appointed in October 2013 to strengthen the agency's ability to gather intelligence .
 He established the Office of National Estimates to provide coordinated intelligence analysis . The Office of Research and Reports to predict economic changes within the Soviet bloc .
 Allen Welsh Dulles was SmithÊs successor as director from 1953 to 1961 . He was the brother of Eisenhower's Secretary of State John Foster . Dulles, was a lawyer and flamboyant former OSS operative .
 CIA launched a wide variety of sometimes spectacular clandestine operations . The organization of successful pro-American coups in Iran and Costa Rica in 1953 and Guatemala in 1954 .
 The disastrous U.S.-backed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in April 1961 was a humiliating failure marked by inadequate planning and resources and wishful thinking, which brought about the resignation of Dulles and his deputy .
 The CIA's new director put more emphasis on intelligence-gathering and analysis . The agency still undertook a wide range of covert activities, including covert operations .
 Operation mongoose was a range of secret operations intended to destabilize and discredit Fidel CastroÊs government in Cuba and assassinate Castro himself . Some of the operations were so far-fetched as to be comically fantastic that they were far from the truth .
 In summer 1962 a CIA group concluded that these ventures were unlikely to succeed, but sabotage and paramilitary operations continued . The CIA infiltrated various anti-Castro guerrilla groups into Cuba .
 McCone pressed the White House to authorize surveillance overflights of Cuba in 1962 . McCone suspected these might include nuclear armaments, and pressed the government to authorize overflights .
 On October 14, a U-2 reconnaissance plane produced photographic evidence of potential nuclear-capable missile sites on Cuba . The U.S. government says the sites could be used to launch nuclear missile missiles .
 McCone was a frequent presence at the subsequent Executive Committee meetings of top U.S. officials convened to handle the situation . McCone attended the meetings of the Executive Committee .
 His preferred option was a full-scale U.S. invasion of Cuba, preceded by air strikes on missile installations, he says . He says the Cuban president wanted a U.N. invasion .
 CIA officials attend briefings to give briefings on missile sites . Head of the National Photographic Interpretation Center notified his superiors of the probable existence of missile sites on October 15 .
 CIA deputy director of intelligence, a strong advocate of a hard line against Cuba, also briefed ExComm members . Ray Cline, CIA Deputy Director of Intelligence, was briefed by ExComm .
 As the crisis continued, the CIA flew additional U-2 missions over Cuba . They returned with evidence suggesting the presence of substantially more installations than those first detected .
 During the crisis the CIA also sent several anti-Castro teams into Cuba . One of the teams was captured by Cuban forces on October 25 .
 On November 8, with the process of dismantling the missile bases well under way, a CIA sabotage unit attacked and destroyed a Cuban industrial plant, adding a further level of tension to the last days of the crisis .
 The federal government closed down many training camps for Cuban exiles in the U.S. in spring 1963 . Perhaps alarmed that the program was out of control and jeopardizing any potential rapprochement with Cuba .
 Sabotage and assassination plots against Castro continued until April 1964, when the Johnson administration called a halt to them .
 Throughout the 1960s the CIA mounted extensive covert operations in Southeast Asia in support of U.S. intervention in Vietnam . The CIA mounted operations in Vietnam during the Vietnam War . CIA was involved in the Vietnam war .
 Growing opposition to the Vietnam War brought new congressional and public demands for CIA accountability . The CIA has been accused of being complicit in the CIA's involvement in the war .
 During the 1970s and 1980s books scathingly critical of CIA activities regularly appeared . During the 1980s and 1990s books critical of the CIA regularly appeared.
 In 1974 CIA director William E Colby provided Congress with a detailed list of all illegal domestic and overseas CIA covert operations . In 1974 Colby responded by providing Congress a list of illegal operations . Colby was forced to resign from the CIA .
 Evidence and revelations of CIA involvement in a wide range of illicit or clandestine activities within and beyond the United States continued to surface for decades . For decades, however, additional evidence and revelations about CIA involvement continued to emerge .
 CIA and Pentagon Covert Operations from World War II through the Persian Gulf . CIA, Pentagon and Pentagon have been involved in covert operations in the Gulf .
 Mao argued armed struggle was the necessary precondition for the spread of communism . Disdaining Soviet premier Nikita KhrushchevÊs policies of peaceful coexistence with the West, Mao argued .
 Mao advanced his own radical brand of communism as a rival to Soviet ideological theories . Mao advanced himself as a leader of the Communist Party in the 1960s and '60s .
 MaoÊs readiness to risk nuclear war with the United States by threatening Taiwan, a United States ally and client, also alarmed Khrushchev . MaoÉs readiness for risk of war with U.S. was also alarmed Khrushche .
 In the late 1950s the Soviet Union ceased assisting ChinaÊs nuclear program, and in 1960 Khrushchev recalled almost all Soviet technical advisers and experts from China .
 The Sino-Soviet split intensified KhrushchevÊs eagerness to demonstrate his revolutionary bona fides by supporting Cuba . The split intensified his eagerness for support .
 Castro sought to keep Cuba in the Soviet rather than the Chinese camp, a concern Castro exploited to extract additional Soviet aid . He also sought to extract more Soviet aid from the Chinese .
 Cuba withdrew diplomatic recognition from Taiwan and opened diplomatic relations with the PeopleÊs Republic in 1960 . China sent substantial quantities of military technology to Cuba .
 Castro asked the Soviet Union for much larger arms shipments than previously, especially of antiaircraft missiles . In fall 1961, Castro asked for much more arms shipments . Castro asked Russia to send more missiles than previously .
 Castro purged his government of several pro-Moscow communists and opened talks with China . When Khrushchev proved 4148-493-00C.
 He also set up partisan guerrilla groups to spread revolution throughout Latin America . He also began setting up guerrilla groups .
 CastroÊs representatives made unfavorable comparisons between Soviet and Chinese approaches to popular insurgencies . When Soviet KGB officers cautiously declined to establish a training camp for this purpose in Cuba, Cuba's representatives said .
 KhrushchevÊs desire to emphasize that he could champion international revolution more effectively than Mao was one factor impelling him to offer nuclear-capable missiles to Cuba in 1962 .
 The United States military included the Chinese embassy in Havana, which had already featured as a possible target for clandestine U.S.-backed sabotage operations, among potential air strike objectives . The Chinese embassy had already been mentioned as a target .
 Chinese leaders responded with disappointment to the peaceful resolution of the crisis . Chinese leaders respond with disappointment that the conflict was resolved peacefully .
 On October 29, 1962, the Chinese apparently sent a note to the Cubans ‘implying that the U.S.R. was an untrustworthy ally,‰ one that had since 1959 refused to provide China with information on the production of nuclear arms .
 The Chinese privately urged Castro to withstand Soviet pressure for a swift settlement . The Chinese were privately urged by the Castro regime to withstand the Soviet pressure .
 Chinese delegates characterized the Soviet decision as ‘cowardly” at a World Peace Council meeting in Stockholm . At a meeting in Sweden, Chinese delegates called the decision ‘Cowardly.’ At the meeting, delegates characterized it as “coward”
 As U.S.-Soviet negotiations on the details of removing missiles from Cuba proceeded, China supported Castro's demands . China vigorously supported demands by Castro for a complete United States withdrawal from Cuba, including Guantánamo Bay military base .
 Chinese officials condemned the Soviet decision to withdraw the missiles as a Soviet Munich . Chinese officials criticized KhrushchevÊs action in installing them as “adventurist” and their removal as ‘appeasement”
 Castro proclaimed that Cuba would remain ‘neutral‰ toward the Sino-Soviet conflict . Some Cuban revolutionaries sided openly with China, some siding openly with them .
 Khrushchev attacked the Chinese for tolerating the existence of colonial enclaves on their own territory, in Macau and Hong Kong . The Chinese were tolerant of the presence of colonial clooms on their territory .
 Over 1 million square miles of Chinese territory in Siberia ceded to Russia in the 1860s constituted a colonial enclave, 4148-493-00C. implying they might no longer accept its loss .
 Khrushchev charged with rashness in deploying the missiles and ‘capitulationism‰ in ultimately withdrawing them . The Chinese delegation, led by Deng Xiaoping, responded with further invective, again charged the Soviet leader with rashiness .
 Chinese polemics also targeted the nuclear test ban treaty Khrushchev and U.S. president John F Kennedy negotiated at that time . Chinese interpreted the treaty as directed at their own nuclear program .
 Kennedy and his advisers believed that the added strains the missile crisis and the treaty placed on Sino-Soviet relations did much to make the split permanent .
 Containment, Doctrine and Course of Fundamental controlling U.S. Cold War strategy, designed to prevent further expansion of Soviet power . Containment was a Cold War response to the threat posed by the Soviet Union .
 President Truman requested George F Kennan to explain the rationale behind Soviet policies in 1946 . Kennan was a counselor in the United States embassy in Moscow and a Soviet expert in Moscow .
 Russia must adopt policies of ‘long-term, patient but firm and vigilant containment,‰ says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Instead, they must resist attempts to expand Soviet influence while awaiting internal changes .
 KennanÊs telegram circulated throughout the higher echelons of the U.S. government . His article ‘The Sources of Soviet Conduct’ was published in the influential quarterly Foreign Affairs .
 The word “containment‰ described the underlying U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union . From then until the early 1990s the word ‘containment' was used to describe containment . The word was used in the United States' policy toward Soviet Russia .
 Kennan was head of Policy Planning Staff, charged with long-range planning of U.S. foreign policy . He soon departs the increasingly military emphasis of containment . He claimed he envisaged that the United States would rely primarily upon peaceful economic and cultural counterpressure .
 Truman pledged to assist any country where democracy was threatened by communism . Truman extended substantial economic and military aid to both Greece and Turkey . Marshall Plan or European Recovery Program to assist with EuropeÊs economic rebuilding .
 By 1950 prominent civilian and military officials sought to expand U.S. defense budgets substantially . This was to counter the recent Soviet acquisition of atomic weapons and the establishment of a communist state in mainland China .
 Various State and Defense Department representatives argued that, should war break out, the U.S. lacked the military resources even to fulfill its existing commitments .
 The planning paper NSC-68 demanded massive enhancements in U.S. conventional and nuclear military capabilities, including substantially enhanced United States troop contributions to NATO forces in Europe . ‘Without superior aggregate military strength, in being and readily mobilizable, a policy of Âcontainment�
 The outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 proved crucial to the implementation of NSC-68 . The Korean War was crucial to both the implementation and the effective globalization of the Cold War .
 U.S. defense spending soared in Europe as well as Asia, reaching $48 billion in fiscal 1951 and $61 billion the following year . After the armistice it still remained far higher than previously .
 In June 1950 the U.S. had 1,460,000 military personnel, of whom 280,000 were stationed abroad . Four years later the totals were 3,555,000 and 963,000 respectively . The United States had more than 3,500,000 personnel in
 Mutual Security Program, instituted in 1951, furnished military assistance to a wide array of U.S. clients and allies . It was established in 1951 .
 By the late 1950s the United States had established numerous additional security pacts, including the Rio Pact covering Latin America, the Central Treaty Organization in the Middle East, the Southeast Asian Treaty Organization, and bilateral treaties with South Korea, Japan, and the Republic of China on Taiwan .
 Covert operations by the Central Intelligence Agency often ensured that any new overseas government unsympathetic to the United States proved short-lived . Iran, Guatemala, and later Chile were among the countries that have been friendly to the US .
 U.S. strategy sought primarily to prevent further communist gains, particularly in countries undergoing decolonization, that were often perceived as subjects for U.-Soviet competition . The Chinese intervention in North Korea in autumn 1950 balked efforts to ‘liberate‰ North Korea .
 In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the U.S. increased incrementally aid to the southern portion of Vietnam . The communist takeover by the north threatened the existing regime . In the 1960s and 1960s this outlook led successive United States presidents to increase aid .
 After 1975 the effective United States defeat in this costly conflict led the U.S. to avoid further large-scale interventions, relying instead upon surrogates, such as anti-Soviet guerrilla forces in Afghanistan during the 1980s .
 U.S. leaders used Sino-Soviet split to win concessions for the United States . China and Russia used distrust of each other to gain concessions for America . The United States used the split between Chinese and Soviet communism to win U.N. concessions .
 U.S. military strategy in the 1950s relied heavily on nuclear weapons because they could inflict far greater casualties at much less cost than 4148-493-00C .
 In the 1960s United States strategic thinking emphasized flexible response, enhancing both conventional and counterinsurgency capabilities . The U.S. national security strategy was designed to be flexible .
 The expansion of the U.S.Ê international commitments did not preclude efforts from the mid-1950s onward to reach an understanding with the Soviet Union that would prevent accidental war and place ceilings on ever more expensive and destructive nuclear weapons .
 U.S. attempts to limit arms control were made in the 1970s and '80s . These attempts, culminating in the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaties of 1972 and 1979, demonstrated the fundamentally cautious nature of United States military strategy .
 President Ronald Reagan was alarmed by what he perceived as increasingly assertive Soviet foreign policies of the 1970s . Reagan increased U.S. defense budgets dramatically and adopted a firmly anti-Soviet posture .
 By the late 1980s, growing economic weakness led to the collapse of both the Soviet Union and the Soviet empire . Many Americans interpreted that as validating the premises of the containment strategy .
 As the 21st century began, no other strategic paradigm had yet attained similar intellectual dominance in the conceptualization of U.S. post-Cold War policy .
 Acheson, Dean Gooderham; Central Intelligence Agency; Dulles, John Foster; Eisenhower, Dwight David; Johnson, Lyndon Baines; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald . Friedberg, Aaron L In the Shadow of the Garrison State: America’s Anti-Statism and
 Harry S Truman and the Origins of the National Security State, 1945–1954 . Harry S. Truman was President of the U.S. State Department of National Security . Truman was assassinated in 1953 . He was assassinated by the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 Andrew Wellington Cordier was born on March 3, 1901, near Canton, Ohio . Cordier, Andrew Wellington Andrew Wellington, was born in 1901 . He was a member of the National Guard .
 State Department adviser on international security drafting early versions of UN Charter . State Department drafted early UN Charter draft of early versions . U.S. State Dept. drafted early version of UN charter, drafted by State Department .
 He also served on the United States delegation to the San Francisco Conference and the Preparatory Commission for the UN, which met in London .
 Cordier became executive assistant to Trygve Halvden Lie in 1946 . Cordier was the first UN secretary general . He was a member of the UN's first staff .
 Cordier retained the position until 1962, serving under Dag Hammarskjöld . Cordier was undersecretary of the State Department under the President of Norway .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk contacted Cordier while awaiting Khrushchev's response to JFK's offer of a guarantee that the U.S. would not invade Cuba in exchange for the removal of Soviet missiles there . Cordier was an old friend of President Kennedy's secretary of state .
 President Obama asked Cordier to prepare a proposal that the U.S. remove NATO Jupiter missiles from Turkey instead . Cordier: The United States should remove NATO missile launchers from Turkey . He also wants the United States remove NATO missiles from the country .
 Rusk and Kennedy intended to ask Cordier to submit this proposal to acting UN secretary general U Thant, whom Cordier knew well . If Khrushchev rejected KennedyÊs offer, Rusk planned to submit the proposal to Thant . Cordier's proposal was intended to
 Thant would claim that this fallback suggestion was made on his own initiative, the government says .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy submitted secret proposals on similar lines to Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet ambassador to the U.S. Robert Kennedy, the presidentÊs brother, also submitted proposals . The proposals were similar to those submitted by Robert Kennedy's brother, President Kennedy's son .
 Only in the late 1980s did U.S. officials reveal existence of the backup plan . The backup plan would have been a last-ditch attempt to avoid a full-scale invasion of Cuba .
 Dobrynin, Anatoly Fyodorovich; Jupiter Missiles (Turkey and Italy); Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Kennedy, Robert Francis; Rusk, Dean David; U Thant; United Nations; United States Allies References Blight, James G., and David A Welch.
 Cuba is a Caribbean island nation comprising 42,803 square miles, about the size of the state of Ohio . Cuba is one of the largest economies in the world .
 Cuba is in the Caribbean Sea, west of Hispaniola and 90 miles south of Key West, Florida . It is the largest and western-most island of the West Indies chain . Cuba is the most populous island in the chain .
 By the early 16th century, Spanish conquistadors and traders had already recognized Havana as an ideal port for trade with Spain . Havana was an ideal trade port for Spain .
 Beginning in the early 1800s, sugarcane production boomed, ensuring a huge influx of black slaves and the institution of a plantation economy . The plantation economy was a major factor in the growth of black slavery .
 During the 1860s, a growing independence movement brought armed revolt against Spanish rule . During the 60să1870s, an armed revolt was held in Spain . The conflict was centered in Spain and Portugal .
 Slavery was outlawed in 1886, and in 1895 Cuban nationalist and poet José Marti led the final struggle against the Spanish . The final struggle was realized thanks to U.S. involvement in the 1898 Spanish-American War .
 Spanish-Cuban-American War marked a watershed in CubanUnited States relations . The war greatly enhanced American influence on the island .
 The result was an uneasy compromise whereby Cuba became an independent republic with limitations to its sovereignty . The 1901 Platt Amendment was an appendix to the Cuban constitution authorizing U.S. intervention in Cuban affairs .
 Cuban sovereignty was central to the crisis that brought down the Cuban republic . The duality of opinions regarding Cuban sovereignty is central to that crisis . The Cuban republic was overthrown in 1998 .
 For the first half of the 20th century, the United States set the standards to which the Cuban population aspired . The U.S. set the standard to which Cuban citizens aspired.
 The crisis of the Cuban economic model of dependence on the sugar industry was accompanied by a sympathetic attitude in Washington toward anticommunist dictators . In this context, the crisis of Cuba's economic model was also accompanied by the U.S. support for the regime .
 Fulgencio BatistaÊs military coup on March 10, 1952, occurred only two months before an election in which nationalist forces were within reach of the presidency . The coup took place in March 1952 .
 The destruction of the Cuban democracy by BatistaÊs rightist junta generated no significant opposition in Washington . In the context of McCarthyism in the U.S. in the United States, the destruction of Cuba's democracy by the Batista regime was not a major issue .
 For its part, the Cuban authoritarian Right manipulated the West by presenting itself as a bulwark against communism . For its own purposes, the West presented itself as an anti-communist state in Cuba .
 In practice, the Batista government actually undermined democracy through its repressive policies . Batista's repressive policies undermined democracy, he says .
 BatistaÊs regime did little to improve living standards for poor Cubans . Middle class and elites enjoyed close and lucrative relationships with U.S. businesses .
 A potent popular insurrection against BatistaÊs regime had grown in the eastern and central parts of Cuba by 1958 . A potent uprising against the regime had also grown in Cuba's east and central provinces .
 The revolutionÊs leaders questioned both Cuban dependence on the United States and market economy principles . perceiving their movement as part of a developing-world rebellion against the West and as a natural ally of the communist bloc. perceiving . the movement as . a developing . world rebellion against
 The U.S. was not prepared to deal with the charismatic and doctrinaire Castro . Castro was the leader of the Cuban revolution . The United States was unprepared for Castro's arrival .
 The United States underestimated the profound grievances provoked by U.S. support for the Batista regime . After his takeover, the United States overestimated the grievances of the Batistas .
 CastroÊs early measures met stiff U.S. resistance . Land reform, the prosecution of Batista cronies, and the nationalization of industries were overwhelmingly popular .
 Castro approached the Soviet Union for support in February 1960 . In February 1960 a Soviet delegation led by Vice Premier Anastas Mikoyan visited Cuba and signed a trade agreement with CastroÊs government .
 The Soviet Union replaced the United States as 4148-493-00C. CubaÊs main trade and political partner .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev promised Cuba new machinery, oil, consumer goods, armaments, and a market for Cuban products now subject to U.S. sanctions . The Cuban products are now under United States sanctions .
 The invasion was doomed from the start, given CastroÊs popularity in Cuba and the lack of U.S. air support for the rebel force . The invasion of Cuba was doomed, given the popularity of Castro Ês popular in Cuba . The United States did not support the
 The botched attack only encouraged closer relations between the Soviet Union and Cuba, especially when the CIA launched additional covert operations .
 Operation mongoose included 14 attempts to assassinate Castro . The most important undertaking included 14 assassination attempts . Castro was assassinated by the CIA .
 Khrushchev proposed installing nuclear-capable missiles in Cuba to gain a better bargaining position with the U.S. The missiles would offer protection to Cuba while offering protection to the United States . The proposal was rejected .
 Khrushchev naively assumed that the missiles could be installed without U.S. detection . The missiles would have been installed without United States detection . They were installed in secret .
 President John F Kennedy declared a naval quarantine of the island in October 1962 . Kennedy declared the naval quarantine in 1962 .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev worked out an agreement whereby the Soviets removed missiles in return for U.S. promises not to invade Cuba and to withdraw Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 The end of KennedyÊs quarantine did not conclude strife between Cuba and the U.S. However, it did not end strife between the two countries .
 In addition to an embargo still in force in 2012, the United States mounted further covert operations against CastroÊs government . The U.S. still has an embargo in place in place .
 United States hostility was reinforced by the Cuban revolutionÊs transformation from a nationalist rebellion against authoritarianism to a totalitarian state aligned with the Soviet Union . U.S. hostility reinforced by Cuba's transformation from nationalist rebellion to authoritarianism . Cuba's shortcomings in civil and political liberties were serious
 Castro refused to accept Moscow or Beijing's directives . CubaÊs foreign policy was made in Havana, so Castro refused . Castro: "I'm not going to accept Beijing or Moscow's directives. I'm going to make a difference"
 In 1968, he cracked down on a group of Cuban communists, accusing them of working with Soviet agents in Havana . In 1968 he accused the Cuban communists of working in Cuba .
 He used the 1968 Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia against the Prague Spring to broker a compromise by which Cuba preserved its autonomy but promised not to criticize the Soviet Union publicly . Eventually, he used the . 1968 Czech intervention to broker the . compromise .
 Cuba became a Comecon member, receiving significant additional economic aid from the communist bloc . Cuba thus became a member of Comecon and received significant additional aid from communist bloc members .
 In Latin America, the Cuban government actively supported revolutionary movements with leftist or nationalist agendas, especially those that 4148-493-00C.indd .
 The 1960s witnessed successive failed attempts to export revolution . But the 1960s saw successive failed Cuban attempts to revolutionize Cuba .
 GuevaraÊs 1967 murder in Bolivia concluded a series of subversive projects encouraged by Havana . The murder was the culmination of a long series of projects by the Cuban government .
 Cuban revolutionary attempts were part of CubansÊ core revolutionary beliefs and also a response to the rupture of diplomatic relations with Havana by all Latin American countries except Mexico .
 From the 1970s to 1990, as part of the Cold War conflict, Cuba played a major international role . Cuba was a major player in Cuba's role in the Vietnam Vietnam War .
 A high point of CastroÊs foreign policy came at the 1979 Sixth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement in Havana . A high-point of the Cuban leader's foreign policy was the 1979 summit in Havana, Cuba .
 Cuba became a major conduit of alliance between the developing world and the communist bloc . Cuba was a major source of alliance with the communist-led communist bloc in the 1950s .
 HavanaÊs diplomatic success and military involvement was accompanied by massive civilian involvement in health and education aid programs to African, Latin American, and Asian countries .
 Castro sent 40,000 troops to Angola to support the pro-Soviet Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola government in its struggle against the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola forces backed by South Africa and the United States .
 He dispatched troops to aid the pro-Soviet government of Ethiopia . He also dispatched troops in Ethiopia to aid pro-Russian government .
 Cuba deployed more than 300,000 troops or military advisers to Angola, Ethiopia, the Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Algeria, Mozambique, Syria, and Syria . In all, Cuba deployed 300,500 troops or advisers to war zones .
 The fight in southern Africa was ended through a skillfully designed tripartite agreement signed by Cuba, Angola, and South Africa . The agreement led to NamibiaÊs independence from Angola .
 Cuba missed its best chance to solve its conflict with the U.S. Paradoxically, due to these Cold War commitments, Cuba missed the best chance of solving its conflict .
 In the 1970s U.S. leaders sought serious negotiations with Cuba . In the 70s United States leaders tried to reach a deal with the Cuban government .
 Carter demonstrated that he was serious in his desire to improve hemispheric relations and promote human rights . Carter demonstrated his willingness to work with the U.S. President of the United States .
 In 1977, Carter stated that the U.S. did not consider a Cuban retreat from Angola a precondition for beginning negotiations . Carter said in 1977 that the United States didn't consider that a Cuban withdrawal from Angola was a pre-conclusion .
 Castro insisted on continuing what he defined as ‘revolutionary solidarity‰ and ‘proletarian internationalism‰ Castro insisted . Castro, however, insisted that he would continue what he called “revolutionary internationalism.” and “proletian internationalism
 Castro took significant steps in releasing political prisoners and allowing Cuban exiles to visit the island as goodwill gestures toward the U.S. The Cuban leader has been criticized for his actions in the past .
 Cuba informed the United States of the Katanga AQ1 rebellion in Zaire . In 4148-493-493,00C.
 Castro gave priority to Cuban relations with other revolutionary movements, especially in Africa . Nevertheless, Castro gave . priority to relations with . other revolutionary groups, especially . Africa, he said .
 In 1977, he sent 17,000 Cuban troops to Ethiopia to support the dictator Mengistu Haile Mariam in his territorial conflict with Somalia . In 1977 he sent troops to support his regime in support of the dictator .
 CastroÊs support for the Sandinista government of Nicaragua in the 1980s . This development represented a major blow to the prospect of improved CubanUnited States relations .
 A new development came in 1976 when Ricardo Boffill, Elizardo Sanchez and Gustavo Arcos founded the first human rights group in Cuba since 1959 .
 A new generation of opposition groups based on strategies of civil disobedience slowly emerged, gaining strength in the 1990s . The groups were formed by a generation of young activists .
 During the 1970s Cuban civil society began to emerge from totalitarian ostracism that had reduced its religious communities to a minimum . Equally, during the 70s Cuba's civil society was beginning to emerge .
 By the late 1980s religious groups were growing rapidly . This evolution continued, with the rise of religious groups in the 1980s .
 The collapse of the communist bloc beginning in 1989 was a catastrophe for CastroÊs government . Cuba lost its major benefactors, including the Soviet Union, in the fall .
 Latin America and the former communist countries adopted general norms of democratic governance opposed to the Cuban leadership's goals and behavior .
 Without Soviet backing, Cuba adjusted its economy and foreign policy to survive in a world that was no longer safe for revolution . The Cuban government adjusted its foreign policy and economic policies to survive .
 In 1988 Castro withdrew Cuban troops from Angola and reduced the Cuban military presence in the Horn of Africa . In 1988, Castro withdrew Cuba's military presence from Angola .
 CubaÊs gross domestic product fell by almost one-third between 1989 and 1993 . CubaÉs Gross Domestic Product fell by nearly a third between 1989-1993 . The Cuban economy fell by a third from 1989 to 1993 .
 The collapse of the Cuban economy was particularly hard on imports, which fell from 8. billion pesos in 1989 to about 2 billion in 1993 . Imports fell from about 8 billion peso in 1989 .
 Castro permitted limited private enterprise, allowed Cubans to hold foreign currencies . He pushed for foreign investment, particularly in tourism, in response to the economic collapse .
 Cuban troops are withdrawn from wherever they are posted . Cuban troops were withdrawn from where they were posted in the country .
 In 2008, Castro retired for reasons of ill health, handing his offices to his younger brother Raúl . Castro was one of the last leaders of the old-style communist order . He retired in 2008, almost 20 years after the Cold War ended .
 He served in the U.S. Navy during World War II, then returned to Dillon Read as board chairman .
 Active in Republican politics, during 1951ă1952 he campaigned actively for Dwight D Eisenhower, the successful presidential candidate, who appointed Dillon ambassador to France in 1953 . Dillon was appointed Ambassador to France by Eisenhower .
 Dillon rose to undersecretary for political affairs from April 1959 to January 1961 . Dillon was State Department's second-highest position . Dillon joined the department in Washington in 1957 .
 Dillon, a dedicated internationalist, concentrated on promoting trade and economic development, coordinating mutual security assistance programs, and enhancing foreign aidÊs scope and effectiveness .
 His efforts contributed to founding the Inter-American Development Bank in 1959 . In 1960 he established the Act of Bogotá economic development program, a forerunner of the Alliance for Progress .
 In December 1960 Democratic president-elect John F Kennedy, seeking to reassure the financial community that he would not adopt ‘easy money‰ policies, named Dillon secretary of the treasury .
 August 1961 he headed the United States delegation to the Punta del Este conference that created the Latin American Alliance for Progress program . In 57 4148-493-00D.
 President Obama initially favored a quick air strike, without any warning, against Soviet missile facilities in Cuba . He initially favored an air strike without warning .
 By October 20 Dillon had come around to favoring the announcement of an announcement of a blockade . The ultimatum might be followed by air strikes within three days if Soviet construction of missile bases continued .
 Russian SA-2 surface-toair missile batteries shot down a U-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba on October 27 . Dillon favored a quick, unannounced strike against them, one that would probably target nearby missile sites .
 Dillon considered the Jupiter nuclear missiles the U.S. had placed in Turkey strategically worthless . Dillon found it unpalatable the prospect of trading them for Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 In March 1968, after the Tet Offensive, he was one of President Lyndon B JohnsonÊs Senior Advisory Group on Vietnam . He was among the „wise men” who urged Johnson to seek withdrawal from Vietnam .
 Eisenhower, Eisenhower, Dwight David; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; U-2 Overflights References Katz, Bernard S. Katz and C Daniel Vencill .
 Biographical Dictionary of the United States Secretaries of the Treasury, 1789–1995 . Biographical dictionary of the U.S. Secretaries .
 Anatoly Fyodorovich Dobrynin was Soviet diplomat and ambassador to the United States. He was ambassador to Washington, Georgia, South Carolina, Georgia and Florida . Dobrynins was Soviet ambassador to U.S. in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Dobrynin joined the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as assistant chief of the Education Department . She also served simultaneously as an assistant professor of United States foreign policy at the Institute of International Relations . Dobrynins is a member of the Foreign Ministry's Department of Education .
 From 1947 to 1952 he worked on the staff of Deputy Foreign Minister Valerian Zorin, ultimately becoming his first assistant . He was the first assistant to Zorinian's first foreign minister .
 Dobrynin was posted to Washington as counselor at the Soviet embassy in 1952 . He served as minister-counselor from 1954 to 1955 . He was posted in 1952 to Washington .
 He was promoted to the rank of ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary in the Foreign Ministry . He was assistant to Foreign Minister Dmitri T Shepilov before returning to Moscow .
 Dobrynin was posted to the U.N. Secretariat as an undersecretary general in 1957 . He became director of the Department of Political and Security Council Affairs the next year . In 1957 he was posted as director of political and security Council Affairs .
 In February 1960 Dobrynin was recalled to Moscow to head the Foreign MinistryÊs American Department . He served until January 1962, returning briefly to the UN in summer 1960 to help Foreign Minister Andrey Gromyko lodge complaints regarding U-2 overflights of the Soviet Union .
 Dobrynin was appointed ambassador to the U.S. in January 1962 . In January 1962 he was appointed Ambassador to the United States . He was the first Russian diplomat to be appointed in the country .
 Anatoly F Dobrynin, appointed Soviet ambassador to the United States in April 1962, played a critical role in almost every aspect of to the U.S. in almost all aspects of the Soviet ambassador role . Dobrynins served in this post until 1986, playing a critical part
 Dobrynin was a fixture in nuclear-capable missiles on Soviet-American relations . A highly effective diplomat, he remained May 1962 decision to install ambassador until 1986 .
 Dobrynin worked with Henry Kissinger to resolve disputes in SALT I negotiations . He became an informal channel for U.S. communications with North Vietnam leading to the Paris Peace Talks . During Richard NixonÊs presidency, he worked with Kissinger .
 During the presidencies of Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan, Dobrynin provided a degree of stability in deteriorating Soviet relations with the United States following the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . The Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in Afghanistan in 1979 .
 Dobrynin became a candidate member of the CPSU Central Committee in 1966 and a full member in 1977 . He was a member of CPSU's Central Committee and a candidate candidate member in 1966 .
 In March 1986, new Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev recalled Dobrynin to join the CPSU Central Committee as secretary for foreign affairs and head of the International Department . Dobrynins was head of CPSU's International Department in 1986 .
 He was elected a deputy to the Supreme Soviet, serving until 1989 . He was also elected to the Soviet Supreme Soviet Council .
 Dobrynin retired from the Central Committee in 1988 . He continued to serve as a foreign policy adviser to Gorbachev until the collapse of the Soviet Union in late 1991 . He was a member of the Communist Party's Central Committee .
 Dobrynin became a consultant to the Russian Foreign Ministry in 1995 . He is now a consultant for the Russian foreign ministry .
 Dulles was in Bern, Switzerland, where he nurtured U.S. embassy contacts with Austro-Hungarian and Balkan exiles . By the time the United States entered World War I he was in Switzerland .
 In 1942 Dulles joined the newly created United States intelligence agency, the Office of Strategic Services . Dulles was a strong supporter of U.S. intervention in World War II .
 William J Donovan spent most of the war based in Bern in neutral Switzerland, running a network of German intelligence agents . Donovan was a major intelligence officer during the Second World War .
 By 1944, the prospect of communist and Soviet expansion in Europe troubled Dulles . Dulles worried about the threat posed by the Soviet Union .
 In spring 1945 Dulles helped negotiate the surrender of GermanyÊs remaining forces in northern Italy . Dulles was involved in negotiations to surrender the German forces in Italy .
 U.S. and British forces initiated the surrender talks without involving their ally the Soviet Union . Soviet leader Joseph Stalin believed they intended to negotiate a separate peace with Germany . Some have perceived this as the opening move of the Cold War .
 In 1950 Dulles became CIA deputy director, and from 1953 to 1961 he served as the agencyÊs third director . Dulles was CIA's third director from 1953 until 1961 .
 He deliberately publicized his agencyÊs existence and accomplishments . He was responsible for building its permanent headquarters in Langley, Virginia .
 President Dwight D EisenhowerÊs 1953 appointment of John Foster Dulles as secretary of state further enhanced his official influence . Dulles held a post until his death in 1959 .
 Under Dulles the CIA mounted extensive covert operations, among them successful antileftist coups against the governments of Iran and Guatemala in 1953 .
 Dulles later authorized a comparable effort 4148-493-00D.
 In March 1961 a poorly planned and botched U.S.-backed invasion attempt by Cuban exiles landing at the Bay of Pigs ended in highly publicized failure, a major international humiliation for the United States . The Bay of the Pigs was a highly publicized failed invasion attempt in March 1961 .
 President John F Kennedy publicly accepted full responsibility but privately blamed Dulles, who resigned a few months later . President Kennedy accepted responsibility for the loss of Dulles .
 In the early 1970s congressional investigations uncovered evidence on some of the CIAÊs past excesses overseas during the Dulles years that severely damaged the organizationÊ's reputation . In the 1970s, congressional investigations found evidence of CIA excesses .
 Dulles subsequently served on the Warren Commission that investigated KennedyÊs assassination . He admitted that to safeguard national security, CIA operatives might well lie even when giving evidence before the commission .
 Dulles unsuccessfully sought to restrain Allied reparations demands on Germany . Dulles was appointed to the United States delegation at the 1919 Paris Peace Conference .
 During World War II Dulles focused on postwar planning and became prominent in Republican politics . Dulles was active between the wars in internationalist organizations .
 Truman included Dulles in virtually all major international meetings, beginning with the 1945 San Francisco Conference that drafted the final United Nations Charter . President Harry S Truman included . Dulles .
 He favored European integration as a means of strengthening the continentÊs economies and militaries . He also favored European unity as a way to strengthen the continent's economies and military .
 Dulles argued that the Truman administration had been timorous in containing Soviet communism when it should have moved to roll back Soviet influence in Eastern Europe . Dulles was a foreign affairs adviser to the Republican presidential campaign .
 Dulles was named secretary of state by President Dwight D Eisenhower in 1953 . He deferred to the presidentÊs leadership, although the two men were very different in style .
 Dulles was a supporter of EisenhowerÊs New Look defense policy of heavy reliance on nuclear weapons . Dulles rhetorically threatened ‘massive retaliation‰ against the United StatesÊ enemies .
 In practice, he followed pragmatic policies, effectively respecting established Soviet interests in Europe . In practice he was often more cautious .
 When discontented East Berlin workers triggered an uprising in 1953 and again when Hungarians rebelled against Soviet rule in 1956, Dulles and Eisenhower welcomed refugees but offered no further support .
 Dulles and Eisenhower ended the Korean War in 1953, pressuring both sides to accept an armistice . The two presidents established a series of alliances around Asia and the Middle East .
 Eisenhower avoided direct major military interventions, preferring to rely on covert operations . The Central Intelligence Agency was headed by DullesÊs younger brother Allen . When possible, Eisenhower avoided major military intervention .
 CIA played key roles in coups that overthrew Left-leaning governments in Iran in 1953 and Guatemala in 1954 . The CIA played a key role in overthrowing governments in both Iran and Guatemala .
 These were precursors of subsequent CIA-orchestrated efforts to overthrow the radical government Fidel Castro established in Cuba .
 Eisenhower hoped to conclude substantive disarmament agreements with Khrushchev . Eisenhower was hoping to reach substantive agreements with the Soviet Union .
 KhrushchevÊs seeming readiness from late 1958 onward to provoke an international crisis over Berlin all alarmed U.S. leaders, including Dulles . Dulles was diagnosed in 1957 with cancer, diagnosed with cancer .
 When his health deteriorated, he resigned as secretary on April 15, 1959 . He resigned from his post as secretary in 1959 .
 Berlin Crises; Central Intelligence Agency; Containment, Doctrine and Course of; Dulles, Allen Welsh; Eisenhower, Eisenhower, Dwight David; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; Military Balance References Hoopes .
 Dwight Eisenhower was born in Denison, Texas, on October 14, 1890 . Eisenhower grew up in Abilene, Kansas, and graduated from the United States Military Academy, West Point, in 1915 .
 In December 1943 he was named to command the Allied forces scheduled to invade Western Europe in 1944, and in spring 1945 he was promoted to general of the army .
 As president, Eisenhower largely endorsed existing Cold War policies, staunchly opposing global communism . Eisenhower's role was largely limited to his role as president of the United States .
 President Obama solidified U.S. defense commitments around the world into a network of bilateral and multilateral alliances . He solidified United States defense commitments .
 Eisenhower introduced the New Look strategy of relying heavily on nuclear weapons rather than on conventional forces . A fiscal conservative uneasy with high defense budgets, Eisenhower was uneasy with spending .
 Eisenhower was the first president to attempt to reach arms-control agreements with the Soviet Union . Alarmed by the increasing destructiveness of nuclear armaments, he was also alarmed by the threat posed posed by nuclear weapons .
 As the Bandung Non-Aligned Movement gained strength around the developing world, President Eisenhower sought to entice Third World nations into the United States camp .
 Eisenhower was generally cautious in risking American troops in overseas interventions . As president, he was cautious about risking U.S. troops .
 Eisenhower relied heavily on covert activities, authorizing the Central Intelligence Agency to back coups in both Iran 65 4148-493-00E.indd 65 .
 After leftist insurgents led by Fidel Castro overthrew the government of Fulgencia Batista in Cuba in 1959, there followed policies of radical land reform and nationalization that often expropriated American businesses .
 Eisenhower administration quickly turned against the new regime, with assorted economic sanctions . Eisenhower administration turned against regime with various economic sanctions.
 As president, Dwight D Eisenhower imposed Castro, despite public decsanctions on Fidel Castro’s revolutionary regime larations that he was not a and set in motion plans to overthrow Castro . From spring 1959 as president, he imposed Castro .
 Eisenhower’s actions did much to set Cuba communist, therefore covertly and the United States on a collision course and sought Soviet aid and military impelled Castro to turn to the Soviet Union for protection, and United States ecoassistance .
 In March 1960 Eisenhower authorized the CIA to devise a scheme to train Cuban exiles based in Guatemala to invade the island and overthrow Castro . In response, in March 1960, in response, the CIA planned to train exiles to overthrow Castro in Guatemala .
 President Kennedy consulted Eisenhower after the failure of the April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion attempt . Eisenhower criticized his successorÊs non-authorization of air cover for the invading force and his reluctance to reveal the extent of United States backing for exiles .
 Eisenhower promised to support KennedyÊs efforts to exclude communism from the Western Hemisphere . Eisenhower also warned that the U.S. would support intervention only when clear and serious provocation existed .
 On October 17, 1962, CIA director John McCone briefed Eisenhower on the presence of Soviet nuclear-capable missiles in Cuba . Eisenhower was briefed on the threat by McCone .
 The former president characterized the situation as ‘intolerable,‰ pledged his support 4148-493-00E.indd 66 .
 Eisenhower advised against air strikes alone but refused to choose between the other alternatives . Consulted by Kennedy in person two days later, Eisenhower advised on air strike alone .
 Eisenhower offered his support to impose a naval blockade . Eisenhower was informed by Kennedy of his intention to impose the blockade . The blockade was imposed by the British government .
 A week later, Kennedy spoke to him again, outlining Soviet premier Nikita KhrushchevÊs agreement to withdraw missiles in return for a U.S. commitment not to invade Cuba . Kennedy spoke again to him a week later .
 Eisenhower warned Kennedy to exercise caution over the precise wording of the noninvasion pledge . Eisenhower: "Exercise caution" over the wording .
 Eisenhower urged McCone to insist that U.S. inspection teams enter Cuba to ensure all missiles had been removed . Kennedy was unwilling to insist on that, something Castro adamantly refused to sanction .
 Eisenhower: The President. vol. vols. . References include the Bay of Pigs Invasion, Berlin Crises; Castro, Fidel Castro . Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; McCone, John Alex. McCone .
 Aleksandr Feklisov was born in Moscow on March 9, 1914 . He was the son of a railway signalman . Aleksandandov was a member of the Russian Communist Party .
 In 1939 he joined the NKVD, predecessor of the KGB, taking the cover name ‘Fomin‰ and specializing in gathering foreign scientific and technological information . In 1939, he took a cover name 'Fomin' and specialized in gathering science and technology information .
 On FuchsÊs arrest in 1950, Feklisov returned to Moscow, served in Czechoslovakia . From 1955 to 1960, he headed the KGB First Chief Directorate, responsible for overseas espionage . He was arrested in 1950 and returned to Russia .
 From 1960 to 1964 Feklisov was counselor at the Soviet embassy in Washington, D.C., headed its KGB operations . He was head of KGB operations in Washington . He headed the KGB in Washington from 1960 until 1964 .
 An outright U.S. invasion of Cuba was unlikely unless the Cubans attacked the United States naval base at Guantánamo Bay or the Soviets installed nuclear-capable missiles on the island . In March 1962 he reported that an outright United States .
 On October 26, 1962, he contacted John Scali, an ABC News State Department correspondent with good contacts in the Kennedy administration, to discuss a potential settlement . Acting apparently on his own volition, without KGB or Politburo authorization, he called Scali .
 Feklisov reportedly warned Scali that, should the U.S. invade Cuba, Soviet forces would attack West Berlin . Soviet Union would remove its missiles from Cuba, whose leader, Fidel Castro, would agree not to accept any further offensive weaponry .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk interpreted it as a positive indication of Soviet willingness to compromise . Scali reported the conversation to the State Department, which interpreted it, however unauthorized, as positive .
 Scali and Feklisov met again that evening, when Scali confirmed these terms might represent an acceptable basis for a settlement . Scali said the terms were acceptable, but they were not yet agreed .
 United States officials believed that FeklisovÊs initiative marked a shift in the original intransigent Soviet position . Nikita Khrushchev sent a letter to the U.S. on October 26, conveying similar proposals .
 Feklisov's report to Moscow helped convince top Soviet officials that an arrangement might prove feasible . He was effectively freelancing, but his report helped convince Moscow officials that it might be feasible .
 Feklisov warned that Soviet officials found it very hard to control Castro . Castro deeply resented that they had conducted settlement negotiations with the United States without consulting him . Castro was proving intransigent over accepting the terms agreed .
 Scali assured Feklisov that Kennedy did not seek to humiliate Khrushchev . Scali then relayed the information to ExComm. ExComm . ExComm: Kennedy didn't seek to embarrass the Soviet leader .
 Feklisov trained spies at the KGBÊs Red Banner Institute until his retirement 10 years later . Reassigned to Moscow in 1964, he was sent to Russia to train spies .
 Castro, Fidel; Guantánamo Bay Naval Base; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; Rusk, Dean David References Andrew, Christopher, and Oleg Gordievsky .
 During World War II Gilpatric acquired a lifelong interest in defense policy and government service . As legal representative for the Finnish government and large industrial clients, he became a legal representative of Finnish government .
 In May 1951, Gilpatric became assistant secretary of the Air Force for matériel, directing aircraft procurement and production . In October 1951 he was promoted to undersecretary, a position he held until January 1953 .
 Gilpatric served on the 1956ă1957 Rockefeller Brothers Fund panel on defense, which produced the Gaither report, recommending major increases in weapons research and spending . The report was produced by the Rockefeller brothers Fund on defense .
 In January 1961 President John F Kennedy appointed Gilpatric, who had advised him on national security issues during his campaign, deputy secretary of defense . President Kennedy appointed him deputy defense secretary in 1961 .
 Gilpatric oversaw procurement and overseas weapons sales under Robert McNamara . GilPatric convinced European allies to strengthen their defenses and narrow the dollar gap through massive purchases of U.S. military supplies .
 ExComm debated whether to launch direct air strikes on Cuban missile sites or impose a naval blockade on Cuba . Although he habitually said little, he made an important intervention on October 20 .
 McNamara and Gilpatric consistently favored the second, less risky option . McNamara: "I think we're going to make the right decision"
 Gilpatric took part in lengthy negotiations with Soviet deputy prime minister Vasily V Kuznetsov on the settlementÊs detailed implementation of the agreement . Once the crisis was resolved he took on the role in negotiations with the Soviet Deputy Prime Minister .
 Gilpatric wrote extensively on disarmament, military policy, and international affairs . He consistently endorsed successive disarmament treaties and urged rationalization of the defense establishment . After leaving office in late 1963 he wrote extensively about disarmament .
 Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Kuznetsov, Vasili Vasilyevich; McNamara, Robert Strange. McNamara . McNamara. Borklund, Carl W. The Department of Defense.
 Anatoli Ivanovich Gribkov was a Soviet major general . He was deputy head of the Main Operations Directorate, Soviet General Staff. He was a major general in the Soviet Armed Forces .
 Anatoli Gribkov was born on March 23, 1919, in Dukhovoye, in the Liskinsky District of Voronezh Province in Russia . He was born one of ten children of a peasant family .
 He served as a tank officer in the Russo-Finnish War and then in Latvia . He also served in the Latvian War and the Second World War .
 He saw combat service on the Kalinin front, took part in the Battle of Kursk . He fought on the southern front in the Ukraine, winning numerous decorations .
 Gribkov studied at the General Staff Academy, receiving high honors, and served in the Leningrad and 4148-493-00G .
 In early 1961 Gribkov became chief of operations in the Main Operations Directorate of the Soviet General Staff . He was the head of operations for the Soviet Armed Forces in 1961 .
 Semyon Pavlovich Ivanov, head of the Main Operations Directorate, instructed Gribkov to prepare detailed plans for Operation anadyr . Over 50,000 Soviet combat troops, equipped with conventional and nuclear-capable weapons, would be deployed to Cuba . A substantial naval
 Between May and October 1962 Gribkov and his subordinates planned and implemented this operation, observing great secrecy . Under considerable pressure, between May . and October . 1962 . The operation was observed with great secrecy, observed great secrecy.
 In September 1962, after President Kennedy warned against any Soviet installation of nuclear-capable weapons on Cuba, Soviet leaders reduced the naval component to four nuclear-armed submarines . Soviet leaders supplemented the weapons with a squadron of Il-28 light bombers, equipped with six atomic bombs .
 Growing Soviet fears that the U.S. government was likely to discover and react strongly to the presence of these forces in Cuba impelled Soviet defense minister Rodion Malinovsky to dispatch Gribkov to Cuba . The mission was to accelerate the construction of military installations and the deployment of
 Kremlin insists Gen. Gen. GribkovÊs presence was to underline Russia's insistence that Gen. Vladimir Putin is not a Russian spy . Russian President Vladimir Putin has been accused of spying on Russia .
 Issa Alexandrovich Pliyev, who commanded Soviet forces in Cuba, forbade any use of R-12 medium-range or R-14 intermediate-range nuclear-armed ballistic missiles against U.S. targets without specific Kremlin authorization . If he lost contact with superiors in Moscow
 Malinovsky tightened Kremlin control when he cabled further instructions to Pliyev that no nucleararmed weapons whatever should be used even in combat situations . On October 22, Gribkov later recalled, as Kennedy publicly demanded withdrawal of Soviet nuclear-capable missiles from Cuba .
 How effective these constraints would have been in battlefield conditions, it has never been entirely clear . Moscow's instructions from Moscow on the subject over the next week were somewhat ambivalent, says CNN .
 Gribkov remained in Cuba until late November, supervising removal of R-12 and R-14 missiles and warheads, the Il-28s, and one batch of short-range missiles . When the crisis was resolved, he returned to Moscow .
 Gribkov, by contrast, flourished, receiving the Order of Lenin in 1963 and promotion to lieutenant general . He became deputy chief of the Operations Directorate . He was promoted to Lieutenant General in 1963 .
 He later commanded the Seventh Guards Army, stationed in Armenia, and the Leningrad Military District . He rose to colonel general in 1973 and general general of the army in 1976 .
 From then until 1989 he served simultaneously as chief of staff of the Warsaw Pact armed forces and first deputy chief of the Soviet Armed Forces General Staff . He also served as head of the Moscow-Warsap Pact military forces .
 For three additional years he served as inspector general of the Soviet armed forces, retiring in 1992 . For three more years, he was inspector general .
 At the height of the crisis in October 1962 there were almost 42,000 Soviet military personnel on Cuba, together with 36 nuclear warheads for 24 medium-range ballistic missile sites, many of them operational . GribkovÊs revelations, at a 1992 conference of former Soviet, American
 Pliyev had discretionary authority from the Kremlin to use shortrange tactical weapons in battlefield combat against U.S. attackers, he said .
 In retirement Gribkov wrote his memoirs, published in German in 1992, and numerous other works . In retirement he wrote numerous works .
 Andrey Gromyko was born in Starye Gromyki, Belorussia, in 1909 . He studied agricultural economics at the Minsk School of Agricultural Technology, earning a degree in 1936 .
 He was named chief of the United States division of the PeopleÊs Commissariat of Foreign Affairs in 1939 . After working as a research associate and economist at the Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow, he entered the Foreign Affairs Ministry .
 In 1943 Soviet leader Josef Stalin appointed Gromyko as MoscowÊs youngest-ever ambassador to the U.S. In 1943 he was Moscow�És youngest ever ambassador to U.N. Gromykos was the Soviet leader's first ambassador to America .
 Gromyko served briefly as ambassador to the United Kingdom during 1952ă1953 and then returned to the Soviet Union . He served briefly in the UK before returning to Russia .
 During his long career, Gromyko became known as an expert and cunning negotiator . He was known as a cunning negotiator and expert in negotiations .
 In the West he was dubbed ‘Mr Nyet‰ because of his hard bargaining and staunch communist views . He was dubbed 'Mr. Nyet' in the West because he was known for hard bargaining .
 At home, he exhibited a great talent for adjusting to ruling leaders, failing to develop his own characteristic political line . At home he showed a great skill for adjusting the ruling leaders .
 Reportedly, Gromyko originally opposed KhrushchevÊs plan to install nuclear-capable missiles secretly on Cuba . Reportedly he later acquiesced in the proposal, though he later agreed to the proposal .
 Gromyko met with United States President John F Kennedy and Secretary of State Dean Rusk on October 18, 1962 . Unbeknown to him, they were already aware of the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba .
 GromykoÊs assurances that Cuba possessed no offensive weapons annoyed both men, but neither betrayed this . Neither did they betray this, despite assurances they possessed no weapons .
 Gromyko sent reassuring but inaccurate messages back to Moscow that the Kennedy administration had not discovered the real situation in Cuba . The Kennedy administration did not find out what was going on in Cuba, according to Moscow . The Cuban crisis was a major source of tension between Moscow and Washington .
 Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev gave Gromyko virtual free rein in setting Soviet foreign policy . He dominated Soviet politics from KhrushchevÊs ouster to his own death in 1982 .
 Under Brezhnev, Gromyko 4148-493-00G.indd 75 2/18/2012 .
 During 1973ă1975 Gromyko negotiated on behalf of the Soviet Union during the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, which led to the landmark 1975 Helsinki Final Act . During 1973’ă 1975 Gromyco negotiated for the Soviets during the conference on security and cooperation in
 Act recognized EuropeÊs postwar borders and set a political template for further negotiations concerning human rights, science, economics, and cultural exchanges . Act recognized postwar borders . Act set a precedent for future negotiations .
 Helsinki Final Act marked the full flowering of East-West détente, but because it did not match expectations about liberalization in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, it precipitated mounting dissent at home and protest abroad .
 In 1985 Mikhail Gorbachev appointed his own protégé, Eduard Shevardnadze, as foreign minister . Gromyko was named president of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR .
 Dobrynin, Anatoly Fyodorovich; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; Rusk, Dean David; U.N. References Gromyko, Anatoli.
 Guantánamo Bay Naval Base is the only U.S. military base on communist-held territory . The base was the site of much East-West discord during the Cold War .
 The Guantánamo Bay naval base has been occupied by the U.S. since the early 20th century . Located on both sides of an impressive harbor on the southwestern coast of Cuba, the base is located on the southwest coast .
 United States troops first landed at Guantánamo Bay in June 1898, during the Spanish-American War . U.S. troops first arrived at the base in 1898 .
 In 1903, the United States leased 28,817 acres, or about 45 square miles of land and water, around Guantánamo Bay from Cuba . The U.S. leased the area to the new Republic of Cuba .
 A 1934 treaty modified the original lease, stipulating that the base would revert to Cuban sovereignty only if both nations agreed to the change . The treaty stipulated that the Cuban base would only be returned to Cuba if both countries agreed to a change .
 The original lease was forced on a weak, newly independent Cuba as part of the 1902 Platt Amendment, which gave the U.S. the right to intervene in Cuban affairs indefinitely . Cubans argued that the original lease on the island was forced by the United States .
 U.S. strategic justifications for retaining the base have undergone various permutations . The base has been used as a military base for decades .
 Guantánamo was initially built as a coaling station to resupply the U.S. fleet . It was originally built in response to a need for resupplies .
 As coal-fueled ships became obsolete, the U.S. sought other pretexts to keep the base . The base is located in Fort Worth, Texas, near Fort Worth .
 Guantánamo, it was argued, gave the United States control over Atlantic entry to the Caribbean as well as sea routes between its Atlantic coast ports and Panama Canal .
 Washington argued that the base was vital to U.S. efforts to interdict drug smugglers from Central and South America . The baseÊs future was debated in the 1990s when the Cold War ended .
 Cuban critics have condemned the U.S. governmentÊs use of the base to interfere in the economic and political affairs of Cuba .
 Guantánamo was used to stage U.S. interventions in Cuba in 1906 and 1912 and during 1917ă1919 . It was ostensibly to stabilize political disturbances and protect US-owned sugar properties in the region .
 Following the 1959 Cuban Revolution, Guantánamo was at the center of the Cold War conflict between the U.S. and communist Cuba, supported by the Soviet Union . The United States and Cuba were involved in the conflict .
 During John F KennedyÊs presidency, his brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, intermittently contemplated faking an attack on the base by Cuban revolutionary forces to provide a pretext for a U.S. invasion .
 U.S. forces order evacuation of United States dependents and nonessential personnel . Airlift an additional 3,600 Marine troops and 3,200 tons of military equipment into the base to reinforce its defenses .
 On October 26 and 27, with the crisis still unresolved, several hundred Soviet troops moved nuclear-capable cruise missiles to advance positions from which they could launch an attack on Guantánamo .
 One truck bearing a missile overturned, crushing two soldiers and a Cuban bystander to death . The truck was carrying a missile carrying a Cuban missile was carrying two soldiers .
 Castro unavailingly sought to include the return of Guantánamo as part of the crisis settlement . In the immediate aftermath of the Cuban missile crisis, Castro sought to return Guantámo .
 Cuban government tried to cut water supplies to Guantánamo base in 1964 . Clashes between U.S. and Cuban troops along fence surrounding the base created tension .
 In 1992, Camp X-Ray was built at the base to house Haitian refugees seeking entrance to the U.S. In 1992 it was built to house refugees seeking entry to the United States .
 In 1994, Guantánamo received thousands of Cubans who wished to leave the island . Thousands of Cuban citizens were allowed to leave in 1994 . The U.S. government says it does not accept Cubans seeking to leave .
 Prisoners captured in the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan began to be ferried to the base for indefinite detention . Eight years later, prisoners were ferried there to be held indefinitely . The base is now being used to hold prisoners held in Afghanistan .
 Evidence of ill treatment of prisoners at the base provoked a wide-ranging debate within the U.S. and abroad during 2002ă2007 .
 Ernesto “Che” de la Serna was the Cuban minister of the interior, 1959 . Guevara was a Marxist revolutionary and contributor to the doctrine of revolutionary warfare . He was a member of the Cuban government .
 He witnessed the Bolivian National Revolution and the October Revolution in Guatemala during the presidency of Jacobo Arbenz . That same year he traveled throughout Latin America .
 AmericaÊs covert 1954 operation that ousted leftist Arbenz from power radicalized Guevara . The operation radicalized him, as did his later encounter in Mexico with several Cuban revolutionaries .
 Guevara joined CastroÊs expedition to Cuba in December 1956 and fought with his July 26 Movement until it triumphed in January 1959 . He fought with CastroÉs expedition in Cuba until January 1959 and fought for the July 26 movement .
 Guevara was CubaÊs first president of the National Bank and then minister of industry in CubaÉs early postrevolutionary government . He was also the first minister of the industry in the early post-revolutionary Cuba .
 With Fidel CastroÊs brother Raúl, he was among the strongest proponents of communism within the Cuban government . He was one of the strongest supporters of communism in Cuba . He is also a member of the Castro family .
 He developed close ties with Aleksandr Alekseev, a Soviet KGB espionage agent who first came to Havana in October 1959 . He was appointed Soviet ambassador in May 1962 .
 Guevara and Raúl Castro believed that a July 1960 Soviet declaration had deterred an anticipated U.S.-backed invasion attempt in October 1960 . The declaration was made by the Soviet Union in July 1960, and the Cuban leaders believed it deterred a U.N.
 In November 1960, Guevara visited Moscow, Prague, and Beijing, celebrating the November 7 anniversary of the Russian Revolution with Soviet leaders . The visit was part of a series of visits to Russia, Prague and Beijing .
 Guevara initialed the secret Cuban-Soviet defense agreement in August 1962 . The agreement governing the installation of nuclear-capable missiles and other Soviet forces in Cuba .
 Guevara deplored KhrushchevÊs decision to make concessions to the United States in October 1962 and remove Soviet missiles from Cuba . Fidel Castro and Fidel Castro both deplored the decision .
 He warned Soviet officials that their actions during the crisis had weakened the Soviet UnionÊs credibility around the world as a leader of international revolutionary movements .
 Guevara was skeptical that U.S. would honor its pledge not to invade Cuba in the future . He told Soviet Presidium member Mikoyan of his skepticism that the United States would honor the pledge .
 In the economic sphere, he rejected the advice of more orthodox Marxist and Soviet advisers . He followed Chinese Communist developmental teachings as propounded by Chairman Mao Zedong . This proved largely unsuccessful in Cuba as in China and in China .
 Guevara traveled to the Congo in 1965 and then to Bolivia in 1966, in the hope of initiating an insurrection that would become a focus for the transformation of neighboring countries . In 1966, he traveled to Bolivia, Bolivia and the Congo, where he planned to launch an uprising .
 GuevaraÊs overwhelming goal was to provide a diversion that would weaken U.S. resolve and resources then dedicated to waging war in Vietnam in Vietnam . He says he was trying to weaken the United States resolve . The United States was focused on the Vietnam War in Vietnam
 A Bolivian Army unit captured Guevara in the Yuro ravine on October 8, 1967, and summarily executed him the next day . The next day at La Higuera, Villagrande .
 One of the hands was removed to facilitate identification by U.S. intelligence . One of his hands removed to help identify him as a terrorist .
 GuevaraÊs body was uncovered in an unmarked site in Bolivia in 1997 and, together with a number of other Cuban revolutionaries, was repatriated to Cuba for interment .
 Alekseev, Aleksandr Ivanovich; Castro, Fidel Castro, Raúl; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; Mikoyan, Anastas Ivanovich References Anderson, Jon Lee.
 In 1959 he toured the Soviet Union, where he had lengthy interviews with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev . He also had interviews with the Soviet premier .
 When Khrushchev visited the U.S. later that year, Harriman reciprocated his hospitality .
 The two men fundamentally agreed on the need for arms-control agreements . The two sides agreed on need to agree on arms control .
 In 1960 the office-hungry Harriman made strenuous efforts to win a foreign policy post . Although not initially close to John F Kennedy, in 1960 he became close to the president .
 Ambassador-at-large became assistant secretary of state for Far Eastern affairs in 1962 . In March 1963 he worked his way up to undersecretary of state of political affairs .
 In these years he developed a warm relationship with both the president and his brother Robert, the attorney general . President Obama and Attorney General Robert Sessions met in Washington, DC .
 As matters hung in the the the Soviet Union and a close friend of Attorney balance after KennedyÊs pub . General Robert F Kennedy, was not formally announced on October a member of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council .
 During the Cuban 22 of the United States naval blockade Missile Crisis he made his views known . Harriman worried a voice for moderation that the U.S. might be forcing the beleaguered Khrushchev into confrontation he wished to avoid .
 He shared his concerns with Arthur Schlesinger Jr., KennedyÊs special assistant, in the hope that they would reach the president . He shared these concerns with a special assistant .
 Khrushchev found particularly galling the presence of NATO Jupiter missiles in Turkey . He also wrote to Robert Kennedy on October 22, warning that he found it galling to have them in the country .
 In July 1963, Khrushchev agreed to resume negotiations for a nuclear test ban treaty . Kennedy requested in his final public exchange of letters during the crisis . Kennedy's final letter to Khrushchchev: "I want a treaty that stops nuclear testing in Russia"
 Harriman headed the delegation that negotiated an agreement whereby both powers as well as Britain agreed to halt atmospheric nuclear tests . He was part of the negotiations that led to an agreement that both countries agreed to stop atmospheric tests .
 Harriman viewed with apprehension growing U.S. involvement in Indochina . Harrimans viewed growing United States involvement in the region .
 In 1961 he brokered a settlement between warring factions in Laos that sought to neutralize that countryÊs participation in the burgeoning insurgency in South Vietnam . In 1962 he negotiated a settlement in Laos with the government of South Vietnam and Laos . He also negotiated a cease-fire in
 Harriman believed internal reforms and a negotiated settlement with the Viet Cong represented the best solution to South VietnamÊs problems . He believed internal reform was the solution to the country's problems .
 Harriman consistently advocated a bombing halt 4148-493-00H.indd 82 2/18/2012 .
 In 1968 he represented the United States when such talks began in Paris . He resigned when Richard M Nixon took office in January 1969 .
 Lyndon Johnson was born in Stonewall in the Texas Hills near Austin, Texas, on August 27, 1908 . Johnson was the first president of the United States .
 As a Democratic congressman from 1937 to 1948, Johnson won a towering political reputation . He won a reputation for his ability to persuade often balky senators and congressmen to reach consensus on legislation .
 During his political career Johnson acquired a respectable understanding of U.S. foreign policies . Johnson had a perspective informed by the orthodox bipartisan Cold War internationalist consensus on the need to resist Soviet communism .
 He supported the economic embargo the U.S. imposed on Cuba in October 1960 . He supported an economic embargo imposed by the United States .
 As vice president Johnson had little input into policy and was excluded from Kennedy's inner circle of advisers . Selected in 1960 as KennedyÊs running mate, as vice president, he had little influence on policy .
 He was left ignorant of planning for the failed April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba . The failed invasion was the first attempt to invade Cuba in 1961 .
 Johnson was a member of the Executive Committee Kennedy established on October 16 to decide how the U.S. government should react to the discovery of Soviet nuclear-capable missile sites .
 Although absent from October 17 to 20, he participated in the final weekÊs deliberations, taking charge when Kennedy was not present . Although absent, he took charge of the deliberations when Kennedy wasn't present .
 Johnson initially favored surprise U.S. air strikes to destroy missile installations . Johnson only reluctantly came round to supporting a blockade of Syria .
 President Kennedy was a strong advocate of removing NATO Jupiter missiles in Turkey in exchange for the dismantling of Soviet missile bases in Cuba . He was the presidentÊs brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, who negotiated as a secret deal .
 Johnson also unsuccessfully advised Kennedy against consulting congressional leaders on the crisis . Johnson also warned that the president would not “get much help out of them.”
 The narrow escape from nuclear war apparently impelled not only President Kennedy but also Johnson actively sought U.S.-Soviet détente . Détente was a policy Johnson supported after becoming president in 1963 .
 While still vice president, Johnson concluded that the threat that communist Cuba under Fidel Castro represented to the U.S. had been “grossly exaggerated” Johnson concluded .
 President Johnson feared that secret Central Intelligence Agency Operation Operation Operation mongoose plots to destabilize Cuba and kill Castro might have impelled Lee Harvey Oswald, a leftist American who belonged to the Free Cuba committee, to retaliate by assassinating Kennedy .
 Johnson initially broke off secret negotiations between Kennedy and Castro, using United States and Cuban UN delegates as intermediaries . In early 1964 he began exploring the possibility of normalizing U.S. relations with Cuba, extending unofficial feelers to Castro .
 Castro retaliated by cutting off the water supply to the United States military base at Guantánamo Bay . The U.S. coast guard seized Cuban fishing boats in United States waters . The crisis was resolved peacefully in spring 1964 . In spring 1964 minor crises occurred when the
 JohnsonÊs growing preoccupation with the escalating war in Vietnam may have prevented him devoting adequate attention to potential rapprochement with Cuba and also undermined his efforts to improve U.S. relations with the Soviet Union .
 In March 1968 he declared that he would not seek another presidential term . Ultimately, JohnsonÊs failure to attain victory in Vietnam and popular disillusionment with the war destroyed his presidency .
 Johnson died at his Texas ranch on January 22, 1973, four years after leaving office . Johnson died in 1973 .
 Dallek, Robert. Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Kennedy, Robert . Francis; Castro, Fidel Castro . Kennedy, Fidel. Kennedy .
 The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff is a military committee consisting of the chiefs of staff of the U.S. Army and Air Force, the chief of naval operations, and the commandant of the Marine Corps . The committee is the United States' highest-ranking military officials .
 Its chairman, a separate officer drawn from one of the services, is a U.S. National Security Council member . Its chairman is a separate official drawn from a separate service .
 The committee was formalized and codified under the 1947 National Security Act that created a Department of Defense incorporating the former War and Navy departments . Originating during World War II, the committee was formally formalized . The committee is now known as the National Security Committee .
 The JCS advise the president, the secretary of defense, and the National Security Council . They provide guidance to commanders in the field and provide guidance for commanders .
 President Eisenhower called for a CIA-sponsored invasion of Cuba by refugee Cuban exiles . Eisenhower was president of the Cuban government in 1953 . The invasion was part of a plan to invade Cuba .
 Kennedy accepted the scheme in principle but insisted that the U.S. should not provide overt military support for the exiles . Kennedy also moved the projected landing site from the planned landing site to accommodate the refugees .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff of U.S. air strikes and air cover during the operation . He also severely limited the number and nature of the strikes .
 In the aftermath of the botched April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, Kennedy and his top civilian aides blamed the JCS for endorsing the plan . The JCS endorsed the plan, albeit with some qualifications, and not pointing out its weaknesses, Kennedy said .
 JCS expected Kennedy would drop pretense of noninvolvement and intervene overtly to assist rebels, he says . JCS had expected that, if the invasion force encountered problems, Kennedy would intervene overtly .
 On their side, the JCS considered KennedyÊs refusal to give the rebels greater support evidence of weak and irresolute leadership . The JCS considers Kennedy�ÊS refusal to support the rebels evidence of a weak leadership . On the rebels' side, they say Kennedy
 Arleigh Burke, chief of naval operations, had since early 1960 supported the overthrow of the Castro government . Burke publicly cast doubt on Soviet premier Nikita KhrushchevÊs July 1960 pledge that the Soviet Union would if necessary use nuclear weapons to defend Cuba against U.S.
 Burke begged Kennedy to allow him to send naval or air support, but after some wavering Kennedy refused . Kennedy refused to send support .
 The JCS despised him for failing to escalate U.S. intervention, while Kennedy distrusted them . Kennedy distrust the JCS for not escalating the conflict, Kennedy said .
 Lyman Lemnitzer, chairman of the JCS, was particularly bad; the two men could scarcely bear to be in the same room . The two men were particularly bad .
 He retired as chief of naval operations on August 1, 1961 . He was replaced by Adm. George V. Eisenhower in 1961 .
 Curtis LeMay replaced Thomas D White as chief of staff of the U.S. Air Force . LeMay also replaced Thomas White as Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force.
 Former chief of staff of the U.S. Army under Eisenhower to investigate the Bay of Pigs . Taylor, who retired four years earlier, to investigate four years later . Taylor was former chief of Staff of the United States Army .
 President Obama appointed Taylor as his principal military adviser . He soon appointed Taylor to serve as liaison with the JCS and as chairman of the Special Group on Cuba .
 On October 1, 1962, Kennedy appointed Taylor chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a post he held until mid-1964 . Taylor was appointed by Kennedy in mid-1962 .
 Earle G Wheeler replaced George Decker as army chief of staff . Wheeler replaced Decker as Army chief-of-staff .
 Initially he recommended a surgical strike against the missile bases, followed by a naval blockade to prevent the arrival of further weapons . Initially, he recommended surgical strike on missile bases .
 Later that day, after consulting the JCS, he recommended massive air strikes on Cuba .
 The JCS recommended massive air strikes against Cuban targets without advance warning, preferably on October 23 . JCS met as a group with Kennedy on October 19, recommending massive strikes .
 With the exception of Taylor, they also favored following this with a full-scale U.S. invasion of the island . They further assumed that this would mean war with the Soviet Union . They also assumed that war with Russia would mean an invasion of Cuba .
 JCS expressed disagreement on behalf of the JCS but pledged their complete backing for the presidentÊs decision . Taylor expressed disagreement but pledged to support the president Ês choice .
 Taylor continued to support massive air strikes targeting all identified nuclear-capable and surface-to-air missile sites . After KennedyÊs public announcement of the quarantine on October 22, Taylor continued his support .
 On October 27, with negotiations with Khrushchev at a critical stage, the JCS recommended launching massive air strikes against Cuba on October 29, followed by an invasion one week later . The JCS also recommended launching air strikes on Cuba on Oct. 29 .
 JCS reacted with dismay when Khrushchev and Kennedy reached agreement on October 28, drafting a message to Kennedy characterizing the Soviet response as ‘an insincere proposal to gain time” that would leave missiles in Cuba . JCS warned against any „relaxation
 The JCS deplored CubaÊs refusal to allow on-site inspections of missile sites in Cuba . The Cuban government has refused to allow inspections of missiles sites .
 LeMay unavailingly suggested that U.S. naval squadrons and bombers be positioned around Cuba . LeMay suggested that if Castro refused access to Cuba's military command center, they would bomb it .
 Joint Chiefs unanimously recommended that unless these left Cuba, the U.S. should either bomb them or land military personnel on Cuba to remove them . In mid-November, the Joint Chiefs recommended that the United States should either drop them or drop them .
 The dispute was resolved peacefully when Soviet officials agreed to send the Il-28s back to Russia . The dispute between the Soviet Union and Russia was resolved in a peaceful manner .
 For the rest of his life Kennedy believed that, had he followed the advice of the JCS, full-scale nuclear war and global devastation would have resulted . Kennedy believed the advice would have led to a nuclear war .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Castro, Fidel; Eisenhower, Dwight David; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Taylor, Maxwell Davenport 4148-493-00J.indd 89 .
 Lyndon Johnson, Robert McNamara, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the lies that led to Vietnam. The truth behind the Vietnam War is still a mystery .
 U.S. President Dwight D Eisenhower offered weapons to British prime minister Harold Macmillan in 1957 . 60 Thor missiles should be deployed on British territory, under joint United States and British control . The missiles were intended to repair relations with Britain after the Suez crisis .
 The U.S. offered Jupiter missiles to allies in Europe after the Soviet launch of Sputnik, the first space satellite, in 1957 . Jupiter missiles were offered to other North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies . The United States decided to offer the missiles to other allies .
 In 1959 Italy agreed to accept 30 Jupiter missiles and Turkey 15 . France, West Germany, Greece, and Greece declined them . In 1959 Turkey agreed to receive 15 Jupiter missiles from Italy .
 The warheads were to remain under U.S. control, with launching requiring approval from both United States and host governments . Launching of the warheads would also have to be approved by the United States or host countries .
 Nikita Khrushchev objected strongly to Jupiter deployments in Turkey . The 1,700-mile range meant these could reach numerous targets in western Soviet territory within minutes .
 Many U.S. officials recommended against installing Jupiters in Turkey . Turkish leaders resisted cancellation and construction of the installations went ahead . Deployments were completed between November 1961 and March 1962 .
 Khrushchev repeatedly assailed the presence of missiles in Turkey, uncomfortably close to his Black Sea dacha . The missiles were built close to the site of his dacha in the region .
 By summer 1962 the United States and Britain had agreed to remove increasingly obsolete Thor missiles within a year . The U.S. and Britain agreed that Thor missiles should be removed from the U.K.
 U.S. officials sought similar arrangements with Turkey, but Turkish leaders protested strongly . The missiles remained undisturbed . United States sought similar deals with Turkey but Turkey objected strongly .
 Robert Kennedy was reluctant to make a public bargain with the Soviet Union . The Kennedy brothers explored the possibility with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador in Washington, and Georgi Bolshakov .
 Soviet and U.S. officials informally agreed that the United States would implement the withdrawal of Jupiter missiles in Turkey and Italy within a few months . Soviet and United States officials said the withdrawal would take place in Turkey, Italy and Turkey .
 Kennedy was ready to encourage U Thant, acting secretary general of the United Nations, to propose a similar arrangement . Had these negotiations failed, Kennedy was prepared to encourage the U.N. to propose such a plan .
 Macmillan was prepared to offer the removal of Thor missiles from the United Kingdom . Thor missiles were also offered to be removed from the UK .
 U.S. officials considered not retaliating further if Khrushchev ordered attacks on Turkish Jupiter bases . There are also indications that had the United States launched air strikes against Soviet bases in Cuba, they may not have retaliated further . The United States considered not responding further should Khrush
 Missiles officials remained ignorant of the agreement, since Khrushchev kept his word .
 On October 29, 1962, McNamara established an interdepartmental task force to supervise removal of the missiles by April 1, 1963 . The task force was set up by McNamara .
 Turkish officials were reluctant to sanction the removal of the Jupiter missiles . Italian leaders were readier to relinquish their missiles in return for alternative security arrangements .
 U.S. offered additional conventional and dual-purpose weapons, including F-104G fighter jets . Turkish and Italian compliance was encouraged by the United States . The United States also offered additional weapons to encourage compliance .
 The Kennedy administration withdrew the Jupiters before consulting NATO's governing body, the North Atlantic Council, that supposedly controlled their deployment . In February 1963, the Kennedy administration announced the withdrawal .
 By the end of April all Italian and Turkish Jupiter missiles had been dismantled . All Jupiter missiles were dismantled by end of the month .
 In their place, nucleararmed United States Polaris submarines patrolled the Mediterranean . Polaris submarines were used to patrol the Mediterranean in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Bolshakov, Georgi Nikitovich; Bundy, McGeorge; Dobrynin, Anatoly Fyodorovich; Eisenhower, Dwight David; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald . Kennedy, Robert Francis; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; McNamara, Robert Strange;
 John F Kennedy was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, on May 29, 1917 . He was born into a large and wealthy Irish Catholic family .
 Kennedy's father, Joseph P Kennedy, was a multimillionaire with presidential aspirations . His mother, Rose Fitzgerald, came from a prominent and politically active Boston family .
 During World War II Kennedy served four years in the U.S. Navy, winning the Navy and Marine Corps Medals and the Purple Heart for action as commander of PT-109, which was rammed and sunk by a Japanese destroyer in the South Pacific .
 After the war, Kennedy worked briefly as a newspaper correspondent before entering national politics at the age of 29 . He won election as a Democratic congressman from Massachusetts in 1946 .
 His career there was relatively undistinguished, due in part to several serious health problems, including chronic back problems and Addison disease .
 In 1960, he nonetheless won the Democratic nomination for president on the first ballot . In 1960 he still won the nomination on first ballot, though .
 Kennedy promised more aggressive defense policies, health care reform, and housing and civil rights programs . Kennedy was a presidential candidate in 1980s .
 He also proposed his New Frontier agenda, designed to revitalize the flagging U.S. economy . The agenda is designed to bring young people into government and service .
 Winning by the narrowest of margins, he became the nation�Ês first Roman Catholic president .
 Only 43 years old, he was also the youngest man ever elected to that office . Only 43-years-old, he became the first man to hold that post .
 His address, in some respects a rather bellicose call to arms, ended with the now-famous exhortation ‘ask not what your country can do for you’ – ask what you can do .
 President Kennedy was forced to respond to the evermore-urgent demands of civil rights advocates . He did so rather reluctantly and reluctantly and Democrat John F Kennedy was elected president .
 November 1960, liked to project an image of Cold the Alliance for Progress and War toughness . By establishing both November 1960 .
 In practice, during the Cuban the Peace Corps, Kennedy Missile Crisis, he nonetheless proved flexible and sought to avoid a nuclear conflagration . In practice he sought to be flexible and avoid a disaster .
 Despite Kennedy's idealism, his presidency witnessed growing tensions in U.S.-Soviet Cold War rivalry . KennedyÊs idealism was often overshadowed by his idealism .
 In 1959 he suggested that President Dwight Eisenhower's failure to welcome Fidel Castro when he visited the U.N. had been a mistake .
 During the 1960 presidential campaign Kennedy excoriated the Eisenhower administration for its failure to eradicate CubaÊs communist government . Kennedy still excused himself for the failure of CubaÉs government .
 One of his first attempts to address the perceived communist threat was to authorize a band of U.S.-supported Cuban exiles to invade the island in an attempt to overthrow CastroÊs government . The Cuban government was overthrown by the Cuban government .
 The April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion turned into an embarrassing debacle for the president . The invasion was planned by the Central Intelligence Agency during EisenhowerÊs administration .
 Kennedy harbored reservations about the operation, but nonetheless approved it . The operation was the first time Kennedy had been involved in it .
 Kennedy and Castro were global competitors for the allegiance of idealistic young people around the world . Castro and Kennedy became global competitors in the 1960s for young people .
 In spring 1961, the Soviet Union renewed its campaign to control West Berlin .
 Kennedy spent two days in Vienna in June 1961 discussing the hot-button issue with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev . Kennedy spent the day in Vienna, Vienna, talking about the war with the Soviets .
 The construction of the Berlin Wall, which prevented East Berliners from escaping to the West, further intensified the Berlin crisis . In the months that followed, the construction of Berlin Wall further intensified it .
 Kennedy responded to the provocation by reinforcing troops in the Federal Republic of Germany and increasing the nationÊs military strength . Kennedy responded with an increased military force .
 Berlin Wall eased tensions in Central Europe that had nearly resulted in a superpower conflagration . The Berlin Wall, albeit perhaps unintentionally, eased tensions with Central Europe .
 Kennedy began deploying what would become some 16,000 U.S. military ‘advisers‰ to prop up Ngo Dinh DiemÊs regime in Vietnam . The commitment set the United States on the slippery slope toward full-scale military intervention in Vietnam.
 After the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy authorized various CIA and other covert initiatives intended, in tandem with economic sanctions, to sabotage, undermine, and destroy CastroÊs government . The CIA and economic sanctions were intended to sabotage and undermine the government of Cuba .
 Fearing a second U.S. invasion attempt, in May 1962 Soviet leaders decided to clandestinely install nuclear-capable missiles in Cuba . The missiles were installed in Cuba in response to fears of an invasion attempt .
 On October 14, 1962, United States reconnaissance planes photographed the construction of missile-launching sites in Cuba . U.S. reconnaissance planes were flying over Cuba .
 The placement of nuclear-capable missiles only 90 miles from U.S. shores threatened to destabilize the Western Hemisphere and undermine the uneasy Cold War nuclear deterrent . U.N. nuclear weapons could destabilize Western Hemisphere .
 Kennedy imposed a naval quarantine on Cuba designed to interdict any offensive weapons bound for the island . The quarantine was designed to stop the flow of offensive weapons .
 On October 22 United States armed forces moved to DEFCON-3, a heightened state of alert . On October 25, the U.S. armed forces upgraded to DEFON-2, only one level short of war, on October 25 . The United States is one of
 The two Cold War superpowers appeared close to thermonuclear war, but ultimately Soviet leaders agreed to remove the missiles . For several days the outcome hung in the balance, as the two .
 In return, the United States pledged not to preemptively invade Cuba . The United States also agreed to remove obsolete NATO nuclear missiles from Turkey . In exchange, the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba and removed obsolete NATO missiles .
 During the crisis, Kennedy secretly taped the discussions of his Executive Committee (ExComm) of senior advisers . Kennedy taped the talks of his ExComm, which he secretly taped during the crisis .
 The transcripts reveal a man who leaned to the less confrontational option of a naval quarantine or blockade . He was prepared to make substantial concessions in order to avoid escalation into a nuclear war .
 Kennedy took up the causes of civil rights and disarmament after the crisis . Kennedy was a prominent advocate for disarmament .
 In October 1963, the same three nations agreed to refrain from placing nuclear weapons in orbit . The three nations also agreed not to put nuclear weapons into orbit .
 A hotline was installed that directly linked the Oval Office with the Kremlin . To avoid potential misunderstandings and miscalculations in a future crisis, it was installed .
 In July 1963 the United States Treasury Department imposed regulations forbidding all U.S. citizens to have any commercial or financial relations with Cuba . The restrictions were imposed in July 1963 .
 In June 1963 Kennedy endorsed further CIA covert sabotage operations intended to destabilize CastroÊs government . Despite his noninvasion pledge, in June 1963 he endorsed further covert operations . Kennedy endorsed the CIA's covert sabotage efforts .
 Kennedy responded favorably to exploratory feelers from Castro on the possibility of normalizing U.S.-Cuban relations . Kennedy worked through William Attwood and Carlos Lechuga, CubaÊs ambassador to the UN .
 He suggested that the U.S. might lift its sanctions on Cuba if Castro drops support for revolutionary movements elsewhere in Latin America . Castro's support for Latin American revolutionary movements has been criticized in Cuba .
 On November 22, 1963, KennedyÊs assassination in Dallas, Texas, during a political campaign trip cut short these overtures . KennedyØs assassination was a political assassination in Texas .
 KennedyÊs successor, Lyndon B Johnson, ended the talks, considering them too politically compromising, liable to expose him to Republican charges that he was soft on communism . JFKÊ's successor, LBJ, decided to end the talks in December 1963 .
 Lee Harvey Oswald held leftist political views that had impelled him to join a Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Oswald was arrested for murdering the president, held leftist views that led to his arrest .
 Oswald, himself shot two days later by a nightclub owner, never stood trial . Oswald, who had sympathy for Cuba, was never tried for his actions .
 Kennedy was laid to rest in Arlington National Cemetery on November 25, 1963 . In a great national outpouring of grief, Kennedy was remembered for his sacrifice .
 Robert F Kennedy was the seventh child of Joseph P Kennedy, a multimillionaire business tycoon and U.S. ambassador to Great Britain . He was born in Boston in 1925 .
 He began his legal career as an attorney in the Criminal Division of the United States Department of Justice in 1951 . He later served as chief counsel to the Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor and Management Field .
 Robert managed his brother JohnÊs successful U.S. senatorial campaign in 1952 and 1960 presidential campaign . Robert managed JohnØs successful United States senatorial bid in 1952 .
 Following the 1960 election, President-elect Kennedy appointed his younger brother to his cabinet as United States attorney general . Kennedy's brother was appointed as Attorney General in 1960 .
 Robert Kennedy was President KennedyÊs closest adviser on both foreign and domestic policy . Robert Kennedy also served as his closest adviser to President Kennedy on foreign policy .
 The president approved the proposed April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion attempt by U.S.-trained Cuban exiles . His brother enthusiastically endorsed this decision and squelched potential critics .
 Robert was one 4148-493-00K.indd 97 2/18:07 PM 98 .
 He also aggressively backed new measures aimed at CastroÊs overthrow, including economic sanctions and covert sabotage operations . He was influential member of the Special Group on Cuba, of which he was an influential member and even chair .
 CIA efforts involved cooperation with leading American Mafia figures and repeated attempts to asRobert F Kennedy, attorney general of the sassinate Castro . The CIA tried to kill Castro in Cuba .
 President Kennedy was the closest adviser of his brother President John F Kennedy . He was also a close adviser to his brother, President Kennedy .
 From April 1961 onward Robert Kennedy opened an unofficial diplomatic back channel with Georgi Bolshakov, a military intelligence agent based at the Soviet embassy in Washington . His reports went to Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev, whose reports were sent to the Soviet premier .
 In over 40 meetings and communications, for 18 months he represented the president in efforts to defuse U.S.-Soviet tensions over Berlin, Laos, and Cuba . He also promoted disarmament and superpower cooperation .
 Khrushchev used Bolshakov to request a cessation of U.S. aerial surveillance of Soviet shipping . Bolshavakov helped facilitate the clandestine installation of nuclear-capable missiles on Cuba . In summer 1962, Bolshov requested the cessation of United States aerial surveillance .
 Robert Kennedy was a crucial figure in the deliberations of the Executive Committee of senior presidential advisers . The Kennedy administration discovered the missiles in October 1962 . The missiles were discovered by the Kennedy administration .
 Initially, on October 16, he favored immediate air strikes to destroy missile bases, but within three days he had become the most influential 4148-493-00K .
 The United States agreed to remove obsolete NATO Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey in exchange for Soviet withdrawal of those on Cuba . In confidential talks with Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet ambassador to the United States, Robert Kennedy negotiated a secret understanding whereby the U.S. removed obsolete NATO nuclear missiles
 His posthumously published account of the Cuban missile crisis, Thirteen Days, became a bestseller . His account was by no means entirely accurate in depicting his stance .
 Cuban exiles captured at the Bay of Pigs were released in exchange for $53 million in American medicines, food, and machinery . Once the missile crisis was resolved, in December 1962 Robert Kennedy concluded an agreement whereby Castro released the exiles . In December 1962, Kennedy concluded a deal with
 The Kennedy brothers continued to endorse proposed covert operations intended to facilitate CastroÊs overthrow and military contingency plans to invade Cuba . His hostility to Cuba was still strong .
 Kennedy administration's dedication to attacking Castro may have been one reason Lee Harvey Oswald assassinated the president in 1963 . Oswald was a leftist American who supported Cuba . Oswald assassinated JFK in November 1963 .
 Some historians have speculated that guilt over the possibility that his near-obsessive crusade against Cuba provoked OswaldÊs action may have intensified Robert Kennedy's devastating grief over his brother's death .
 He became a vigorous advocate of social reform and minority rights . Sworn into the Senate in January 1965, he became a strong advocate of minority rights and social reform .
 He became sharply critical of President Lyndon B JohnsonÊs steep escalation of the war in Vietnam . Although he had initially supported his brotherØs increasing military and economic aid to South Vietnam, he later became critical of the President's escalation .
 Kennedy became a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination in March 1968 . Kennedy campaigned across the country in the Democratic primaries . Kennedy was a presidential candidate in 1968 .
 On June 4, 1968, just after he had won the California primary, Sirhan B Sirhan shot Kennedy in the head . He died two days later and was buried in Arlington National Cemetery .
 Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev was born on April 17, 1894, in Kalinovka, Kursk Province, to a peasant family . He worked as a pipe fitter in various mines near his home as a child .
 Fear of nuclear devastation nonetheless made him willing to concede withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . Fear of nuke devastation ultimately led him to concede the withdrawal of missiles .
 In 1938 he became a candidate of the Politburo, and in 1939, a full member of the party . In 1939 he was a candidate and full member, becoming a candidate .
 He was one of few senior party officials to survive StalinÊs Great Purges . He was a member of the Communist Party who survived the Great Purge .
 Khrushchev was made a lieutenant general after the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 . He was placed in charge of resistance in Ukraine and relocating heavy industry eastward . He is credited with leading Soviet resistance to the Nazi invasion .
 As one of the powerful committee secretaries, Khrushchev benefited from this change . As a powerful committee secretary, he was able to influence the Soviet Union .
 Following StalinÊs death on March 5, 1953, a brief power struggle ensued, with no one individual on the 10-member Presidium dominating . No one individual in the Presidium dominated .
 Khrushchev, chosen as party secretary in 1953, emerged as supreme leader over the next two years . He became premier in 1958, becoming the Soviet Union's first prime minister .
 Khrushchev's greatest achievement as Soviet leader was to repudiate Stalin and attempt to de-Stalinize Soviet society . He repudiated Stalin in an attempt to try and de-stalinize society .
 Under Khrushchev, the Soviet Union gradually became more liberal, and oppressive domestic repression relaxed considerably .
 Soviet success during the 1950s in economic policy, industrial production, and the space program, prompted Khrushchev to proclaim that by 1970, the Soviet Union would surpass the United States in per capita production . Soviet success in economic and space programs compelled Khrushchchev to declare that by
 In 1980, he grandiosely predicted, the U.S. would embrace communism . He grandly predicted that the United States would embrace the Communist Party .
 KhrushchevÊs foreign policies within and beyond the communist bloc tended to be ambivalent . The Soviet Union's foreign policy in the 1950s and '60s was often criticized for its lack of transparency .
 He restored Soviet relations with Yugoslavia in 1955, repairing the Tito-Stalin break of 1948 . He restored relations between Yugoslavia and Russia in 1955 .
 He promoted de-Stalinization programs in Eastern bloc states and allowed overseas communist parties a certain limited autonomy . He was prepared to suppress dissent if he thought this was in Soviet best interests .
 When Albanian and Chinese officials criticized his de-Stalinization policies and rapprochement with the West, this led to crises and permanent schisms in Soviet relations with both countries .
 Khrushchev generally attempted to ease tensions with the West, particularly with the U.S. Khruschev generally tried to ease tension with the United States .
 He rejected StalinÊs thesis that wars between capitalist and socialist countries were inevitable and instead sought peaceful coexistence . He rejected the idea that war between capitalism and socialism was inevitable .
 His talks with President Dwight D Eisenhower produced, at least briefly, a warming termed the Spirit of Camp David . The spirit of the camp David was briefly captured by President Eisenhower .
 Khrushchev also engaged in some rather dubious and dangerous foreign policy initiatives . But he also had some dubious, dangerous foreign policies, including a dangerous policy .
 He initiated the 1958ă1961 Berlin Crises, authorized the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961, and used the U-2 Affair in 1960 to derail the May 1960 Paris summit meeting with Eisenhower . In 1961, he used the Berlin Affair to derail a meeting with
 Khrushchev welcomed the emergence of a radical revolutionary regime in Cuba in 1959 . Fidel Castro soon sought Soviet economic and military assistance .
 Khrushchev offered to station Soviet military units equipped with short-, medium-, and intermediaterange nuclear-capable ballistic missiles and other conventional weapons on Cuba . Fears that John F Kennedy intended forcibly to overthrow CastroÊs government, and a desire to redress the massive advantage the
 He intended to install both men and missiles on the island in great secrecy before publicly announcing their presence there . He hoped to use them to pressure U.S. officials on Berlin, Cuba, and other issues .
 In October 1962, when the missile bases were still under construction, the Kennedy administration discovered their existence . The Kennedy administration demanded the removal of all nuclear warheads and nuclear-capable delivery vehicles from Cuba .
 For some days, thermonuclear war between the superpowers seemed a distinct possibility . The U.S. and South Korea have been at odds for years .
 Khrushchev eventually decided to dismantle the missiles and ship them back to Russia . In return for a public pledge by the United States not to invade Cuba, the U.S. agreed to return the missiles .
 Khrushchev also agreed to withdraw NATO Jupiter missiles installed in Turkey and Italy, within easy reach of the Soviet Union . Secretly, Kennedy agreed to withdrawal of NATO Jupiter intermediate-range missiles .
 Living quietly in semi-disgrace, he then wrote his memoirs, which were published in the West beginning in 1970 . The memoirs were published beginning to 1970 .
 Khrushchev died in Moscow on September 11, 1971, following a massive heart attack . The former Soviet leader was assassinated in June 1968 .
 From 1947 to 1949 he served in the United States embassy in Moscow . From 1949 to 1952 he was director of the Voice of America radio broadcasting network .
 During the 1950s he spent stints with the Policy Planning Staff and the Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs . He was counselor in the United States embassy in Turkey and was detailed to the International Cooperation Agency .
 From December 1959 to August 1962, Kohler was assistant secretary of state for European Affairs . Kohler served as the Assistant Secretary of State for Europe from 1959 to 1962 .
 On October 16 Kohler, just arrived in Moscow, reported a conversation with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev . The latter promised to do nothing to complicate relations with the U.S. before the approaching early November congressional midterm elections .
 In June 1963 the Soviet Union and the United States established a dedicated transatlantic telephone ‘hotline‰ to enable leaders in both countries to communicate directly with each other . This system proved so slow and clumsy that in June 1963 it was established in the USSR .
 In 1947 he became second secretary of the Kuybyshev provincial party committee . He was also a member of the Communist Party of Soviet Russia .
 In 1949 he was assigned to Leningrad, and in 1953 he became first secretary of the CPSU in that city . In 1953 he was appointed as first secretary in the Soviet Union . He was also assigned to Russia's Communist Party in 1953 .
 Kozlov became a full member of the Presidium in 1957 . Closely allied with Nikita Khrushchev, Kozlov was close ally with the Soviet Union . Kozlov is a member of Russia's Communist Party Party .
 He was briefly premier of the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic during 1957-1958 . He resigned this post to become the deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union .
 In 1960 he assumed the powerful post of secretary of the CPSU Central Committee . He assumed the power post in 1960 . He was the leader of the Soviet Union's Communist Party .
 Kozlov was among Soviet hard-liners who favored an uncompromising stance toward the West . Kozlov is one of the most prominent members of the Soviet Union's hard-line .
 Novocherkassk was a key player in enforcing an uncompromising approach against the June 2, 1962, workersÊ strike that resulted in several deaths when Red Army soldiers fired on demonstrators, an event kept secret for almost 30 years .
 Kozlov, Presidium member who followed intelligence activities most closely, endorsed an assertive policy on Cuba . Kozlov was the Presidium's most closely-watched intelligence officer . He endorsed a more assertive approach to Cuba .
 In March 1961 he assured Raúl Castro, younger brother of Cuban leader Fidel Castro, that the Soviet Union was ‘prepared to give Cuba whatever she needed‰ militarily, provided ‘Soviet specialists were sent to Cuba‰ to supervise the use of such weaponry
 In May 1962 Politburo meetings he spoke in favor of KhrushchevÊs decision to deploy nuclear-capable weapons in Cuba . In 1962 he spoke to support the decision to use nuclear weapons against Cuba .
 At the end of October, however, he endorsed the removal of such missiles, acquiescing in KhrushchevÊs pragmatic recognition that nuclear war over these with the U.S. was unacceptable .
 Without this health setback, Kozlov and not Leonid Brezhnev might have been the next Soviet leader . Kozlov's health setback could have prevented him from becoming the next leader .
 Despite his near-complete incapacitation, Kozlov retained his posts until he was forced to resign in November 1964 after KhrushchevÊs removal from power . Kozlov remained in power until the end of the war in 1964 .
 Kuznetsov, Vasili Vasilyevich Soviet politician, was first deputy foreign minister, 1955 . He was the first deputy minister of Soviet Union in Soviet Union . He died in 1977 .
 Vasili Kuznetsov was born on February 13, 1901, in Sofilovka, Kostroma Province, Russia . Vasili was born in 1901 . He was a member of the Soviet Union .
 He studied engineering and metal processing in the United States from 1931 to 1933 at the Carnegie Institute of Technology .
 He was chairman of the All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions from 1944 to 1953 . He also chaired the Soviet of Nationalities from 1946 to 1950 .
 In 1953 Kuznetsov switched to the foreign ministry, serving briefly as Soviet ambassador to China . After the death of Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, in 1953 he switched to foreign ministry . In 1953 he was briefly ambassador to the United States .
 He attended the 1954 Geneva conference on Indochina as a Soviet representative . He was Soviet representative at the 1954 conference .
 In 1955 Kuznetsov became first deputy foreign minister, a post he held until 1977 . He worked closely with Foreign Minister Andrey Gromyko . In 1977 he was the country's first foreign minister .
 Khrushchev dispatched Kuznetsov to the United Nations to negotiate the details of the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . The removal of the Soviet missiles was part of the plan to remove Soviet missiles .
 He worked intensely with UN acting secretary general U Thant and American John J McCloy . U.S. accepted that Cuban premier Fidel Castro would not permit on-site inspections in Cuba .
 Soviet Il-28 light bombers and tactical nuclear-capable missiles were also withdrawn from Cuba . Despite last-ditch efforts by Castro and Soviet defense minister Rodion Malinovsky to leave these in place, at U.S. insistence .
 Kuznetsov warned McCloy, ‘we will honor this agreement.” In late December 1962, as their negotiations came to an end, as they . ended, “We will honor [McKoy] this agreement,” he said .
 The Soviet Union is not going to find itself in a position like this ever again, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The Soviet Union will not be in such a position again," he says .
 In May 1963 Kuznetsov unsuccessfully opposed Khrushchev's public statement that the Soviet Union would if necessary use nuclear weapons to defend CubaÊs independence . In May 2013 Kuznnetsov still unsuccessfully opposed the statement, in a Cuban-Soviet communiqué .
 In 1977 Kuznetsov became first deputy chairman of the Soviet Presidium, a post he held until he retired in 1986 . He served as the Soviet Union's acting head of state after the deaths of Leonid Brezhnev, Yuri Andropov, and Konstantin
 Castro, Fidel; Gromyko, Andrey Andreyevich; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich . Malinovsky, Rodion Yakovlevich; McCloy, John Jay; U Thant; U.N. References Bird, Kai.
 He went on active duty during World War II in the U.S. Army, serving with the Office of Strategic Services . He finished his wartime service as a major with the United States Army Air Forces in the western Pacific .
 In 1950, Lansdale became a member of the United States Military Assistance Group, undertaking operations to suppress the communist Hukbalahap rebellion . Lansdale was a Filipino president Elpidio Quirino at the request of the president .
 Lansdale joined the U.S. mission in Vietnam as adviser on counter-guerrilla operations . Lansdale was sent to Vietnam in 1953 to join the United States mission in the country .
 After a brief tour in the Philippines, he returned to Vietnam in 1954 to serve with the U.S. Military Advisory Group .
 Lansdale helped solidify South Vietnamese prime minister Ngo Dinh DiemÊs rule . Lansdale returned to Washington in 1957 and held various military and Defense Department positions .
 He was promoted to brigadier general in 1960 and major general upon his retirement in 1963 . He was also promoted to major general in 1961 .
 As deputy assistant secretary of defense for special operations, he played a prominent role in training Cuban exiles for the disastrous April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion .
 LansdaleÊs career included two years of service as a consultant to the Food for Peace Program . He was also a consultant for two years as a member of the Food For Peace program .
 He returned to South Vietnam in 1965 as senior liaison officer of the U.S. Mission to the Republic of Vietnam . He then became assistant to United States ambassador Ellsworth Bunker in 1967 .
 Lansdale retired for good in 1968, wrote his memoirs, and died in McLean, Virginia, on February 23, 1987 .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Castro, Castro, Fidel; Central Intelligence Agency; Kennedy, Robert Francis; mongoose, Operation Operation Mongoose . Bohning, Don.
 Robert Lovett, Robert Abercrombie, is the U.S. secretary of defense and presidential adviser . Lovett is a former Secretary of Defense Robert A. Lovett .
 Stimson appointed him assistant secretary of war for air for air . Stimson held the post for almost five years . He was appointed by Stimson to be air secretary for air, a post he held almost five .
 In September 1950, when Marshall became secretary of defense during the Korean War, Lovett once again served as his deputy . Lovett supervised a major military buildup and succeeded Marshall when the latter retired in late 1951 .
 Robert Lovett left office when Truman administration ended, but successive presidents repeatedly sought his views on assorted foreign policy issues . Lovett held no official position in John F Kennedy’s administration but was one of the trusted “Wise Men” of the American foreign policy .
 By the mid-1950s, Lovett had come to deplore the Central Intelligence Agency’s intrusive covert operations in other countries . Lovett presciently come to the conclusion that the CIA had become overly enamored of such operations .
 In 1960 he forcefully attacked CIA plans to invade Cuba . He unsuccessfully demanded a complete reassessment of overall covert policies . The Eisenhower administration resisted his advice .
 Lovett believed that air strikes would not necessarily succeed in destroying all the missiles . Lovett said air strikes may not have succeeded in destroying missiles .
 On October 20 he helped Kennedy draft the announcement of a naval quarantine . He also helped draft the decision to quarantine .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Central Intelligence Agency; JFK, Kennedy, John Fitzgerald Reference Isaacson, Walter, and Evan Thomas . Bay of Pigeas Invasion; .
 Rodion Malinovsky enlisted in the Russian Army at the outbreak of World War I, fighting in France and North Africa . Born to a poor peasant family near Odessa on November 23, 1898, he enlisted in Russia .
 Malinovsky returned to Russia via Vladivostok in August 1919 . He joined the Red Army and fought against the White forces . He fought against White forces in the Russian Civil War .
 He was a military adviser to the Republican forces during 1937ă1938 in the Spanish Civil War . He was an adviser to Republican forces in Spain .
 During World War II Malinovsky took part in the ill-fated June 1942 Kharkov Offensive . Played a key role in the Battle of Stalingrad in December defeating Army Group Don, the German relief force .
 Malinovsky began a long association with Nikita Khrushchev, then a political officer assigned by Stalin to watch him . He was reportedly assigned by Soviet leader Joseph Stalin to do so . He also had a long friendship with the late Soviet leader .
 He played a major role in the Battle of Kursk in July 1943 and then spearheaded the drive across the Ukraine, taking Odessa in April 1944 . He led the drive to take Odessa, taking the city of Odessa from Kiev, Ukraine .
 From the Ukraine, he led Soviet forces into Romania, Hungary, Austria, and Czechoslovakia . He led Soviet troops into Romania and Hungary, and led forces into Austria, Hungary and Czechs .
 When the war in Europe ended, Malinovsky took command of the Transbaikal Front in the Far East . He pushed into Manchuria, pushing into Japaneseheld Manchia .
 He was a prominent member of the Soviet military hierarchy after the war . He headed the Far East Command during 1947ă1953 and 1953ę1956 .
 Malinovsky introduced strategic missiles into the Soviet arsenal . He oversaw Soviet military modernization and introduced strategic missile technology .
 From mid-1960 onward, Malinovsky approved the dispatch of increasingly substantial quantities of military assistance to Cuba . The assistance included tanks, rifles, pistols, machine guns, field artillery and antitank guns, and antiaircraft guns, plus ammunition .
 By May 1962, Malinovsky was an enthusiastic advocate of KhrushchevÊs plan to base nuclear-capable missiles on Cuba, overriding opponents who queried it in meetings .
 President Nixon considered this an excellent opportunity to project Soviet military power into the Western Hemisphere and thereby redress the nuclear balance in the SovietsÊ favor, he says . He said it would deter U.S. leaders from ever considering a first strike against the Soviet Union .
 Malinovsky was responsible for implementing the decision, supervising preparations to move and install the missiles . The Soviet military personnel operating them quickly and in great secrecy . The missiles were installed quickly and operated with great secrecy in secrecy .
 He actively discouraged subordinates from suggesting U-2 surveillance overflights would probably detect missile bases before they became operational . The U.2 surveillance system would have detected missile bases, he said .
 In August 1962 Malinovsky initialed the secret Soviet-Cuban defense treaty governing the installation and operation of the missiles and other Soviet military facilities and forces on Cuba . The treaty was signed by the Soviets in August 1962 .
 Kennedy publicly warned the Soviet Union in September 1962 against installing offensive weapons on Cuba . Khrushchev and Malinovsky expanded the program of deliveries to include shipments of short-range Luna missiles and R-11m cruise missiles .
 Malinovsky argued that the U.S. would not react to the missiles when discovered, but he anticipated that, if necessary, a show of Soviet naval power in the Caribbean would suffice to quell objections .
 Malinovsky urged that the Soviet commander in Cuba, Gen. Gen. John Kennedy, make a public statement . Kennedy made the announcement on October 22, 1962 . The Kremlin was waiting for Kennedy to make a statement .
 Issa Pliyev should be instructed to use only conventional weapons in response to any U.S. military action, he says . He says he will be told to use conventional weapons only if he is attacked by the United States .
 Malinovsky remained silent as Khrushchev and the Politburo made the decision to remove the missiles . Malinovski remained silent on October 25, 1962 .
 Khrushchev and Malinovsky signed an order authorizing Pliyev to use “all available means of air defense” on October 27, anticipating potential U.S. air strikes . Khrushchev signed the order .
 On October 28, Khrushchev decided to accept Kennedy's proposals . Malinovsky instructed Pliyev to begin dismantling the missile sites .
 Despite post-crisis acrimony Cuban officials displayed toward the Soviet Union, Malinovsky felt it important to maintain cooperative military relations with Cuba . The island was considered an important strategic asset to the Soviets .
 Thomas Mann, Thomas C U.S. State Department official and Latin American specialist . Mann is Thomas C United States State Dept. official . He is also a State Department specialist in Latin American affairs .
 He began working for the Department of State in 1942 as a special assistant to the U.S. ambassador to Uruguay .
 In 1952, Mann argued that disparities in wealth between the U.S. and Latin America would spur anti-Americanism and economic nationalism . Mann was a deputy assistant secretary of state for Inter-American Affairs .
 Willing to jettison the United States nonintervention pledge, he concluded that Washington must intervene in Latin America if communism threatened to gain a foothold there . He concluded that the U.S. must intervene .
 Mann was among the creators of the multilateral Inter-American Development Bank . In 1959 Mann articulated fears that plans for a large U.S. aid program for Latin America would raise unreasonably high expectations that could not be met, resulting in increased anti-Americanism in the region
 President Kennedy's misgivings were largely borne out in the Alliance for Progress, launched by President John F Kennedy in 1961, that disproportionately benefited the wealthy . The Alliance was launched by the President in 1961 .
 Mann produced a devastating assessment of the April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion attempt . Mann's assessment was critical of the U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 The U.S. would then face the unpalatable alternatives of abandoning these men or overt military intervention to rescue them and overthrow Castro .
 Mann also pointed out that the operation violated international law and would damage U.S. credibility . Mann also said the operation would damage the United States credibility .
 MannÊs warnings failed to dissuade Kennedy from sanctioning the operation . Presented to Kennedy in February 1961, with a memorandum by CIA deputy director Richard Bissell favoring the invasion .
 Mann was both assistant secretary for Inter-American Affairs and head of the Agency for International Development, which ran the Alliance for Progress . Mann was in charge of the agency from December 1963 to December 1963 .
 The Mann Doctrine shifted the emphasis of the Alliance for Progress toward anticommunism and the protection of U.S. investments . The so-called Mann Doctrine promoted cooperation with military or nondemocratic regimes .
 In March 1965 Johnson appointed Mann undersecretary of state for economic affairs . Mann was appointed by President Johnson in March 1965 .
 Mann strongly supported the April 1965 intervention in the Dominican Republic . Key congressmen asserted that the intervention had greatly overstated the communist threat . That same year, however, key congressmen said the intervention was overstated .
 With the 1966 appointment of Lincoln Gordon as assistant secretary of state for Inter-American Affairs, MannÊs influence over Latin American policy effectively ended . MannÉs influence on Latin American affairs effectively ended with the appointment of Gordon in 1966 .
 He resigned from the Department of State in May 1966, yet future administrations would adopt many of his policies . He resigned in 1966 .
 Alliance for Progress; Bay of Pigs Invasion; Bissell, Richard Mervin, Jr. Bissell Jr. Jr. was the leader of the Democratic National Party .
 Servants of Power to Imperial Presidents, 1898–1968, edited by Thomas McCormick and Walter Lafeber . The book, "Servants of power to Imperial presidents," was published in 1968 . It was published by Walter Lafber, who died in 1968, at the age
 John J McCloy attended Amherst College and Harvard Law School . McCloy was born March 31, 1895, in Philadelphia .
 During World War I he interrupted his studies to serve in the U.S. Army, becoming a captain of artillery and acquiring an internationalist outlook . During the war he served in the United States Army .
 In 1940 McCloy joined the War Department as a consultant to Secretary Henry Lewis Stimson . Stimson was a lifelong hero and role model of McCloyÊs. The War Secretary was a role model .
 McCloy was involved in virtually every major political and military wartime decision until he left that position in November 1945 . Appointed assistant secretary the following year, McCloy became involved in nearly every major decision .
 McCloy was U.S. high commissioner in the Federal Republic of Germany from 1949 to 1952 . He was responsible for implementing the country's return to independent statehood . McCloy served as high commissioner during the FRC's transition period .
 He was one of the ‘Wise Men,‰ recognized foreign policy experts whom successive presidents consulted on a wide range of international issues . He was consulted by presidents on a range of issues .
 The journalist Richard H Rovere even called him the ‘chairman‰ of the American Establishment” . The journalist Rovere called him “chairman of the . American Establishment.”
 In 1961 President John F Kennedy appointed McCloy director of the new Arms Control and Disarmament Agency . McCloy was entrusted with formulating broad disarmament policies and revitalizing U.S.-Soviet negotiations for a treaty to ban atmospheric nuclear tests .
 McCloy learned in advance of the Bay of Pigs invasion plan, it's unclear whether he learned of the plan . McCloy's role in the invasion plan remains unclear .
 He criticized the operation for diverting resources from more serious problems, including Berlin, NATO defense, and disarmament negotiations . In its aftermath, he said the operation was frivolous .
 McCloy: By arming Cuban anti-Castro rebels, the U.S. government undermined the legal basis of its protests against Soviet backing of Laotian and South Vietnamese insurgents . Considering Cuba strategically insignificant to the United States, McCloy warned that by arming Cuba, it undermined the
 On October 16, when Kennedy learned of the presence of Soviet missile installations in Cuba, McCloy was in Europe . McCloy traveled to Europe on that day .
 Kennedy consulted him before meeting with his Executive Committee of senior officials . Kennedy consulted with him by telephone . Kennedy consults with him even before meeting .
 McCloy recommended an air strike to destroy missile sites, if necessary, followed by a full-scale U.S. invasion of Cuba . McCloy: "A full scale invasion would be a success"
 McCloy viewed their presence in Cuba as a test of U.S. international credibility . McCloy feared that if they remained his countryÊs NATO partners would lose all faith in United States commitments to Western Europe . While believing the missiles made little practical difference, McCloy believed the
 McCloy briefed United Nations delegates on the crisis on October 21 . McCloy was recalled home from the U.N. in October 21, 2013 .
 Many ExComm members feared that Adlai Stevenson, U.S. ambassador to the UN, might be too conciliatory when responding to UN initiatives on the crisis . He remained at the UN for most of the crisis, in part because of fears that he might not be too
 McCloy resisted suggestions by UN officials that Kennedy agree to temporarily lift the quarantine if Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev suspended further weapons shipments to Cuba . Kennedy publicly imposed a naval blockade of Cuba on October 22, 1962 .
 He endorsed the presidentÊs decision to withdraw NATO missiles from Turkey . He responded favorably to suggestions from acting secretary general U Thant that the U.S. might pledge not to invade Cuba .
 McCloy hoped these talks would give added momentum to subsequent U.S.-Soviet arms-control efforts . McCloy: "I hope these talks will give us momentum"
 McCloy also pragmatically suggested that the United States should respond favorably to any overtures from Cuban leader Fidel Castro to normalize U.S.-Cuban diplomatic relations . McCloy: The United States shouldn't respond to Castro's overtures .
 McCloy aware that a small combat brigade of Soviet troops would remain in Cuba . McCloy was aware of the presence of Soviet forces in the country .
 McCloy defused the crisis when he publicly stated that their deployment on the island did not breach the understandings United States and Soviet representatives had reached in late 1962 . In 1979, when press revelations of the continuing presence of Soviet military personnel in Cuba embarrassed the administration .
 McCloy continued as a presidential arms control adviser until 1974 . He welcomed progress on U.S.-Soviet détente and helped negotiate various disarmament agreements .
 John McCone, John Alex Industrialist and director of the Central Intelligence Agency, 1961 . McCone was director of CIA from 1961 to 1965 . He was CIA Director of the CIA until 1965 .
 In 1950, he became undersecretary of the Air Force, urging President Harry Truman to begin a program of building guided missiles . He urged President Truman to build guided missiles, which he did not immediately do .
 In 1951, he returned to private business but continued to serve Washington in special missions . He returned to Washington in 1951, but continued his service in special operations .
 In 1958, President Dwight D Eisenhower appointed him head of the Atomic Energy Commission .
 On September 27, 1961, President John F Kennedy appointed McCone, a conservative Republican with virtually no intelligence experience, to head the CIA . McCone succeeded Allen Dulles, succeeding him as CIA chief .
 He immediately convened a study group to identify the duties of the director and submit suggestions on agency reorganization .
 This substantially improved scientific and technological research and development capabilities, added a costanalysis system, and created a position of comptroller . The position was created as a comptroller.
 Kennedy publicly strengthened the agency by announcing that the director would be charged with developing policies and coordinating procedures at all levels across the intelligence community . In addition, Kennedy also announced that he would develop policies and coordinate procedures with the CIA .
 McCone was a longtime advocate of overthrowing Fidel CastroÊs government in Cuba . McCone attended many of the subsequent Executive Committee (ExComm) meetings of top U.S. officials .
 His access to the president waned after he bragged too loudly how accurate his predictions of Soviet missiles in Cuba had been . Subsequently, his access to President Nixon's administration waned because of his comments .
 McCone remained CIA director after KennedyÊs November 1963 assassination . McCone was CIA director until 1963 assassination of Kennedy .
 His criticism of President JohnsonÊs escalation of the war in Vietnam as unlikely to prove effective may have hastened his departure from CIA in 1965 .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Castro, Fidel; Central Intelligence Agency; Dulles, Allen Welsh; Eisenhower, Eisenhower, Dwight David; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Kennedy; U-2 Overflights .
 Robert Strange was the U.S. secretary of defense between 1961 and 1968 . Robert McNamara was the Secretary of Defense of the United States . McNamara died in 1968 .
 McNamara was an Army Air Corps officer in World War II . He used statistical techniques acquired at Harvard Business School to improve the logistics, planning, and analysis of strategic bombing raids over Europe and Japan .
 In November 1960 he was appointed president of the Ford Motor Company . Left almost immediately when President John F Kennedy recruited him as secretary of defense . Joined Ford Motor Co. after the war, in November 1960 .
 McNamara moved immediately to enlarge his personal staff and centralize decision making in the secretaryÊs office . McNamara developed and employed a planning-programming-budgeting system in efforts to enhance cost-effectiveness .
 Proposal to close unneeded military bases and consolidate National Guard and Army Reserves into one system provoked fierce opposition from many military men and from powerful congressional and civilian lobbies .
 McNamara made an early mistake in endorsing the disastrous April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba . McNamara endorsed the invasion of the Cuban Islands in 1961 .
 McNamara repeatedly stated that the presence of mediumand intermediaterange Soviet nuclear-capable missiles on Cuba made little if any difference to the strategic balance . Determined to avoid nuclear war, McNamara was determined to avoid war .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara endorsed massive U.S. air strikes on Cuba . McNamara was one of the key members of the Executive a move averted only by KenCommittee of the National Security Council .
 As the crisis developed, he oversaw the mobilization nedyÊs determination to allow of United States forces for potential military action against Soviet Union additional Cuba .
 In retirement, he participated in several time before launching such enlightening gatherings of Soviet, Cuban, and drastic measures, he said .
 Eisenhower broke with President EisenhowerÊs emphasis on expanding the military by expanding military by 300,000 personnel . EisenhowerÉs emphasis was to develop flexible-response capabilities, a mobile striking force prepared for conventional or guerrilla warfare .
 Defense Department budgets rose from $45 billion in 1960 to $53. billion in 1964 . Defense Department budget rose to nearly $60 billion in 1965 .
 McNamara's decision to increase land-based U.S. intercontinental ballistic missiles to 1,000 may have triggered a similar Soviet buildup . Another reason for this surge was McNamaraÊs early decision to . increase land based United States ballistic missiles .
 Growing U.S. involvement in the Republic of Vietnam undercut McNamara's efforts at rationalization . McNamara endorsed his efforts to rationalize his decision to withdraw from the Vietnam War .
 Military intellectuals later criticized McNamaraÊs decision to permit the demands of the Vietnam War to denude United States North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces . U.S. forces were stripped of NATO forces .
 By 1966 McNamara had become increasingly pessimistic over the warÊs outcome, especially when antiwar protests intensified . As late as mid-1967 he seemed to believe that the war could be won .
 In late 1967 Johnson rejected his recommendations to freeze U.S. troop levels, cease bombing North Vietnam, and transfer ground combat duties largely to the South Vietnamese Army .
 McNamara announced his impending resignation in November 1967, leaving three months later to become president of the World Bank . McNamara resigned in November .
 McNamara remained at the World Bank until 1982 . He dramatically expanded its lending and development programs . McNamara was at the bank until the end of his tenure .
 McNamara was one of several leading U.S. diplomats who openly sought a pledge by the United States that it would never be the first state to use nuclear weapons . During Ronald ReaganÊs presidency, McNamara sought such a pledge .
 In 1986 he published proposals designed to reduce the risk of conflict . He published proposals to reduce conflict risk in 1986 .
 In 1995 he finally published his memoirs and became heavily involved in continuing efforts by Vietnamese and Western scholars and officials to attain greater understanding of each otherÊs position in the Vietnam conflict .
 He also participated in several conferences that brought together Soviet, American, and Cuban participants from the 1962 missile crisis .
 His refusal to characterize the U.S. decision to intervene in Vietnam as inherently immoral and unjustified generated passionate and often highly personal criticism from former opponents of the war .
 In 1926 Mikoyan became a candidate member of the Politburo and was appointed commissar for foreign trade . A supporter of Joseph Stalin, he was appointed Commissar of foreign trade in 1926 . He was also a candidate candidate for a place in the Soviet Union's Polit
 He became a full member of the Politburo in 1935 and was deputy prime minister from 1937 to 1955 . He was deputy PM of Russia from 1937 until 1955 .
 Stalin, believing that Mikoyan was plotting to unseat him, was planning his death when he himself himself died in 1953 . Stalin believed that he was planning to kill his own successor, Stalin did so . There are indications that Stalin planned to kill the Soviet leader .
 In the post-Stalin succession struggle in 1953, Mikoyan supported Nikita Khrushchev . In the 1950s, he supported the Soviet Union leader in a bid to win the succession battle .
 Even before KhrushchevÊs denunciation of Stalin in 1956, Mikoyan often referred to the ‘evils” of Stalin�És dictatorship . The Soviet leader often referred himself to the 'evils' of the dictatorship .
 Mikoyan received in person the first reports on Cuba delivered by KGB intelligence agent Aleksandr Alekseev in November 1959 . He became an early Kremlin supporter of the Cuban revolution .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin suggested that Moscow barter Soviet goods for Cuban sugar . That same month he recommended that Soviet goods be exchanged for sugar from Cuba .
 In February 1960 he visited Cuba, the first top Soviet official to do so . He had lengthy talks with Fidel Castro and other Cuban leaders, and negotiated trade credits for Cuba .
 In response to growing U.S. hostility to Cuba, Mikoyan offered the Cubans substantial armaments, including 100,000 automatic rifles and 30 tanks, without expecting payment in return . In July 1960, during a visit to Moscow by CastroÊs brother Raúl
 Mikoyan remains wary of moves the United States might find unduly provocative . Mikoyans said he was wary of U.S. moves that might be provocative . He said he remained wary of provocative moves .
 President John F Kennedy publicly demanded that the Soviet Union withdraw missiles from Cuba . Mikoyan endorsed KhrushchevÊs decision to do so, provided the United States would agree not to invade .
 Mikoyan's wife died just as he arrived in Cuba and was forced to endure repeated tirades condemning Soviet behavior during the crisis . CastroÊs resentment was the brunt of his wife's death as she died in Cuba .
 Castro also attempted to sabotage the settlement by refusing to allow on-site inspections and seeking to shoot down overflying U.S. reconnaissance aircraft verifying the dismantling of the missile sites . Castro also refused to allow inspections and sought to shoot .
 Mikoyan bluntly informed Castro that Soviet antiaircraft batteries and personnel would not attack U.S. airplanes . Castro told him that Soviet forces would not be attacked by the United States planes .
 Soviet leaders refused to allow Il-28 light bombers to remain in Cuba, as Castro demanded . Soviet leaders also refused to let Il-27 light bombers remain in the country .
 Mikoyan refused to allow tactical nuclear-capable cruise missiles to remain in Cuba . On his own initiative, Mikoyans refused a further request from Castro to allow them to remain .
 On leaving Cuba, Mikoyan met with U.N. secretary general U Thant, who had brokered many of the arrangements for removing missiles, and Kennedy .
 Kennedy assailed Soviet behavior in installing the missiles as deliberate deception but assured Mikoyan that his country „would not attack Cuba‰ though Americans „still consider Castro Castro our adversary”
 Mikoyan relinquished his chairmanship in December 1965 . With new leadership headed by Leonid Brezhnev, he found himself increasingly isolated .
 Cold War military balance was not merely a comparison of U.S. and Soviet military capabilities but just as much a reflection of perceptions, ideas, and assumptions . It was fueled by the necessity of protecting not just the physical security of a nation but also its core values and way of life
 This balance was driven by how leaders on both sides of the Iron Curtain perceived and responded to events on the world stage . This balance, moreover, was an evolutionary process, says historian John MacIntosh .
 Much is known about decision-making dynamics within the U.S. national security establishment during the Cold War . The same cannot be said for the Soviet Union, even after some Soviet archives were opened after Cold War ended . Some Soviet archives have been opened after the end of Cold War,
 The first phase, marked by the United States nuclear monopoly, was ushered in when atomic weapons were used in August 1945 to persuade Japan to surrender . U.S. nuclear monopoly ushered in by the use of atomic weapons .
 The beginning of the Cold War coincided with the dawn of the nuclear age . The history of the two would become inextricably intertwined .
 As the postwar period progressed, relations between the United States and the Soviet Union rapidly deteriorated . Relations between the U.S. and Soviet Union deteriorated .
 U.S. insistence upon free elections in what it considered its sphere of influence in Central and Eastern Europe . Threat of capitalist encirclement by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1949, and the United States .
 Western democracies perceived a growing Soviet threat to liberal capitalist democracies around the globe . In much the same way, Western democracies saw a growing threat to the Soviet threat .
 Communist threats to both Greece and Turkey in 1947, the communist coup in Czechoslovakia in 1948, and the Berlin Blockade all seemed to confirm that the Soviets were intent upon world domination . The Berlin blockade and Prague coup in 1948 were the most recent examples of Soviet aggression .
 Despite this growing hostility, U.S. officials were confident that as long as the United States held the nuclear monopoly, the threat of Soviet military aggression against core interests was minimal . Despite this, officials were reasonably confident that .
 This correlation of forces ensured that relations between the two Cold War powers remained relatively stable . Relations between the U.S. and Russia were relatively stable during the Cold War .
 August 29, 1949, marked a crucial shift in the Cold War military balance . The Soviet Union detonated its first atomic weapon, years ahead of most predictions .
 U.S. national security planners believed by 1954 the Soviets would possess sufficient nuclear capacity to launch a devastating strike against the United States . The Soviet Union could initiate a conventional assault on Western Europe and rest relatively secure in the knowledge that the threat of a nuclear counter-response from the Kremlin
 If the U.S. and NATO chose not to increase their conventional forces, Soviet aggression after 1954 would force either free world appeasement or nuclear devastation . The United States and NATO did not increase conventional forces in response to Soviet aggression .
 TrumanÊs response to the NSC-68 report called for massive conventional and nuclear military buildup . This urgency, combined with the outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950, underpinned TrumanÉs response . The Korean War outbreak in 1950 was the result of the National Security
 Truman's post-1950 defense posture redressed the military balance through a vast conventional rearmament program both at home and in Western Europe . The underlying fear of the consequences that accompanied Soviet nuclear capabilities in the absence of an adequate conventional deterrent defined the Truman administrationÊs new post-
 The Korean War stalemate and the U.S. preoccupation with rearmament led to budget deficits, inflation, rigid governmental controls on prices and wages, materials shortages, and what many considered to be the beginnings of a U .S. garrison state .
 Dwight D Eisenhower based his 1952 election platform on a more cost-effective national security posture . Eisenhower was the Republican presidential candidate in 1952 . Eisenhower's platform was based on a cost-efficient national security .
 The Korean War seemed to provide ample evidence that the Truman administrationÊs approach was based too heavily on reaction rather than prevention, and allowed the Soviet Union too much initiative . In the long run would be economically unsustainable, he says .
 Eisenhower adopted the so-called New Look defense strategy, predicated on massive retaliation . Eisenhower therefore adopted the 'New Look' strategy .
 To further heighten its perceived credibility, massive retaliation was deliberately cloaked in ambiguity . The U.S. government has deliberately cloaked itself in secrecy to avoid further scrutiny .
 It was believed that Soviet leaders would refrain from aggression if it remained unclear whether a U.S. nuclear response would be automatic . It was thought to be possible that if it was unclear whether the U.N. response was automatic .
 Defense Secretary Charles Wilson says NSC-68 could provide more bang for a buck . This could be done at a lower cost than the programs prescribed by NSC68, he says .
 Sputnik 1 impact massive retaliation on NSC-68 . The Korean War shaped perceptions of the Korean War . The Soviet launch of the Soviet Union's first satellite launched in 1961 .
 Sputnik 1 was propelled into space by an intercontinental ballistic missile . The continental United States was vulnerable to direct missile attack . The launch demonstrated that the continental U.S. could be attacked by direct missile attacks .
 Soviet nuclear stockpile had increased significantly since 1949, forcing strategists to rethink the wisdom and prudence of massive retaliation . This event, coupled with the knowledge that the Soviet nuclear stockpiles had increased, forced defense strategists .
 EisenhowerÊs policy was marginally more cost-effective, but it also carried with it a heightened sense of brinkmanship and thus the possibility of nuclear war through miscalculation . The ambiguity upon which much of the deterrent value was based was based also carried a heightened .
 EisenhowerÊs political opponents, backed by several influential figures within his own military establishment, began calling for a more balanced military capability with a de-emphasis on nuclear weapons .
 By increasing NATOÊs conventional strength, the U.S. and its allies would avoid the unpalatable choices of either nuclear annihilation or appeasement when responding to Soviet aggression .
 Kennedy adopted the new doctrine of flexible response as the basis for national security policy . KennedyÊs nomination as the Democratic presidential candidate saw him adopt the new policy .
 Flexible response was implemented in 1961 following Soviet premier Nikita KhrushchevÊs ultimatum to end Western access rights to West Berlin . It was implemented following the Soviet prime minister's decision to end West Berlin access .
 Although the conflict was resolved peacefully, it highlighted the dangers of brinkmanship and the threat of full-scale nuclear conflict .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union began to seek a Cold War détente . With these lessons fresh in their minds, both the U.S. and the . Soviet Union .
 As the decade progressed, both the U.S. and the Soviet Union increased their nuclear stockpiles . Both sides recognized that a nuclear war was unwinnable . The United States and the USSR increased their stockpiles of nuclear weapons .
 This underlay the concept of mutually assured destruction and, paradoxically, the belief that mutual vulnerability was the key to stability and deterrence . The concept was underlayed by the idea that mutual destruction was key to deterrence .
 Strategic Arms Limitation Talks began in November 1969 and set the tone for much of the remaining Cold War . This balance of strategic nuclear parity coupled with Warsaw PactÊs massive conventional forces and the sword and shield concept embraced by NATO gave rise to the talks .
 Alleged shortfall of U.S. intercontinental ballistic missiles as compared to those of the Soviet Union during the late 1950s . Soviet Union missile gap was the largest in the world .
 Debate on this matter peaked in 1960 but began as early as 1956, when a Missouri senator charged that the U.S. lagged behind the Soviet Union in producing guided missiles .
 Eisenhower's administration denied the allegations, but Democrats refused to drop the issue . EisenhowerÊs administration denies the allegations .
 In October of the same year, the Soviet Union launched the first satellite, Sputnik 1 . The first satellite was launched by the USSR in 1961 .
 Sputnik 1 was propelled into space by a rocket, leading many Americans to believe the Soviet Union had taken the lead in rocket technology . Popular belief in the gap between the nations began in earnest .
 This development presented Americans with a public relations problem but also had national security ramifications . The United States now faced a potential Soviet ICBM attack, says author .
 The findings of the 1957 Gaither Committee further increased the sense of technological inferiority and vulnerability . The findings further increased this sense of technology inferiority .
 The Gaither Report argued that the missile gap not only existed but could be expected to widen . The Soviet Union is well ahead of the U.S. in missile and rocket technology, the report said .
 These figures, however, represented nothing more than pure speculation .
 Eisenhower tried to downplay Sputnik 1 and the Gaither ReportÊs findings, but the public reacted with fear and outrage . The public was outraged by the findings, and the report was published in 1958 .
 Eisenhower administration spent heavily to develop guided missiles, especially the Titan, Thor, Polaris, and Minuteman . Eisenhower administration did so cautiously seeking to find middle ground among defense spending, domestic spending and balanced budgets .
 Eisenhower was unconvinced about the prospect of Soviet missile programs . The president was convinced by the Central Intelligence Agency's estimates .
 A Comparison of Soviet and U.S. Power Today, which criticized EisenhowerÊs reaction to Sputnik 1. Today, the comparison was made in a book published by the United States. Today.
 Pentagon still warning of missile gap and advocating increased defense spending . Some voices from the Pentagon still warn of the gap .
 Joseph Alsop charged that the Soviet Union ‘will have unchallengeable superiority in the nuclear striking power that was once our specialty‰ and blamed Eisenhower . Another influential figure who joined the fray was the prominent . journalist Joseph Alosop, who charged that . the Soviet
 AlsopÊs column provoked a striking reaction, especially given the upcoming 1958 congressional elections . The next year's congressional elections will be held in Washington, DC .
 Eisenhower then launched a countercampaign, asserting that no missile gap existed and the United States was still ahead in the missile race . His efforts failed to convince the public .
 The missile gap furor helped the Democrats retake both houses of Congress in the November 1958 elections . The Democrats were poised to push through higher defense appropriations .
 In 1959 Congress voted for a defense budget larger than Eisenhower had requested . In 1959, Eisenhower requested a larger defense budget .
 Among those convinced of the existence of the missile gap was Massachusetts senator John F Kennedy, a Democrat, who ran for reelection in 1958 in part by citing the gap as proof of Republican bungling . The missile gap remains a mystery .
 Kennedy easily won a second term but continued his crusade over the gap after his reelection . Much of his evidence for it apparently came from AlsopÊs columns on the subject, rather than from hard intelligence sources .
 The missile gap became a major issue in KennedyÊs 1960 presidential campaign . He attempted to portray his opponent, Vice President Richard M Nixon, as soft on defense spending and communism .
 Reportedly, Eisenhower possessed fairly reliable intelligence data from clandestine U-2 overflights of the Soviet Union . But national security imperatives bound him to secrecy .
 Kennedy won a razor thin victory over Nixon in the 1960 presidential election . Kennedy was defeated by a narrow margin of victory .
 Robert McNamara, KennedyÊs secretary of defense, quietly resolved the controversy . McNamara casually mentioned that no missile gap existed during a February 1961 press conference . The subject sank into relative obscurity .
 Kennedy conducted national security policy on the basis that the U.S. enjoyed strategic nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union . In practice, Kennedy conducted his national security . policy was based on the fact that the United States enjoyed considerable strategic . superiority .
 Eisenhower, Eisenhower, Dwight David; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; McNamara, Robert Strange . McNamara: Military Balance; Nuclear Arms Race; U-2 Overflights; .
 Operation U.S. covert operation, begun in 1961, to overthrow the Cuban government and assassinate Cuban leader Fidel Castro . Operation began in 1961 to overthrow government, assassinate Castro .
 Castro and Khrushchev's communications increased following the failed April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion . The two leaders were in touch after the failed March 1, 1961, invasion of Cuba .
 Within a year, Moscow had approved a $148 million arms package, although Khrushchev stalled the support . The package was approved within a year of Khrushchchev's approval .
 Richard Goodwin, President John F KennedyÊs representative to the Inter-American Economic and Social Council in Uruguay, met Ernesto ‘Che‰ Guevara, Cuban minister of the interior, on August 22, 1961 . Goodwin laid out ways that Cuba could improve relations
 Kennedy began exploring options to eliminate Castro . Various U.S. agencies started discussing programs to sabotage the Cuban economy . Kennedy was exploring options for eliminating Castro .
 KennedyÊs brother and attorney general, Robert Kennedy, did not want to involve the Central Intelligence Agency because of the Bay of Pigs debacle . Robert Kennedy�Øs brother, Attorney General, didn't want the CIA involved .
 In November 1961, he approached President Kennedy with a plan to establish an interagency project against Cuba that would not rely on CIA experts . He approached the president with an idea to establish a project against the island nation .
 The interagency committee, known the Special Group, included Robert Kennedy and Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon . Robert Kennedy was on the committee .
 SGA members include CIA director John McCone, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, State Department's Alexis Johnson from the State Department, Roswell Gilpatric from the Defense Department, Gen. Gen. Jan. Roswell .
 Also in attendance at meetings were President Kennedy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara . President Kennedy was not a member of the organization .
 Khrushchev agreed to provide enhanced arms support to Cuba after receiving intelligence reports that the White House was planning to destroy Castro . In February 1962, the Soviet Union agreed to arm Cuba with increased arms support .
 Lansdale devised a two-phase plan to implement Operation mongoose that included paramilitary, sabotage, and political propaganda programs . Lansdale's plan included paramilitary and political sabotage programs, including paramilitary, sabotaging, political propaganda .
 The SGA ordered an intensification of sabotage and intelligence activity, while President Kennedy continued to waver on the need for military action . President Kennedy refused to accept the need to go to war .
 Operation mongoose began to weaken after the U.S. forces pulled out of support . Operation mongouose was the first major operation to try and destroy Operation Mongoose in Afghanistan .
 Lansdale used his experience in psychological warfare to devise propaganda strategies . The CIA turned to the Mafia for assistance in assassination plots, Lansdale says . Lansdale's propaganda strategies were based on psychological warfare .
 In spring 1962, Robert Kennedy asked the SGA to consider the role of the Soviet Union as a factor in determining the outcome of Operation mongoose . The SGA was asked to look at the possibility of a Soviet Union role in the operation .
 The group did not, however, act on this directive, viewing the idea of a Soviet military base on Cuba too remote too consider .
 Khrushchev agreed to begin building up Cuban forces in 1959 . Only a few months earlier, Khrushchev had agreed to build up forces in Cuba .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Bundy, McGeorge; Bundy; Castro, Fidel; Central Intelligence Agency; Dillon, C Douglas; Gilpatric, Roswell Leavitt; Guevara de la Serna, Ernesto ‘Che‰; Joint Chiefs of Staff
 The statement, a unilateral announcement, effectively defined the Western Hemisphere as a U.S. sphere of influence . The statement effectively defines the Western hemisphere as a United States sphere .
 Throughout the 19th century, the United States tacitly relied heavily on the far stronger British fleet to enforce these principles . The U.S. relied heavily upon the British fleet .
 United States leaders repeatedly invoked the Monroe Doctrine against British efforts to form alliances or acquire territory in the Americas . U.S. leaders nonetheless invoked the doctrine against British attempts to acquire territory or form alliances .
 In 1842 President John Tyler extended the doctrine to the mid-Pacific islands of HawaiÊi, then coveted by Britain . The doctrine was extended in 1842 to the islands of the Hawaiian Islands .
 The Monroe Doctrine was also evoked to justify U.S. intervention against continued Spanish rule in Cuba in 1898 . The Monroe doctrine was also used to justify United States intervention in Cuba .
 Under the 1904 Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, President Theodore Roosevelt asserted the right of the United States to intervene in the affairs of any Latin American nation that had fallen into disorder . The U.S. frequently used the proviso to prevent European naval expeditions collecting debts owed
 The United States invoked the Corollary to justify numerous unilateral interventions in Latin American nations, including Mexico, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Honduras, Cuba, Chile, the Dominican Republic, Panama, El Salvador, and Grenada .
 Critics characterized the Monroe Doctrine and Corollary as assertions of exclusive U.S. hegemony over the Americas . Critics characterized them as assertions that the United States was dominant in Americas .
 During the 1930s, President Franklin D Roosevelt supposedly replaced these with a less intrusive ‘Good Neighbor Policy” During this period, President Roosevelt supposedly changed the policy . The policy was supposed to be less intrusive and less intrusive than FDR's Good Neighbor Policy .
 President Kennedy sought to apply its principles to U.S. actions against Cuba . President Kennedy doubted the validity of the Monroe Doctrine as international law .
 Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Organization of American States References Livingston, Grace. Kennedy, Grace . Kennedy. Kennedy. Fitzgerald . Kennedy . Fitzgerald .
 The United States and Latin America from the Monroe Doctrine to the War on Terror. The U.S. has been involved in Latin America since the 1950s . Latin America is a key part of America's history .
 He entered investment banking in 1928, and during and after World War II held several government positions related to international trade and economics .
 In late 1949 he became director of the State DepartmentÊs Policy Planning Staff . He was also director of State Department's policy planning staff . He is credited with saving the country from World War II .
 Nitze was asked to chair an interdepartmental study group to conduct a full review of U.S. foreign and defense policy . In January 1950, responding to the Soviet detonation of an atomic bomb and the fall of China to communism, Secretary of State Dean Acheson
 Nitze largely wrote its report, NSC-68, which was handed to President Harry S Truman in April 1950 . Nitze argued that the Soviets were bent on world domination .
 Nitze recommended that the U.S. should rebuild the West economically, while assuming primary responsibility for the entire non-Communist worldÊs defense and security against outside attack . Nitze: To meet this challenge, the United States should rebuild economically .
 NSC-68 envisaged doubling to quadrupling U.S. defense spending . Estimates that the United States could devote up to 20 percent of its gross national product to defense .
 When the Korean War began two months later, these recommendations were implemented . The Korean War started two months after these recommendations .
 The broad framework of U.S. defense capabilities, commitments, and objectives laid out in NSC-68 would in many respects characterize the United States strategy for the subsequent 40 years . The framework of United States .
 President John F Kennedy made Nitze assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs in 1961 . Nitze was made assistant secretary for international affairs for the first time .
 U.S. prepared detailed plans to implement a blockade, he says . Together with deputy undersecretary of state U Alexis Johnson, he prepares detailed plans for blockade .
 The existence of this blueprint helped tip the balance in favor of the quarantine option . Nitze himself believed this initial strategy might ultimately require reinforcement with air strikes and possibly a U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 Nitze opposed the idea of removing NATO missiles in Turkey in return for the dismantling of Soviet missiles in Cuba . He remained ignorant of the secret U.S.-Soviet understanding to this effect negotiated by Attorney General Robert F Kennedy .
 From 1963 to 1967 Nitze was secretary of the Navy, he was a proponent of a negotiated Vietnam peace settlement . Nitze became a leading advocate of a de-escalation of the ground war in Vietnam . He was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Nitze was one of the ‘Wise Men’s Ad Hoc Task Force on Vietnam which recommended U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam in March 1968 . Nitze recommended withdrawal from the Vietnam conflict in 1968 .
 Nitze was a founder of the second Committee on the Present Danger . He argued that U.S. defenses were dangerously inadequate . Nitze also attacked the SALT II arms-limitation treaty negotiated under Gerald Ford as ineffective .
 He died of pneumonia at his Georgetown, Washington, home on October 19, 2004 .
 Callahan, David. Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Kennedy, Robert Francis; Military Balance; Nuclear Arms Race References References . Callahan: Containment, Doctrine and Course of; Jupiter Missiles .
 Nuclear Arms Race was undeclared Cold War contest in which the U.S. and the Soviet Union developed, tested, and deployed increasingly advanced nuclear weapons and delivery systems .
 The strategic motivation behind the arms race was each nationÊs drive to ensure that its adversary didnÊt gain any measurable advantage in nuclear-strike capability . The arms race began in 1950s and '80s .
 Also at play was the evolving concept of nuclear deterrence, which held that a nation must retain adequate nuclear capabilities to deter the enemy from launching a preemptive nuclear attack .
 The concept became known as mutually assured destruction and held that any preemptive attack would result in an overwhelming and catastrophic retaliatory strike . This was known as mutual assured destruction .
 The nuclear arms race traces its origins to World War II, when the U.S. learned that Germany had the capacity and desire to build an atomic bomb . The U.N. government learned in 1945 that Germany could build a nuclear bomb .
 Americans raced the Germans to build the first nuclear weapon, but it was hardly a competitive endeavor . Spurred by this threat, the U.S. raced to develop the first nuke weapon .
 The Germans paid less attention to atomic weapons development than the Americans, who poured considerable sums into their Manhattan Project . Germany focused on apparently more pragmatic weapons systems .
 With its first test explosion in July 1945, the United States possessed an atomic monopoly . The Soviet Union feared the U.S. nuclear threat, especially given its demonstrated ability to conduct long-range bombing .
 Soviet spies allowed the Soviet Union to detonate its first nuclear weapon in August 1949 . Soviet spies infiltrated the Manhattan Project and a skilled scientific community allowed the detonation .
 The U.S. success in developing the hydrogen bomb in 1952 was followed by Soviet success in 1955 . The Soviet Union developed the first atomic bomb in 1955, and the second in 1952 .
 The nuclear arms race now entered its most recognizable form, wherein the superpowers pursued weapons that were smaller in size, more powerful, and increasingly accurate . Delivery systems became faster, more accurate, and more difficult for enemy surveillance to locate .
 More advanced aircraft were needed to carry more than one nuclear weapon . Nuclear weapons needed to be smaller to enable a variety of aircraft to carry them, he says .
 The United States B-29 bomber was matched by the Soviet TU-4, but neither proved adequate . The U.S. B-52 and B-U-20 were developed to deliver large payloads to multiple targets .
 Advances in rocketry led to the development of ballistic missiles in both the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union and the United States developed ballistic missiles .
 The Atlas D missile was deployed on October 31, 1959 . Atlas D was the first U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile deployed in the United States in 1959 .
 The Soviets followed suit with their own ICBM, the SS-6 Sapwood of North Atlantic Treaty Organization designation, on January 20, 1960 . The ICBM was the first ICBM to be developed by the Soviet Union .
 ICBMs were a step up from their cousins, medium-range ballistic missiles and intermediate-range missiles . They became the most popular delivery system because of their range and relative invulnerability to enemy air defenses . They were also considered the most powerful delivery system .
 ICBMs had a maximum range of 10,000 miles and could be stationed on the other side of the world from their targets . ICBM could be deployed on other sides of world from its targets .
 In the 1950s, both superpowers came to rely on nuclear weapons as the primary weapon for any major Cold War engagement . Both superpowers relied heavily on nuclear arms in the Cold War .
 The nuclear arms race created ever-larger arsenals and increasingly effective delivery systems . Both sides are vulnerable to an enemy attack, leaving both sides vulnerable to each other .
 This vulnerability perpetuated the arms race during the decade and beyond . The arms race perpetuated during the 1990s and 2000s .
 Neither side was willing to give up its weapons, and the newer weapons now meant that the nation that launched a first strike might be able to avoid a retaliatory strike if its nuclear advantage were enough to allow it to destroy most of the enemyÊs nuclear forces .
 Any large gap in nuclear arms made one nation vulnerable, says U.S. nuclear parity . Only nuclear parity could ensure nuclear stability .
 Scientific advances by one nation had to be matched by the other, since otherwise a gap would result, advantaging one side . Scientific advances in one nation must be matched with the other to avoid a gap between them .
 In the 1960s the evolution of the counterforce doctrine aggravated this situation . In the 60s, the development of this doctrine was aggravated by the 'counterforce doctrine'
 Adopting this policy meant accepting the reality that in order to sustain the ability to launch an effective counterstrike, a nation must deploy sufficient weapons to ensure that the enemy could not destroy them all in a preemptive strike .
 Arms-control talks and treaties during the 1970s and 1980s slowed but did not halt the nuclear arms race . Arms-reduction agreements during the 1980s also slowed but didn't halt the arms race.
 When the Cold War ended, so did the nuclear arms race in its original form . Nuclear arms race was the original form of the original Cold War arms race .
 Nuclear weapons remain a strategic force for some nations . A new and different nuclear arms race can be anticipated .
 Simón Bolivar proposed a league of Latin American republics in the early 19th century . The league was created to encourage cooperation among Western Hemispheric nations .
 After 1945 various pressures, many related to the Cold War, led the U.S. and Latin American governments to seek closer cooperation through new institutions . The United States and Latin America governments sought closer cooperation .
 Latin American leaders worried by declining U.S. economic engagement following World War II . They sought to open new channels to encourage United States aid and investment in Latin America . Latin America leaders sought to encourage the United States .
 Truman hoped to consolidate U.S. authority in the hemisphere . TrumanÊs administration hoped to do so in response to worsening Cold War tensions .
 In 1947 the United States and 19 Latin American governments signed the Rio Pact, a mutual defense treaty . The Rio Pact advanced the long-standing U.S. effort to make enforcement of the 1823 Monroe Doctrine a multilateral responsibility .
 21 Western Hemispheric nations gathered in Bogotá, Colombia, to discuss economic and political relations . A year later, 21 countries gathered in Colombia to discuss relations with each other .
 Members of the Communist Party were committed to opposing communism within the Western Hemisphere . Members were dedicated to opposing Communism in the Americas .
 Latin American governments keenly aware of the long record of U.S. intervention in their nations, the OAS also declared the principle of nonintervention . At the insistence of Latin America governments, Latin American . governments .
 Article 15 of the OAS Charter asserted that ‘no State or group of States has the right to intervene, directly or indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the internal or external affairs of any other State.’ Article 15 was adopted over United States objections .
 President Dwight EisenhowerÊs administration established this pattern in 1954 when it used the OAS to help oust the left-leaning government of Jacobo Arbenz in Guatemala, in the following way . The OAS helped oust the government in 1954 .
 In March 1954, at an OAS meeting in Caracas, U.S. officials successfully pushed for a resolution committing OAS members to take joint action against any communist regime in the Western Hemisphere .
 Eisenhower administration calculated that an OAS resolution condemning Arbenz as a communist would give a veneer of legitimacy to U.S. action against his regime . The Eisenhower administration had calculated that .
 The United States told Latin American governments that the episode was a ‘test case‰ of the OASÊs ability to defend the hemisphere . The U.S. government threatened to act alone if the organization failed to take a stand .
 With only Guatemala in opposition, 16 Latin American governments grudgingly supported the United States . Only Guatemala was in opposition to the U.S.
 The OAS performed a similar function when the U.S. sought to apply pressure on Cuba during 1959 and the early 1960s . OAS has a similar role when the United States sought to pressure Cuba .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro was initially cagey about committing himself openly to the communist camp . Castro was worried the U.S. would allow the United States to invoke the Caracas Resolution and cloak any action against his government .
 Cuban officials conceal how they received arms from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and eventually the Soviet Union . Similar reasons impelled Cuban officials to conceal how .
 U.S. convinced the UN Security Council that the OAS, not the UN, was the appropriate body to consider the issue . Cuban leaders complained to the U.N. about United States hostility, but the UN said the issue was not an issue .
 Cuba was excluded from attending OAS meetings and participating in the body's activities . Technically, Cuba remained a member state, but its existing government was excluded . Cuba was banned from attending meetings, participating in OAS activities . Cuba is now a member member of the OAS, but
 The Kennedy administration decided to quarantine the U.S. under OAS auspices . The OAS won unanimous support for the quarantine, winning unanimous support .
 The blockade became operative at 10:00m. on October 24 and remained in force until November 20, 1962 . The blockade remained in place at the end of 1962 .
 Cuba's suspension from the OAS lasted much longer because Castro openly promoted revolution in other Latin American states . CubaÊs suspension from OAS was due to Castro's role in promoting revolution in Latin American countries .
 In 1964, after Cuba began supporting revolutionary movements in Venezuela and elsewhere, all Latin American nations except Mexico broke diplomatic relations with Cuba . Cuba's support for revolutionary movements led to a split in Latin America in 1964 .
 In June 2009 the OAS Assembly voted to lift CubaÊs suspension, but made this conditional on compliance with all treaties signed by OAS member states, including the Inter-American Democratic Charter of 2001 . OAS members voted in June 2009 to lift the suspension of Cuba .
 Eisenhower, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Kennedy and Rusk; Rusk, Dean David; Herz, Mônica. Herz was the author of the book, "Containment, Doctrine and Course"
 Carolyn Shaw, Carolyn M. Shaw, wrote that the Organization of American States is a member of the U.S. Cooperation, Conflict, and Consensus in the O.A. States .
 The PTBT was the result of five years of intense negotiations concerning the limiting of nuclear weapons tests . The deal was reached after a series of intense talks concerning limiting nuclear weapon tests .
 The PTBT was clearly an attempt to make nuclear weapons programs more difficult to sustain, thus limiting nuclear proliferation . It was clearly a attempt to limit nuclear proliferation by limiting nuclear weapons production .
 Signatories agreed that they would no longer carry out any nuclear test explosion in the atmosphere, underwater, in outer space, or in any other environment that would allow radioactive fallout to spread beyond the borders of the state conducting the test .
 Its goal was to prevent the use of Antarctica for military purposes in the belief that it was in humankindÊs interest to keep the continent pristine and open to scientific research . The Antarctic Peninsula is now uninhabited .
 France's decision to conduct atmospheric tests in Polynesia in 1962 inflamed public opinion . FranceÊs decision to carry out tests in 1962 further inflamed the public opinion in the region .
 In early July that year, 52 percent of Americans signaled unqualified support for a test ban . 52 percent said they would like to ban the practice .
 81 percent of those polled approved the ban after the treaty had been signed . 81 percent approved of the ban in a poll .
 During the early 1960s, two developments were influential in pushing forward a test ban . Two developments in the 1960s were influential to pushing forward the ban .
 World's nuclear states had advanced their nuclear technology to the point where underground tests and physical calculations gave them sufficient information to design and test their strategic weapons without risking radioactive fallout .
 In 1962, the Eighteen-nation Disarmament Committee within the United Nations became the principal forum for discussions concerning a test ban . The committee was established within the U.N. in 1962 .
 An agreement emerged on the use of seismic stations and on-site inspections for verification purposes, but disagreement on the acceptable number of inspections continued . After protracted negotiations, an agreement emerged .
 In July 1963 the United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union initiated tripartite talks on the cessation of nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in outer space, and underwater .
 Agreement on partial testban treaty emerged from discussions after three weeks of talks . Agreement on a partial test ban treaty emerged after about three weeks talks .
 In 1968 the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was signed, restricting the flow of weapons, technical knowledge, and fissile materials to states that did not already have nuclear weapons . The treaty was signed by states that didn't already have nukes .
 The United States and the Soviet Union went a step further in 1974 when they signed the Threshold Test Ban Treaty . The treaty entered into force in 1990 .
 Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; Military Balance; Nuclear Arms Race; United States Allies References Dean, Arthur H Test Ban and Disarmament: The Path of Negotiation . Dean: "Test Ban and disarmament is the path of negotiation"
 Issa Alexandrovich Soviet general was commander of Soviet forces on Cuba, July 1961 . Pliyev was a Soviet general in charge of Soviet troops on Cuba .
 Issa Pliyev was born on November 25, 1903, in Stari Batakoyurt, North Ossetia, in the Russian Empire . He was born in 1903 and died in 1953 .
 After fighting in the Russian Civil War, he joined the Red Army in 1922 . Graduated from Leningrad Cavalry School in 1926, Frunze Military Academy in 1933, and the Soviet General Staff Academy in 1941 .
 A cavalry and tank commander, during World War II Pliyev took part in the battles of Moscow, Stalingrad, and Debrecen . He was also a tank commander .
 In August 1945 he commanded the Soviet-Mongolian Cavalry-Mechanized Group in Manchuria, fighting the Japanese Kwantung Army . He was a member of the Soviet Mongolian Army of the Second World War .
 For his wartime service, Pliyev was twice named a Hero of the Soviet Union . For his war service, he was awarded two medals for his bravery .
 From 1955 to 1962 he served as deputy commander and then commander of the North Caucasus Military District . He served in the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In 1962, after suppressing popular riots in Novocherkassk in the Caucasus, he was appointed general of the army . In 1962 he was given the title of general of army .
 In July 1962 Pliyev was selected to command forces selected to install nuclear-capable missiles in Cuba . He had served in Hungary and Manchuria during World War II, under whom he served .
 He left by air by air for Cuba on July 10 . Bearing a false passport under the assumed name Pavlov, he left Cuba by air .
 Pliyev, who suffered from a recurrent kidney ailment, possessed a dour personality and few diplomatic skills . He was also known for his dour personalities and a lack of diplomacy .
 He developed little rapport with Cuban officials, especially Premier Fidel Castro . He developed no rapport with Castro .
 Aleksei Alekseyevich Dementyev, head of the group of Soviet military advisers in Cuba, largely handled relations with Cuban authorities . He was the head of a group of military advisers to Cuba .
 Under his supervision, 41,000 Soviet personnel moved swiftly to construct 24 R-12 medium-range ballistic missile sites and 16 R-14 intermediate-range missile sites, together with 16 coastal batteries, each equipped with 5 short-range FKR cruise missiles . The Soviet Union built the
 In early September 1962, Malinovsky failed to confirm this authorization when sending Pliyev written instructions, in connection with further deployments of a squadron of Il-28 light bombers equipped with six atomic bombs .
 In mid-October the Soviet Ministry of Defense dispatched a mission to Cuba . Concerned that the U.S. government appeared suspicious of the presence of Soviet forces in Cuba .
 Anatoli I Gribkov is deputy head of the Soviet General StaffÊs Main Operations Directorate . He is the head of Russia's main operations director . He was the Soviet Union's first commander of Soviet troops in the Cold War .
 Gribkov reiterated and emphasized Kremlin insistence that the R-12 and R-14 missiles must not be used . MalinovskyÊs orders were made by the Kremlin .
 Even the short-range Luna missiles were to be employed only if U.S. forces actually attacked and invaded, and there should be no haste to do so . The missiles would be used only if United States forces actually attack and invaded .
 Malinovsky also stressed the need to maintain strict control of all missiles . Malinovski stressed the importance of maintaining strict control over missiles .
 On October 22, President John F Kennedy publicly announced that the United States would not tolerate the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Pliyev had completed construction of the R-12 sites but not R-14 installations . The sites were completed in October .
 He controlled 36 R-12 warheads, all the Luna missiles, the Il-28s and their bombs, and 36 cruise missile FKR warheads . He controlled all the weapons, including all the bombs and missiles .
 After KennedyÊs speech, construction of missile sites continued at full speed . One Soviet ship, the Alexandrovsk, carrying 24 nuclear warheads for IRBMs and 44 warheads for FKR land-based cruise missiles, reached Cuba just before the United States imposed a naval blockade .
 Presidium considered allowing Pliyev to use tactical nuclear-armed missiles to resist a U.S. invasion . Presidium also considered forbidding him to launch the MRBMs against targets in the United States without direct authorization from Moscow .
 On October 22 Pliyev received instructions ‘to be in full readiness‰ but not to employ any nuclear weapons, including the Lunas and FKR cruise missiles, in combat situations . The instructions effectively a tightening of Kremlin control .
 On October 23 Pliyev stepped up preparations for war, accelerating the uncrating and assembly of Il-28s capable of carrying nuclear payloads . On October 25 Pliyeva stepped up .
 It seems likely that on October 26 he moved nuclear warheads on or close to missile sites, though it is uncertain whether any missiles were actually armed .
 Presidium instructed Pliyev to refrain from installing nuclear warheads on short-range cruise missiles or atomic bombs on Il-28s without specific authorization . Shortly afterward, however, as a negotiated settlement with the U.S. seemed likely, the Presidium told him not to install nuclear
 On the morning of October 27, a U.S. U-2 reconnaissance plane piloted by Maj. Maj. John S. O'Brien crashed into the Pacific Ocean . The plane was shot down by a Japanese plane in the Pacific on October 27 .
 Rudolf Anderson overflew Cuba, where a Soviet SA-2 surface-to-air missile battery spotted it . Anderson was shot down by the Soviet Union in Cuba, Cuba .
 Antonyetets, tried to call Pliyev at his headquarters but failed to reach him . Antonyets tried to contact Pliyeva at his HQ in Moscow, Russia, but could not be reached .
 Stepan Grechko, authorized Antonyets to fire at the U-2, which he did, downing it and killing Anderson . Anderson was killed in the attack on the U2 .
 On learning of the incident, Pliyev sent a report to the Ministry of Defense . Malinovsky characterized the response as ‘too hasty’ given that negotiations to resolve the crisis were already under way .
 Presidium allows Pliyev to use force to defend himself in such an eventuality, leaving it ambivalent whether or not he might employ tactical nuclear-armed weapons . Presidium is still concerned that the United States might launch air strikes on missile sites .
 Khrushchev sent Pliyev a warning forbidding him to use either missiles or fighter jets to attack U-2s . The warning came as the outlines of a settlement with the U.S. became clearer .
 Pliyev was ordered to begin dismantling the MRBM sites, which were already operational . Shortly afterward, he was told to start dismantling the sites, already operational, in Russia .
 On October 30, he received instructions to load all the R-12 warheads onto the Alexandrovsk, to be returned to the Soviet Union . The R-14s were also loaded with the warheads . The warheads will be returned together with the other warheads .
 Malinovsky ordered Pliyev to ship out all remaining tactical nuclear warheads on Cuba . Operation completed on December 25, 1962 . Operation was completed on November 20 and 22 .
 Around 18,000 Soviet troops remained on Cuba . Pliyev soon followed, though around 18,,000 remained on the island .
 The Soviet government awarded Pliyev the Order of Lenin for his service in Cuba . He was awarded the order of Lenin by the Soviet government .
 He subsequently wrote two volumes of memoirs on his service in World War II .
 In 1968 the Defense Ministry appointed him a military inspector and adviser to its General Inspectors Group .
 During World War II, he served in the Office of Strategic Services . From 1945 to 1949, he held positions in the State Department and the Economic Commission for Europe .
 For a decade he taught economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . In 1950 he returned to academic life in 1950 .
 He was associated with the InstituteÊs Central Intelligence Agency and Center for International Studies . He was also associated with CIA and CIA-supported Center for Intelligence Studies .
 RostowÊs research centered upon modernization theory and sought to provide an alternative to Marxist models and historical theories of economic development . Rostow Ês work focused on modernization theory . His research was published in the 1990s and 2000s .
 Rostow enthusiastically supported substantially expanding U.S. programs in South Vietnam . Rostow was deputy special assistant to the president for national security affairs . He was the president's national security adviser in 1961 .
 Rostow warned Kennedy against allowing resentment of Cuba to dominate U.S. foreign policymaking to the detriment of United States interests in Southeast Asia . The failed April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba led Rostow to warn Kennedy not to allow resentment of Cuban people to dominate American foreign policy
 In August 1961 he urged that the U.S. should employ covert means to overthrow Fidel CastroÊs government while providing massive developmental aid to Latin American nations . He urged that, to safeguard its own credibility and standing in the Western Hemisphere, the United States should use covert means .
 On October 25, he unsuccessfully recommended that the U.S. embargo all petroleum imports to Cuba .
 Rostow also proposed deploying tactical nuclear weapons in Berlin . Rostow further proposed deploying nuclear weapons . This suggestion never reached the president .
 Rostow was unaware of KennedyÊs secret understanding with the Soviets to remove NATO Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey . Rostow thought that U.S. firmness alone had forced Soviets to back down, a belief that reinforced his proclivity to advocate the continuing expansion of United States
 Rostow succeeded Bundy as national security adviser in March 1966 . Rostow became the administrationÊs staunchest advocate of this position .
 In voluminous writings, he consistently defended U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War . He argued that this gave other Southeast Asian nations the breathing space needed to develop strong economies and become bastions of anticommunism .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Berlin Crises; Bundy, McGeorge; Castro, Fidel; Central Intelligence Agency; Johnson, Lyndon Baines; Jupiter Missiles . References: Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Kennedy, JFK; .
 In 1934 he became professor of government and dean at Mills College, California . In 1934, he became dean of government at Mills .
 An Army Reserve officer, he was called to active duty in 1940, ending the war as a colonel on the War Department General Staff . He was a colonel in the Army Reserve .
 He then became special assistant to Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson . He was then Special Assistant to Robert P Patterson .
 In 1947 incoming secretary of state George C Marshall invited Rusk to head the State DepartmentÊs Office of Special Political Affairs . Rusk was the first person to be invited by Marshall to the office .
 Major policy initiatives during his tenure included the Marshall Plan, the establishment of a separate West German state, and negotiating the North Atlantic Treaty .
 In March 1950 Rusk became assistant secretary of state for Far Eastern affairs . Rusk is credited with formulating policy on the PeopleÊs Republic of China and the Republic of the China .
 The meeting of October 29, 1962, included President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara . The meeting also included Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Gen. Eisenhower .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Director William C Foster and CIA Director John McCone .
 His varied experiences reinforced his conviction that aggressive totalitarian powers, whether leftist or rightist, must be uncompromisingly opposed .
 During 1951ă1961 Rusk headed the Rockefeller Foundation, greatly expanding aid programs to the developing world . Rusk was the first head of the Rockefeller foundation in 1961 .
 Rusk had doubts regarding the feasibility of the April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion attempt against Cuba . Rusk failed to express these forcefully in meetings of KennedyÊs advisers or to coordinate potential opposition to the scheme .
 Rusk refused to allow further U.S. air strikes against Cuban airfields . As the invasion encountered major resistance, Rusk turned down requests from planners .
 Rusk headed the U.S. delegation that persuaded the Organization of American States to suspend CubaÊs participation and impose economic and diplomatic sanctions . Rusk is credited with convincing the O.A. State Department to impose sanctions on CastroÊ's government .
 Rusk favored the naval quarantine/ blockade approach rather than immediate air strikes . Rusk was often silent during the deliberations of the Executive Committee .
 Unannounced air strikes would, he warned forcibly, contravene international law . Unannounced strikes would violate international law, the president said .
 Rusk led the delegation that obtained OAS endorsement of the blockade on October 23 . Rusk says the blockade has been in place since 2008 .
 Rusk was among the few Kennedy advisers privy to efforts by the presidentÊs brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, to negotiate an understanding with Soviet officials . The United States would decommission NATO Jupiter nuclear missiles in Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba .
 Had this approach failed, he and John Kennedy were ready to ask the secretary general of the U.N. to propose a similar arrangement, he said .
 He soon became the warÊs most ardent official defender, backing subsequent troop increases and bombing raids on North Vietnam . He was soon backed by the U.S. military, backing troop increases, heavy bombing raids .
 U.S. historian, special assistant to the president, 1960ă1964. United States historian, Special Assistant to the President, 1960 .
 He served in the Office of War Information from 1942 to 1943 . He then transferred to the OSS as an analyst, spending two years in Britain and France .
 Schlesinger, a diligent researcher and prolific writer, rejoined HarvardÊs History Department in 1947 . He rejoined the Harvard history department in 1947 and wrote extensively .
 A committed Democrat, he produced several volumes focusing upon the presidencies of Andrew Jackson and Franklin D. Roosevelt .
 Schlesinger quickly became a leading figure in the anticommunist United States left . In 1947 he helped to found Americans for Democratic Action, an organization embodying this outlook .
 Schlesinger worked to elect the young, Harvard-educated senator John F Kennedy, whom he considered the embodiment of pragmatic liberalism . He considered the young Harvard educated senator to be pragmatic liberal .
 In late 1960, Kennedy appointed Schlesinger to the ill-defined position of special assistant to the president . He remained until two months after KennedyÊs assassination in November 1963 .
 He functioned as presidentÊs contact to intellectuals and his liaison with U.N. ambassador Adlai Stevenson . Schlesinger had supported earlier presidential bids .
 Schlesinger also advised Kennedy on Latin America, a long-standing interest of his own, and wrote some of his speeches . He also wrote some speeches .
 In 1961 he was among the few administration officials to oppose the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion attempt in Cuba . He publicly defended this venture, though afterward he publicly defended it .
 Schlesinger did not join the Executive Committee of senior officials that debated U.S. policy during the October 1962 crisis over the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba . He was not on the committee during the crisis .
 On October 24 Schlesinger also passed on to Kennedy advice from W Averell Harriman, assistant secretary of state for Far Eastern affairs, that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was seeking a peaceful solution . The United States should cooperate with him to achieve this, Schles
 At this time Schlesinger remained unaware of the secret U.S.-Soviet understanding that NATO Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be removed . Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, the presidentÊs younger brother, negotiated the deal .
 He supported Robert in his 1968 presidential bid, cut short by assassination . Robert was a supporter of Robert in the 1968 campaign .
 SchlesingerÊs two somewhat hagiographical volumes on the Kennedy brothers reflected his deep attachment to them . He tended to interpret history in their favor while ignoring less flattering evidence . Although important sources, they were important sources .
 He continued to write prolifically, producing numerous short pieces on history and politics, many later published in book form . He also continued to produce numerous short works on history .
 Schlesinger turned against the U.S. military intervention in Vietnam he had originally supported . He watched apprehensively the growing strength of United States conservatism in the later 20th century .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Harriman, William Averell; Jupiter Missiles . Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; Stevenson, Adlai Ewing II; Depoe, Stephen P Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., and the Ideological History of American
 Theodore Chaikin was Special Counsel to President John F Kennedy, 1961 . Sorensen was John Kennedy's special counsel to President Kennedy .
 Theodore Sorensen was born on May 8, 1928, in Lincoln, Nebraska, where his father was active in progressive Republican politics . Theodore was born in 1928 .
 In 1953 the youthful senator John F Kennedy of Massachusetts hired Sorensen as a legislative assistant . In 1953 he was the legislative assistant to Kennedy's Massachusetts senator .
 Sorensen remained with Kennedy until the latterÊs death, his duties expanding to include speechwriting . Many of KennedyÊ's best known lines and jokes originated with him .
 He drafted numerous articles for Kennedy, did significant research and writing on KennedyÊs prize-winning book Profiles in Courage . He accompanied the senator as he traveled across the United States campaigning for the presidency .
 Once elected, Kennedy immediately appointed Sorensen special counsel to the president . Kennedy expected him to be a major adviser on domestic affairs as well as chief speechwriter .
 Sorensen had no involvement in planning the abortive April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba . He did not participate in the April 1961 invasion .
 After this event, Kennedy began to consult Sorensen on foreign policies, including such sensitive issues as the ongoing German crisis over the status of West Berlin .
 Kennedy entrusted Sorensen with drafting several presidential letters to Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev . Kennedy entrusted the draftsman with several letters to the Soviet premier . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 U.S. naval blockade on Cuba may have helped tip the balance toward air strikes against missile installations . Cuban President Obama failed to produce an acceptable draft of an initial communication on Oct. 18 .
 Sorensen himself favored the quarantine option as less likely ‘to precipitate general war while still causing the Soviets . . to back down” . The quarantine option was less likely to precipitate . general war .
 Robert F Kennedy helped draft the presidentÊs response to Khrushchev's letters of October 26 and 27, setting out terms on which the Soviet Union would remove the Cuban missiles .
 He also drafted a secret letter to Khrushchev on scrapping of the Turkish missiles . He also joined in drafting a letter to the Soviet leader on the scrapping .
 Robert McNamara, KennedyÊs secretary of defense, credited him with helping hold the members of ExComm together . McNamara: "ExComm" was the group of members of the Kennedy administration .
 Three months after KennedyÊs assassination, Sorensen submitted his resignation to President Lyndon B Johnson . President Johnson had asked him to remain and utilized his speechwriting talents for his first State of the Union Address .
 Sorensen wrote a memoir of the Kennedy administration and had a successful career with a prominent international law firm . He also wrote a successful memoir .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Berlin Crises; Johnson, Lyndon Baines; Jupiter Missiles . Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; McNamara, Robert Strange References Goduti, Philip A., Jr.
 Joining the leading Chicago law firm of Cutting, Moore and Sidley, he rapidly won social prominence and a wide circle of intellectual friends . Served on many public service organizations, most notably the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations .
 Stevenson worked for the U.S. Navy Department from 1941 to 1944 . Stevenson worked in the Navy Department .
 He served on the United States team at the 1945 San Francisco conference that created the UN . He then spent three years in the State Department as a special assistant to the secretary of state .
 In 1952 and again in 1956 Stevenson ran unsuccessfully as the Democratic candidate for the U.S. presidency . He lost twice by wide margins to the Republican Dwight D Eisenhower .
 In 1961 the newly elected Democratic president, John F Kennedy, made Stevenson ambassador to the UN, a position he held for the rest of his life . In 1961 Stevenson was made ambassador to UN, where he spent most of his career .
 The president and his closest adviser, his brother Robert, considered Stevenson overly liberal, weak, and indecisive, and treated him rather contemptuously . Stevenson's brother, Robert, called him overly liberal and weak .
 Stevenson was left ignorant of planning for the April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba . He erroneously informed the UN that his country had played no part in it, a humiliating indication of his exclusion .
 He displayed photographic evidence of Soviet missile bases on Cuba . He aggressively demanded that Valerian Zorin, the Soviet UN representative, confirm whether or not his country had deployed nuclear-capable missiles .
 Stevenson advised against air strikes on missile installations by Kennedy . Stevenson said air strikes would not be possible .
 By October 20, he supported the option of a blockade of Cuba, which he hoped would lead to negotiations ‘in an atmosphere free of threat.”
 On October 24 he inclined to favor a proposal by UN secretary general U Thant suggesting that the Soviet Union suspend all further nuclear and other weaponry shipments for two or three weeks while the United States dropped its quarantine . Both sides embarked on peaceful discussions and both sides embarked upon peaceful discussions .
 Stevenson participated in lengthy UN-supervised negotiations with Soviet representatives settling the details of these arrangements . Once the Soviet Union had agreed to withdraw the missiles, Stevenson took part in lengthy negotiations .
 The Saturday Evening Post published an article by the journalists Stewart Alsop and Charles Bartlett depicting Stevenson as eager to conciliate the Soviets during the crisis by jettisoning NATO missiles in Italy and Turkey in exchange for those in Cuba . The article was published in December 1962 in the
 Robert Kennedy, who had secretly negotiated an arrangement along these lines with Soviet officials, was the unnamed source for this story .
 It probably represented an attempt on his part to force Stevenson, whom he disliked intensely, to resign from his brotherÊs administration, he said .
 Stevenson retained his post until July 14, 1965, when he died suddenly of a heart attack in London . Stevenson kept his post in charge of the London police force until 1965 .
 Eisenhower, Eisenhower, Dwight David; Jupiter Missiles; Kennedy, Robert Francis; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; Schlesinger, Arthur M Jr; U Thant; United Nations; Zorin, Valerian Aleksandrovich .
 He graduated from the U.S. Military Academy, West Point, in 1922 . He was a member of the United States Military Academy at West Point .
 In his 1959 book The Uncertain Trumpet Taylor publicly aired his views, winning the attention and approval of EisenhowerÊs successor, John F Kennedy, and a reputation as a ‘political general” Taylor won the attention of Kennedy and the approval of his successor .
 Kennedy brought Taylor in to investigate that episode . He then appointed Taylor his principal military adviser, to serve as liaison with JCS and as chairman of the Special Group on Cuba .
 Taylor developed an extremely close relationship with Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, the presidentÊs brother . Taylor also developed a close friendship with President Kennedy's brother, Attorney General Kennedy .
 Taylor favored an expanded program of intelligence gathering and economic warfare against Cuba . Taylor favored efforts to discredit Castro domestically and internationally .
 Taylor was a key member of the Executive Committee of senior officials the Kennedy administration established on October 16, 1962, to handle the crisis in Cuba . Taylor was one of the key players in the Cuban missile crisis .
 Initially he recommended a surgical strike against the bases, followed by a naval blockade to prevent the arrival of further weapons . Initially he suggested a surgical attack on the bases .
 Later that day, after speaking to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, he recommended massive air strikes on Cuban military facilities over several days . He hoped to avoid outright U.S. invasion .
 By October 19 the rest of the JCS unanimously supported the full program of air strikes plus invasion . Taylor eventually converted as evidence of numerous additional Soviet missile sites on Cuba emerged .
 In late 1961 Taylor was an early advocate of the expansion of U.S. troop commitments in South Vietnam . Taylor was also a strong advocate for economic and military aid to the region . Taylor: "In late 1961, I was a strong supporter of the Vietnam war"
 As JCS chairman from 1962 to 1964, Taylor opposed the commitment of further U.S. ground forces to Vietnam . Taylor supported escalation of the war through air strikes within Vietnam and bombing raids on North Vietnam .
 Taylor was one of only three senior advisers or ‘Wise Men‰ to dissent from the view that the U.S. should seek a negotiated settlement to end the war . In March 1968 Taylor was only one of three advisers to dissent against the idea .
 For the rest of his life Taylor continued to defend U.S. policies in Vietnam . Taylor blamed his countryÊs defeat largely upon criticism by the media .
 U.S. career diplomat and one of the premier Cold War Soviet experts . United States career diplomat . Former diplomat and Soviet expert .
 He endeared himself to Muscovites by staying on during the grim Nazi siege of 1941ă1942 . He ended up staying in Moscow during the siege .
 In 1944 he was sent to London, and in 1946 he returned to Washington to take on senior posts in Eastern European and European affairs . In 1946 he took on posts in Washington and London .
 He went on to serve during 1957ă1961 as ambassador to the Soviet Union, where he secured Soviet leader Nikita KhrushchevÊs personal trust .
 Thompson was an adviser to presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy during Cold War crises over Berlin and Cuba between 1958 and 1962 . This served Thompson well as well as advising presidents Dwight D Eisenhower and John F Kennedy .
 Thompson returned to Washington in 1962 and was appointed ambassadorat-large . Thompson served as ambassador at the U.S. Embassy in Washington .
 Thompson was the longest-serving U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union in history . He was involved in many crucial nuclear arms talks with the Soviets .
 Eisenhower, Dwight David; Johnson, Lyndon Baines; Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Nuclear Arms Race References Beschloss, Michael R The Crisis Years: Kennedy and Khrushchev, 1960–1963 .
 U Thant was born in Pantanaw, Burma, on January 22, 1909 . He worked as an educator and freelance journalist before going into government service . He was a member of the Burma government .
 During 1947ă1957 he served as press director of the government of Burma, director of national broadcasting, secretary to the Ministry of Information, secretary of projects in the Prime MinisterÊs Office, and executive secretary .
 He quickly became a leading figure in the UN effort to broker a solution to the war in Algeria . He became a key figure in efforts to end the Algerian war .
 He was elected to complete the term of UN secretary general Dag Hammarskjöld, who died in a September 1961 plane crash . As a moderate neutralist, he was elected in 1961 to take over the post-Hammarskjold term .
 He served two further terms in his own right, from November 1962 until December 1971 . He also served two more terms in the same period .
 As secretary general, Thant preferred quiet diplomacy . He tended to rely more heavily on superpower initiatives than his predecessor .
 He sent UN forces in November 1961 and again in December 1962 to end the secession crisis involving the Congolese province of Katanga . But he could also be quite forceful in policy implementation .
 His most notable successes included sending UN peacekeeping forces to Cyprus in 1964 . His 1965 brokering of a cease-fire in the 1965 IndoPakistani war over Kashmir .
 On October 30 and 31, 1962, Thant led a delegation that visited Cuba and inspected some of the missile installations . Once a settlement was reached in principle, he led the delegation to Cuba .
 As a conciliatory gesture, the United States ceased surveillance overflights during his visit . The United States also stopped surveillance over-surveillance overflights .
 Thant allowed U.S. and Soviet representatives to work under UN auspices in finalizing the agreement to remove the missiles and other weaponry from Cuba . Thant also allowed the sometimes contentious details of the agreement .
 ThantÊs attempts after 1963 to sponsor negotiations among the United States, the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and the Soviet Union were less successful . Thant Ês attempt after 1963 was unsuccessful .
 He retired from the UN in December 1971 when his term of office ended .
 Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; U-2 Overflights; United Nations References Firestone, Bernard J The United Nations under U Thant, 1961–1971 .
 Lockheed developed light jet-powered sailplanes that could undertake photographic reconnaissance missions at high altitude . The U-2s were designated by Lockheed in the 1950s . Lockheed developed the U.2s as part of the Lockheed-U.S. Navy .
 These clandestine flights violated Soviet airspace, provided CIA with vital information on the number, strength, and location of Soviet nuclear missiles and other weapons .
 The program was ended with the 24th such flight in 1960, after the U-2 Affair, in which Soviet surface-to-air missiles shot down a U.2 deep over Soviet territory .
 One casualty of the U-2 Affair was a summit meeting in Paris between Eisenhower and Khrushchev . The meeting was intended to defuse international tensions and make some progress toward halting the nuclear arms race .
 President John F Kennedy deliberately chose not to retaliate with an air strike against the antiaircraft battery responsible for downing the U-2 . Fearing that any retaliation would further escalate the situation and possibly result in outright war, President Kennedy did not retaliate .
 CIA director John McCone pressed to resume U-2 missions over Cuba . McCone had heard reports that unusual quantities of Soviet military equipment were arriving in Cuba . Rumors that these included nuclear warheads .
 At the insistence of Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara, uniformed military officers rather than civilians piloted the airplanes involved .
 Analysis of photographic data collected by several flights on October 14 and 15 revealed the existence of several nuclear-capable missile sites in Cuba . Some of the sites were equipped for intermediate-range ballistic missiles and others intended for medium-range missiles . Others were crates holding Il-28 medium-
 CIA deputy director of intelligence passed on information to national security adviser . Ray Cline passed on this information to McGeorge Bundy, President John F KennedyÊs national security advisor .
 Further U-2 sorties over the next week identified numerous additional missile sites on Cuba . No certainty that the reconnaissance revealed all existing installations . U.S. reconnaissance aircraft have not been able to identify all existing sites .
 U.S. ambassador Adlai Stevenson displayed sample photos of Soviet missiles on Cuba . He demanded that Valerian Zorin, his Soviet counterpart, confirm or deny the presence of Soviet nuclear-capable missiles . The U.N. Security Council is scheduled to hold a
 CIA officials flew to France bearing sets of the photographs to verify their allegations . French newspapers expressed doubts over the validity of the photographic evidence . CIA officials traveled to France with sets of photos to verify allegations .
 Soviet forces tracked overflights on October 14, 15, and 17, but had been ordered not to fire on United States aircraft unless attacked . U.S. aircraft were tracked by Soviet forces, but were not attacked .
 On October 27, as negotiations between U.S. and Soviet officials continued, a Soviet SAM battery in Cuba shot down a U-2, killing the pilot . Maj. Maj. Gen. Carlos S. S. was the pilot of the U.2 .
 Other lower-flying naval reconnaissance aircraft over Cuba also came under fire . One of the aircraft was damaged but returned safely to base .
 Kennedy and other U.S. officials had previously agreed that any attacks on United States airplanes would trigger United States air strikes against the batteries responsible for these attacks .
 Kennedy and McNamara decided against immediate retaliation . Instead, they assumed that lower-level Soviet military personnel in Cuba had acted without authorization from their superiors in Moscow .
 Nuclear-armed United States fighter jets based in Alaska escorted the U-2 back once it reentered United States airspace . Soviet MiG fighter jets tried to intercept it, but it was intercepted by nuclear-armed U.S. fighter jets in Alaska .
 All these incidents revealed the potential for trigger-happy military forces to spark an incident that could easily spiral into a full-scale nuclear exchange .
 The Pentagon hastily stated that any interference with U.S. surveillance would provoke a response . The Pentagon said interference with United States surveillance would provoked a response.
 Khrushchev initially believed that Cuban rather than Soviet troops had shot down the U-2 . He instructed his military commanders in Cuba to exercise restraint and avoid further attacks on U.S. aircraft .
 At this point the bellicose Cuban leader Fidel Castro was urging Khrushchev to initiate a nuclear first strike against the U.S. At the time, the Cuban leader was urging the United States to launch a strike .
 Khrushchev begged him to resist the temptation to respond forcibly to U.S. overflights . Khrrushchev feared Castro might try to incite Soviet and Cuban military officers manning missile batteries to further hostile action against United States targets .
 U-2 overflights monitored the progress of these operations, provoking sharp protests from Castro . Castro protested the removal of the missiles from Cuba .
 The Soviet government bluntly warned him that Soviet troops would no longer assist in shooting down such aircraft . Soviet government told him it would not be used to shoot down aircraft .
 Eventually, United States officials decided to suspend the noisy and disruptive low-level flights . Eventually, they decided to restrict their surveillance to highaltitude U-2 missions . The U.S. government has since suspended the noisy, disruptive flights .
 U-2 flights over Cuba continued until the late 1970s . They were reintroduced during times of tension in U.S. relations with Cuba .
 Bundy, McGeorge; Castro, Fidel; Eisenhower, Dwight David; Kennedy, Kennedy, John Fitzgerald; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; McCone, John Alex; McNamara, Robert Strange . Stevenson, Adlai Ewing II; United Nations; United States
 Central Intelligence Agency, Center for the Study of Intelligence, 1998 . Central Intelligence agency: "It's not a secret"
 The creation of the United Nations was an attempt by the World War II Allies to establish an international organization more effective than the interwar League of Nations . The League had failed to mitigate the worldwide economic depression or prevent a second world war .
 The UN soon became an arena for Cold War contests and disputes in which major powers tested their strength . Third World nations came to see the UN as a forum where concerns of less-developed countries could be voiced and made effective .
 The UN became a venue where communist and Western-led camps contended for power . In the Cold War context, the UN was a venue for communist and western-led power .
 Despite its stated security role, the organization proved largely unsuccessful in defusing the growing tensions that, during the second half of the 1940s, rapidly came to divide the former World War II Allies . The Western powers were soon fiercely at odds with the Soviet Union .
 When the UN was founded, it was anticipated that peacekeeping and the restoration of international security and order, if necessary by military means, would be among its major functions .
 U.S. ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson challenged his Soviet counterpart Valerian Zorin to confirm or deny the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Stevenson challenged him to deny or deny that Soviet missiles were in Cuba.
 Stevenson displayed U-2 surveillance photographs documenting the existence of these missiles . Stevenson displayed photos of the missiles in U.2 surveillance photos .
 UNÊs charter states were originally expected to agree to make specified military forces available to the UN for deployment under the organizationÊ's control . UN�És charter was intended to use military intervention on occasions when military intervention was required to maintain international peace .
 No nation signed any such agreement relinquishing control of any military forces to UN authority . In practice, no nation signed such an agreement . No nation has relinquished control of its own military forces .
 The UN General Assembly was the stage for some of the most significant pronouncements and dramatic confrontations of the Cold War . It provided a backdrop to the saga of Cuba in the late 1950s and 1960s .
 U.S. diplomats soon noted that under Fidel Castro Cuba frequently voted with the Soviet bloc . Cuba's new international alignment was a disturbing indication of its new international alignments .
 The audience included Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev, who loudly affirmed his countryÊs support for Cuba . The audience was filled with Cuban refugees .
 Fears that the U.S. was planning military intervention against Cuba mounted in October 1960 . Both Cuban and Soviet representatives appealed to the United Nations to prevent this . A month later, on October 25, 1960, both appealed .
 U.S. ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson initially denied that his country was involved in the Bay of Pigs invasion attempt against Cuba in April 1961 . He was forced to retract a statement he later retracted .
 Stevenson challenged his Soviet counterpart Valerian Zorin to confirm the presence of Soviet nuclear-capable missiles in Cuba in October 1962 . Stevenson displayed photographic evidence of these installations in Cuba .
 UN secretary general U Thant sent identical messages to both parties, suggesting that the Soviet Union suspend all further nuclear and conventional weapons shipments for two or three weeks . U.S. dropped its quarantine and both sides embarked on peaceful negotiations .
 President John F Kennedy offered to mediate a settlement after his own efforts for a peaceful resolution proved futile . President Kennedy might well have accepted the offer, but it was not enough .
 On October 30 and 31, 1962, a UN delegation headed by U Thant visited Havana to inspect the missile sites . The UN delegation visited Havana on October 30, 1962 .
 Soviet and U.S. negotiators anticipated UN inspectors would provide verification once missiles had left . But resentful Castro refused to allow such inspections on Cuban soil . Soviet and United States negotiators had hoped to provide verification .
 United States representatives led by arms-control negotiator John J McCloy and Soviet deputy foreign minister Vasili Kuznetsov spent two months working under UN auspices to finalize details of an agreement to remove missiles and other assorted weaponry .
 In late 1963 William Attwood, an adviser to Stevenson, and Carlos Lechuga, Cuban ambassador to the UN, served as conduits for preliminary feelers from Castro to Kennedy on a possible normalization of Cuban relations . Attwood: KennedyÊs assassination in November 1963 was
 Bay of Pigs Invasion; Castro, Fidel; Cordier, Andrew Wellington; Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich; Kuznetsov, Vasili Vasilyevich . U Thant, Adlai Ewing II; Zorin, Valerian Aleks
 Most United States allies considered United States hostility toward CastroÊs Cuba excessive . Most U.S. allies considered the hostility toward Cuba excessive.
 The British Conservative government under Prime Minister Harold Macmillan thought United States economic sanctions against Cuba liable to prove counterproductive by inclining Castro toward the communist bloc . During 1959ă1960 United States pressure impelled Britain to refuse to sell Hunter warplanes or other arms to Castro .
 By mid-1960 British officials sympathized with United States president Dwight D EisenhowerÊs desire to oust Castro . British officials urged caution in avoiding the appearance of United States interventionism .
 Macmillan loyally backed President John F KennedyÊs actions during the abortive U.S.-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion attempt . The episode drew widespread condemnation from the British press, public, and political elite .
 Most U.S. allies in Western Europe and Canada were generally unfavorable, especially when United States officials sought to deceive the United Nations over their country's involvement .
 Kennedy consulted frequently with Macmillan by telephone and in person with his old friend Sir David Ormsby-Gore, the British ambassador in Washington . On October 19, the CIA formally briefed British officials on the developing crisis, and from then onward onward Kennedy consulted with Kennedy .
 Ormsby-Gore selected the option of U.S. air strikes against Cuban missile bases . Kennedy ultimately chose the alternative .
 On October 22 Kennedy dispatched personal emissaries to inform Macmillan, Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer of his anticipated response to the Soviet missiles .
 Macmillan offered his support, as did de Gaulle, though much British and French media opinion was initially skeptical of U.S. allegations that nuclearcapable missiles were present on Cuba . Some reservations over the blockadeÊs legality and fears that confrontation might escalate into fullscale
 U.S. and Soviet officials secretly agreed that the United States would remove obsolete NATO Jupiter nuclear missiles in Turkey and Italy, close to Soviet borders, in exchange for Soviet withdrawal of nuclear-capable weapons in Cuba .
 Soviet diplomats in London apparently suggested a bargain on these lines . Soviet diplomats reportedly suggested a deal on a deal with London .
 Before offering this concession, Kennedy consulted Macmillan, who was willing to contribute 60 Thor intermediate-range ballistic missiles . The missiles were already scheduled for removal in 1963 .
 Formally, the Turkish and Italian missiles were under NATO control . The U.S. had to convince its allies, especially the reluctant Turks, that relinquishing these weapons would not affect those countries' security .
 U.S. defense officials agreed to compensate for their loss by stationing nuclear-armed submarines in the Mediterranean . Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev eventually but unavailingly protested the deployment .
 Turkey and Italy also received substantial quantities of substitute U.S. conventional and dual-purpose weaponry . The countries also received significant amounts of substitute weapons .
 President de Gaulle's sense that U.S. officials had informed rather than consulted him during the crisis intensified his conviction that French policy should be more independent of both NATO and the United States .
 The U.S. decision to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey and Italy impelled France to develop its own independent nuclear deterrent, free from United States control . France also developed its own nuclear deterrent in response to the United States' decision .
 The fact that Western Europe came uncomfortably close to enduring thermonuclear devastation over distant bases on a Caribbean island helped boost European peace organizations, including the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament .
 Most United States allies greeted the peaceful resolution of the crisis with relief . Most U.S. allies greeted it with relief.
 Many in South Korean military were eager to see it escalate into full-scale war . Many believed this would offer an ideal opportunity to invade North Korea and unify the country .
 United States forces in the Demilitarized Zone separating the two Koreas turned their artillery south toward their own ally . South Korean air force planes were grounded, to prevent any attack on the north .
 U.S. president John F Kennedy was conscious that he needed to maintain congressional support for his policies . Kennedy was always conscious of the need to maintain the support of Congress .
 Usually, strongly anticommunist senators and congresspersons attacked his administration for being too weak on Cuba . The president's administration has been criticized for its policies on Cuba by anti-Cuban Republicans .
 President informed J William Fulbright, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, of the planned April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion . An exception to this pattern came when the president told Fulbright about the planned invasion .
 Fulbright forcefully condemned the venture as a hypocritical affront to stated American principles of national self-determination . Fulbright: The venture is a hypocritical attack on American principles . The venture has been condemned by Fulbright as hypocritical .
 As Cuba moved ever further into the Soviet camp, Republican criticism of KennedyÊs policies mounted . Arizona senator Barry Goldwater was one of the leading Republicans to criticize the Cuban policy .
 Indiana senator Homer Capehart, also a Republican, suggested that the U.S. should impose a blockade on Cuba .
 On September 4 Kennedy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and Defense Secretary Robert McNamara met with 15 congressional leaders and stated that U.S. surveillance had so far revealed only defensive weaponry on Cuba .
 Kennedy then issued a public statement that the U.S. would take action if Soviet combat troops, military bases, or offensive ground-to-ground or nuclear-capable missiles were present on Cuba . Kennedy then said the United States would act if Soviet forces were present .
 Nikita Khrushchev informally sent a message that he would do nothing provocative until mid-November, after these had taken place . Kennedy faced political pressures to take a tough anti-Soviet line .
 A few days later, on October 10, the Kennedy administration accelerated its U-2 surveillance overflights of Cuba . Keating again claimed that six launching pads for intermediate-range ballistic missiles were under construction .
 Kennedy publicly announced the presence of Soviet nuclear-capable missiles on Cuba . Kennedy made the announcement on October 22, 1962 . Kennedy announced the existence of the Cuban missiles .
 President Obama briefed congressional leaders on the situation . Two hours earlier, he had told them he initially intended to impose a blockade . He had briefed 20 Republican and Democratic leaders .
 Fulbright favored air strikes or an invasion, the more provocative options . Richard Russell, Richard Russell and Carl Vinson favored the air strikes . Fulbright was Fulbright's secretary of state at the time .
 After Kennedy's speech that evening, Congress adopted a resolution supporting his policies, especially his demand that the Soviets remove the missiles . The resolution was passed by Congress in a vote of approval .
 Central Intelligence Agency director John McCone met again with selected congressional leaders, including Fulbright and Russell . The following day, the CIA director met with select congressional leaders .
 On October 24, the blockade came into force, and U.S. officials waited to see whether Soviet ships would turn back . Kennedy once more met congressional leaders, who were broadly supportive .
 The successful resolution of the crisis rebounded to Kennedy�Ês political advantage . KennedyÊ's political advantage was boosted by the successful resolution .
 Khrushchev congratulates Kennedy on political outcome of 1962 midterms . Nixon lost his gubernatorial race in California and Democrats gained four Senate seats overall . Nixon was a strong anticommunist, but Kennedy was an anti-communist .
 Fears of adverse political repercussions were a major reason Kennedy administration officials insisted on keeping secret . The informal U.S.-Soviet agreement that NATO would remove nuclear missiles from Turkey was kept secret .
 In February 1963, Kennedy faced renewed allegations from suspicious Republican congressmen that up to 40 Soviet medium-range nuclear-capable ballistic missiles remained concealed on Cuba .
 On February 7 McNamara publicly denied these allegations, providing U-2 surveillance photographic evidence . McNamara provided photographic photographic evidence of the alleged U.2 surveillance .
 He was less forthcoming over continued stationing of Soviet troops in Cuba, which lasted throughout the Cold War, provoking congressional complaints in 1979 . In 1979, Congress complained that Soviet troops were still stationed there .
 Khrushchev suggested a meeting with Kennedy after Kennedy took office in January 1961 . The meeting took place shortly after JFK took office .
 After the abortive Cuban Bay of Pigs invasion in April, KennedyÊs advisers adamantly opposed the conference . They believed Khrushchev would exploit the failed invasion either by berating the president or using it as a propaganda ploy .
 Kennedy wanted the meeting to focus on a nuclear test ban treaty and the neutralization of Laos, where a communist insurgency was threatening the government . Kennedy wanted Laos to be neutralized by neutralizing the government's communist insurgency .
 The president believed that these agreements would be important steps toward easing Cold War tensions, which had intensified since the May 1960 U-2 Affair . President believed that the agreements would help ease tensions .
 Khrushchev had little interest in a test ban and almost none in Laos, however, however . Laos was one of the few countries in the world to test their nuclear weapons .
 He wanted an agreement that would stanch the flow of East Germans fleeing to the West via the divided city . He wanted to stop the flow, but it was never possible .
 Eisenhower threatened to sign a peace treaty with the German Democratic Republic (East Germany), which would have given the GDR full control of the city, had failed . The treaty failed to convince Eisenhower into accepting a settlement on Berlin by threatening to sign it .
 Kennedy later claimed that Khrushchev had used this channel to trick his brother into believing that he would limit the Vienna discussions to Laos and the test ban treaty . The talks could be verified by numerous on-site inspections .
 Khrushchev was not interested in either Laos or a nuclear test ban, records show . He had never agreed to on-site inspections of Laos or nuclear test sites .
 KhrushchevÊs notes to Kennedy focused on Berlin, reiterating his earlier threats . Instead of threatening threats, he focused on threats to Berlin .
 President Kennedy sent the attorney general to Bolshakov, offering concessions and assurances that he wanted a good working relationship . President Kennedy hoped to make the summit a success, but it was canceled .
 Khrushchev berated those who suggested that he work seriously with Kennedy . He told them that the president was weak and would buckle under his threats . The Soviet leader was traveling to Vienna, Austria, to meet with the Soviet Union .
 During the conference the president was in constant pain from a recent back injury, which many suggested meant he was not in top form . Many suggested that he was suffering from a back injury .
 The summit had no formal agenda, allowing the two men to roam from topic to topic . The summit was held in honor of President Obama .
 Kennedy told aides that when he broached the subject of the dangers of war through miscalculation, Khrushchev became almost uncontrollably hostile . Kennedy said when he told aides, "Miscalculation" was a risk of war .
 The Soviet leader also rebuffed KennedyÊs efforts to discuss the nuclear test ban, responding that it ‘meant nothing” outside the context of total nuclear disarmament, he said .
 Khrushchev taunted Kennedy over Cuba . As predicted by Kennedy advisers and ignoring the presidentÊs earlier request, he ignored his earlier request .
 Khrushchev again threatened to sign a peace treaty if Kennedy did not agree to neutralize Berlin . Kennedy refused to agree to a neutralization of the city . The war broke out in 1953 .
 Khrushchev hinted at possible future discussions on Laos, although no progress was made on the test ban . No progress has been made on Laos' test ban, despite Khrushchchev hinting at possible talks .
 In his last meeting with the president that day, Khrushchev told Kennedy that he intended to give East Germany control over West BerlinÊs access routes . If the United States used force to keep them open, war would result, he said .
 Kennedy's aides told him that the meeting had been typical for Khrushchev . The president refused to believe it and began to prepare for war over Berlin .
 The administration even advised Americans to build backyard bomb shelters . The administration also suggested Americans build backyard shelters .
 Khrushchev soon realized that he had badly miscalculated by bullying Kennedy . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in the early 1960s .
 Khrushchev concluded that the only way to solve the Berlin Crisis and avoid a war was to construct a wall separating the halves of the city . Believing that Kennedy had lost control of his government to militarists, he decided to build the wall .
 Khrushchev continued to view Kennedy as weak . Nevertheless, largely because of Vienna, he continued to see Kennedy as a weak .
 This probably contributed to his decision in summer 1962 to offer to install nuclear-capable missiles in Cuba . The Cuban government refused to accept the offer .
 The multilateral Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance signed on May 14, 1955, in Warsaw, Poland . It formally institutionalized the Eastern European alliance system, the Warsaw Treaty Organization, known as the Warsaw Pact .
 The Warsaw Treaty was identical to bilateral treaties concluded during 1945ă1949 between the Soviet Union and its Eastern European client states . It was intended to assure MoscowÊs continued military presence on their territory . The treaty was signed in 1945 and 1949 .
 The Soviet Union, Albania, Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, Poland, and Czechoslovakia pledged to defend each other if one or more of the members were attacked . The alliance was formed in the early 1950s and 1960s .
 The Warsaw Pact was created as a political instrument for Soviet leader Nikita S KhrushchevÊs Cold War policy in Europe . It was created by the Soviet Union as an instrument for its Cold War policies .
 The immediate trigger was the admission of the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization on May 5, 1955 . The Austrian State Treaty of May 15, 1955 provided for Austrian neutrality and the withdrawal of Soviet troops .
 The creation of the Warsaw Pact sent important signals to both Eastern Europe and the West . The Warsaw Pact was created in 1961 and signed over to the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union made clear to its satellite states that AustriaÊs neutral status would not likewise be granted to them . Austria�És neutrality status was not given to them, but it was given to Austria by the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev allured the West with a standing offer to disband the Warsaw Pact in conjunction with the dissolution of NATO . The offer was made contingent upon East-West agreement on a new collective security system in Europe . On the other hand, the West agreed to disband NATO with a new
 PCC met almost annually in one of the capitals of the Warsaw Pact states . The PCC was based in Warsaw Pact capitals .
 A unified command and a joint staff were created to organize the actual defense of the Warsaw Treaty states . On the military side, a unified command was created . A joint staff was also created .
 Behind the façade of unity, however, growing differences hounded the Eastern alliance . The Eastern alliance was formed in the 1980s .
 Poles and Hungarians in the fall of 1956 demanded a reform of the Warsaw Pact to reduce overwhelming Soviet dominance within the alliance . Following KhrushchevÊs campaign of de-Stalinization, Polish and Hungarian leaders demanded a change .
 In November 1956, the Soviet Army invaded Hungary and soon crushed all resistance . Hungary was invaded by the Soviet Union in November 1956 .
 Romania demanded withdrawal from its territory of all Soviet troops and military advisers in 1958 . Romania demanded the withdrawal of its territory from all Soviet forces . In 1958, Romania demanded a withdrawal of Soviet troops from all its territory .
 Khrushchev termed this a unilateral troop reduction contributing to greater European security . To cover Soviet embarrassment, Khrushvic termed this reduction of troop reduction to cover embarrassment .
 Albania formally withdrew from the Warsaw Pact in 1968 . At the height of the Berlin Crisis, Albania was the weakest and least strategically important country . Albania was formally withdrawn from the alliance in 1968.
 Fidel CastroÊs revolutionary government in Cuba sought to purchase substantial armaments from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and other Warsaw Pact countries . Those states carefully cleared with the Soviet Union before dispatching any military equipment to Cuba .
 Only after the crisis ended, Eastern European leaders learned, in a secret meeting, that nuclear war had been narrowly avoided . Only after that meeting, leaders learn, in secret, that the crisis had been averted .
 Romania reacted quickly to Moscow's nonconsultation in such a serious matter . Romania reacted promptly to MoscowÊs non-consultations in such an issue . Russia's refusal to consult Romania is a serious problem, the country says .
 In 1963, Romania gave secret assurances to the United States that it would remain neutral in the event of a confrontation between the superpowers . The Romanian government gave the U.S. assurances in 1963 .
 In 1963 Castro asked Khrushchev to admit Cuba as a Warsaw Pact member, the Soviet leader rejected the request . Castro sought additional assurance that the U.S. would not invade Cuba in future .
 Heiss, Mary Ann, and S Victor Papacosma, eds. eds., ed. Heiss and Victor Papasma . Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich, Nikie Sergeyevitch . Castro, Fidel Castro, Khrushchevich, Kh
 He taught and served as a party official in several posts until joining the PeopleÊs Commissariat of Foreign Affairs in 1941 . He was a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 He served as assistant secretary general during 1941ă1942, deputy commissar during 1942ę1943, and head of the Fourth Department during 1943ă1945 .
 In March 1945, Zorin was appointed Soviet ambassador to Czechoslovakia, where he served until the spring of 1947 . He served as ambassador to the Czech Republic .
 He then served as Soviet representative to the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe . He then returned to Moscow in November 1947 as deputy foreign minister, a post he held until 1955 .
 He was dispatched to Prague to help oversee the February 1948 coup that installed a communist government . He helped oversee the overthrow of the Czechoslovak government .
 From October 1952 to April 1953, Zorin was Soviet ambassador to the UN while retaining his foreign ministry post . He was Soviet Ambassador to UN from 1952 to 1953 .
 In 1955 he was named Soviet ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) before returning as deputy foreign minister the following year . In 1965 he held a position he held until 1965, when he was appointed Soviet ambassador .
 Cuba sought arms from Poland and Czechoslovakia, both Soviet satellites, in 1959 . The two Eastern European governments consulted Soviet officials before buying arms from Cuba .
 Zorin expressed misgivings that arms sales might harm the recent rapprochement negotiated by U.S. president Dwight D Eisenhower and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev .
 Zorin urged all nations to implement ‘urgent measures to prevent military action against Cuba’ In October 1960, with rumors rife that the U.S. planned to invade Cuba and overthrow Castro .
 Zorin participated in negotiations with U.S. and UN representatives to hammer out details of implementation . The Soviet Union agreed to remove missiles from the Soviet Union in 1978 .
 In 1965, Zorin was named Soviet ambassador to France, where he served until retiring in 1971 . He served as ambassador to the French capital .
 He served as an ambassador-at-large with responsibility for human rights issues . Subsequently, he served as a diplomat for the U.S. State Department of Justice .
 He was a candidate member of the CPSU Central Committee in 1956 . He became a full member in 1965 . He was elected a full CPSU member in 1966 .
 The first public acknowledgment that the U.S. government knew of the presence of Soviet nuclear-capable missiles in Cuba came when President John F Kennedy addressed the nation on October 22, 1962 . President Kennedy made the announcement to the nation .
 He demanded the withdrawal of these weapons and announced the imposition of a naval blockade on Cuba . The Cuban government has not responded to the demands .
 This Government has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet military buildup on the island of Cuba, Cuba .
 A series of offensive missile sites are now in preparation on that imprisoned island, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The purpose of these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere . The purpose for these bases is to provide nuclear strike capabilities against the western hemisphere .
 "Surveillance be stepped up. Upon receiving the first preliminary hard information of this nature last Tuesday morning at 9 A.M.M., I directed that our surveillance be stepped down. Upon . receiving the . first preliminary . hard information, I directed . that our . surveillance be
 Government feels obliged to report this new crisis to you in fullest detail . And having now confirmed and completed our evaluation of the evidence and our decision on a course of action, we feel obliged to do so .
 The characteristics of these new missile sites indicate two distinct types of installations, says CNN.com . The characteristics indicate two types of sites .
 Several of them include medium range ballistic missiles capable of carrying a nuclear warhead for a distance of more than 1,000 nautical miles . Several of the missiles could be used to carry a nuclear weapon .
 Additional sites not yet completed appear to be designed for intermediate range ballistic missiles . These missiles could be capable of striking most of the major cities in the Western Hemisphere .
 In addition, jet bombers, capable of carrying nuclear weapons, are now being uncrated and assembled in Cuba . The necessary air bases are also being prepared .
 This is an explicit threat to the peace and security of all the Americas, the president says . The presence of these large, long-range, and clearly offensive weapons of sudden mass destruction, he says .
 This action contradicts repeated assurances of Soviet spokesmen, both publicly and privately delivered, that the arms buildup in Cuba would retain its original defensive character . The Soviet Union had no need or desire to station strategic missiles on the territory of any other nation, he says .
 The size of this undertaking makes clear that it has been planned for some months, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 Neither the United States of America nor the world community of nations can tolerate deliberate deception and offensive threats on the part of any nation, large or small, it says .
 We no longer live in a world where only the actual firing of weapons represents a sufficient challenge to a nationÊs security to constitute maximum peril . We live in an increasingly dangerous world, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Nuclear weapons are so destructive and ballistic missiles are so swift, that any substantially increased possibility of their use or any sudden change in their deployment may well be regarded as a definite threat to peace . Any increase in the use of nuclear weapons or a change in deployment could well be seen as a
 For many years, both the Soviet Union and the United States have deployed strategic nuclear weapons with great care, never upsetting the precarious status quo which insured that these weapons would not be used in absence of some vital challenge .
 Our own strategic missiles have never been transferred to the territory of any other nation under a cloak of secrecy and deception . Our history, unlike that of the Soviets since the end of World War II, demonstrates that we have no desire to dominate or conquer any other country or impose our system upon
 American citizens have become adjusted to living daily on the bullÊs-eye of Soviet missiles located inside the U.S. or in submarines . Nevertheless, American citizens are still adjusting to living in the crosshairs of missiles .
 The nations of Latin America have never previously been subjected to a potential nuclear threat . In that sense, missiles in Cuba add to an already clear and present danger, the author says .
 U.S. President Barack Obama decries the buildup of Communist missiles in violation of Soviet assurances . The move is "a deliberately provocative and unjustified change in the status quo which cannot be accepted"
 Our policy has been one of patience and restraint, as befits a peaceful and powerful nation, which leads a worldwide alliance, says President Obama .
 We have been determined not to be diverted from our central concerns by mere irritants and fanatics . We have not been diverted . We are determined to focus on our national concerns, not on irritants or fanatics, we said .
 Further action is required-and it is under way; and these actions may only be the beginning . But now further action is needed, and it's under way, says President Obama .
 We will not prematurely or unnecessarily risk the costs of worldwide nuclear war in which even the fruits of victory would be ashes in our mouth- but neither will we shrink from that risk at any time it must be faced .
 A strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated . Cuba has been building up its military forces in recent years .
 All ships bound for Cuba from any nation or port will be turned back . If found to contain offensive weapons, they will turn them back . The Cuban government has vowed to crack down on ships bound to Cuba .
 This quarantine will be extended, if needed, to other types of cargo and carriers . The quarantine is expected to be extended to other carriers .
 "We are not at this time, however, denying the necessities of life as the Soviets attempted to do in their Berlin blockade of 1948," says President Obama . The U.S. has been in the grip of a blockade of Berlin since 1948 .
 I have directed the continued and increased close surveillance of Cuba and its military buildup, says President Obama . President Obama has directed increased surveillance on Cuba .
 Foreign ministers of the OAS rejected secrecy on such matters in this hemisphere . The foreign ministers rejected secrecy in their communiqué .
 If these offensive military preparations continue to increase the threat to the hemisphere, further action will be justified . Further action would be justified if these offensive preparations continue .
 I have directed the Armed Forces to prepare for any eventualities . I trust that in the interest of both the Cuban people and the Soviet technicians at the sites, the hazards of continuing this threat will be recognized .
 It shall be the policy of this Nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response . The U.S. will respond to any missile launch from Cuba from any
 "As a necessary military precaution, I have reinforced our base at Guantanamo, evacuated today the dependents of our personnel there, and ordered additional military units to be on a standby alert basis"
 We are calling for an immediate meeting of the Organ of Consultation under the Organization of American States, to consider this threat to hemispheric security and invoke articles 6 and 8 .
 Under the Charter of the United Nations, we are asking for an emergency meeting of the Security Council be convoked without delay to take action against this latest Soviet threat to world peace .
 U.N. resolution calls for prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all offensive weapons in Cuba . Cuba's quarantine can be lifted under supervision of United Nations observers .
 I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate this clandestine, reckless, and provocative threat to world peace and to stable relations between our two nations . The Soviet Union was overthrown in December 1968 .
 I call upon him further to abandon this course of world domination, and to join an historic effort to end the perilous arms race and to transform the history of man .
 He has an opportunity now to move the world back from the abyss of destruction, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: President Obama has a chance to end the crisis by withdrawing weapons from Cuba .
 This Nation is prepared to present its case against the Soviet threat to peace, and our own proposals for a peaceful world, in any forum-in the OAS, in the United Nations, or in any other meeting that could be useful- without limiting our freedom of action .
 We have in the past made strenuous efforts to limit the spread of nuclear weapons, says South Korea . We have also made efforts to try and prevent nuclear weapons from being spread in the world .
 We have proposed the elimination of all arms and military bases in a fair and effective disarmament treaty . We have also proposed a reduction of all military bases .
 We are prepared to discuss new proposals for the removal of tensions on both sides, including the possibility of a genuinely independent Cuba, free to determine its own destiny .
 We are a peaceful people who desire to live in peace with all other peoples. We have no wish to war with the Soviet Union. We are peaceful people. We wish to live peace with other peoples .
 "It is difficult to settle or even discuss these problems in an atmosphere of intimidation," says the BBC . But it's difficult to discuss these issues in a climate of intimidation, he says .
 "Any other threat which is made either independently or in response to our actions this week must and will be met with determination," says President Obama .
 Any hostile move anywhere in the world against the safety and freedom of peoples to whom we are committed will be met by whatever action is needed, says the UK .
 President Obama's speech is being carried by special radio facilities in Cuba . Cuba is being held captive by the Cuban people, he says .
 I have watched and the American people have watched with deep sorrow how your nationalist revolution was betrayed-and how your fatherland fell under foreign domination . And I have . watched and I have ... watched and . the American . people watch with deep . sorrow how . your nationalist . revolution was
 Cuba is the first Latin American country to become a target for nuclear war . The Cuban government has turned Cuba against your friends and neighbors in the Americas . They are puppets and agents of an international conspiracy .
 This country has no wish to cause you to suffer or impose any system upon you. But this country does not want to cause any system to be imposed upon you, it says .
 We know that your lives and land are being used as pawns by those who deny your freedom, we say . We also know that you're being used to deny freedom in the U.S. We know this is unacceptable .
 Many times in the past, the Cuban people have risen to throw out tyrants who destroyed their liberty . Many times, the Cuba people have thrown them out of the country, including in recent years .
 Most Cubans today look forward to the time when they will be truly free-free from foreign domination . And I have no doubt that most Cubans are looking forward to a truly free time .
 Cuba should be welcomed back to society of free nations, says President Obama . Cuba must return to society, says Obama . "And then shall Cuba be welcome back," he says .
 No one can foresee precisely what course it will take or what costs or casualties will be incurred . No one knows exactly what will happen or how long it will be .
 Many months of sacrifice and self-discipline lie ahead for the U.S. President, Obama, Hillary Clinton and others .
 The path we have chosen for the present is full of hazards, as all paths are, but it is the one most consistent with our character and courage as a nation and our commitments around the world, says President Obama .
 "One path we shall never choose, is the path of surrender or submission," she says . And one path we will never choose is surrender, she says. And that is the way of surrender .
 "Our goal is not the victory of might, but the vindication of right-not peace at the expense of freedom, but both peace and freedom, here in this hemisphere, and, we hope, around the world"
 Khrushchev and Kennedy traded intransigent letters in which neither showed any sign of backing down . For four days, through October 25, the letters were exchanged in which both sides refused to back down .
 Khrushchev suggested that the Soviets might be willing to remove their missiles if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba in the future . On October 26, the Soviets sent a lengthy letter to the United States . The letter was a response to a request for the removal of missiles
 The following day, he demanded that the U.S. remove intermediate-range ballistic missiles installed in Turkey, a United States NATO ally, which could be used to attack targets in the Soviet Union .
 On October 27 Kennedy responded publicly to the first letter, accepting its terms in principle . Kennedy responded to the letter on October 27, accepting it . On October 26, Kennedy accepted the terms of the letter .
 He did not publicize a response to the second letter but privately authorized his brother Robert to explore with Soviet officials . The two discussed the possibility of an informal understanding on the removal of intermediate-range NATO missiles in Turkey and Italy .
 On October 27, Soviet surface-to-air batteries shot down a U.S. U-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba, killing the pilot, while another U.2 strayed into Soviet airspace over Siberia but returned safely . The U.N. reconnaissance plane was shot down by
 United States and Soviet officials feared that such these episodes might easily escalate into outright war . U.S. and Soviet governments feared that these episodes could easily escalate to outright war.
 Khrushchev and Kennedy discussed these incidents in further correspondence on October 28, 1962 . In further correspondence, they also discussed the incidents .
 Khrushchev complained of overflights, pointing out their potential to overturn any peaceful resolution of the crisis . In a message broadcast over Soviet radio to ensure that it would reach the U.S. as fast as possible, he said .
 On October 28, Kennedy went so far as to apologize for the October 27 intrusion into Soviet airspace . Kennedy apologized for the incident on October 28 .
 A copy of the statement I am making tonight concerning developments in Cuba and the reaction of my Government has been handed to your Ambassador in Washington . The statement was made by President Barack Obama to the Cuban President .
 I want you to know immediately and accurately the position of my Government in this matter . In view of the gravity of the developments to which I refer, I want to know the position .
 "I have not assumed that you or any other sane man would, in this nuclear age, deliberately plunge the world into war which it is crystal clear no country could win and which could only result in catastrophic consequences"
 At our meeting in Vienna, I expressed our readiness and desire to find, through peaceful negotiation, a solution to any and all problems that divide us . I expressed my readiness to find a peaceful solution, says President Obama .
 The United States could not tolerate any action on your part which in a major way disturbed the existing over-all balance of power in the world . At the same time, I made clear that in view of the objectives of the ideology to which you adhere, the U.S. could
 I stated that an attempt to force abandonment of our responsibilities and commitments in Berlin would constitute such an action . The United States would resist with all the power at its command, he said .
 The U.S. would do whatever must be done to protect its own security and that of its allies, he says . It was in order to avoid any incorrect assessment on the part of your Government with respect to Cuba .
 Congress adopted a resolution expressing its support of this declared policy . Congress also voted in favor of the resolution .
 Cuba is developing long-range missile bases and other offensive weapons systems in Cuba . Despite this, the rapid development of these weapons systems has proceeded .
 I must tell you that the United States is determined that this threat to the security of this hemisphere be removed . The United States. is determined to remove this threat from this hemisphere .
 "The action we are taking is the minimum necessary to remove the threat to the security of the nations of this hemisphere," says President Obama . "At the same time, I wish to point out that the action . is the . minimum necessary," he says .
 I hope that your Government will refrain from any action which would widen or deepen this already grave crisis . I hope we can agree to resume the path of peaceful negotiation .
 Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, Moscow, October 23, 1962 . Mr President Kennedy was assassinated in October 1962 .
 I have just received your letter, and have also acquainted myself with text of your speech of October 22 regarding Cuba regarding Cuba . I have also read text of text of speech of Oct. 22 about Cuba .
 I should say frankly that measures outlined in your statement represent serious threat to peace and security of peoples . I should . say frankly, measures outlined . represent serious threats to peace, security, peoples .
 United States has openly taken path of gross violation of Charter of United Nations, violation of international norms of freedom of navigation on high seas . U.S. has openly violated the Charter of U.N. and violated international norms, says U.K. diplomat .
 Statement of Government of U.S. America cannot be evaluated in any other way than as naked interference in domestic affairs of Cuban Republic, Soviet Union, and other states . Statement of government of United States. America .
 Charter of United Nations and international norms do not give right to any state whatsoever to establish in international waters control of vessels bound for shores of Cuban Republic . Charter of U.N. and international . norms . does not give . right to . any state nor to establish . any right to
 It is self-understood that we also cannot recognize right of U.S. to establish control over armaments essential to Republic of Cuba for strengthening of its defensive capacity . Cuba cannot accept right of United States to establish .
 Armaments now on Cuba, regardless of classification to which they belong, are destined exclusively for defensive purposes . Armaments are destined to secure Cuban Republic from attack of aggressor .
 Viewpoint of Soviet government with regard to your statement of October 22 is set forth in statement of Soviet Government, which is being conveyed to you through your Ambassador in Moscow . Viewpoint is set out in statement from Soviet Government .
 The steps which started the current chain of events were the action of your Government in secretly furnishing offensive weapons to Cuba . I think you will recognize that the steps . started the . current chain-events was the action . of your government in secretly . furnishing . offensive weapons .
 In the meantime, I am concerned that we both show prudence and do nothing to allow events to make the situation more difficult to control than it already is . I'm concerned that the situation is already being difficult .
 The quarantine will go into effect at 1400 hours Greenwich time October twenty-24 .
 I have received your letter of October 23, have studied it, and am answering you . I have read it and studied it. I have answered you .
 "Just imagine, Mr President, that we had presented you with the conditions of an ultimatum which you have presented us by your action," says President Obama .
 In presenting us with these conditions, you, Mr President, have flung a challenge at us, says Mr President . "Mr President, Mr Obama, has flung at us," he says. "In presenting us ... you have thrown a challenge," he adds .
 Our ties with the Republic of Cuba, like those of other states, concern only the two countries between which these relations exist, we say . We are happy to clarify that our relations with other states concern only two countries .
 A quarantine may be established only by agreement of states between themselves, not by some third party . A quarantine can only be established by agreement between states and each other .
 The question is in no way one of quarantine, but rather of far more serious things, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "You, Mr President, are not declaring a quarantine, but rather are setting forth an ultimatum and threatening that if we do not give in to your demands, you will use force," the president says .
 It would mean guiding oneself in oneÊs relations with other countries not by reason, but by submitting to arbitrariness . It would be for one to guide oneself in relations with oneÉs relations by reason .
 No, Mr President, I cannot agree to this, and I think that in your own heart you recognize that I am correct,” she says . “I think that Mr President. I cannot believe this,’ she says. “Mr President. You recognize that
 The U.S. is seeking to overturn the decision of the Organization of American States . The decision by the OAS "cannot in any way substantiate the demands now advanced by the United States," the president says .
 This Organization has absolutely no authority or basis for adopting decisions such as the one you speak of in your letter . The Organization has no authority to adopt such a decision .
 International law exists and universally recognized norms of conduct exist, says CNN.com.com . "International law exists," says author of the book .
 You wish to compel us to renounce the rights that every sovereign state enjoys, you are trying to legislate in questions of international law . You are violating the universally accepted norms of that law, and you are violating that law . The UK is the only country in the world that has
 The Cuban president says he's doing this out of hatred for the Cuban people and its government . He says it's because of considerations of the election campaign in the U.S.
 The actions of the U.S. with regard to Cuba constitute outright banditry or, if you like, the folly of degenerate imperialism . No such morality or law can be found, because the actions of U.N. are immoral or lawless . The United States is
 The U.S. has lost its isolation with the advent of modern types of armament . Unfortunately, such folly can bring grave suffering to the peoples of all countries, and to no lesser degree to the American people . The United States has completely lost its former isolation .
 The Soviet Union cannot fail to reject the arbitrary demands of the U.S. President. Therefore, Mr President, if you coolly weigh the situation which has developed, not giving way to passions, you will understand .
 "Try to put yourself in our place and consider how the United States would react to these conditions," Obama says . When you confront us with such conditions, think about how the U.S. would react, he says .
 I do not doubt that if someone attempted to dictate similar conditions to you·the United States·you would reject such an attempt . You would reject that attempt, he says .
 The Soviet Government considers that the violation of the freedom to use international waters and international air space is an act of aggression . The violation pushes mankind toward the abyss of a world nuclear-missile war .
 The Soviet Government cannot instruct the captains of Soviet vessels bound for Cuba to observe the orders of American naval forces blockading that Island . Therefore, the Soviet Government can't instruct the captain of Soviet ships bound for Cuban Islands to observe orders of U.S. forces .
 Our instructions to Soviet mariners are to observe strictly the universally accepted norms of navigation in international waters and not to retreat one step from them .
 If the U.S. side violates these rules, it must realize what responsibility will rest upon it . And if the American side violates it, it will be responsible for that case .
 "Naturally we will not simply be bystanders with regard to piratical acts by American ships on the high seas," says the president of the U.S. Navy .
 "We will then be forced on our part to take the measures we consider necessary and adequate in order to protect our rights," she said . The government has been forced to take measures to protect its citizens .
 I have received your letter of October 24, and I regret very much that you still do not appear to understand what it is that has moved us in this matter . I have written to you that you don't seem to understand .
 In August there were reports of important shipments of military equipment and technicians from the Soviet Union to Cuba . The Soviet Union is known to have sent important military equipment to the island .
 In early September I indicated very plainly that the United States would regard any shipment of offensive weapons as presenting the gravest issues . The U.S. would regard such shipments as presenting a shipment of the "gravest issues"
 No offensive weapons were being sent to Cuba, the UK says . The UK says it received an explicit assurance from the UK that weapons would not be sent to the island .
 TASS issued a statement in September saying that Tass was assured by Tass . If you will review the statement issued by TASS in September, you will see how clearly this assurance was given .
 In reliance on these assurances I urged restraint upon those in this country who were urging action in this matter at that time . In reliance upon these solemn assurances, he urged restraint .
 President Obama learned beyond doubt what he had not denied was false, says Obama . Obama: "All these public assurances were false and that your military people had set out recently to establish a set of missile bases in Cuba"
 I ask you to recognize clearly, Mr Chairman, that it was not I who issued the first challenge in this case, and that in the light of this record these activities in Cuba required the responses I have announced, he says .
 I repeat my regret that these events should cause a deterioration in our relations. I repeat this regret that . These events should not lead to a deterioration of our relations, I say .
 I hope that your Government will take the necessary action to permit a restoration of the earlier situation . I hope to see a return to the previous situation .
 "From your letter, I got the feeling that you have some understanding of the situation which has developed and a sense of responsibility," says the author of the letter . "I got the impression that you had some understanding," she says .
 Each of us has set forth his explanation and his understanding of these events in Cuba . Now we have already publicly exchanged our evaluations of the events around Cuba .
 I would think that, apparently, a continuation of an exchange of opinions at such a distance, even in the form of secret letters, will hardly add anything to that which one side has already said to the other . Consequently, I think that . I would say that . continuation of .
 I think you will understand me correctly if you are really concerned about the welfare of the world. I think it will be a matter of concern if you really care for the world, I say .
 Communists are against all wars between states in general and have been defending the cause of peace since we came into the world . We, Communists, are against war between states, and are against wars .
 We have always regarded war as a calamity, and not as a game nor as a means for the attainment of definite goals, nor, all the more, as a goal in itself . War is 'a calamity' and not a game or a means of attainment of a definite
 It is thus that we, Soviet people, and, together with US, other peoples as well, understand the questions of war and peace . The Soviet Union and the United States have been involved in the conflict in Ukraine .
 I can, in any case, firmly say this for the peoples of the socialist countries, as well as for all progressive people who want peace, happiness, and friendship among peoples . I can't, of course, say this. I can say this to the peoples .
 I see, Mr President, that you too are not devoid of a sense of anxiety for the fate of the world and not without an understanding of what war entails . Mr President. You too must be aware of the threat of war, he says .
 "People invested with authority, trust, and responsibility. And that must be clear to us," she says . "We are people invested in authority and responsibility," she adds .
 We must not succumb to intoxication and petty passions, regardless of whether elections are impending in this or that country, or not impending, we must resist temptation . We must never succumb to the temptation of intoxication, even if elections are imminent .
 If war breaks out, it would not be in our power to contain or stop it, for such is the logic of war . These are all transient things, but if indeed war should break out, then it would be impossible to contain it, says the PM .
 "I have participated in two wars and know that war ends when it has rolled through cities and villages, everywhere sowing death and destruction," says President Obama . Obama: War ends when "it rolls through cities" and "rolls through villages and villages"
 In the name of the Soviet Government and the Soviet people, I assure you that your arguments regarding offensive weapons on Cuba are groundless . The Soviet government and Soviet people should not be concerned about offensive weapons, he writes .
 It is apparent from what you have written me that our conceptions are different on this score, or rather, we have different definitions for these or those military means . In reality, in reality, the same forms of weapons can have different interpretations, he says .
 A cannon is a defensive means if it is set up to defend boundaries or a fortified area . A cannon can be used to defend borders or fortified areas . It can also be used as a cannon to defend the surrounding area .
 If one concentrates artillery, and adds to it the necessary number of troops, then the same cannons do become an offensive means . The same cannons prepare and clear the way for infantry to advance, says the historian .
 "The same happens with missile-nuclear weapons as well, with any type of this weapon," he says . The same thing happens with missiles and nuclear weapons, he adds .
 "You are mistaken if you think that any of our means on Cuba are offensive. You are mistaken," says Obama .
 You, President, are a military man and should understand: can one advance, if one has on oneÊs territory even an enormous quantity of missiles of various effective radiuses and various power, but using only these means .
 How can one, consequently, give such a completely incorrect interpretation as you are now giving, to the effect that some sort of means on Cuba are offensive? "How can one ... give such an incorrect interpretation?" asks.
 All the means located there, and I assure you of this, have a defensive character, are on Cuba solely for the purposes of defense, and we have sent them .
 Has something so new appeared in military strategy that one can think that it is possible to advance thus? The U.S. military strategy is a new concept of the war, the author says .
 I say precisely advance, and not destroy, since barbarians, people who have lost their sense, destroy . "Barbarians ... destroy," he said. "They destroy" "barbarians"
 You can regard us with distrust, but, in any case, you can be calm in this regard, that we are of sound mind . We understand perfectly well that if we attack you, you will respond the same way. You can also be calm that if you attack us, you
 "My conversation with you in Vienna gives me the right to talk to you this way," says Putin . Putin: "I'm not going to lie to Putin, but I'm going to talk about it in this way"
 This indicates that we are normal people, that we correctly understand and correctly evaluate the situation, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 Only lunatics or suicides, who themselves want to perish and to destroy the whole world before they die, could do this . Only lunatic or suicides could do it, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "We, however, want to live and do not at all want to destroy your country," says President Obama . "We are not going to destroy our country. We want to protect our country," he says .
 Ideological questions, as well as economic problems, should be solved not by military means, they must be solved on the basis of peaceful competition, writes David Frum .
 We have proceeded and are proceeding from the fact that the peaceful co-existence of the two different social-political systems, now existing in the world, is necessary, that it is necessary to assure a stable peace .
 You have now proclaimed piratical measures, which were employed in the Middle Ages, when ships proceeding in international waters were attacked . You have called this ‘a quarantine‰ around Cuba,” says President Obama .
 Our vessels, apparently, will soon enter the zone which your Navy is patrolling, says the U.S. Navy . Our vessels are apparently entering the zone, says Navy .
 I assure you that these vessels, now bound for Cuba, are carrying the most innocent peaceful cargoes . The vessels are bound for the island of Cuba, Cuba .
 Military people imagine that these are some sort of special type of weapon, I assure you that they are the most ordinary peaceful products . Although perhaps . perhaps your military people imagine . that these . military people . imagine that . these are special weapons, he said .
 There are no weapons on the ships bound for Cuba, says President Obama . Obama: "I assure you that on those ships, which are bound to Cuba, there is no weapons"
 The weapons which were necessary for the defense of Cuba are already there, says President Obama . The weapons are already in place, he says .
 "I do not want to say that there were not any shipments of weapons at all," says President Obama . "There were no weapons shipments at all" says Obama .
 "I should like to have you believe in yourself and agree that one cannot give way to passions; it is necessary to control them," she said . But she said: "I would like you to believe in your ability to control your passions"
 If you stop the vessels, then, as you yourself know, that would be piracy . If you stopped the vessel, then you yourself would be pirated, it's piracy .
 "If we started to do that with regard to your ships, then you would also be as indignant as we and the whole world now are," he said . "We are indignant," he added. "You would be indignant"
 One cannot give another interpretation to such actions, because one cannot legalize lawlessness . One can't give a different interpretation to the actions of those who commit lawless acts .
 If this were permitted, then there would be no peace, there would also be no peaceful coexistence . There would be also no peace coexistence, he says. If this was permitted, it would also mean no peace .
 We should then be forced to put into effect the necessary measures of a defensive character to protect our interest in accordance with international law . We should also be obliged to put in effect measures to protect us from harm .
 We have received an appeal from the Acting Secretary General of the UN, U Thant, with his proposals . We have also received a request from the acting Secretary General, U. Thant .
 His proposals come to this, that our side should not transport armaments of any kind to Cuba during a certain period of time, while negotiations are being conducted . The other side shouldn't undertake any sort of piratical actions against vessels engaged in navigation .
 This would be a way out of the situation which has been created, which would give the peoples the possibility of breathing calmly . This would help the people breathe calmly, says the author .
 We were very grieved by the fact·I spoke about it in Vienna·that a landing took place, that an attack on Cuba was committed, as a result of which many Cubans perished . We spoke about the fact .
 "You repeated it to me several times, hinting that not everybody occupying a high position would acknowledge his mistakes as you had done," he said . "Not everybody occupies a high place would acknowledge their mistakes," he added .
 "We also acknowledged those mistakes which had had been committed during the history of our state, and not only acknowledged, but sharply condemned them," he said . "We too possess no less courage," he added .
 If you are really concerned about the peace and welfare of your people, and this is your responsibility as President, then I, as the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, am concerned for my people, says President .
 "At one time, our people itself had a revolution, when Russia was still a backward country, we were attacked then. At one time," says Putin . Putin: "We were attacked when we were still backward country"
 "This has been recorded by participants in the aggression against our country," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "This is not the first time I have heard from such a group of people in Russia"
 A whole book has been written about this by General Graves, who, at that time, commanded the United States Expeditionary Corps . General Graves has written a book about this .
 "We sincerely sympathize with Cuba and the Cuban people, but we are not interfering in questions of domestic structure," says President Obama . "We are not intervening in their affairs," he says .
 The Soviet Union desires to help the Cubans build their life as they themselves wish and that others should not hinder them, says the Soviet Union . "The Soviet Union wants to help [Cubans] build their lives," says the Kremlin .
 You declared that you sympathized with the Cuban counterrevolutionary emigrants, that you support them and would help them realize their plans against the present Government of Cuba . But you also declared that . you also sympathized . with the . Cuban emigrants .
 It is also not a secret to anyone that the threat of armed attack, aggression, has constantly hung, and continues to hand over Cuba . The threat has hung in the hands of the Cuban government, says President Obama .
 It was only this which impelled us to respond to the request of the Cuban Government to furnish it aid for the strengthening of the defensive capacity of this country .
 If assurances were given by the President and the Government of the United States that the U.S. itself would not participate in an attack on Cuba, this would change everything . This would immediately change everything, says the author .
 I am not speaking for Fidel Castro, but I think that he and the Government of Cuba, evidently, would declare demobilization and would appeal to the people to get down to peaceful labor . The Cuban government would have to demobilize its troops, says author .
 If there is no threat, armaments are a burden for every people, says Peter Bergen . Then, too, the question of armaments would disappear, he says .
 The question of the destruction, not only of the armaments which you call offensive, but of all other armaments as well, would look different . Then, too, the question of destruction of the . armaments would look . different, he said. "Then, also, the
 "When one accumulates them, this damages the economy," he says . "If one puts them to use, then they destroy people on both sides," he adds .
 Only a madman can believe that armaments are the principal means in the life of society, says the author .
 "No, they are an enforced loss of human energy, and what is more are for the destruction of man himself," says the author of the book .
 If people do not show wisdom, they will come to a clash, like blind moles, and then reciprocal extermination will begin . If people don't show wisdom they will clash, then in the final analysis, it will be fatal .
 You would declare that the United States will not invade Cuba with its forces and will not support any sort of forces which might intend to carry out an invasion of Cuba .
 President Obama would have left Cuba without the presence of military specialists in Cuba, he said . He added that the Cuban government should have left the country .
 Mr President, I appeal to you to weigh well what the aggressive, piratical actions, which you have declared the USA intends to carry out in international waters, would lead to. Mr President . Mr President. Mr Obama, Mr Obama .
 You yourself know that any sensible man simply cannot agree with this, cannot recognize your right to such actions . Any sensible man can't agree with such actions, he says .
 "If you did this as the first step towards the unleashing of war, well then, it is evident that nothing else is left to us but to accept this challenge of yours," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "If this is seen as a first step to unleashing war
 The more the two of us pull, the tighter that knot will be tied, Mr President says . If you have not lost your self-control and sensibly conceive what this might lead to, we and you ought not now pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied
 The knot may come so tight that even he who tied it will not have the strength to untie it, and then it will be necessary to cut that knot . And a moment may come when that knot will be tied .
 "What that would mean is not for me to explain to you, because you yourself understand perfectly of what terrible forces our countries dispose," she said .
 If there is no intention to tighten that knot and thereby to doom the world to the catastrophe of thermonuclear war, then let us relax the forces pulling on the ends of the rope, let us take measures to untie that knot .
 I expressed gratitude to Mr Bertrand Russell, who manifests alarm and concern for the fate of the world, and readily responded to the appeal of the Acting Secretary General of the UN, U Thant . Mr Russell's response to the UN's appeal was accepted by Mr Thant.
 These thoughts are dictated by a sincere desire to relieve the situation, to remove the threat of war . These thoughts have been dictated by the desire to free the situation .
 I have studied with great satisfaction your reply to Mr Thant concerning measures that should be taken to avoid contact between our vessels and thereby avoid irreparable and fatal consequences . President: "I have studied . great satisfaction" Your reply should have led to an agreement to avoid collision between the vessels
 This reasonable step on your part strengthens your belief that you are showing concern for the preservation of peace, which I note with satisfaction. This strengthens my belief that . This is a reasonable step, which strengthens my . belief that your . concern for peace, I note, satisfaction .
 I have already said that our people, our Government, and I . personally, as Chairman of the Council of Ministers, are concerned solely with having our country develop and occupy a worthy place among all peoples of the world .
 Both the victor and the vanquished will derive only benefit from it, says President Obama . "This is the most noble and necessary field for competition," he says .
 "The main thing must be done is to normalize and stabilize the state of peace among states and among peoples," he says .
 I understand your concern for the security of the United States, Mr President, because this is the primary duty of a President. I understand this concern for your security, Mr Obama, says Mrs Obama .
 You have been alarmed by the fact that we have aided Cuba with weapons, in order to strengthen its defense capability . Cuba cannot be equated with you since the difference in magnitude is so great, particularly in view of modern means of destruction, the president says .
 "No one can dispute the humanity of our motives, which are oriented toward enabling Cuba to live peacefully and develop in the way its people desire," the Cuban president says .
 You wish to ensure the security of your country, and this is understandable. It's understandable. You want to ensure your country's security, and that's understandable . It's a good thing to say, but it's not always easy to say .
 Cuba, too, wants the same thing; all countries want to maintain their security . But Cuba also wants to maintain its security, says President Obama .
 Your missiles are located in Britain, located in Italy, and are aimed against us, says British PM . Your missiles will be aimed at Britain and Italy, says PM .
 It is 90 miles by sea from the coast of the United States of America . You say that this disturbs you because it's 90 miles from the U.S. coast .
 Turkey adjoins us; our sentries patrol back and forth, see each other . But Turkey's border with Syria is also part of the world's most dangerous region .
 You have placed destructive missile weapons, which you call offensive, in Turkey, literally next to us, says President Erdogan . You have also placed destructive missiles weapons, he says . Erdogan: "I'm not going to be happy with this, but I'm not happy with it."
 It is good, Mr President, that you have agreed to have our representatives meet and begin talks, he says . Mr President: "Mr President, Mr Obama, has agreed to meet with our representatives to begin talks"
 We consider that he will be able to cope with this responsible mission, provided, of course, that each party drawn into this controversy displays good will . He has assumed the role of a mediator .
 We are willing to remove from Cuba the means which you regard as offensive. We are prepared to remove them from Cuba, the Cuban government says .
 We are willing to carry this out and to make this pledge in the United Nations. We will pledge to carry it out in the U.N. We are prepared to carry out this pledge .
 Your representatives will make a declaration to the effect that the United States, for its part, considering the uneasiness and anxiety of the Soviet State, will remove its analogous means from Turkey . The United States .
 Let us reach agreement as to the period of time needed by you and by us to bring this about. Let's hope we can reach agreement on the period needed by us and by you, by us, to bring it about .
 U.N. Security Council members could inspect pledges made . They could inspect on the spot the fulfillment of the pledges made.
 Cuba and Turkey must have permission to enter Cuba, Turkey, says President Vladimir Putin . Russia and Cuba have not been allowed to enter each other's countries, says Putin .
 Of course it would be best if these representatives enjoyed the confidence of the Security Council, as well as yours and mine . Both the United States and the Soviet Union, Soviet Union and Turkey and Cuba would also enjoy confidence, he says .
 I do not think it would be difficult to select people who would enjoy the trust and respect of all parties concerned. I do think it's a good idea to select someone who would be a good person for the public .
 The U.S. will respect the inviolability of CubaÊs borders and its sovereignty . It will pledge not to interfere in its internal affairs, not to invade Cuba itself or make its territory available as a bridgehead for invasion .
 Of course, for this we would have to come to an agreement with you and specify a certain time limit . We would need to agree a time limit, we would like to say .
 Let us agree to some period of time, but without unnecessary delay, within two or three weeks, not longer than a month . Let’s agree to an agreement within a month, not more than two months .
 Any accidental use of them to the detriment of the United States is excluded . The U.S. is excluded from using them in the future .
 These means are situated in Cuba at the request of the Cuban Government and are only for defense purposes . The Cuban government has requested the use of these means in Cuba .
 If there is no invasion of Cuba, or attack on the Soviet Union or any of our allies, then these means are not and will not be a threat to anyone . Therefore, if there is . no invasion or attack of Cuba or . any of its allies, the U.S
 If you also select your people and give them the corresponding instructions, then this question can be quickly resolved . If you are using the same instructions, the question can also be answered quickly .
 Because the whole world is now apprehensive and expects sensible actions of us. Because of the world's apprehensive actions, we expect sensible actions,’s David Cameron says .
 "The greatest joy for all peoples would be the announcement of our agreement and of the eradication of the controversy that has arisen," he says .
 I attach great importance to this agreement in so far as it could serve as a good beginning . It could make it easier to reach agreement on banning nuclear weapons tests, he says .
 The question of the tests could be solved in parallel fashion, without connecting one with the other, because these are different issues . The tests could also be solved without connecting them with each other, he says .
 It is important that agreement be reached on the cessation of nuclear tests and that consequently the atmosphere will no longer be poisoned . However, it is important to present humanity with a fine gift, and also to gladden it .
 "All of this could possibly serve as a good impetus toward the finding of mutually acceptable agreements on other controversial issues on which you and I have been exchanging views," he says .
 These views have so far not been resolved, but they are awaiting urgent solution, which would clear up the international atmosphere . These views are not resolved .
 I have read your letter of October 26 with great care and welcomed the statement of your desire to seek a prompt solution to the problem . I have been in touch with you since October 26 to discuss the letter .
 All weapons systems in Cuba capable of offensive use to be rendered inoperable, under effective United Nations arrangements . The first thing that needs to be done, however, is for work to cease on offensive missile bases in Cuba, CNN says .
 You would agree to remove these weapons systems from Cuba under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision . You would also agree to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems into Cuba, the UN says .
 U.S. would agree to remove quarantine measures now in effect and give assurances against an invasion of Cuba . Other nations of the Western Hemisphere would be prepared to do likewise .
 If you will give your representative similar instructions, there is no reason why we should not be able to complete these arrangements and announce them to the world within a couple of days . We will give you similar instructions .
 U.S. is very much interested in reducing tensions and halting the arms race, he says . "If your letter signifies that you are prepared to discuss a detente affecting NATO and the Warsaw Pact, we are quite prepared to consider with our allies any useful proposals"
 The first ingredient, let me emphasize, is the cessation of work on missile sites in Cuba . Measures to render such weapons inoperable, under effective international guarantees, he says .
 The continuation of this threat, or a prolonging of this discussion concerning Cuba by linking these problems to the broader questions of European and world security, would surely lead to an intensification of the Cuban crisis and a grave risk to the world .
 I hope we can quickly agree along the lines outlined in this letter and in your letter of October 26 . For this reason, I want to quickly agree on the issues outlined in the letter .
 I express my satisfaction and thank you for the sense of proportion you have displayed and for realization of the responsibility which now devolves on you . The responsibility now devolve on you is for the preservation of the peace of the world .
 I regard with great understanding your concern and the concern of the United States people in connection with the fact that the weapons you describe as offensive are formidable weapons indeed . I regard . great understanding of your concern .
 The Soviet Government has given economic assistance to the Republic of Cuba, as well as arms, because Cuba and the Cuban people were constantly under the continuous threat of an invasion of Cuba . Mr President, I should like to repeat what I had already written to you in my earlier messages, Mr
 It is a fact that these Cubans have no territory, they are fugitives from their country, and they have no means to conduct military operations . "These Cubans ... have no territories, they're fugitives, they've no means of conducting military operations," says President Obama .
 This means that someone put into their hands these weapons for shelling Havana and for piracy in the Caribbean in Cuban territorial waters . The weapons are likely to be used by someone who wants to use them for piracy .
 It is impossible in our time not to notice a piratic ship, considering the concentration in the Caribbean of American ships from which everything can be seen and observed .
 In these conditions, pirate ships freely roam around and shell Cuba and make piratic attacks on peaceful cargo ships . The situation is similar to what happened in Cuba in the 1970s .
 Cuba was under the continuous threat of aggressive forces, which did not conceal their intention to invade its territory . In a word, Cuba was in danger of being invaded by aggressive forces . Cuba was also under constant threat of an invasion, Cuban president says .
 The Cuban people want to build their life in their own interests without external interference, says President Obama . The Cuban government has been criticized for its policies in recent years .
 This is their right, and they cannot be blamed for wanting to be masters of their own country and disposing of its own labor . This is the right, they say, and it's their right .
 The threat of invasion of Cuba and all other schemes for creating tension over Cuba are designed to strike the Cuban people with a sense of insecurity, intimidate them, and prevent them from peacefully building their new life .
 I should like to say clearly once more that we could not remain indifferent to this. Mr President, I should say clearly, Mr President . Mr President. Mr Obama, said he would not be indifferent .
 The Soviet Government decided to render assistance to Cuba with the means of defense against aggression . Only with means for defense purposes . The Soviet government decided to give Cuba assistance only to defense purposes.
 "We have supplied the defense means which you describe as offensive means. We have supplied . We have . supplied the . defense means . Which you describe are offensive means? Please email us at [email@mailonline.co.uk .
 We have supplied them to prevent an attack on Cuba·to prevent rash acts. They have been supplied to prevent attacks on Cuba .
 The Cuban state of Cuba has been declared a state of war with the United States . The U.S. government has been involved in the Cuban government for more than a decade .
 It is for this reason that we instructed our officers to take appropriate measures to discontinue construction of the aforementioned facilities, to dismantle them, and to return them to the Soviet Union .
 "We are prepared to reach agreement to enable United Nations Representatives to verify the dismantling of these means. As I had informed you in the letter of October 27, we were prepared to . We are ready to reach an agreement to . .
 "There is every condition for eliminating the present conflict," says President Obama . "There are every conditions" for eliminating conflict, he says .
 I note with satisfaction that you have responded to the desire I expressed with regard to elimination of the aforementioned dangerous situation, as well as providing conditions for a more thoughtful appraisal of the international situation, .
 We must stamp out centers where a dangerous situation fraught with grave consequences to the cause of peace has arisen. Therefore, vested with trust and great responsibility, we must not allow the situation to become aggravated and must stamp it out .
 If we, together with you, and with the assistance of other people of good will, succeed in eliminating this tense atmosphere, we should also make certain that no other dangerous conflicts which could lead to a world nuclear catastrophe would arise .
 In conclusion, I should like to say something about a detente between NATO and the Warsaw Treaty countries that you have mentioned . I should also mention the detente with NATO and Poland, he said .
 We have spoken about this long since and are prepared to continue to exchange views on this question with you and to find a reasonable solution . We have been in touch with you long since to discuss this long ago .
 We should like to continue the exchange of views on the prohibition of atomic and thermonuclear weapons, general disarmament, and other problems relating to the relaxation of international tension, we say .
 There are irresponsible people who would like to invade Cuba now and thus touch off a war, says President Obama . "I trust your statement, Mr President, Mr Obama," says Cuban leader .
 We are confident that the people of all countries, like you, Mr President, will understand me correctly . We are also confident that people in all countries will understand this correctly .
 Russia has created the greatest material, spiritual, and cultural values since the October Revolution . The country has achieved tremendous successes since the revolution, says President Vladimir Putin .
 Our people are enjoying these values; they want to continue developing their achievements and insure their further development on the way of peace and social progress by their persistent labor .
 I should like to remind you, Mr President, that military reconnaissance planes have violated the borders of the Soviet Union, says President Vladimir Putin . I should also remind you that military aircraft have violated Soviet borders, says Putin .
 "There have been conflicts between us and notes exchanged. In connection with this there have been clashes between us," she said . She added: "I'm not happy with this. It's not the first time I've been in contact with her."
 In 1960 we shot down your U-2 plane, whose reconnaissance flight over the USSR wrecked the summit meeting in Paris . In 1960, the U.2 plane crashed into the USSR and crashed in Paris, France .
 At that time, you took a correct position and denounced that criminal act of the former U.S. Administration . "At that time," she said, "You took a . correct position"
 U-2 plane in the Sakhalin area is a violation of our border, says President Obama . "During your term as President, another violation of the border has occurred, by an American U.2 plane"
 At that time you replied that that that violation had occurred as a result of poor weather, and gave assurances that this would not be repeated . At the time, you replied to say that that . It was a violation that occurred ... but it was not a repeat of that .
 We trusted your assurances, because the weather was indeed poor in that area at that time, because of the weather, because it was poor . The weather is indeed poor, and we are happy to return to the site .
 Even poor weather could not have brought an American plane into our airspace, even poor weather . But had not your planes been ordered to fly about our territory, they would have flown in .
 The conclusion is that this is being done with the knowledge of the Pentagon, which tramples on international norms and violates the borders of other states . Hence, the conclusion .
 A still more dangerous case occurred on 28 October, when one of your reconnaissance planes intruded over Soviet borders in the Chukotka Peninsula area in the north and flew over our territory . The Russian military said it was a "very dangerous case"
 One of your planes violates our frontier during this anxious time we are both experiencing, when everything has been put into combat readiness, says the U.S. President .
 You can imagine the responsibility you are assuming, especially now, when we are living through such anxious times. Therefore, you can imagine a responsibility you .
 Reports say U.S. planes are making flights over Cuba . CNN's John Sutter says he has reports of American planes making flights .
 We are interested that there should be no war in the world, and that the Cuban people should live in peace, he says . We are also interested in no war, no war and no peace in Cuba .
 President Obama said it was "no secret" that Cuba had its people in Cuba . Cuba has its own people in the Cuban exile community, he said .
 I should like you to consider, Mr President, that violation of Cuban airspace by American planes could also lead to dangerous consequences . Mr Obama should also consider that, Mr Obama, should .
 If you do not want this to happen, it would be better if no cause is given for a dangerous situation to arise . And if you don't want this, it's better if there is no cause given for it to arise, it is better to avoid it .
 We must be careful now and refrain from any steps which would not be useful to the defense of the states involved in the conflict . We must not be provoked for a fateful step, writes David Cameron .
 We must display sanity, reason, and refrain from such steps . Therefore, we must display reason, sanity, and avoid such steps. We must also display sanity and reason .
 "We value peace perhaps even more than other peoples because we went through a terrible war with Hitler," says President Obama . "Perhaps even more," says Obama .
 Our people trust their Government, and we assure our people and world public opinion that the Soviet Government will not allow itself to be provoked. We assure ourselves that we are not being provoked. The Soviet Government .
 If provocateurs unleash a war, they will not evade responsibility and the grave consequences a war would bring upon them . But if the provocateur unleashed a war they will be responsible for the consequences of a war .
 We are confident that reason will triumph, that war will not be unleashed and peace and the security of the peoples will be insured . But we are also confident that the war will be not unleashed .
 I am replying at once to your broadcast message of October twentyeight even though the official text has not yet reached me because of the great importance I attach to moving forward promptly to the settlement of the Cuban crisis . President Obama is replying to the broadcast message from October .
 I think that you and I, with our heavy responsibilities for the maintenance of peace, were aware that developments were approaching a point where events could have become unmanageable . I think . Developments were approaching the point of a point of 'unmanagingable' events .
 I welcome this message and consider it an important contribution to peace. So I welcome it, I consider it important contributions to peace .
 The distinguished efforts of Acting Secretary General U Thant have greatly facilitated both tasks . The distinguished . efforts of acting Secretary General . U. Thant has greatly facilitated the . tasks .
 I consider my letter to you of October twenty-seventh and your reply of today as firm undertakings on the part of both our governments which should be promptly carried out . I consider your letter to me of October . of October 20, “I consider my . letter to
 I hope that the necessary measures can be taken through the United Nations as your message says, so that the United States in turn can remove the quarantine measures now in effect . The U.N. should also remove the U.S. quarantine measures, he says .
 I have already made arrangements to report all these matters to the Organization of American States, whose members share a deep interest in a genuine peace in the Caribbean .
 You referred in your letter to a violation of your frontier by an American aircraft in the area of the Chukotsk Peninsula, Russia . You referred to the incident in the letter .
 I have learned that this plane, without arms or photographic equipment, was engaged in an air sampling mission in connection with your nuclear tests . The plane was without arms, photographic equipment and was engaged .
 Its course was direct from Eielson Air Force Base in Alaska to the North Pole and return . The North Pole is a direct route from Alaska to Alaska .
 In turning south, the pilot made a serious navigational error which carried him over Soviet territory . The pilot made an error which led him to Soviet territory in the Soviet Union .
 He immediately made an emergency call on open radio for navigational assistance . He was guided back to his home base by the most direct route . The rescue mission was the first time he had been in the air .
 I regret this incident and will see to it that every precaution is taken to prevent recurrence . I regret that I will not be able to use this incident again, I said .
 Both countries have great unfinished tasks and I know that your people as well as those of the U.S. can ask for nothing better than to pursue them free from the fear of war . Mr Chairman, both of our countries, Mr. Obama said .
 Modern science and technology have given us the possibility of making labor fruitful beyond anything that could have been dreamed of a few decades ago . Modern technology has allowed us to make labor productive beyond anything we could have imagined in the past .
 I agree that we must devote urgent attention to the problem of disarmament, as it relates to the whole world and also to critical areas . I agree with you that we need to devote . attention to disarmament .
 I think we should give priority to questions relating to the proliferation of nuclear weapons, on earth and in outer space, and to the great effort for a nuclear test ban . We should also focus on nuclear weapons proliferation on earth, outer space and on earth .
 We should also work hard to see if wider measures of disarmament can be agreed and put into operation at an early date . But we should also look at wider measures that could be agreed at a later date .
 President John F Kennedy was unwilling to agree publicly to decommission NATO intermediate-range nuclear missile bases in Turkey and Italy in exchange for the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . Meeting between United States Attorney General Robert F Kennedy and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin .
 Khrushchev proposed such an arrangement in a letter to Kennedy broadcast over Soviet radio on October 27 . Privately, however, he thought such a deal would be acceptable means of ending the crisis .
 Kennedy sent Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, his brother and closest adviser, to discuss the possibility of such a bargain with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador in Washington . That same evening Kennedy sent attorney general Robert F. Kennedy to discuss such a possible deal with the Soviets .
 Robert Kennedy stressed that such an understanding would be strictly contingent on the immediate cessation of further Soviet work on the missile bases in Cuba . Kennedy: Such an understanding is strictly contingent upon the cessation of any further work in Cuba on the bases .
 Dobrynin immediately cabled a description of it to Soviet leaders in Moscow . Robert Kennedy, who reported back to his brother and Secretary of State Dean Rusk, set down his recollections of their encounter three days later .
 All concerned kept their discussions extremely confidential, as they wished the negotiations to remain secret .
 We have just received a report that an unarmed American plane was shot down . The plane was carrying out a reconnaissance flight over Cuba . It is believed to have been a U.S. reconnaissance plane .
 The military is demanding that the President arm such planes and respond to fire with fire . The President is also demanding that he arm the President with such planes .
 Time is of the essence for President Barack Obama to win the White House seat in 2016 .
 The U.S. can't stop flights to Cuba to get information about missile bases, says President Obama . Cuba's missile bases pose a very serious threat to our national security, says Obama .
 If we start to fire in response, a chain reaction will quickly start that will be very hard to stop, he says . But if we start shooting in response·a chain reaction would quickly start, he adds .
 The same thing in regard to the essence of the issue of the missile bases in Cuba is the same thing, he says . The Cuban missile bases are a key part of the Cuban government .
 "A real war will begin, in which millions of Americans and Russians will die," says Vladimir Putin . Putin: A real war would begin, and millions of people will die. Putin: "I'm not exaggerating, I'm exaggerating"
 We want to avoid that any way we can, IÊm sure that the government of the USSR has the same wish . IÉm sure the government has the . same wish, he said. "We want to . avoid that," he said .
 "The situation might get out of control, with irreversible consequences," says CNN.com.com . "It's not the first time I've heard from such a person in my life," she says .
 The most important thing is to get as soon as possible the agreement of the Soviet government to halt further work on the construction of the missile bases in Cuba and take measures under international control .
 The U.S. government is ready to repeal all measures on the ‘quarantine,‰ to give the assurances that there will not be any invasion of Cuba and that other countries of the Western Hemisphere are ready to . give the same assurances . The United States government is certain
 The deployment of missile bases in Turkey was done by a special decision of the NATO Council . Formally the deployment of the missile bases has been done by the NATO council .
 President Obama's decision to withdraw missile bases from Turkey would damage NATO structure . U.S. position as the leader of NATO, as the Soviet government knows very well, he says .
 R Kennedy said that in order to withdraw these bases from Turkey,‰ R. Kennedy said, ‘we need 4ă5 months’ to withdraw them from Turkey .
 This is the minimal amount of time necessary for the U.S. government to do this, taking into account the procedures that exist within the NATO framework . The United States will have to wait for the next few days to make the decision .
 Khrushchev agrees with what IÊve said, we can continue to exchange opinions between him and the president, using him, R Kennedy and the Soviet ambassador . The president and Soviet ambassador will continue to be able to discuss their opinions, writes Richard Nixon .
 R Kennedy then warned that his comments about Turkey are extremely confidential . Besides him and his brother, only 2ă3 people know about it in Washington, he said . R Kennedy warned that only 2 people in Washington know about Turkey .
 Khrushchev to give him an answer if possible within the next day on these thoughts in order to have a business-like, clear answer in principle in principle . not to get into a wordy discussion, which might drag things out, he said .
 "The current serious situation, unfortunately, is such that there is very little time to resolve this whole issue," says President Obama . The president says he has "very little time" to resolve the situation .
 The request for a reply tomorrow,‰ stressed R Kennedy, ‘is just that’s just that·a request, and not an ultimatum”
 The president hopes that the head of the Soviet government will understand him correctly .
 Khrushchev's appeal in his last letter to the president to demonstrate state wisdom in resolving this question was made in his letter to Vladimir Putin . The former Soviet Union leader appealed for state wisdom to resolve this question .
 President Kennedy said the presidentÊs thoughts would be brought to the attention of the head of the Soviet government . Then he told R Kennedy that the president Ês . thoughts would . be brought . attention of head of Soviet government, he said .
 R Kennedy gave me a number of a direct telephone lines to the White House . Kennedy gave him a direct phone line to White House.
 R Kennedy was very upset during a meeting with CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "IÊve never seen him like this before. In the course of the conversation, R Kennedy noted that he knew about Scali's conversation"
 He tried to return to the topic of ‘deception‰ (that he talked about so persistently during our previous meeting), but he did so in passing and without any edge to it . True, about twice he tried to . again, he said .
 Kennedy: 'He immediately went to see the president, with whom, as R Kennedy said, he spends almost all his time now'
 I asked him if he would come to the Justice Department at a quarter of eight, he said yes . "He said yes, yes," he said. "I asked him to come to Justice Department"
 I told him first that we understood that the work was continuing on the Soviet missile bases in Cuba, he said . I also told him that we knew that we were continuing to work on the bases, he added .
 One of our U-2Ês had been shot down and the pilot killed . Further, I explained to him that in the last two hours we had found that our planes flying over Cuba had been fired upon and that one of our planes had been .
 "We would have to make certain decisions within the next 12 or possibly 24 hours," says manager Mark Hughes .
 "If the Cubans were shooting at our planes, then we were going to shoot back," he said . "We're going to defend ourselves," he added .
 This could not help but bring on further incidents and that he had better understand the full implications of this matter . This could help to bring on more incidents, he said .
 He raised the point that the argument the Cubans were making was that we were violating Cuban air space . He said the argument was that the U.S. was violating Cuba's airspace .
 If we had not been violating Cuban air space then we would still be believing what he and Khrushchev had said there were no long-range missiles in Cuba . I replied that if we hadn't been violating Cuba air space, we would have continued to believe what he had said .
 In any case I said that this matter was far more serious than the air space over Cuba and involved peoples all over the world . In any . case, this matter is far more . serious than . air space . over Cuba .
 I said that he had better understand the situation and had better communicate that understanding to Mr Khrushchev . I said: "He had better understood the situation. He had better communicated that understanding"
 The Soviet Union had secretly established missile bases in Cuba while proclaiming, privately and publicly, that this would never be done . This would never have been done, the Soviet Union said .
 "We had to have a commitment by at least tomorrow that those bases would be removed," says White House chief Donald Trump . "We're going to have to have those bases removed," he says .
 He should understand that if they did not remove those bases then we would remove them, he would be removed . He should be careful, he said, and he should be aware of his position .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin should understand that before this was over, while there might be dead Americans there would also be dead Russians . His country might take retaliatory action but he should understand it before this is over, he says .
 I said a letter had just been transmitted to the Soviet Embassy which stated in substance that the missile bases should be dismantled and all offensive weapons should be removed from Cuba . I said that a letter was just to be sent to the Embassy .
 In return, Cuba and Castro and the Communists ended their subversive activities in other Central and Latin American countries, we would agree to keep peace in the Caribbean and not permit an invasion from American soil .
 KhrushchevÊs other proposal dealing with removal of missiles from Turkey was rejected . He then asked me about Khrushchev's other proposal to remove the missiles . The proposal was rejected by the Soviet leader .
 I replied that there could be no quid pro quo·no deal of this kind could be made . I replied there could not be a quid-procedure .
 This was a matter that had to be considered by NATO and that it was up to NATO to make the decision . This is a matter of consideration by NATO, says CNN's John Defterios .
 I said it was completely impossible for NATO to take such a step under the present threatening position of the Soviet Union . I said NATO would not be able to do so under the threat of such a move .
 I said I was sure that these matters could be resolved satisfactory. If some time elapsed, I mentioned four or five months, I said . I mentioned that time elapsed and per your instructions, I told you that it would be resolved . I said he was sure it could be . satisfactory
 I repeated that there could be no deal of any kind and that any steps toward easing tensions in other parts of the world depended on the Soviet Union and Mr Khrushchev taking action in Cuba and taking it immediately .
 I repeated to him that this matter could not wait and that he had better contact Mr Khrushchev and have a commitment from him by the next day to withdraw the missile bases under United Nations supervision for otherwise, I said . There would be drastic consequences, I told him .
 Meeting between U.S. Attorney General Robert F Kennedy and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, October 28, 1962 . Private exchanges were used as a conduit for additional assurances and understandings .
 Khrushchev sent a message to the president’s brother, which Dobrynin passed on the same day, reporting back immediately to Moscow . The message was sent to Dobrynins, the brother of the president, who died in the war .
 The thoughts which R Kennedy expressed at the instruction of the President find understanding in Moscow, Russia . The thoughts . found understanding in Russia .
 Today, an answer will be given by radio to the PresidentÊs message of October 27, and that response will be the most favorable . That response is expected to be the best of all the time .
 He said he would quickly return to the White House in order to inform the President about the ‘important response‰ of the head of the Soviet government. Expressing thanks for the report, he said that he would return to Washington .
 In parting, R Kennedy requested that strict secrecy be maintained about the agreement with Turkey .
 I responded that in the Embassy no one besides me knows about the conversation with him yesterday . I responded to the question: "No one besides myself knows about him yesterday. I responded . No one else else knows about me," she said .
 R Kennedy said he will maintain contact with me directly, avoiding any intermediaries . Kennedy said that in addition to the current correspondence and future exchange of opinions via diplomatic channels, on important questions he will still maintain contact .
 I explained to R Kennedy that the tardiness was caused by a delay of telegrams at the telegraph station . I explained that the delay was due to a delayed telegram from the station .
 Kennedy accepted U.S. offer to remove missiles from Turkey . Kennedy accepted the United States' offer of removing missiles from the country . Kennedy: "It's a good thing for Turkey to have missiles removed"
 On October 29 Dobrynin forwarded Khrushchev’s letter to Robert Kennedy . On October 31, Dobrynins forwarded the letter to Kennedy . Khrushin's letter was sent to Kennedy on October 29 .
 The president refused to accept this letter, as he preferred that no formal written record of their bargain exist . The president, however, thought the matter so sensitive that he refused to accepted this letter .
 One day later, his brother Robert therefore returned it to Ambassador Dobrynin . One day after his brother returned it, Robert returned it back to the ambassador .
 Ambassador Dobrynin has apprised me of his conversation with Robert Kennedy which took place on October 27 . President Obama spoke to Robert Kennedy at the end of October 27.
 Robert Kennedy: It's difficult for you to publicly discuss the question of eliminating the U.S. missile bases in Turkey because of the fact that the stationing of those . bases in . Turkey was formalized through a NATO Council decision, Kennedy said .
 Readiness to agree on this issue that I raised in my message to you of October 27/1/ was also emphasized . Readiness for the White House was emphasized in the letter .
 Kennedy said removal of bases from Turkey would take 4 to 5 months . In this context Robert Kennedy said that removal of those bases would take four to five months . Kennedy: Removal of Turkey's military bases would be a long process .
 Robert Kennedy wished for exchanges of views to continue through Robert Kennedy and the Soviet Ambassador . The wish was expressed that these exchanges should be considered confidential . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 I feel I must state to you that I do understand the delicacy involved for you in an open consideration of the issue of eliminating the U.S. missile bases in Turkey . I'm sorry for the "delicate" involved in eliminating the United States missile bases .
 I take into account the complexity of this issue and I believe you are right about not wishing to publicly discuss it . I take . account of the complexity, this issue has been described as 'complexity' of this .
 Robert Kennedy and the Soviet Ambassador in Washington should discuss this matter confidentially, says Robert Kennedy . "I agree that our discussion of this subject be pursued confidentially through Robert Kennedy," says Kennedy .
 You may have noticed that in my message to you on October 28, which was to be published immediately, I did not raise this question·precisely because I was mindful of your wish conveyed through Robert Kennedy . You may also notice that in . that message, which . was to
 All the proposals that I presented in that message took into account the fact that you had agreed to resolve, the matter of your missile bases in Turkey consistent with what I had said in my message of October 27 and what you stated through Robert Kennedy in his meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin on
 "I express my great appreciation to you for having instructed your brother R Kennedy to convey those thoughts," says President Obama .
 Security of Europe and the international situation as a whole can be a good impetus to resolving other issues . And that in turn can provide an impetus to resolve other issues concerning both security and the security of Europe, the European Union .
 This means that we need to address the issues which contain too much explosive material . This is the case of 'too many explosive material' in the world's most volatile regions .
 "We cannot delay the solution to these issues, for continuation of this situation is frought with many uncertainties and dangers," says President Obama .
 U.S. Attorney General Robert F Kennedy met with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin in October 30, 1962 . The meeting took place in the same place in 1962 .
 He refused to accept a letter from Khrushchev, delivered the previous day, setting down in writing that NATO missiles would be removed from Turkey in exchange for the dismantling of those in Cuba .
 The U.S. will ensure that Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey are taken out within four or five months, he says . He promises to ensure that the missiles in both countries are removed within 4 or 5 months .
 Kennedy’s notes for this meeting survive, and Dobrynin sent an account of it to Moscow . Kennedy's notes for the meeting were sent to Moscow, where it was recorded by Dobrynins .
 Robert F Kennedy, Notes for Meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin, October 30, 1962 . Read letter; Studied it over night. Read letter . Studied letter over night .
 If you feel it is necessary to write letters, then we will also write one which you cannot enjoy . Take back your letter. Reconsider it & if you don't like it, consider it. Take your letter back .
 If you should publish any document indicating a deal then it is off, it will further affect the relationship . Also if you should . publish any . document indicating . that a deal is off then it will . also if done afterward will further affected the relationship.
 Arthur M Schlesinger Jr. Jr., Robert Kennedy and His Times, 2 vols. , 1:546. Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Robert Kennedy died in 1968 at the hands of President Kennedy .
 Corresponding measures will be taken towards fulfilling this understanding within the period of time indicated earlier, in confidential observance of NATO guidelines, NATO guidelines . NATO guidelines do not mention that this is connected to the Cuban events .
 We are not prepared to formulate such an understanding in the form of letters, even the most confidential letters, between the President and the head of the Soviet government when it concerns such a highly delicate issue .
 "I myself, for example, do not want to risk getting involved in the transmission of this sort of letter," he says . "Who knows where and when such letters can surface or be somehow published"
 The appearance of such a document could cause irreparable harm to my political career in the future, he said . The appearance could cause "irreparable harm" to his political career .
 Robert Kennedy: "It is possible, Robert Kennedy continued, that you do not believe us and through letters you want to put the understanding in writing" Robert Kennedy said: "Through letters, we want to ... put the ...understanding in writing."
 We will live up to our promise, even if it is given in oral form . We will however live up with our promise to give it to us, even though it is oral .
 Khrushchev was speaking to Khruschev regarding the removal of a certain number of American soldiers from Thailand . The incident occurred during a visit to Thailand by the Soviet Union .
 "If you do not believe me, discuss it with them, and they will tell you the same thing. If you don't believe them, talk to them about it, you will . If you do, you can't believe it, talk about it with friends and family members .
 Robert Kennedy asked to take the letter back without delay . Robert Kennedy insisted he wanted to take it back . Kennedy asked for the letter to be returned without delay.
 Khrushchev: "Even the President and he, Robert Kennedy, could be sure of the fact that the Soviet government is regarding the understanding that has been reached as strictly secret and not for publication"
 Robert Kennedy said he confirmed it, and again that he hoped that their motivations would be properly understood in Moscow . Robert Kennedy: "I hope that the motivations of the Russian government will be fully understood"
 Robert Kennedy: "I believed it conditionally possible" before receiving any instructions from Moscow . "It would, in my opinion, only weaken Robert KennedyÊs firm statements on the understanding that has been reached"
 In conclusion Robert Kennedy said that, in his opinion, the events connected with the Cuban issue have been developing quite favorably, and that he hoped that everything would eventually be settled . Robert Kennedy: "I hope that everything is settled"
 Khrushchev on the exchange of letters on such delicate issues as missile bases in Turkey, or issues which need to be handled more by the State Department than by him personally, taking into account the delicacy of his situation .
 Robert Kennedy added that he does not want to claim for himself the State Department . Kennedy said that his ‘solitary diplomacy’ may be needed several more times .
 I answered to Robert Kennedy that I was prepared to maintain contact with him on highly important issues in the future, he said . Kennedy said he would pass over heads, as he himself suggested, of all intermediaries .
 President is trying now to avoid exchanging any documents on issues of a highly delicate nature like Turkey which could leave a trace anywhere, says Robert Kennedy . Kennedy said he favors the continuation of a confidential exchange of opinions between the heads of the two governments .
 Khrushchev personally prepared to take into account the PresidentÊs desire for maintaining the secrecy of the oral understanding on the removal of the U.S. missile bases from Turkey . The United States is prepared to remove the missile bases .
 It is also expedient to tell of our willingness, if the President is also prepared for this, to continue the exchange of opinions between the heads of the governments on many important unresolved issues .
 Castro begged Khrushchev to open hostilities with a nuclear first strike against the United States . Fearing that a U.S. invasion of Cuba was inevitable, Castro feared that a United States invasion was inevitable . Castro's request was rejected .
 Khrushchev did not consult Castro, an omission that infuriated the Cuban leader . When he sent Kennedy two letters, on October 26 and 27, suggesting terms on which the crisis might be settled, he did not consulted Castro .
 Khrushchev wrote to Castro, defending his proposals to Kennedy as the best outcome for Cuba . The proposals would keep Cuba secure against any future U.S. invasion . On October 27, Khrushche wrote Castro to Castro .
 He warned Castro against attacking U.S. airplanes . Not yet aware Soviet rather than Cuban military personnel had been responsible for shooting down a U-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba .
 On October 28, Castro asserted Cuba’s right to shoot down U.S. aircraft . Castro was unwilling to accept any outside inspections of Cuban territory in connection with the recent Soviet agreement to remove the missiles in question from the island .
 Khrushchev defended the recent agreement as one that was in Cuba’s best interests, warning that a nuclear war would have brought destruction to Cuba . He denied that Castro had failed to consult Castro during the crisis .
 Castro claimed that not just the Cubans, but also the Soviet soldiers stationed there, had been prepared to fight to the bitter end against the United States . His persuasions failed to mollify the deeply resentful Castro, who claimed not only Cubans but also Soviet soldiers .
 Castro complained that Soviet officials had not consulted him when negotiating with their U.S. counterparts . Once again, Castro complained he was not consulted by Soviet officials .
 Fidel Castro to Nikita Khrushchev: "Aggression is almost imminent within the next 24 or 72 hours" Fidel Castro: "I consider that the aggression is almost inevitable within the coming 72 hours." Nikita: "The situation and the reports in our possession"
 I understand that this variant would call for a large number of forces and it is, in addition, the most repulsive form of aggression, which might inhibit them . It is, also, a form of . aggression, that might inhibit . them, which may inhibit them, I understand
 "You can rest assured that we will firmly and resolutely resist attack, whatever it may be," says President Obama .
 The morale of the Cuban people is extremely high and the aggressor will be confronted heroically, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "The aggressor [will be confronted] heroically"
 If the imperialists invade Cuba with the goal of occupying it, the danger that that aggressive policy poses for humanity is so great that following that event the Soviet Union must never allow the circumstances in which the imperialist could launch the first nuclear strike against it .
 I tell you this because I believe that the imperialistsÊ aggressiveness is extremely dangerous . If they actually carry out the brutal act of invading Cuba in violation of international law and morality, that would be the moment to eliminate such danger forever through an act of clear legitimate defense .
 It has influenced my opinion to see how this aggressive policy is developing, how the imperialists, disregarding world public opinion and ignoring principles and the law, I said . The imperialists are blockading the seas, violating our airspace and preparing an invasion, I added .
 "I realize how bitter these hours must be, when the outcome of your superhuman efforts is so seriously threatened," she writes . "You have been and continue to be a tireless defender of peace," she says .
 "Up to the last moment we will maintain the hope that peace will be safeguarded," says the group . "We are willing to contribute to this as much as we can. However, up to the . last moment," they say .
 "We view as quite real and quite close. But at the same time, we are ready to calmly confront a situation which we view quite real," says President Obama .
 Cuban President Leonid Castro says he has "infinite gratitude and recognition of our Cuban people to the Soviet people" and wishes you success .
 Nikita Khrushchev to Fidel Castro, October 28, 1962 . Our October 27 message to President Kennedy allows for the question to be settled in your favor, to defend Cuba .
 KennedyÊs reply offers assurances that the U.S. will not invade Cuba with its own forces, nor will it permit its allies to carry out an invasion . KennedyÉs reply: "The United States will not invasion Cuba"
 In this way, the president of the United States has positively answered messages of October 26 and 27, 1962, 1962 .
 I am not going to convey it here, for you surely know the text, which is now being broadcast over the radio . The text will be broadcast on the radio, but I'm sure you know it from the text .
 "Not to be carried away by sentiment and to show firmness. With this motive I would like to recommend to you now, at this moment of change in the crisis," he said .
 I must say that I understand your feelings of indignation toward the aggressive actions and violation of elementary norms of international law on the part of the U.S. I'm sorry for your anger at the United States, President Obama says .
 Rather than law, what prevails is the senselessness of the militarists at the Pentagon . But now, instead of law, the Pentagon's senselessness prevails, rather than law .
 Now that an agreement is within sight, the Pentagon is searching for a pretext to frustrate this agreement . The Pentagon is looking for pretexts to thwart this agreement, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Yesterday you shot down one of these, while earlier you didnÊt shoot them down when they overflew your territory . Earlier you had shot them down, but earlier you hadnÉt shot them when they flew over .
 The aggressors will take advantage of such a step for their own purposes, says the president . The aggressor will be the aggressors, he says .
 "I would like to advise you in a friendly manner to show patience, firmness and even more firmness. Therefore, I would like you to be patient and firmness," she said .
 "Naturally, if thereÊs an invasion it will be necessary to repulse it by every means," he says . "It will not be possible to resist it by any means. Naturally, if you're going to invade it, you're not going to be able to rep
 The Pentagon is trying to frustrate the agreement and provoke you into actions that could be used against you . But we mustnÊt allow ourselves to be carried away by provocations, writes CNN's John Avlon .
 Fidel Castro to Nikita Khrushchev: "I have just received your letter. I have just gotten your letter" Fidel Castro wrote in response to the letter . Castro: "Comrade Krushchev, Comrade Khrushchev"
 The position of our government concerning your communication to us is embodied in the statement formulated today, whose text you surely know . The position is embodied by the statement, which you must know, says the government .
 I wish to clear up something concerning the antiaircraft measures we adopted, says David Cameron . Mr Cameron: "I am not satisfied with the way we dealt with the situation in the air force. I am happy to clarify that this is not the case."
 There was the danger of a surprise attack on certain military installations, officials say . There was also a danger of an attack on some military installations .
 We decided not to sit back and wait for a surprise attack, with our detection radar turned off, when the potentially aggressive planes flying with impunity over targets could destroy them totally . We decided to turn off detection radar to avoid a possible attack .
 We didn't think we should allow that after all the efforts and expenses incurred and, in addition, because it would weaken us greatly, militarily and morally . We didnÊt think we shouldn t allow that .
 Cuban forces mobilized 50 antiaircraft batteries, our entire reserve then, to provide support to the Soviet forcesÊ positions . For that reason, on October 24, on Oct. 24, the Cuban troops mobilized 50 anti-aircraft batteries, the entire reserve of the Cuban forces .
 If we sought to avoid the risk of a surprise attack, it was necessary for Cuban artillerymen to have orders to shoot, says the British PM .
 Soviet command can furnish you with additional reports of what happened to the plane that was shot down . The Soviet command has no idea what happened .
 Yesterday the U.S. government tried to make official the privilege of violating our airspace at any hour of the day and night . Yesterday the American government tried . to make it official the . privilege to violate our airspace . The American government is trying to make . official .
 Cuban batteries not to open fire, but only for as long as negotiations last and without revoking declaration published yesterday about the decision to defend our airspace .
 It should be taken into account that under the current tense conditions incidents can take place accidentally . It should also be taken to account that such incidents can happen accidentally, says CNN.com .
 I also wish to inform you that we are in principle opposed to an inspection of our territory . We are also opposed to inspecting our territory. We are not allowed to inspect our territory, we are not interested in an inspection .
 I appreciate extraordinarily the efforts you have made to keep the peace and we are absolutely in agreement with the need for struggling for that goal . We are all in agreement that we need to struggle to achieve that goal.
 If this is accomplished in a just, solid and definitive manner, it will be an inestimable service to humanity . If this was achieved, it would be a good, solid, definitive manner . It will be a service for humanity.
 Nikita Khrushchev to Fidel Castro, October 30, 1962: "We have received your letter of October 28 and the reports on the talks that you as well as President Dorticós have had"
 We understand your situation and take into account the difficulties you now have during this first transitional stage after the liquidation of maximum tension that arose due to the . threat of attack on the part of the U.S. imperialists, which you expected would occur at any moment .
 The Cuban government has promised to withdraw the missile base from Cuba, since it is viewed as an offensive weapon, in exchange for the U.S. commitment to abandon plans for an invasion of Cuba . The United States has also promised to lift the ‘quarantine‰, that
 Some Cubans want a declaration of another nature rather than the declaration of withdrawal of the missiles, says the Cuban ambassador . "Some Cubans have a . opinion that the Cuban people want a . declaration of . another nature," he says .
 Political and government figures are leaders of a people who doesn't know everything . But we, political and government leaders, are leaders, they say . We canÊt really comprehend all that we leaders must deal with .
 "We should march at the head of the people and then the people will follow us and respect us," he says . Therefore, he says. Therefore, we should march . The people should follow us, respect us, he adds .
 The U.S. government could have caused millions of people to die in the war of annihilation, says President Obama . The country's leaders should not have allowed themselves to be carried away by passionate citizens, he says .
 Preventing war and an attack on Cuba depended not just on measures adopted by governments but also on an estimate of the actions of the enemyÊs forces deployed near you . Preventing the war depended on measures taken by our governments and estimates of enemy forces .
 There are opinions that you and we, as they say, failed to engage in consultations concerning these questions before adopting the decisions known to you . In addition to there being opinions, there are also opinions that the government failed to consult with you .
 Fidel Castro: "We consulted with you, dear Comrade Fidel Castro, receiving your cables, each one more alarming than the next" Fidel Castro's cable of October 27 said he was 'nearly certain' that an attack on Cuba would be launched .
 You believed it was merely a question of time, that the attack would take place within the next 24 or 72 hours. You believed that it would happen within the coming days, he said .
 "We viewed it as a very well-founded alarm. Upon receiving this alarming cable from you and aware of your courage," said CNN.com.com . "We are very grateful for your courage."
 If we had continued our consultations, we would have wasted time and the attack would have been carried out, he says . Under the conditions created, also bearing in mind the information that the unabated warmongering group of U.S. militarists wanted to take advantage of the situation
 In your cable of October 27, you proposed that we be the first to launch a nuclear strike against the territory of the enemy . In the future, the U.S. could launch a nuke attack on the enemy territory .
 Rather than a simple strike, it would have been the start of a thermonuclear world war . The strike would have led to the end of a nuclear war .
 I consider this proposal of yours incorrect, although I understand your motivation . Fidel Castro's proposal is incorrect, but I understand his motivation . I consider your proposal incorrect, I consider it incorrect .
 We have lived through the most serious moment when a nuclear world war could have broken out, says David Cameron . The world has lived through a serious risk of nuclear war, he says .
 The U.S. would have sustained huge losses, but the Soviet Union and the whole socialist camp would also have suffered greatly . The United States would have suffered much more if the U.K. went to war with the Soviets .
 As far as Cuba is concerned, it would be difficult to say even in general terms what this would have meant to them, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There is no doubt that the Cuban people would have fought courageously, or that they would have died heroically . There was no doubt in Cuba that it would have been brave and heroic, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 We are not struggling against imperialism in order to die, but to take advantage of all our possibilities, to lose less in the struggle and win more to overcome and achieve the victory of communism . But we are not trying to die but to win more, says the Communist Party .
 President Obama: "Now, as a result of the measures taken, we reached the goal sought when we agreed to send the missiles to Cuba"
 We have wrested from the United States the commitment not to invade Cuba and not to permit their Latin American allies to do so . The U.S. will not invade Cuba, the U.K. has pledged not to .
 We consider that we must take advantage of all the possibilities available to defend Cuba, strengthen its independence and sovereignty, defeat military aggression and prevent a nuclear world war in our time . We must take all the opportunities available, defend Cuba and strengthen its sovereignty .
 Of course, we made concessions, accepted a commitment, acting according to the principle that a concession on one side be answered by the other side. "Of course, I made concessions," he said .
 U.S. aggression on the part of the United States and thermonuclear war with the commitment of a concession in exchange for a concession, the upholding of the inviolability of the Republic of Cuba and the prevention of a world war . The total outcome of this reckoning is perfectly
 Cuba can't rely on a U.S. government veto, says President Obama . "Naturally, in defending Cuba as well as the other socialist countries, we canÊt rely on the United States government veto"
 "At present, as a result of our weapons supplies, Cuba is stronger than ever," says President Obama . Cuba is "stronger than ever" says Obama .
 Even after the dismantling of the missile installations you will have powerful weapons to throw back the enemy, on land, in the air and on the sea, he says . Even after dismantling the . missile installations, there will be powerful weapons, he adds .
 President Obama said he would not forget his responsibility to help the Cuban people . Obama said in a letter to the Cuban president, "We stand at their side and we will not forget"
 "It is clear to everyone that this is an extremely serious warning to the enemy on our part," says President Obama . "This is a serious warning," says Obama .
 You also stated during the rallies that the United States canÊt be trusted . You also said that the U.S. can't be trusted by the Russians .
 "We also view your statements on the conditions of the talks with the United States as correct," she said. "We view your statement on the terms of the negotiations with the U.S. as correct"
 The shooting down of a U.S. plane over Cuba turned out to be a useful measure because this operation ended without complications . The operation ended with no complications .
 "Needless to say, our enemies will interpret the events in their own way," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not going to be surprised by the events"
 We think you will completely dominate your domestic internal enemies without our assistance . But we think you can do it without our help . We hope you will be able to dominate your internal enemies .
 The main thing we have secured is preventing aggression on the part of your foreign enemy at present, says the Prime Minister .
 He made preparations to attack Cuba but we stopped him and forced him to recognize before world public opinion that he wonÊt do it at the current stage . We stopped him from attacking Cuba but he didn't want to do it .
 The imperialists, of course, will not stop their struggle against communism . They will continue their struggle to defeat communism .
 This process of struggle will continue so long as there are two political and social systems in the world, until one of these is a communist system . Until one is one, the communist system will win and triumphs throughout the world .
 Comrade Fidel Castro, I have decided to send this reply to you as soon as possible . Fidel Castro: "Comrade Castro" has decided to write him a reply to him .
 A more detailed analysis of everything that has happened will be made in the letter IÊll send you shortly . IÉll send a letter to tell you what happened to you and your family .
 In that letter I will make the broadest analysis of the situation and give you my evaluation of the outcome of the end of the conflict . I will also give you an analysis of how the conflict ended in Iraq .
 As the talks to settle the conflict get underway, I ask you to send me your considerations . Now, as the talks begin, we are happy to hear from your thoughts .
 "For our part, we will continue to report to you on the development of these talks and make all necessary consultations," says CNN .
 Fidel Castro to Nikita Khrushchev: "I received your letter of 30 October. October 31, 1962" Fidel Castro: "Comrade Krushchev, I received your letters of 30 Oct. 1962"
 You understand that we indeed were consulted before you adopted the decision to withdraw the strategic missiles. We are happy to clarify that we were consulted by the Chinese government.
 You base yourself on the alarming news that you say reached you from Cuba and, finally, my cable of October 27. That's what you say from Cuba . It's not the first time you've heard from Cuba, it's the second time in a row .
 I don't know what news you received; I can only respond for the message that I sent you the evening of October 26, which reached you the 27th . I donÊt know what News you received, I can't say what news I received, but I sent it
 "What we did in the face of the events, Comrade Khrushchev, was to prepare ourselves and get ready to fight," says Soviet leader . "We did not want to fight. What we did was prepare ourselves," she says .
 When in our opinion the imperialist attack became imminent, I deemed it appropriate to so advise you and alert both the Soviet government and command . The Cuban government was prepared to fight at our side to defend the Republic of Cuba .
 I told you that the morale of our people was very high and that the aggression would be heroically resisted . I told them that . I said that . The morale of . our people would be very high, and that . aggression would heroically resist .
 "At the end of the message I reiterated to you that we awaited the events calmly," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are prepared to wait calmly"
 Danger has been hanging over the country for a long time now and in a certain way we have grown used to it. Danger couldnÊt impress us, for danger couldnÉt impress . We have grown accustomed to it .
 The Soviet troops which have been at our side know how admirable the stand of our people was throughout this crisis and the profound brotherhood that was created among the troops from both peoples .
 The Cuban people were ready to do their duty toward the nation and humanity . Perhaps you donÊt know the degree to which the Cuban people was ready to help the nation .
 I realized when I wrote them that the words contained in my letter could be misinterpreted by you and that was what happened . Perhaps because you didnÊt read them carefully, perhaps because of the translation, perhaps . perhaps because I meant to say so much in too few lines,
 Few times in history, and it could even be said that never before, was a people so willing to fight and die with such a universal sense of duty . No people had ever faced such a tremendous danger, says CNN.com .
 We knew, and do not presume that we ignored it, that we would have been annihilated, in the event of nuclear war . We knew that, as you insinuate in your letter, in a nuclear war, in an event of such a war .
 "That didnÊt prompt us to ask you to withdraw the missiles, that didnÉt prompted us to . However, that did not prompt us . We didn't want you to yield. However, we wanted you to pull the missiles out of the missile range,�
 The fact is that this event was possible, that imperialism was obstructing every solution and that its demands were, from our point of view, impossible for the USSR and Cuba to accept . The fact was that this . was possible .
 You yourself have said that under current conditions such a war would inevitably have escalated quickly into a nuclear war . You yourself said that such a conflict would have escalated rapidly into a nuke war .
 "I understand that once aggression is unleashed, one shouldnÊt concede to the aggressor the privilege of deciding, moreover, when to use nuclear weapons," says President Obama . "One shouldnÉt concede the privilege to decide when to deploy nuclear weapons"
 "The destructive power of this weaponry is so great that the aggressor would have a considerable initial advantage," the author says .
 I did not suggest to you, Comrade Khrushchev, that the USSR should be the aggressor, because that would be more than incorrect, it would be immoral and contemptible on my part . And I didn't suggest that the Soviet Union should be aggressor. That would
 The imperialists would by this act become aggressors against Cuba and against the USSR, Cuban president says . Cuba would respond with a strike that would annihilate them, he says . But from the instant the imperialists attack Cuba, there are Soviet armed forces stationed in Cuba .
 "Comrade Khrushchev, I maintain my point of view, because I understand it to be a true and just evaluation of a specific situation," he said . "I maintain my view of the situation. And in this sense, Comrade Khruschev," he added .
 You may be able to convince me that I am wrong, but you can't convince me . You can't tell me that you are wrong without convincing me, he says . You may have been wrong, he writes .
 "I know that this is a delicate issue that can only be broached in circumstances such as these and in a very personal message," she said .
 "Following the dictates of my conscience as a revolutionary duty and inspired by the most unselfish sentiments of admiration and affection for the USSR," he writes .
 "I spoke not as a troublemaker but as a combatant from the most endangered trenches," he said . " Moreover, I spoke ... not as an troublemaker," he added .
 "I do not see how you can state that we were consulted in the decision you took. I don't see how I can say that I was consulted," she said . She said: "I don't think you should have been consulted in that decision"
 There are not just a few Cubans, as has been reported, but many Cubans who are experiencing at this moment unspeakable bitterness and sadness, says President Obama .
 The imperialists have talking once again of invading our country, which is proof of how ephemeral and untrustworthy their promises are, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . "The imperialists' talk of invading is proof that they are not trustworthy," he says .
 Our people, however, maintain their indestructible will to resist the aggressors . They perhaps more than ever need to trust in themselves and in that will to struggle, he says .
 December 1898 Spain cedes Cuba to the United States under the Treaty of Paris . Cuba was officially ceded to the U.S. under the treaty of 1898 .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt withholds recognition of Ramón Grau�Ês government for a year . President Fulgencio Batista led an unsuccessful revolution against Batista in 1953 . Fidel Castro led a failed revolution against the Batista government .
 Cuban Agrarian Reform Law forbids foreign land ownership . Expropriates farm holdings over 1,000 acres . May 1959 Cuban law expropriates foreign land holdings . Cuban law forbids foreign ownership of land . 1959 law exposses foreign land .
 February 1960 Soviet Politburo member Anastas Mikoyan visits Cuba, signs Soviet-Cuban trade agreement . Soviet-Cuba trade agreement signed in 1960s .
 March 1960 President Dwight D Eisenhower authorizes a program to fund and train Cuban exiles to overthrow CastroÊs government . March 1960 . President Eisenhower authorized the program to train and recruit exiles .
 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev pledges that Cuba falls under the protection of the Soviet nuclear umbrella . Nikita was the prime minister of Cuba in the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 October 1960 Cuba nationalizes $1 billion of private American investments in Cuba . October 1960 Cubans nationalize $1billion of private U.S. investments in Cuban territory . October 1959 Cuba nationalized $1bn of American investments into Cuba .
 December 19, Cuba aligns itself with the Soviet Union and the 1960 communist bloc . Cuba was Cuba's first country to join the communist bloc in the 1960s .
 April 14, 1961 U.S. B-26 bombers piloted by Cuban exiles attack Cuban airbases . April 14: 1961 United States B.26 bombers attacked Cuban airbase .
 The CIA-backed invasion of Cuba by Cuban exiles 1961 ends in failure . April 17 is the date of the Cuban invasion of 1961 .
 August 13, 1961 Soviet and East German forces erect the Berlin Wall, dividing East and West Berlin . The Wall was erected in 1961 by Soviet and German forces in East Berlin .
 Kennedy authorizes Operation mongoose to destabilize CastroÊs government . November 30, 1961, President Kennedy authorized the operation . Operation mongouose was launched in Cuba in 1961 .
 January 1962 The Organization of American States excludes Cuba from participation in its activities . January 1962 Cuba was banned from participating in the OASA's activities . The OAS excluded Cuba in 1962 .
 February 1962 Kennedy imposes a full trade embargo on Cuba . The embargo includes cigars and food, though not medicines, but not medicines .
 April 1962 15 United States Jupiter nuclear missiles in Turkey become operational . April 1962: 15 U.S. Jupiter nuclear missile missiles become operational in Turkey . April 1963: 15 of the 15 Jupiter missiles were operational .
 Khrushchev decides to offer to install nuclearcapable missiles in Cuba . The offer was rejected by the Cuban government .
 Kennedy states publicly that the United States will not tolerate Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba . September 4, 1962 Kennedy says the U.S. won't tolerate the use of offensive weapons against Cuba .
 October 14, 1962 a U-2 surveillance flight over Cuba photographs nuclear-capable missile installations . October 14: 1962 U.2 surveillance flights over Cuba photographed missile installations in Cuba .
 October 16, 1962 Kennedy receives photographic evidence of nuclearcapable missile bases on Cuba . Kennedy summons meeting of Executive Committee of National Security Council, his senior foreign policy advisers, which meets every day from then to October 28 .
 October 18, 1962 Kennedy meets Soviet foreign minister Andrey Gromyko, who denies the presence of any Soviet nuclear-capable missiles on Cuba . Kennedy: "There are no nuclear missiles"
 October 22, 1962 Kennedy announces publicly that the U.S. knows Soviet nuclear-capable missiles have been installed on Cuba . He demands their withdrawal, and imposes a naval quarantine on the island .
 October 24, 1962 The United States naval quarantine of Cuba becomes operative . The U.S. Navy quarantined Cuba in 1962 . The quarantine was the first of its kind .
 Soviet ships stop at the quarantine line and go no further, while Kennedy delays boarding . Kennedy delayed boarding .
 U.S. ambassador Adlai Stevenson presented photographic evidence of Soviet nuclear-capable missile installations on Cuba to the U.N. Stevenson presented the evidence to the United Nations .
 October 26, 1962 Khrushchev writes to Kennedy, offering to remove missiles in exchange for a pledge not to invade Cuba . Kennedy: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not going to do it again"
 Castro urges Khrushchev to mount a nuclear first strike against the U.S. Castro urges a first strike on the United States . Castro: "I'm going to go to war. I'm not going to war."
 October 27, 1962 Khrushchev sends a second letter, requesting that the U.S. remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The letter was sent to the United States from the Soviet Union .
 Soviet surface-to-air batteries shoot down a U-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba . U.2 plane was shot down by Soviet forces in Cuba .
 U.S. warships confront nuclear-armed Soviet Foxtrot submarine B-59 in the West Atlantic . United States warships confronted by Soviet F-59 submarine .
 Robert Kennedy secretly meets Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and offers to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey and Italy within 4.5 months . Kennedy offered to remove the missiles within 4ă5 months of his visit to the Soviet Union .
 October 28, 1962 Khrushchev accepts United States terms in letter read over Radio Moscow . October 28 was 1962 . November 28 was October 28 . October 29, 1962 was October 30 .
 Khrushchev writes private third letter to Kennedy setting out terms of agreement on Jupiter missiles . Kennedy: "I'm not going to be surprised, but I'm going to make it clear that you're going to have to get ready to shoot"
 October 30, 1962 Robert F Kennedy hands back KhrushchevÊs private third letter to Kennedy to Ambassador Dobrynin . The letter was returned to the ambassador's hand .
 November Soviet nuclear-capable missiles and some other December 1962 weapons were removed from Cuba . November . November 1962 . December 1962 . Soviet nuclear weapons removed from the island .
 Khrushchev renews the Soviet nuclear guarantee of CubaÊs security . The guarantee was made by the Soviet Union in 1963 . The Cuban government was forced to accept the guarantee .
 November 22, Kennedy is assassinated in Dallas, Texas, by an 1963 American Castro sympathizer . Kennedy was assassinated by an American Cuban sympathizer, a Cuban-born American .
 Mikhail Gorbachev withdraws all Soviet troops from Cuba in 1991 . Soviet president Mikhail Gorcachev withdrew all Soviet forces from Cuba .
 July 31, 2006 Castro transfers his responsibilities to his brother Raúl Castro . Castro transfers responsibilities to Raún Castro .
 Ausland, John C Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Berlin-Cuba Crisis 1961– 1964. Ausland: The Berlin Crisis 1961- 1964 . Ausland and Kennedy: The U.S. and the crisis 1961-1964 .
 A Reference Guide to U.S. Involvement in Latin America and the Caribbean . The United States is involved in Latin American affairs .
 Philip Foner, Philip S. A History of Cuba and Its Relations with the United States. Foner . Philip S . Foner wrote a history of Cuba's relations with the U.S.
 Philip S. Foner, Philip S The Spanish-Cuban-American War and the Birth of American Imperialism, 1895–1902 . Foner: "The Cuban War was the birth of America Imperialism"
 Gadds, John Lewis, Philip H Gordon, Ernest R May, Ernest May, and Jonathan Rosenberg .
 Insurgent and Counterinsurgent Violence during Latin America’s Long Cold War . Latin America's Cold War: Latin American Civil War. Latin American history .
 Nikita Khrushchev and the creation of a superpower . Nikita was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1950s and '60s . He was the prime minister of Soviet Russia .
 Castro, Kennedy, Dirty Business, Double Dealing, and the FBI’s Tamale Squad . The FBI's "Tamale Squad" is based in Washington, D.C. and New York .
 Drug Trafficking, Smuggling, and Gambling in Cuba from the 1920s to the Revolution . Drug trafficking, smuggling, and gambling in Cuba was a major problem .
 The Dissolution of Friendly Relations between Washington and Havana, 1956–1961, was 1956-61 . Havana was one of the last bastions of friendly relations between the U.S.-Cuban relations .
 Dr. David Tal Colorado Springs, Colorado, is the Kahanoff Chair in Israeli Studies Department of History . Dr. Tal is a member of the History of the U.S. Israel .
 She read history at KingÊs College, Cambridge, where she also earned a doctorate in history .