 Management Dr. Dr. Michael Schoenfeld: 'An Operational Puzzle:' Preventing Future Plane Crashes is an "operational puzzle"
 Defense One Ebook: Special Operations Technology Oversight . Two years of COVID-19 Oversight: A Look Back Management Feds' Stories of How the Pandemic Has Changed them .
 We also share information about your use of our social media, advertising and analytics partners . Use this information to help us understand our shopping habits .
 The information collected might relate to you, your preferences or your device . It is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to and to provide a more personalized web experience .
 Click on the different category headings to find out more . Change our default settings according to your preference .
 You can usually find these settings in the Options or Preferences menu of your browser . The settings are usually found in your browser's settings .
 You may exercise your right to opt out of the sale of personal information by using this toggle switch . Use the opt-out to view your privacy information .
 If you opt out we will not be able to offer you personalised ads . We will not hand over your personal information to any third parties .
 If you have enabled privacy controls on your browser, we have to take that as a valid request to opt-out . Additionally, you may contact our legal department for further clarification about your rights as a California consumer .
 This may affect our ability to personalize ads according to our preferences . Use this information to help users with disabilities . Use the data to help us understand our shopping habits .
 Adverts are used to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites . They may be used by those companies to build an adverts based on your interests .
 They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device . The information is based on the information collected by your browser or web device .
 They are capable of tracking your browser across other sites and building up a profile of your interests . They are able to build up a profiles based on your preferences .
 If you want to opt out of all of our lead reports and lists, please submit a privacy request at our Do Not Sell page . We are happy to let you know that we are not selling our products .
 Government Executive Media Group and its partners use data to serve me targeted ads . I agree to the use of my personal data to help us understand our advertising preferences .