 Renewable Hydrogen Renewables are widely perceived as an opportunity to shatter the hegemony of fossil fuel-rich states and democratize the energy landscape . Renewable hydrogen renewable energy is seen as a way of breaking fossil fuel hegemony .
 Virtually all countries have access to some renewable energy resources and could substitute foreign supply with local resources . Virtually every country in the world has access to renewable resources .
 The role countries are likely to assume in decarbonized energy systems will be based on resource endowment and policy choices, authors say . Their research shows that the role countries will assume will depend on their resource resources .
 Full event video and after-event thoughts from the panelists . What We All Can Do panelists discuss what we all can do . Panelists also share their thoughts on what they think we can do together .
 Allison and Burns were panelists at a forum at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston to consider the modern lessons of the missile crisis . Burns said that lesson is equally relevant today for those trying to find a solution .
 Harvard Kennedy School's Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs is marking the 50th anniversary of the missile crisis . The event kicked off an intensive series of seminars and workshops for scholars .
 President Kennedy was considering an invasion of Cuba – but did not know that the Russians had deployed battlefield nuclear weapons that would have been used against United States ground troops . Allison said that similarly, the United States knows now about some Iranian nuclear sites .
 Kennedy recognized what he called ‘the precarious rules of the status quo,” Allison said . Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to a limited nuclear test ban treaty and to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty .
 Unless the U.S. and China can work out their own precarious rules of the status quo, the chances for confrontation in East Asia is significant, he says .
 News, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, November 2, 2012. News .
 Some analysts assume China’s new regulations and restrictions on tech giants will destroy the industry . Kevin Klyman argues they will do the opposite . Security and Defense Sophia Becker, Christian Mölling and Ambassador Victoria Nuland .
 Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine took steps toward relinquishing nuclear weapons following the Soviet Union collapse in 1991 .