 The film was developed in Jacksonville, Fla., later that day of Oct. 1962 . Ecker continued on in the same RF-8A plane to Washington .
 He was rushed to a briefing with Kennedy and the Joint Chiefs of Staff . There, he was also rushed to meet with Kennedy .
 The black and white photograph of the bunker, now whitewashed and surrounded by towering palm trees, showed several men standing on the roof and several in front .
 What appears to be construction materials are piled up off the side of the road . Construction materials appear to be piled up .
 Ecker's team took photos of an apparent missile launch site at a military installation about 80 miles west of Havana . Other photographs show an apparent launch site near the Cuban capital .
 CIA analysts say tent-like structures shelter missiles that could travel up to 1,500 miles . One image showed large tentlike constructions that appeared to be sheltering medium-range missiles .
 Ecker pulled out his wallet to show a photo taken by Kennedy in Key West, Florida . Kennedy awarded him the Distinguished Flying Cross the following year . The photo was taken on the tarmac at the base where Kennedy presented the award .
 The visits follow a two-day gathering of American, Cuban and Russian protagonists in the missile crisis drama . The crisis drama brought the world to the precipice of nuclear destruction .
 Conference participants learn that fast-moving events nearly spun out of control and brought them closer to nuclear disaster than they earlier imagined . Studying thousands of newly declassified materials from the governments involved .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro participated in the conference's closed-door sessions on Friday and Saturday . Former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara also attended the conference .
 McNamara leaves Havana calling for an end to the risks of nuclear catastrophe . McNamara calls for an ending to the risk of a nuclear war . The former rivals said good-bye late Saturday .
 McNamara suggested moving "toward eliminating the risk of destruction of nations by nuclear weapons" McNamara .
 McNamara mentioned that he was now 86 and probably would not be around for the next missile crisis conference 10 years from now, Castro said . Castro said McNamara said he would probably not be as old as he is now . McNamara left the conference Saturday evening .
 The missile crisis began in mid-October 1962 when President Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the U.S. The Cuban missile crisis was triggered by the discovery of Soviet nuclear weapons in October 1962 .
 Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and Richard Goodwin also attended the conference . Former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni interpreted spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 That we have missed and misunderstood crucial events that took place in the weeks before the confrontation. That is crucial to understanding crucial events, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 John F Kennedy performed admirably, but infighting and distrust between his administration and the intelligence community helped propel a dangerous situation toward a global crisis .
 Political science professor David Barrett offers a detailed analysis of the five-week period in which U.S. intelligence flights over western Cuba were suspended . Barrett's new book, Blind Over Cuba, offers a disquieting analysis .
 That span proved to be exactly when the Soviets were deploying missiles . The Soviets deployed missiles during the time of the Cold War .
 Look closer and "you discover there are all sorts of things that aren't quite the same as the mythology,"" Barrett said . Barrett: "Look closer and find out what's the mythology"
 His book is timed to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the crisis, which played out over 13 days in October 1962 . The book will be released on Friday .
 Coauthored with Max Holland, editor of the online monthly Washington Decoded, it's based on declassified documents .
 Blind Over Cubatells is the story of an intelligence failure as compelling as any in a spy novel . Blind over Cubatelli is published by Simon Tisdall, a former CIA operative .
 CIA director happened to be on a French Riviera honeymoon at a critical moment . CIA director was on the Riviera at the time of the crisis .
 Anniversary seminars and observances abound, from the Kennedy Library in Boston to Greenville, S.C., where a wreath was placed at the grave of pilot Rudolf Anderson Jr. The pilot died in the crash .
 The administration's response was not "error-free crisis management," as then-national security adviser McGeorge Bundy asserted, but quite the opposite . Bundy sought to tell a largely unknown story, documenting how the administration responded to the crisis .
 In spring 1962, Nikita Khrushchev decided to place intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . The missiles were capable of striking cities across the southeastern U.S. cities .
 He believed the move would deter any U.S. attack on the Soviet Union . The move was intended to deter any United States attack on Russia .
 Cuban dictator Fidel Castro welcomed the missiles as protection against a repeat of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion a year earlier . Fidel Castro said the missiles would protect the Cuban people from the attack .
 During the summer of 1962, the Soviets secretly worked to build the installations . The Soviets secretly built the installations in the summer .
 The United States had been conducting U-2 spy plane overflights since October 1960 . The U.S. had conducted overflights of U.2 spy planes in the 1960s .
 An Aug. flight found that surface-to-air missile sites, designed to bring down enemy planes, were being built in western Cuba . The sites are believed to be being used to attack enemy planes .
 Kennedy was inclined to believe that Soviet military aid to Cuba was defensive, Barrett writes . Barrett: Kennedy believed it was defensive .
 The U.S. was still traumatized from the so-called U-2 incident in May 1960, when a plane was shot down over Soviet airspace . The incident was the first time the U.2 plane had been shot down by the Soviet Union .
 The United States denied it was spying, then had to admit its lie when the Soviets produced the living pilot, Francis Gary Powers . The U.S. denied it had spied, then admitted its lie after Powers was found .
 On Aug., a U-2 violated Soviet airspace, causing a public protest by Moscow . On Aug. 31, a U.2 violation of Soviet airspace caused public protests by Moscow.
 A U-2 manned by a Taiwan-based pilot was lost over China in Sept. 2013 . The U.2 was a Taiwanese-based U.S. mission to carry out a mission to China .
 Bundy rescinded presidential approval of the second September flight . At a meeting two days later, he rescinded the approval . Bundy said the decision was made after a meeting with the White House .
 Two flights stuck to international waters off the coast of Cuba, two covered portions of central and eastern Cuba . Two covered areas of the island nation .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk, dealing with Cold War dangers in Berlin and Vietnam, felt the coastal flights were sufficient .
 To the public, and to doubting members of Congress, the administration was reassuring, insisting that U.S. surveillance was vigilant . The administration insisted that United States surveillance is vigilant .
 President Kennedy and key members of his administration distrusted the CIA and military leadership, who had pushed for the disastrous Bay of Pigs .
 CIA Director John McCone, a 60-year-old widower, had left Washington in late August to be married for the second time . McCone is a widower who has been married twice .
 The CIA's senior leader was certain in his gut that the Soviets wanted offensive weapons in Cuba . He wasn't there to personally press for greater U-2 surveillance . His absence meant he wasn't able to press for more surveillance .
 He forcefully pointed out the void to the president and his senior aides, he says . The president and senior aides failed to adequately address the void, he adds .
 Students usually went to Mass twice a week, but now they went every day . Students now go to Mass every day at least once a week .
 Confession went from once a month to every other day, the nuns wanted to ensure the children's souls were spotless in case they were incinerated . Confession became more frequent in the 1950s, with the nuns wanting to ensure their souls were safe .
 The nuclear showdown ended Oct. 31, when the Soviets agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba and for the unpublicized removal of United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The Soviets agreed in exchange with the United States for the removal of
 "Keep open the lines of communication to the mavericks, to the iconoclasts who approach matters differently"
 In the Kennedy administration, it was McCone, whom the president privately described as ""stupid"" and ""a bastard,"" who demanded the resumption of U-2 flights . The president privately called McCone "a bastard"
 In the years after the crisis, many authors wrote that toughness and military strength carried out the day . Many authors said toughness and strength carried the day.
 Kennedy warned of dire consequences if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dared to cross it . Kennedy drew a symbolic line in the Atlantic and warned of consequences if he crossed it .
 Historians now say the resolution of the standoff was really a triumph of backdoor diplomacy . Historians say it was a triumph for backdoor diplomacy.
 In reality, the United States came out a winner, but so did the Soviet Union . The U.S. came out on top in the Cold War, but did not come out as a winner .
 Washington and Moscow haggled over details of what weapons would be removed . The "October Crisis,"" as it is known in Cuba, dragged on for another month or so .
 Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan traveled to Cuba that Nov. 11 and spent 20 days in tense talks with the Cuban leader . Deputy Premier spent the last 20 days negotiating with Cuban President Fidel Castro .
 The book explores the sociological and emotional repercussions of the crisis on Americans . The book also explores the effects of the financial crisis in the United States .
 McCarthy, 64, will discuss her decision to write the book during an appearance from 2 to 4m. McCarthy will be appearing on 2-4m.
 The book is a fictional account of an ordinary family's experiences during the tense, 13 historic October days of the crisis . Residents prepared for an atomic bomb to be detonated on United States soil .
 McCarthy said she began having nightmares about the 9-11 terror attacks in the wake of the attacks . McCarthy says she has nightmares about that time in her childhood . McCarthy: "I'm not afraid to be afraid anymore"
 McCarthy wanted to capture the intensity of memories unique to Floridians . McCarthy says not much had been written about the intensity unique to Florida .
 She then went on to write ads for Walt Disney World in Orlando, moved to Atlanta and worked in advertising . She then became a full-time freelance writer after moving to California in 1977 .
 Critics say McCarthy's books blend facts, memories, imagination and truth and are widely selected by libraries and universities . Critics say he blends facts and memories with the imagination . McCarthy has been accused of plagiarism .
 McCarthy's father cooperated with an FBI investigation of a series of race crimes in Florida during the early 1950s . McCarthy's first novel, ""Lay That Trumpet in Our Hands,"" is a fictional account of her father, who cooperated in the FBI investigation .
 Her second novel, ""True Fires,"" also was prompted by events that occurred in Lake in 1954 . She also wrote a novel about Lake Lake .
 Library director Stephanie Haimes said she is pleased to host McCarthy again after reading her debut novel several years ago . Haimes also invited the author to speak at the library .
 On Oct. 1962, The United States and the Soviet Union are at a stand-still and so is the Avery family . The Avery family was in the U.S. and Soviet Union on Oct. 31, 1962 .
 The town of College Park is buzzing with gossip about the traffic at McCoy Air Force Base . Wes Avery, a World War II veteran and former bomb-dropper, can't help but assume the worst -the United States is on the brink .
 President George W Bush is misinterpreting history by citing Mr Kennedy's actions during the missile crisis as justification for a pre-emptive military strike against Iraq . At the same time, several former aides to late president John Kennedy, who attended the Cuban conference, warned that Bush is
 Newly declassified documents reveal how close the world came to nuclear confrontation in October 1962 . The conference was held on the 40th anniversary of Cold War's worst moment .
 On October 27, 1962, a U.S. Navy destroyer dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine near Cuba without realising it was carrying a nuclear weapon . The most dangerous day of the 13-day stand-off was the day when a US Navy destroyer attacked the submarine .
 The Soviet submarine commander ordered a nuclear-tipped torpedo readied for launch . Angered and fearing death, the commander ordered the torpedo launch .
 At the last second, the commander decided to hold his fire after consulting with other officers . The commander held his fire at the last minute .
 Some participants drew a parallel between the 1962 crisis over the installation of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba and the gathering war clouds over Iraq . The conference was attended by Fidel Castro, former U.S. and Soviet officials, academics and others .
 Santa Fean Eloy Ortiz found himself in the middle of a nuclear poker game between two superpowers 50 years ago . The New Mexican Section of Local News 1469 words .
 The 13-day confrontation between the Soviet Union and Cuba on one side, and the United States on the other, ended Oct., 1962 . Ortiz recalled with pride his role in the confrontation between Cuba and the U.S. in his childhood home .
 The confrontation began when American U-2 spy planes discovered that Soviet forces had installed nuclear weapons in Cuba . The U.S. says the Cuban government had installed missiles in Cuba, including medium-range missiles .
 President John F Kennedy kept the news secret until the president gave a nationally televised announcement on Oct. 22, 1962 . President Kennedy said he planned to order a quarantine of the island .
 Many Americans responded in fear and shock to Kennedy’s announcement that if any such missiles were launched from Cuba, he would view it as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States and order retaliatory strikes .
 Ortiz dropped out of high school in the 11th grade and was just 17 when he joined the Marines in January 1959 . Ortiz dropped from high school to join the Marines after he was 17 years old . Ortiz was 17 at the time of his service in the Marines .
 He visited a Marine recruiter in the upstairs office of a federal building near the current location of the Museum of Contemporary Native Arts on Cathedral Place .
 The young Marine had no idea that this world would be confined to Southern California and a sea trip to Cuba . He says he was surprised to discover that his life had to change dramatically .
 After 16 weeks of basic training in San Diego, Ortiz was assigned to the transportation pool at Camp Pendleton . Ortiz is a heavy-equipment operator and truck driver . Ortiz has been deployed to the U.S. Army with the Marine Corps .
 He was an expert shot with the M-1 rifle, which, he said, had a clip of eight shells . He said he was expert shots with the rifle .
 The small arms remained locked up with all the other small arms onboard the USS Colonial during the entire affair .
 On the way to Cuba, his ship stopped at Camp Garcia on the Puerto Rican island of Vieques, where the men were hastily trained to use the more advanced M-14 . The men were then sent to Cuba to fight in Cuba .
 Fording gears were installed on all the base’s vehicles, transforming them into amphibious landing vehicles . But earlier in October, he knew something was up when they were ordered to install fording gears .
 He left his wife, Fabiola, and his 7-month-old son, Daniel, behind in Southern California . He left behind his wife Fabiola and their son Daniel .
 Ortiz received an honorary discharge in February 1963 . Ortiz and a friend drove back to Santa Fe with a friend to stay with Ortiz . Ortiz received his honorary discharge from the Army in 1963 .
 The USS Colonial joined the other ships in the blockade . Upon reaching its destination, the USS Colonial was joined by other ships .
 Every day, Ortiz would check over the various military vehicles fastened to the ship’s surface . Ortiz would be checking over the vehicles every day . Ortiz says he hopes to be able to find out if he is in the right place .
 The crew did not receive any radio or television reports about what was happening . The crew received no radio or TV reports from the incident .
 Noncommissioned officers emphasized the importance of the men writing home to their families . “But don’t tell them anything,” they warned .
 Ortiz: The general public probably knew more about what was going on than some of the men on the ships . Ortiz: That was ridiculous, because of the general public's knowledge of what was happening . Ortiz says the public probably knows more about the ships than the men .
 Ortiz did not vote during the presidential election of 1960 . Ortiz says he has voted in every election since . Ortiz looks back at Kennedy's actions as calm, yet determined .
 Kennedy and his advisers used the blockade to buy time and showcase military might . The blockade bought time while continuing negotiations with the Soviet Union . Kennedy: "It was a good move for the U.S. to show its might"
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to order the dismantling of the weapons in Cuba in return for Kennedy’s promise to not invade Cuba and to remove American nuclear missiles from Turkey . Ultimately, the Soviet Premier agreed to remove the weapons from Cuba and Turkey .
 On the last day of the blockade, Ortiz and his shipmates watched as some Soviet ships left Cuba with their cargo covered with tarps . Ortiz: "I'm not going to be able to go back and forth with my life in Cuba"
 He could see the Soviet soldiers and sailors standing at attention on deck . He could also see Soviet soldiers standing on the deck .
 Some of the American servicemen yelled obscenities at the ‘Russkies’ until a sergeant quietly told them, “Don’t do that.” The sergeant quietly tells them, "Don't do that."
 More excitement occurred on the way back home, when the ship stopped at Camp Garcia . Camp Garcia is located in Camp Garcia, a military base in southern California .
 After a group of military men on leave went into a nearby town and raised hell, the town and surrounding area was declared off-limits . After a first group of soldiers on leave raised hell in the town, it was declared an area off limits .
 Four American servicemen were hauled off in a police wagon in a saloon brawl . Ortiz was on guard duty the last night there and heard of the brawl .
 He was aboard the USS Colonial on Thanksgiving Day 1962, when a storm hit . The ship, the tables and the plates on the table kept tipping back and forth, he says .
 Ortiz left full-time military service early in 1963 . Ortiz remained in the Reserves for two years . Ortiz served in the Army during his time in the military .
 At 71, he currently serves as a courier for TriCore Reference Laboratories . At 71 he is the oldest person in the world to still be a courier .
 To them, he and his son Daniel noted, it was just something that played out on television a long time ago . They said it's just something they saw on television .
 Fernandez: Most studies of that period concentrated on the two superpowers, the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Fernandez: Cuba's role less well-known than its role in the Cold War . Fernandez says most studies focused on the United States and Soviet Union, with Cuba's
 Conference participants on Sunday will travel to sites related to the crisis, including a missile silo in Pinar del Rio . Conference participants will also travel to missile silos and missile sites in the region .
 To remove the missiles the Kremlin had sneaked into Fidel Castro's Cuba produced the Cold War's defining collision of short-term safety with longer-term credibility, prestige and, for Kennedy, political survival . Kennedy's decision to remove missiles from Cuba produced a Cold War defining collision .
 Harvard editors of this remarkable and unprecedented exercise of historical documentation, Ernest R May and Philip D Zelikow, don't examine it in its full dimensions . A pity then that the Harvard editors donot examine it more closely .
 They make of the proceedings a paean to the modern-day political-science category of crisis management, they say . They make it a paedan to a modern political-scientist category, crisis management .
 Their focus is not on the larger strategic dilemma that framed the instant challenge but on the immediate decision-making techniques practiced along the way . Their focus was not on larger strategic dilemmas but on how to deal with it .
 In the process, the reconstruction of the missile crisis becomes what the editors identify as a progression from history to drama to screenplay . The editors identify this as what they identify as an attempt to turn history into a screenplay .
 It becomes a stage on which to nominate John Kennedy, a president who unfortunately was never given the time to make an unambiguous record for greatness, for greatness . Kennedy was nominated for the White House in 1964 .
 Missing from this version is a full evaluation of the mixed political, strategic and psychological results of the missile crisis . Missing from the full evaluation is that of the political and psychological consequences .
 It brought the nuclear nonproproliferation treaty and the closure of the Berlin crisis -valuable developments . The Berlin crisis was a major event in the world's history .
 Russia and the U.S. expanded nuclear arms-building in the 1960s and '60s . At the same time it brought a vast mutual expansion of nuclear arms building . Khrushchev's early ouster of the ''hare-brained'' leader was followed by a Kremlin
 The crisis cost Americans the sense of invulnerability behind two oceans that had been the mark of American innocence until then . Although hailed as a Cold War victory for the United States, the crisis permanently cost Americans .
 Missing too is any evaluation of the impact of the crisis on democratic practice . Missing also is an evaluation of impact on the democratic practice of democratic practice. Missing is a lack of evaluation of how the crisis has affected democracy .
 This convulsive event put into a few hands in the White House a constitutionally unauthorized power to make ultimate decisions about the life and death of the nation . The White House made such decisions affecting not only the United States and the Soviet Union but the rest of an unconsulted world .
 Later American disputes over a president's war powers fade into insignificance against the war-and-ruin powers the president found it unavoidable to take onto himself in the missile crisis .
 At the end of those days of October, the planet was still there . The planet is still there.
 Kennedy forced Nikita Khrushchev to extract -for modest political recompense - the nuclear missiles the Soviet leader had slipped in . Kennedy had forced Khrushchchev to . extract .
 The new book's editors find Kennedy calm, lucid, making no serious misjudgments, avoiding impulsiveness . Kennedy's finest hours were played out some of his finest hours, editors say .
 The editors do in fact make a convincing case for Kennedy's coolness under unimaginable pressure . The editors of this week's edition of The Washington Post make a compelling case for the president .
 Kennedy and his predecessors in the White House and all his other collaborators and advisers -the system - put a president in the situation where to defend against a genuine strategic threat he had to put at risk the very existence and survival of the United States and the world .
 It seems to be less important to celebrate the high personal qualities of one leader in a crisis that passed than to grasp the deadly systemic qualities of a defense system that remains unchanged .
 With the Cold War behind, we and the Russians still rely on a model of nuclear deterrence that entails the targeting, the keeping on alert and the preparing for Armageddon of some 10,000 nuclear warheads . Russia and the U.S. still rely heavily on the model of deterrence .
 The map that Kennedy called his ""victory map "" was sold by Boston-based RR Auction during an auction that ended Wednesday .
 The map shows the position of every Soviet missile, bomber and fighter jet, and nuclear storage facility in Cuba as of noon, October 27, 1962 . It also includes the nine targets that American planes would have attacked had Kennedy ordered air strikes on the island .
 The buyer and seller remained anonymous, but the seller said they were given it about 20 years ago by Robert McNamara, secretary of defense during the crisis .
 David Halberstam's "The Best and the Brightest" explained how a group of supposedly intelligent individuals could have led us into Vietnam quagmire . It was therefore uplifting to delve into ""The Kennedy Tapes,"" where decisions of many of the same people led to
 Professors May and Zelikow have transcribed the tapes of the two weeks of meetings that occurred during the month of October 35 years ago . Professor May transcribed tapes of meetings .
 They meticulously footnoted the text with explanatory references . They also have filled in the gaps between these meetings with notes explaining what w as happening outside the Oval Office .
 While this book may not interest the casual reader, it provides a fascinating insight into the workings of government at the highest level during a critical situation .
 Most of the participants agreed that the positioning of offensive missiles in Cuba was not a major military problem . Most of them agreed that it was not major military problems .
 The U.S. response to the crisis would shape the way that the U.K. would be perceived in the world, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The situation was seen from the outset as a political one," he says .
 In one of the more poignant passages, the President confides to his brother that he would have been impeached had he not taken some action .
 President did not relish the idea of perhaps starting a nuclear war, even though he was being pushed toward an invasion strategy by some members of his inner circle . In a similar vein, the transcripts demonstrate that the transcripts .
 Of the many participants in these daily gatherings, the input of two particularly stands out . The input of these participants in the daily gatherings is that of two .
 John McCone, the head of the CIA, is extremely thorough in giving the briefings that start most of the meetings . McCone: "The CIA is very thorough"
 Robert S McNamara, as expected, clearly comes through as both the best analyst and the best detail man . McNamara sets forth all possible contingencies and their possible ramifications .
 "The discussions are extremely mundane, not the stuff of historical novels," says the author . The discussions are "extremely mundane," he says .
 This grammar lesson goes on while the country lies on the brink of nuclear war . The country is in danger of being hit by a nuclear bomb .
 Early in the crisis, McGeorge Bundy states, "I think any military action does change the world" Bundy: "Any military action [does change] the world." Bundy: "I think [any military action] does change world"
 As thorough as the transcripts are, the tape did not pick up Dean Rusk's "eyeball to eyeball" quote . Rusk apparently made as an aside to another member of the inner circle .
 The transcripts show how the U.S. ultimately decided to respond to two proposals from Khruschev . The first indicated that the Russians would remove missiles in exchange for a United States promise to not invade Cuba . The other was a promise to remove missiles from Cuba .
 U.S. missiles from Turkey could be removed from Turkey, Turkish president says . Erdogan demands removal of United States missiles from the country .
 All the participants agree that the Turkish missiles are obsolete, and the President wonders how he can reject such an offer that will appear reasonable to the public . The President wondered how he could reject such a proposal that will .
 It is perhaps for this reason that the decision is made to respond to the first letter and ignore the second, at least publicly . The decision to respond is perhaps the reason for this decision .
 The Cuban missile crisis was the first time I remember being frightened by world events . I was in high school when the crisis occurred, and I was frightened by it .
 Reading ""The Kennedy Tapes"" has shown that, while my fears were indeed justified, as we were on the brink of a Cuban invasion, those in charge of making the decisions, in particular President Kennedy, were well-informed .
 The inscription in a clearing in a hilly part of western Cuba, is deceptively laconic . It was found in a field in a remote area of the country .
 30 years ago a U.S. high-altitude U-2 spy plane first pinpointed a launch site for Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles on the Caribbean island . The site marks the site where a United States spy plane pinpointed the launch site .
 Almost all that remains of San Cristobal 1, as it was codenamed at the time by CIA analysts, is a small whitewashed silo, now a military museum .
 Antonio Castineyra, a Cuban military historian who has studied the missile sites, has studied missile sites in Cuba . He says the sites are likely to be used by the Cuban government in the future .
 The tell-tale ''footprint'' of the R-12 missile launch site at El Cacho confirmed beyond doubt earlier reports by CIA ground agents that large missiles had arrived .
 Recently unclassified CIA documents have revealed that U.S. intelligence chiefs came close to missing the deployment of the R-12s, known in the West as SS-4s . CIA documents show that the R12s were deployed in the United States .
 Diez said the U-2 plane that discovered the sites at El Cacho, 60 miles west of Havana, had set out to photograph a Soviet anti-aircraft missile battery . Diez: The plane had been trying to photograph an anti-missile missile battery farther north .
 The pilot flew one mile off course, right over the much more important and hitherto unknown R-12 site . But the pilot flew over the more important, hitherto unknown, site .
 After this discovery, U.S. planes flew several low-level reconnaissance runs over El Cacho .
 Photographs picked out details such as the silo used for checking missiles, transporters and erectors, tents used to conceal the rockets and even Soviet troops .
 President John F Kennedy used the photographs to justify ordering United States forces to go on combat alert and imposing a military blockade on Cuba on Oct. 22, 1962 .
 For a week, the world held its breath until Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to defuse the crisis . The world held their breath for a week until the crisis was over . The crisis was the height of the Cold War .
 The Soviet missiles were withdrawn in return for a U.S. pledge not to attack Cuba . The Soviet missile withdrawal was part of a deal between the United States and the Soviet Union .
 Cuban historians think the Soviet forces erred in not taking greater care to conceal the missile sites at El Cacho and at five other locations on the island . Historians think the Soviets erred not to take greater care in not hiding the sites .
 36 operational R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads were deployed on the island . A total of 43,000 Soviet troops were also equipped with nine Luna tactical nuclear missiles and antiaircraft missile batteries .
 U.S. aerial detection of El Cacho blew the lid off ''Operation Anadir,'' the top-secret operation under which the missiles were shipped to Cuba and deployed . The operation was part of the top secret 'Anadir' operation .
 Castineyra said Soviet troops may have become careless after receiving an order from Moscow to speed up the installation . Castineirra said the order may have been received from Moscow for speedening the installation.
 Soviet engineers were also unaccustomed to the hilly, tropical terrain of Cuba . The terrain is far different from East European forests where Soviet R-12 sites were already in place .
 Cuba has insisted the missiles were deployed as a deterrent against a U.S. attack on the island . In international conferences held in the past two years to debate the Missile Crisis, Cuba has said it was a deterrent .
 President Fidel Castro said in retrospect he would not have accepted Soviet missiles in Cuba . Castro: In retrospect, in retrospect, I would not accept Soviet missiles . President Castro says in a television interview this month he wouldn't have accepted them .
 A U-2 spy plane photographed launch pads and missiles capable of reaching Washington on Oct. 1962, more than a month after the Soviet buildup began, after repeated warnings from 25 secret agents on the island .
 The missiles would have been operational within several days, Soviet officials say . Soviet officials: They would have had the missiles operational within a few days .
 Had the missiles been ready to launch, the Soviets may not have been so ready to back down . The Soviets may have backed down after the launch .
 Dozens of reports from CIA informants in Cuba were disregarded for a variety of reasons, all of which amount to an intelligence failure of nearcatastrophic proportions . The failure was a failure of intelligence failures of the CIA .
 Some analysts found it hard to believe that the Soviets would be rash enough to do anything so provocative . Some analysts said it was unlikely they would have been rash enough .
 Others thought Soviet shipments involved only relatively short-range missiles to defend Cuba from a feared U.S. invasion . Others thought that Soviet shipments were only limited to relatively short range missiles .
 A Soviet general confirmed for the first time that one-third of his country's nuclear warheads designed to strike the U.S. were in Cuba at the time . A third of the country's warheads were located in Cuba, he said .
 Soviets and Americans have met before to discuss the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. response, a blockade of the island and a demand for the rockets' removal, has never been discussed .
 At the time of the crisis, 20 Soviet nuclear warheads were on Cuba . Dmitri A Volkogonov, director of the Defense Ministry's Institute of Military History, said that at the time .
 Another 20 warheads were headed to the island aboard a Soviet ship caught in a U.S. naval blockade, he said . Another 20 were headed for the island on a ship that was caught in the United States naval blockade .
 He made the remarks in a closed session of the conference Saturday . The remarks were reported by a State Department official at the time .
 Garthoff said Volkogonov reported 20 nuclear missiles were on Soviet territory targeted at the U.S. Garthoffs said the missiles were aimed at the United States . He added that 20 missiles were targeted at Soviet territory, including at least 20 Soviet missiles .
 McNamara credited the Cuban leader, president John F Kennedy and Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev with saving the world from destruction . McNamara retired behind closed doors with his Cold War foe .
 McNamara outlined questions he hoped would be answered . McNamara said on the eve of the conference, he hoped to answer questions he hopes to answer .
 The key Cuban participant at the conference is 76-year-old Castro, 76 . Castro was young revolutionary leader in power for just three years before the conference .
 Those attending the conference will travel to sites related to the crisis, including a missile silo in Pinar del Rio . The conference will focus on the crisis in the western province of Pinar Del Rio .
 The change of heart meant the U.S.-Soviet understandings that resolved the 1962 crisis were never made permanent . The change in heart meant that the 1962 agreement was never renewed .
 The crisis was triggered by the discovery in the fall of 1962 that Russia had sent missiles to Cuba . The U.S. discovered the missiles in fall of that year that Russia sent them .
 An anxious world was uncertain whether the two countries would settle peacefully or reduce each other to ashes . It was uncertain if the two nations would be able to settle peacefully .
 In a Nov., 1962, conversation with George Ball, the State Department's third-ranking official, Kennedy said he was worried about how a no-invasion pledge would affect U.S. response if Cuba undertook a major arms buildup, shot down United States planes or attacked a pro
 The Soviets also saw the U.S. as intent on having a ""free hand so it will not have to keep its obligations,"" the memo said . The Soviets wanted a "free hand" for the United States, it said .
 The United States could use the Rio Pact to attack Cuba ""by alleging that Cuba had undertaken aggression not involving the use of armed force, including subversion" As seen by the Soviets, the U.S. could accuse Cuba of having undertaken aggression .
 He tends to take an upbeat view of the experience, believing that it served as a beneficial learning experience . He said it was a good learning experience for him .
 Both the Soviets and the Americans decided they had come too close to nuclear holocaust during October 1962 . Both Soviets and Americans, he told The Miami Herald, decided to end the war .
 Afterward, Sergei says, "Khrushchev stopped talking about Berlin, and Kennedy stopped talking to Cuba" Sergei says: "I'm glad that we're not talking to Berlin, but we're talking about Cuba,"
 American military leaders felt that, with that superiority, the Communists dared not try anything, and the Americans could automatically win any confrontation . U.S. military leaders believed that with that . superiority, they would win any . confrontation .
 Other U.S. leaders feared that the foe with less weapons might fight harder, because he was more frightened . But other leaders feared it might be easier for the enemy to fight harder because of his fear .
 Both sides were petrified of destroying the world, says Brenner . Brenner: Both sides 'petrified' of losing the world .
 "Force and threat of force got us into this situation in the first place," says President Obama . "We're not going to be able to do this again," says White House spokesman .
 Cubans and Russians learned about Operation Mongoose, a U.S. program to overthrow Castro government, in October . The U.N. program is a covert U.K. program and a proposal to overthrow the Castro government .
 Cuba is also beginning to understand that we saw its actions as a threat to our security," says Cuban president . Cuba's alliance with the Soviet Union and its support of revolutionary movements was a concern, he says .
 McNamara: "We must place ourselves in each other's shoes" McNamara says the main point of the crisis is to "place ourselves in the shoes"
 If they don't, the missile crisis has shown, the actions can have long-lasting effects . If they fail to act, the consequences will be long lasting, they will be in the air .
 Major powers backed Third World groups in the ""proxy wars" in Angola, El Salvador, Nicaragua and elsewhere as a way to avoid another direct confrontation .
 Fidel Castro believes the crisis sent the old superpowers into an expensive and damaging arms race . Fidel Castro says the crisis was the result of an arms race between the old and new superpowers .
 Cuba, then as now, is feeling vulnerable and abandoned, says Blight . Blight says when Castro feels threatened, he is capable of very unpredictable things . Cuba, Cuba as now as now is feeling abandoned, he says .
 Nikita Khrushchev responded to President John Kennedy's warnings and agreed to turn the ships around . President Kennedy's warning didn't mean he would keep his word . The ships were turned around .
 The weapons that had been put in Cuba before the main crisis were put in place . Then there was the matter of the weapons that were put there by the Cuban government .
 Kennedy was under pressure to assure our nation that the threat was resolved . Kennedy was pressured to assure us that our nation had been hit by the threat .
 If he gave such assurance and it turned out hollow, it was unlikely Kennedy could win a second term in 1964 . But if he gave . assurance, it would be unlikely he would have won a second .
 The deliberations were captured on secret White House tapes that were transcribed and made public . What's noteworthy and the material for this book is that the deliberations were recorded .
 Kennedy wanted White House tapes for book material after his presidency . It is believed he wanted the tapes to be used as book material for his book .
 Kennedy kept former President Dwight Eisenhower fully informed about the missile crisis, not wanting to be criticized by Ike . Kennedy kept Ike fully informed of the crisis, fearing criticism .
 Students of American history and the presidency will find much that's beneficial in these pages . Students of U.S. history and American history will find a lot of useful in this pages .