 Stephen Kruiser Stacey Lennox Matt Margolis Charlie Martin Rick Moran Dennis Prager Chris Queen Jeff Reynolds Gwendolyn Sims Robert Spencer Spengler .
 The U.S. discovered the installation of Soviet missiles in Fidel Castro’s Cuba in October 1962 . The cause was the discovery of Soviet missile installations in Cuba .
 The crisis was defused after 13 days of high suspense . Yet the two superpowers never stepped over the brink and the crisis was resolved .
 The Soviet missiles were withdrawn, and Kennedy’s reputation soared as a result . Kennedy's reputation soared after the withdrawal of Soviet missiles .
 He was enjoying stellar ratings when, thirteen months later, he was assassinated . The president of the U.S. was assassinated 13 months later .
 The placement of Soviet missiles developed out of the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion by Cuban dissidents the previous year, assisted covertly by U.S. forces . The “victory” consisted of extricating Kennedy from a self-induced crisis, the author says .
 Khrushchev had placed the missiles for non-offensive purposes, to secure Cuba from future invasion . The missiles were placed in Cuba to protect the country from invasion .
 Khrushchev spoke of selecting U.S. targets with care and with a view to inflicting maximum damage and spreading terror . We also now know from a tape recording released in 1990 he spoke of a plan to inflict maximum damage on American targets .
 Khrushchev’s son, Sergei, said the missiles could have been made operational within hours if he had given the order . The missiles had not been fitted with nuclear warheads when the crisis arose, he said .
 Khrushchev was later to say that, “I’m not a Czarist officer who has to kill himself if I fart at a masked ball.” He later said that he was not an officer who had to die himself if he farted .
 A month before the crisis, Kennedy had said that he would not tolerate a Soviet offensive military capacity in Cuba . But given the stakes, Kennedy could not afford to be incautious .
 Military service heads including the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Maxwell Taylor, were urging air strikes to eliminate nuclear missiles . Suddenly, he was facing the prospect of nuclear missiles, and the military service heads, including the . Joint chiefs of Staff were urging .
 It is a myth, popularized widely, that Kennedy was never enamored of this option . Kennedy was not interested in this option, but it's a myth that he was interested .
 The transcripts of ExComm, his swiftly convened crisis cabinet, show him to have assumed the need for strikes in the opening days of the crisis . To the contrary, the transcripts show that he had assumed that strikes would be necessary .
 Confirmation that the Air Force could not ensure 100% elimination of missile sites induced caution . The Air Force says it could not guarantee 100% of the missile sites . The U.S. military says it has a "dilemma"
 Kennedy opted for placing a naval “quarantine” on Cuba — the more obvious and accurate term “blockade” was avoided, blockade being an act of war . The Organization of American States’ agreement to this course of action provided the legal cover required .
 Soviet ships turned back rather than invite confrontation with the 63 U.S. naval vessels and 33,000-strong United States forces enforcing the quarantine .
 Kennedy soon came into receipt of two missives from Khrushchev . But this was scarcely the end of the crisis .
 Khrushchev proposed removal of the missiles from Cuba in return for a public American pledge never to invade Cuba . The U.S. never invaded Cuba in the 1960s and '60s .
 The second, on October 27, was impersonal and rigid — and suspected of being a Politburo production, not Khrushchev’s . The second was more belligerent, insisting also on the removal of the United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 The same day, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down and its pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, killed, killed . To make matters worse, the same day an American spy plane shot down .
 A second U-2 strayed into Soviet airspace and nearly shared the same fate . The U.2 went missing in Soviet airspace in the early 1980s . U.S. pilots were killed in the crash .
 ExComm previously decided that a downed U-2 called for eliminating the offending SAM anti-aircraft missile site . ExComm had previously decided to eliminate the SAM site .
 ExComm had determined that all SAM sites in Cuba were to be destroyed if a second U-2 was downed . ExComm also determined that a second SAM site in Cuba would be destroyed . All SAM sites were also destroyed if the U.2 downed .
 Kennedy wisely chose not to order retaliation for the first U-2 and to remain silent about the second . He wisely chose to stay silent on the second U.2 attack .
 He also ordered United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey defused so they could not be fired without authorization . President Obama ordered the missiles defused in Turkey .
 On October 22, the United States moved to Defcon-2, the highest state of alert reached at any time in the Cold War . The U.S. is now at the highest level of alert in Cold War-era Cold War history .
 Agreement reached along the lines of Khrushchev’s second letter, though the removal of the Jupiter missiles was a secret component of the deal .
 On October 28, the world — for once not a hyperbolic image — breathed a sigh of relief . The deal was concluded on October 28 .
 The Democrats picked up four Senate seats in the midterms that followed . A nuclear exchange had been averted and the Democrats had won four seats in Congress .
 Kennedy’s wretched judgment on the Bay of Pigs had spurred the Soviets to shore up their Cuban ally to the point of installing nuclear missiles . In short, Kennedy's wretched judgment had prompted the Soviets .
 Kennedy carefully extricated the United States from the ignominious prospect of Soviet missiles positioned ninety miles from mainland U.S. The stakes were so high, Soviet determination untested, and the room for maneuver was small .
 He thus extricated the world from a nuclear exchange precipitated by this development . The world was saved by this act of action .
 Some thought the deal weak, that a more seasoned, sure-footed president would have insisted on the restoration of the status quo ante and the complete demilitarization of Cuba . Some thought that Obama's deal weak .
 Given the stakes, one is inclined to give Kennedy the benefit of the doubt for not attempting to find out . Yet no accounting of the deal can omit its costs .
 The 42,000 Soviet advisers in Cuba remained, training Castro’s forces to develop what was to become the leading communist army, which would assist subversion in Latin America, Africa and Asia for the next two decades .
 Cuban exiles had to forfeit any hope of dismantling communism in their homeland until at least after the Cold War and, indeed, up to the present day . The Cuban ex-communist state of Cuba remains a communist state in Cuba .
 They paid the heaviest price for sparing the world the horrors that might have been unleashed half a century ago . The U.S. government paid a heavy price for saving the world from the horrors .