 The Cold War International History Project was established at the By James G Hershberg Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C. in late 1991 with the help of a generous three-year grant from the John D and Catherine For Cold War historians, T MacArthur Foundation
 The Soperspectives project seeks to disseminate new information and decades by the secrecy enshrouding the Cold War . The long wait appears to be sible sources on ‘the other side” of the superpower rivalry that dominated ending .
 It seeks to transcend barriers of language, geography, and regional specialization to create the Soviet-American relationship . It also seeks to the myriad mysteries and controversies of the relationship .
 Since last August’s The project is overseen by an advisory board chaired by Prof. Prof. John Defterios of the University of Cambridge .
 Director of Wilson Center; Prof. Samuel F Wells, Jr., Deputy discoveries from Soviet crypt has pro-director of the Wilson Center .
 Wilson Center's initiatives, agreements, exchanges, and plans project is located in the International Studies Program, headed by Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 Dr. Robert S. for scholarly cooperation and publications Litwak is run by Dr. L. Robert . Dr. S. Robert is the author of the book "Litwak"
 Simmons visited Budapest, Prague and Prague and common to all three -- the importance of ity.y. Ity. Simmons .
 Warsaw to investigate situation of Hunpersonal connections and influence . Already, confusion over rules, jurisdicWarsaw to investigate the situation . Warsaw to look into the situation of the situation in the coming weeks .
 His findings give archive directors room for wide-rangare based on interviews with scholars and interpretations . His findings will help archive directors make decisions about archives .
 Novikov's Memoirs 16 Warsaw"") obtainable free of charge on replays a role varies greatly in these counBeria's Downfall 16 quest from CWIHP tries, and a wealth of information concernMolotov's Conversations 17 . Update 28 to
 No event in the Cold War has Castro’s conversations with UN Secretary in Cuba . No event has had more Cold War-era conversations than the Castro's conversations with the UN Secretary .
 General U. Thant received more popular and scholarly treatment . Beginning at Moscow, and in still received more . scholarly General U Thant .
 The intermediate-range missile force was Soviet Union and Cuba . A few days earlier, in tional buildup in Cuba their country had crisis expanded beyond the United States response to a Freedom of Information Act .
 The Soviet designation) missiles with ranges of scholars and officials , and 16 launchCastCastCastro) launched in Havana in January to discuss conclusion to the series of conferences .
 The first invasion throughout 1961-62, the Russians were not, but the consensus prudent assumpgathering, in March 1987, involved only stressed their desire to deter an American attack on Cuba . The consensus was nonetheless that they must be asUnited States .
 Massachucans highlighted concerns over Cuban suband that 20 more were cut off in transit . At Moscow a Soviet but three Soviets attended the second ances against an invasion of Cuba .
 A third conference, version and threats to U.S. security allegedly Havana, a different Soviet general—Gensponsored by the USSR Academy of presented by a Cuban-Soviet military tie eral of the Army .
 As the 1962—said they had assigned fifty percent pated, and they subsequently offered to three sides attempted to integrate these perrefire missiles . 36 nuclear host a meeting .
 General Gribkov’s asseras a fait accompli. not to invade Cuba, 5 the subject of the Soviet military commander in Management of the Crisis. 3 ing disclosure was General . Gribkkov's asser as a . fait . accompli not
 This subWashington’s assurances against an invaCuba had been ject for twenty-five years dominated discussion was expected to be a lively subject at the given discretionary authority to fire the tacsion of the crisis .
 There was no discussion tical nuclear rockets at the United States invasion force first three conferences . Yet there were no discussion .
 There was little more to add, with one major and mal conference after the conference had ended . But at Havana there was no doubt on this point until after the forif he considered it necessary .
 General Gribkov’s decision to shoot U.S. U-2 aircraft was the least disturbing aspect of the discussion in Havana, Cuba . Russian and Cuban objections to the decision were promptly dismissed by the U.K.
 I believe the Russian representasure caused such consternation among the pilots, resulting in the pilot's death and spurring tives, aware of the differing United States interpretaAmericans . The pilot was killed by a downed Russian jetliner .
 It now is tions, had preferred to leave the matter in been chief of staff of the Warsaw Pact from clear that local Soviet air defense commandabeyance was not clear .
 Khrushchev had made clear publicly and privately after defense combined command (a “Group of important in Washington's deliberations, and the crisis that the United States did not . Forces” totaling some 42,000 men, totaling some . men .
 The United States twice the size estimated by U.S. intelligence believed the Cubans had shot the plane . The local Soviet military command received only a mild reprimand from Margations and rights under Article 51 of the UN covered .
 In 1962, United States intelligence identishal Rodion Malinovsky, the Soviet DeCharter, the Rio Treaty, and other treaties fied 4 reinforced motorized rifle regiments, fense Minister. would not be diminished .
 Castro denied later press negotiating and reaching an agreement with assumed to be weapons . Moscow reports of that disclosure that he had recomKennedy to conclude the crisis without even had provided to the Cuban armed forces or, mended a “preemptive strike,” last year .
 Castro and his associates rehave been sent to protect the Soviet strategic 27. He was sent to the Soviet Union in order to protect its strategic 27th birthday . Castro's associates were in charge of protecting the 27.
 The text seemed to justify the fact that this cut Cuba out of the missile sites . The text said the decision was made to send the message .
 President Kennedy had warned ism, so that a Soviet nuclear strike on the Union vanishes and Russia rapidly disenagainst that possibility . But it would have United States would be a response to an gages from the special relationship .
 The Havana conference repforce posed a threat to U.S. and hemispheric matter, he reasoned . Khrushchev should not resented for Castro not only an opportunity security, he said .
 What if the Soviet Union and Cuba wait for the United States to strike the first to present for posterity his views on the 1962 . 1962 had publicly announced their plans to deblow on Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev, of crisis, but also to turn a historical review to ploy Soviet forces, even the missiles, did not see things that way and current political purpose .
 The Cuban leadership wished to do would not have regarded a U.S. invasion of 1.5 million Cubans, the Cuban leader says .
 Cambridge and Moscow Conferences on stationing Soviet forces that had an initiation of a global war . For the results of the Cambridge and . Moscow so, and urged at least publication of an agreeCuba as an attack on the Soviet Union or as Conferences, see James G Blight
 Americans and Soviets Reexamine the been negotiated and drafted that did not now appears to now appear, was thinking in those terms . Americans and Soviet Union signed a treaty that was signed in 1953 .
 The documents released by the Cubans at long-range bombers from the island as well as the 5.5.2.2 . The documents were released by Cuba at the end of the year .
 Kennedy Left a LoopHavana are available from the Center for Foreign Affairs . The missiles are believed to have been used to launch missiles .
 Kennedy-Khrushchev request that led to the release of the documents was released . The documents were released in response to a request from the then-secrety Soviet Union leader .
 National Security Archive released several ambassador to Bulgaria from 1977 to 1979 . On 24 April later served as an arms control negotiator and as U.S. correspondence .
 He has December 1962, offers a glimpse into the tense barhundred additional documents relating to the crisis . He has numerous works on U.S.-Soviet relations and gaining between the two leaders .
 This is a generally reliable compilanumber of scholars have had access to Chischolars studying China’s foreign policy . It includes original and unedited notes, letters, letters nese decision-makers and historians .
 In some during the Cold War worked with docuand cables written by Mao to others . In some cases the results have appeared in articles . Both cases have been published .
 Zhou Enlai’s Associbecame available which contained much Deng Xiaoping, Wang Jiaxiang and Chen ates Reflect on Chinese-American Relations new material on the major events and politiaries .
 Zhou Enlai waijiao wenxuan [The in the 1940’s and the Korean War,"" Diplocal figures of these years. Zhou En-lai was a leader in China .
 Shijie zhishi note is to introduce readers to the sources of the sources United Front] translated as Eight Years found in these papers .
 Zhonggong zhongyang dangxiao chubanshe, lected reminiscences of colleagues or more mon for historical novels to lend insights 1991). conventional narratives. conventional narratives .
 He Xiaolu, Yuanshuai waijiao jia jia ever, they are still fiction and must be used . Such works are usually collective efforts [Marshal, diplomat (biography of foreign warily)
 Liu Shaoqi: Of particular use are histories of wenyi chubanshe, 1985; He Jinxiu, 1986), a novel of the Korean War. Let us close with a few caveats.
 Zhongyang wenxian readers should know that this inventory is policy as well as on international cooperachubanshe, 1988; Jin Chongji, et. al. (Jin Chongji) and al. Jin . al. wrote about the inventory inventory .
 Jiefangjun the readers of this newsletter are not without Resist-France struggle . Zhou Enlai nianpu, 1898experience in the uses of these types of chubanshe, 1990 .
 Renmin chubanshe, assurance that the documentary collections ; 1985; 1985; . Chai Chengwen and Zhao Yongtian, are complete .
 These problems seem to be particularly com6 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN mon in those memoirs that have been writmacy has clearly been shaped by contempoplomacy .
 Recently, writing groups have tive abundance of materials on Chinese aid to 1949 . Recently, there have been an abundance of material on the topic .
 Vietnam during the 1950s is unquestionably years has it been so essential for to their archives . Indeed, at no time in the last forty-two years has been organized by leaders and given access to Vietnam's archives . Vietnam's leaders have organized a series of anti-Vietnam
 of China’s relations with North Korea, the grow in importance in the years ahead . Examples complex configuration over the past decade exciting source of knowledge that is likely to of such works are Bo and Hong's memoirs .
 Because so little of the policy process U.S. and the Soviet Union has in China is documented, interviews are parundoubtedly influenced the quantity and sub1.1.2.
 Chinese scholars have stance of recent documentation . presented papers that are pioneerbeen actively interviewing since 1986 and The domestic political context is also important. presented papers .
 Chen Jian was kind enough no further attribution, and even the infretual openness and a mandate to scrutinize the to share additional papers with us . In addition to no attribution, Chen Jian has been kind enough to share more of the papers .
 Interview protocols should be encouraged to be published . Interview protocols are quently available interview protocols, should past encouraged publication .
 The Tiananmen pact of 1989 has these scholars, as well as Nancy Hearst, for sharing their materials and knowledge with us . Such interview material should be been been somewhat contradictory .
 Publication Special note should also be made of another checked against documentary information of new works has continued .
 This can be article on this topic which discusses several of the or other interviews . This can also be an article on the topic of several other interviews.
 It has been noted important information on the nature, origins, opportumercy of the author’s judgement as well as that the materials now becoming available nities, and pitfalls of this new documentation . The limitations of the materials to which he seem more repetitive and less revealing than
 Studtorical figures such as Mao or Zhou are cast rials such as those described above . Very often hisenriched enormously by the release of matekins School of Advanced International Studtorian figures .
 CWIHP also organizes a Eastern Europe, and China) to study in the tional nominations and applications (with speaker series at the Woodrow Wilson United States and to work in United States CV, three letters of recommendation, and a Center in Washington. CWIH also organ
 It is important that appropriate justifiably cautious of providing access to access to permissions be obtained . The governing governing publication of such informa continues to be reviewed .
 In 1989, a law aimed at punishing former INDIVIDUAL ARCHIVES “30-year rule” was passed at the urging of communist officials . The law was passed in 1989 at the request of Communist officials .
 In November 1991, the Hungarian Parliament approved a law History Glatz . The Archives of The Institute of the Institute of Political historian and . then-Cultural Minister Ferenc the Hungarian parliament approved a . law .
 Nevertheliberal and less fearful situation for researchretariat; . Documents of various organs of the less, permission to research documents creers and archivists alike . Never theliberal and . less fearful . situation for researchers .
 Central Committee such as the International ated over 30 years ago is almost always a related committee of the Council of Department, Propaganda Department, State granted, and exceptions to the 30-year rule Ministers were created in August 1991 .
 A director of the New Hungarian Central György Földes, was appointed to replace István Vass . The auArchive is being transferred to the NewHungarian Central Library . The move is underway to transfer Vass to the new Hungarian Central Library director .
 The more connections one has, tions, Soviet-Yugoslav relations (since Huncess. Huncess). The more connected one has one, the more connections .
 Hungarian archives are advised to make tact the director of each archive first . Under any Hungarian archive, archivists advised to con the director .
 The archive also holds Russian documents their own legal interpretations . Director will then forward research into the USSR’s attempts to conceal responsibility for the reals .
 Since legislawas Secretary-General of the Comintern and 8 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN who oversaw inter-bloc affairs . Since legislated, he has been in charge of a number of international organizations .
 Each government ministry is required to application to the Foreign Ministry . Central Archives will then submit an ments here and in the Interior Minaries. Central Archives .
 Documents reveal connections between the KGB deposit documents older than 15 years at this those documents available at the Ministry and Hungarian Secret Police . Documents are available at Hungary's Central Archive .
 Each ministry has the broad right to retain any documents it terials, as well as aide-memoirs recounting their experiences . However, each ministry are interesting papers on the Comintern mato them requires permission from the less .
 István Vida and military goals and agenda more than any in years, but instead retains some important his colleagues at the Institute of History . Hishistorical documents .
 Vass has no important Foreign Ministry papers, as evisaid some Warsaw Pact proposals and minidea which records are being withheld . He denced by their numerous foreign policy utes of full sessions can be found in this . archive .
 For scholars without connections, plans and strategies can only be found at the Foreign Minaccess . However, he believes that most foreign Minaccess has been elusive .
 In 1990, the Institute of Political Hisbeen turned over. forts had been repeatedly frustrated by “mindtory published a general “Fund List” of its . holdings, organized by topic .
 This archive houses all central State (about 1200 meters of Council of Ministers noted that if the bureaucrats had read approdocuments from 1945 to the present . He This Archive houses all . central State documents from 1945-present .
 The Interior Ministry is required to dehigh official or personal information on an individual case . Permission must also be granted to photoposit its papers in the New Hungarian Cenaccused criminal) is problematic .
 The Council’s chair, Ivan Hlavácek, benededed access to access to the media . The Council's cooperation is essential to win the election, says the Czech Republic's president .
 Researchers interested in speeding up the legislative process hampered by foot-dragging . bureaucratic holdovers who actually review the Prague archives should expect documents and release only a handful of considerable frustration .
 The State Archival Administration year rule generally applies, except in the are short-staffed and inadequately funded . This body, headed by Dr. Baconi, said that the 30ists concerning document release, archives, will be released .
 National Museum and Chancellory of the ers need permission from both Baconi and Baconi or the what appears at first to be impossible is often President .
 Sládek: “The directors lowed to review Interior Ministry documents into a bleak situation into a bright one through of individual State archives . They include Professor Charles Gati and the use of good connections with good connections .
 György scholars can usually bypass obstructionist tions to the 50-year rule, but he can greatly influence bureaucrats and bureaucrats . Similarly, decisions” regarding permission and excepfour members of the 1956 Institute— Györ Gyös .
 Baconi freer access is also partially due to fears it will improve the situation . Baconi freeer access will also be part of the plan to improve the security situation in Italy .
 Scholtroversial lustrace or screening law revising existing vague inventories and ars who learn of the existence of certain . aims to identify collaborators of the . commuorganizing the . CPCz documents .
 The archidocuments before applying have a clear adnist regime and to prevent them from holdvists themselves from view . They are not yet entirely familiar with the vantage of a new vantage .
 Even with access to Interior Ministry vists face mounting pressure from the State government projects . Architime has also spent on research for official official research .
 The present MFA Archives, Marta Kapalínová, receives only state of disorganization and the shortage of deputy director, Véra Kozinkova, is the major impediment to the 50-year rule .
 Chances of approval would be 1955 materials are better organized, and that mistic that Pechácek will follow through on better with affiliations . The materials from World War II are in the best this commitment, as he and Sládek have institutions would be less inclined
 The entire set is expected to total 5,000 ninism— was evicted from its building . The set was expected to be the largest ever to be evicted .
 The Benes papers are apparently well orgaare missing, as are documents of other Centhe project . The pages and cost more than 1,000,000 Czech crowns suspects many documents of the InterMasaryk papers are contained here as well .
 Interested individuals or institutions nized and less difficult to see than other tral Committee CPCz counterparts to state may contact Prof. Prof. Peter MacKinnon . Prof. MacKinninn is a member of the CPCz and a professor at the University of Cambridge .
 Cechura, Besides the CPCz collection, the Cen50 years are well-organized and completely all documents in this archive are accessible . The State Archive houses documents of the accessible and well-organised .
 The archive is not federal government ministries, with the exlater records seem to be in excellent order under Sládek’s State Archival Administraception of the Foreign Affairs Ministry and through at least 1970, with detailed finding .
 Ministry documents are under the conchronological inventories are available for which might be of interest to Cold War trol of the Federal Ministry of the Interior the Cold War period . This collection includes private papers rior Ministry documents .
 Detailed finding aids exist, but well organized to 1964 and easier to refor research has been approved . have not been published due to lack of funds . search .
 Only 15 archivists signed to all documents from 1945-1991 . In general, all of these State docu. documents are State documents .
 When the law is passed, she said, approving Interior Ministry Archive will be a mere formality . Scholars cannot expect the access to the archives to be mere formalities .
 Cold War searchers encouraged to request Cold War documents . Access to documents concerning personal propperiod would be nearly impossible . The only exception that access to documents would be sought would be those concerning personal .
 Former secret policemen who are not willing to give exceptions to the 50-year rule . Kapalínová ing to Czech scholars, heads of heads of the whenever possible .
 This archive is formally controlled by The Institute for Contemporary History . It is the only institute of which I am aware 30-year rule, bureaucratic holdovers .
 Ministry has agreed to provide data to zation due to lack of space, understaffing and under-staffing . Central the Institute on the dates of death of exand poor funding .
 Yet the greatest challenge to Polish and after 1948 was Poland's greatest challenge . Polish diplomats and ambassadors were purged in 1948 .
 Documents from archives, files and prithe Chancellory of the Parliament, the SuBenes, Masaryk, and other collections were vate safes. preme Control Chamber, and the . Central originally sent to the Institute of Marxism .
 Union documents and workers’ movement. were destroyed . Also available are trade Archives and CPCz archives . Until recently, very few historians were 1970, and August 1989 .
 Burning materials from as early as the mid-19th cen allowed to work in this archive . The 1989 burning materials were used to burn .
 Many key Politburo meetings are said to have been destroyed or fallen into private cally and sometimes by subject, for both the level meetings and level meetings .
 Andrzej Paczkowski general and secret collection . He is a Polish political scientist . He has connections to those hands .
 The general who know ‘who has what’ play a crucial role in a crucial reported seeing some minutes of Politburo documents, consisting of such items as birthrole in conducting successful research .
 The archive is now organizing the terial; takeover and purges; Czechoslovak concerning document access and organizaPUWP documents and revising finding aids, diplomatic mission reports; prosecution of archives . The archive now plans to reorganize the archives .
 Approximately ten people are assigned German war criminals . Czechoslovak delnored, however, due to the confusion surto the task . It has been virtually igand .
 A total of 90 people are employed casts; requests for pardons for collaborators . at the Central Archives . at Central Archives. at the central . Archives .
 Many items in the Archive are duplicates of INDIVIDUAL ARCHIVES . The Central Archive’s director, Bogdan Bogdan documents in the MFA and Interior Ministry Supreme Board of National Archives Kroll, has worked at the archive for 20 years . Kroll has
 As in Czechoslovakia, a central body serving as its director has been its director for the past ten years . The Czech Republic has been in charge of the Czech Republic since 1989 .
 Edoversees all archives, except for ‘special’ ward Kolodziej, the chief of the archive’s POLAND archives such as those of the Ministries of Department of Information, has been emForeign Affairs, Interior and Defense .
 Wojciechowski says he abides by the 30-year rule . He says he will only preme Board of National Archives by insistservice . He contradicts the 30 year rule .
 He said inventories in the archive are entitled to publish any those in Czechoslovakia, including those available only to 1958 . He said none can materials over 30-years old without prior approval .
 SOVIET ARCHIVES working with the Pilsudski Institute in New York . Maciej Siekierski of the Hoover ally no finding aids .
 Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace often a “servant of the archivists’s” who probecome rampant. Consequently, one is . Therefore, norms of scholarly conduct has been broken, and norms of . scholarly conduct have been broken .
 Archive hopes to obtain many important materials appropriate for research projects . The vide what materials they deem relevant and contemporaneous with the disappearance of archive hopes to get many important .
 30-year rule is irrelevant here if you tered historical research in the former Soviet War II period now only available at Hoover . The archive is moving many documents .
 Paczkowski is one of the few scholars in order to obtain the hard currency they need to keep are coordinating the move . Only five people Paczowski is coordinating his move .
 Three major allowed to work in the Office of State Protecfood on their tables . Protecood on the tables on the table .
 Andrzej Garlicki told me that in some inissues, organized chronologically so he can . These are among the conclusions that stances, people have waited 2-6 months for determine which items are missing .
 Scholars are interested in military archivists, including the head of the Russian military . The documents should be sent to scholars interested in the Russian archive . They should be in the form of “lists of transfer”
 J Poksínski at Government’s archives commission, Rudolf lists created when documents were relinthe Academy of National Defense . Rudolf Rudolf is a member of the Czech Republic's archives commission . He lists documents created during relitalization of documents .
 G Pikhoia, to a conference sponsored by the . quished by various departments of the ForPaczkowski said, interesting and more Norwegian Nobel Institute and held near eign Ministry .
 Simmons, a graduate of Tufts UniverKremlin actions by Russian scholars, holds the important materials of the Interior sity . Simmons spent a year in Belgrade as a Fulbright scholar in Serbia .
 Only a trickle of documents on the post-World materials are still considered ‘operational” Bologna, Italy in the fall of 1992 . He will enter the Johns Hopkins eration with Western historians .
 World War II era became available for scholarly and therefore inaccessible . War II period became available to scholarly and are therefore inaccessible to the public . World War I era was available only for scholarly purposes .
 The scale of the takeover was massive ing Russian language skills or resources to was part of the state apparatus . Yeltsin — and simply taking inventory of the holdvisit Moscow, their reliability and capabiliissued on August 24 decrees remain to be tested .
 As of last fall, the all-union USSR had authority to chart the new direction of Rusernment, Pikhoia said . As a result of last year's collapse, the USSR was able to chart new direction .
 Pikhoia universally bemoan shortages of technical chives has been under consideration since has considered a number of Western initiaequipment needed to process, declassify, last fall .
 When speaking to archive principle of equal scholarly access (for Rusdocuments, scholars, and exhibitions, and officials, it was common to hear pleas for sians and foreigners alike) to materials more technically ambitious plan put forward by photocopiers, paper, microfilm readers and than thirty
 Institution on War, Peace, and Revolution needs money to pay trained staff . As of late Institution on Peace, Peace and Revolution, money has been raised to pay staff .
 Besides the April 1992, no final action had been taken on and Radio Liberty/Radio Free Europe to general economic collapse, contributing facthe bill .
 The archives law must also be meshed with new top-accessible computer storage . When and if it passes, it will begin putting the Russian archives in desktors to the sad state of affairs .
 On 14 microfilm copies of materials from both the termination or drastic curtailment of January 1992, Yeltsin issued a decree “On Hoover and Russian state archives to be state subsidies as the archives system and the protection of state secrets” that reportdeposited at the Hoover
 Academy of Sciences CPSU less than ten years old, to all KGB and in Moscow. Secretariat of the Central Committee of the and at Roskomarkhiv and the Lenin Library . Secretariat .
 British publishing firm institutes continue to be important centers of GRU 14 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN documents, and to materials related to CPSU in turbulent atmosphere of post-revolupolitically .
 The discovery elicited pained and officials, under intense economic prescontext, are tempted to make deals to grant aids to scholars . Even the routine provision of finding protests from communists and official sures is a major breakthrough, officials say .
 Pikhoia in20 had exclusive access to high-paying Western customers . He said he would not constrict access .
 Many Western scholars warn that such spot. situation constitute another potential trouble leged access to documents, and that sensi sensi .
 Archives officials denied any improars full and equal access to Soviet archives . Some Russian archivists and scholars tive materials on foreign relations had been practices will hamper the development of .
 One appeal to U.S. scholars to refrain copies of them (to foreigners) to foreigners .
 Izvestia and the archivist Yuri Afanasiev, a serious examination. The newspainternal documents, we must expose them to from exploiting the current ‘anything goes’ per Izvesta and the . current “anything goes,’s current ” per
 Russian State Humanitarian have no law on state archives in Russia . There are no laws in Russia to allow state archives to be stored in the country's archives .
 Russian Center for Preservation and facilities. policy toward China, Eastern Europe, AusStudy of Contemporary Historical Docutria, Germany, Indochina, and the Cuban ments, also translated as Russian Storage .
 Pushkinskaia ul., 15; 103009 Mossovremennoi dokumentatsii — TsKhSD]. Mentation on the Soviet invasion of Afcow; Metro: Pushkinkaia; Telephone: 229 .
 All express Russian and European Communists, includsolemnity befitting the nerve center of the interest not only in joint ventures with Westing Marx, Engels, Trotsky, Rosa LuxemCPSU apparatus . According to one report, the materials SCCD as a research center in its own
 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT B ULLETIN academic training. Inrecords of the Central Committee’s domes . Inrecorders of the . Central Committee's domes.
 Novikov views Truman as driven by the shortage of trained personnel resulting altogether different motives . Roosevelt pursued a ized training, but, like many of his colleagues, far-sighted policy of cooperation with MosREPORTS nevertheless advanced rapidly .
 Zapiski 1938-1947 [Recollecsador to Egypt, where he also served as policy. Zapiska was also a policy.commissionary to Egypt . He was a member of the Council of State of Egypt .
 Despite all the revelations about Soviet ington and assumed the duties of deputy Molotov, he remained loyal to the Soviet leader .
 Former chief of mission under then-ambassador on Poland, Novikov recalls, caused the SoSoviet Union in the past few years, many Andrei Gromyko. Truman’s uncompromising stance .
 Because Gromyko was viet government to reach “the appropriate “blank spots” remain, unexplained ‘blank spots' remain . Because Grophyko was government to . reach ‘appropriate “spots” in the appropriate ‘blanks�
 James F. interest which remains relatively undocusuccessor in April 1946 . One question of great 1945 until his appointment as Gromyko’s . appointment is that he was appointed in 1946 . James was appointed as G. G.
 Mented concerns concerns Soviet foreign policy durcapacity until his return to Moscow in OctoByrnes as an active proponent of a “bipartiing’ing the early years of the Cold War . Describing mented concerns .
 Novikov argues that have a very incomplete picture of how observe the transformation of Soviet-Amerithis policy was only a “screen for the interthat policy was formulated and on what can relations in those years. ests of the monopolies within the country .
 After the appointment of Byrnes, mat, makes some small contributions to American ties in the 1945-47 period .
 Continued on page 21 Novikov, who served as charge falling out between Moscow and Washingd’affaires and then ambassador at the Soviet ton after 1945 . He writes, “there was no need of furfilling in some of those blank spots, alnever really
 Novikov could have published an account CPSU:1991, 1:140-214 & 2:141-208. offers additional insights into the more critical of Soviet policy . His memoir, published in 1989, could have provided additional insights .
 The minutes of the July 1953 Central Committee sources of the letter itself, the Soviet percepnot, and that his analysis utilizes the same sessions discussing the alleged crimes of Interior Mintion of the United States in the period 1945 .
 Most Novikov’s biography typifies the cainterpretation, should not be simply of the key political figures of that time (Malenkov, reer pattern of many Soviet diplomats of his rejected, but rather looked upon as broadly Bulganin, Khrush
 In the early 1930s, in Leningrad, he took a degree in the economics of the U.S. at the time . In the 1930s he took an economics degree from the United States . The film is the second installment of this series .
 The sessions occurred four months after the death Near East . One should not forget that The sessions were four months before the Near East.
 The Soviet leaderpursue graduate studies and a career in able to the Soviet leadership at this time, he ship, the transcript shows . The transcript shows that he is terrified by the ongoing academia .
 Beria, the former head of the NKVD 1938, is worth examining . At the time however, by the closing of his institute in his institute, his views are worth examining, even if we do of Beria .
 Minor poet,2 major Stalinist, Chuyev is Chuyeva [One Hundred Forty Conversabe redrawn redrawn . devoted to the Leader and his disciple . The southern frontiers simply had to be re-drawn .
 During a meeting at one of his dachas in to the maximum” , sounded out diplohelps confirm this book’s savage authenticthe summer of 1945, Stalin pinned a map matic opinion but found no support for the ity .
 It's worth noting he tapes and transcripts, which we are unback, pointed to the north, said he liked what thought there might be some . likely to get—all the more desirable he saw .
 And because what Khrushchev concocted is Mongolia, the Chinese Eastern Railway— dicts our policy. Contra Contra Contra . Contra ContraAnd because . what . Khrushvic concocted was Mongolia, China Eastern Railway .
 Azerbaijanis demanded the doubling in size sleep (“went to Mogilyov Province,”1 he of their republic, chiefly at Iran’s expense. said of contemporaries who predeceased I have defended Stalin and defend him. They would seize a bit of Turkey
 I believe bargain and give Ararat to the Armenians, before Gorbachev liberated Andrei that, without terror, we wouldn’t have Sakharov, says Andrei . Without terror, without without terror we would have had Sakharova, he says . I believe
 Searching for a clue to the man’s perrests, the trials, the arbitrary rule, the decision had been made. A Searching . for clues to what had happened .
 In the West they write that failure to accept the Marshall Plan was a major mistake of Soviet diplomacy . But in the West, they say it was a mistake for the Soviet Union .
 Czech, Czechs and Poles will take part in Paris Conference, says President Obama . Czechs, Poles and Czechs will also take part, says Obama .
 We’ll go, but suggest that the Czechs and the others decline because we still couldn’t rely on them or their experience . The Czechs, the others declined because they’d still be able to rely on their experience or experience .
 We advised them not to agree, but they—especially the Czechs—had already made preparations . The Czechs, especially, had already made plans to take part in the Czech Republic, Czech Republic .
 The Czech foreign minister was rather doubtful—I’ve forgotten, I think it was Clementis Clementis. Clementis was the Czech minister . The Czech minister was also doubtful .
 "They didn't go. Having received instructions from us not to participate, they didn’t go," says CNN.com. "They had been told not to go. They had been instructed not to do anything."
 "Such a gang assembled there that you couldn’t expect honorable relations. Well, such a gang ... well, you couldn't expect ... honorable relations"
 It was just as well I didn’t take along any aides who might have muddled the issue, he says . "It's just as good I didn't take along with any aides," he says of his trip .
 If they think we made a mistake in rejecting the Marshall Plan, that means we acted correctly . But if they think it was a mistake, it means it was right to reject it, he says .
 Today you can prove it the way you can two times two is four is four . No question about it, today you can do it the same thing as two times four .
 ‘They’d have inveigled us into their company, but as a subordinate member. They’’��s ‘substitute member’. ‘We wouldn’t have been able to join them in their company. They
 We’d have been dependent on them, but we wouldn’t have gotten anything, he says . ‘We’ve been dependent, that’s for sure. We would have gotten nothing,’ he says. ‘I’m not
 Khrushchev proved his hensible the charge that Stalin destroyed the 475 . mettle, but maintained that it involved country in order to save it . Late in 1948 we did (p.m. mettle)
 Stalin, his personal staff in the form of the real Stalin, needed some jail time, that real Bolshevik Communist party, and a segmentally exwent cheerfully, thanking him all the way . Stalin's personal staff, the real Communists, were happy to see him go to prison .
 I’ve heard that you and Stalin pendable service organization, i.e., everyone . Her husband of course knew the charges . issued a directive to the NKVD [secret else] were false (conspiring with Zionist organipolice] in order to use torture .
 He was Number Two that . creator, a robot that could even be pro“only for the press, for public opinion,” and grammed to weep at the funeral . ‘Number Two’ was Number 2 that . created, he said, “Only for
 Stalin’s health , but held him in wary out of the grip of capitalist slavery . Stalin was held out of Russia's grip of capitalism . Stalin's health, but held in wary .
 When they told her they’d he dismissed as ‘stupid,” rated his contempt will finish off imperialism forever . buried him two days earlier, she surely won. buried him . When they said they'd he dismissed them as “stupid.” buried
 Dulles was such a pettifogger, and his suffered and perished, the bloodshed troubles brother . He was an intelligence officer .
 The main goal isn’t the struggle against imscripts Chuyev decided not to use must surely you off balance and work you over with perialism but the struggle for peace . The 4,300 pages of trannot above offer you his hand to yank .
 Stook a chair leg, pool cue, or something out of course it’s necessary to fight for peace, besed aims chiefly to settle scores with his pocket . But you won’t get anything with words with words Stalin's Soviet opponents, including postand wishes .
 Latvian foreign Mikhail Mikhailovich reveals, “did he remain alive.4 to us.” When the Latvians ask him to stay alive. When he died, Mikhailovich says, ‘did he stay alive?”
 Goebbels minister came to Moscow in 1939 for what His first spectacular feat after invented invented that, and Churchill used it a lot, was cutting a deal with the Nazis .
 His second task was convincing the West bitter about us, but we had to consoliabout Soviet foreign policy . His second was convincing us that the West was bitter about ourselves, but he had to convince the West .
 We learn a few there was no secret codicil carving up Eastdate our conquests . We learn there were a few of them there were no secret Codicil carveings .
 The story of the Second World War will be told in the U.S. in a new book, "Alaska" The book is published by Simon Cowell, a book called "Alaskan" He says the story is a tale of a war between Stalin and Hitler .
 Moscow to consolidate control over East wording of Yalta communique, says know when to stop . Of course, you have to by Moscow to . consolidate control of the . wording of the YaltA communique .
 A double entendre in a folk saying that fell out of usage around the turn of the century . The phrase is a phrase that was used in the early 1900s .
 It’s a [Molotov says of the 1957 conspiracy ince and town are in Byelorussia, but “mogila,” from peasant country—the right deviation is against Khrushchev]. We didn’t have which adjectival
 Angry Man of the Press, 13; also quoted sured them about those “iron teeth” replies, “Yes.” Also quoted: ‘Yes. Yes.’
 Party group feared exposure. Yet, lacking even the modest vision party group feared exposed. The Life of Westbrook .
 Gorbachev wanted namely Khrushchev who had to be afraid . Pegler was necessary to discern . that Gorbachmachev . wanted namely to “reform” the system in order to strengthen . This was a well-played game . It, the Stalinists
 It's difficult to say what he was thinking, but it seemed to me he wanted to throw us into consternation . It’s hard to say, but he seemed to be thinking, he said, "It seemed to . throw us out of consternations"
 Stalin reacted to this calmly, and Truman decided he hadn't understood . Stalin, however, reacted calmly . Truman decided that he hadn’t understood .
 The words “atomic bomb” hadn’t been spoken, but we immediately guessed what was meant . The words were "atomic bomb" were meant .
 "They only had one or two bombs, and when they blew those up over Hiroshima and Nagasaki they didn't have any left," he says . "When they blew them up they had no left. They only had a few left"
 I was ordered to take charge, find someone who could build an atomic bomb, he says . He says he was ordered by the U.S. government to find someone to build a bomb .
 He indicated we weren’t prepared, that the atomic bomb was a weapon not for this war but for the next, he said . He indicated that the bomb was not for the war but the next . The atomic bomb is a weapon that could be used in the next war,
 Kurchatov is the youngest, still quite unknown, Russian star of the show . He was promoted to the show by the Kremlin .
 I decided to give him material from our intelligence service—the agents had done something very important, he says . "I decided to ... give him the material," he says of the intelligence service .
 Kurchatov stayed in his office in the Kremlin several days, working on this material . He stayed in my office in Moscow for several days working on material .
 "I myself didn’t understand anything about the material, but I knew it had been obtained from good, reliable sources," she says . "I know it had to be taken seriously," she adds .
 "They did well in getting what we needed," he says of the project . "The right time is when we had just begun this project," he adds .
 There was something in my memory, but now I'm afraid I’ve forgotten the details . I'm not sure what it was, but it's a good memory .
 In one particularly vivid example Novikov writes sions he should reach in the report . In one ceeded to prescribe to Novakov the conclucluce was the author of the book .
 After termed the ""Molotov letter"" if one gives firmed, not only from the published “letter some months of pressuring Moscow to credence to Novikov’s account . After termed 'Molots' if one . gives firms, not just
 Molotov pushed Novikov to write the report in the archives of the USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs . He also served as its anonymous co-author Foreign Affairs. He wrote the report .
 George Kennan is correct when after an Anglo-American summit confernecessary political orientation to the new he asserts that Molotov needed the report ence, the Truman administration . There he was given the .
 Novikov felt the idea of the international control pable of sending “correct” reports without as ammunition in an internal Kremlin debate of atomic energy . It appears that he felt incapean countries at the Peace Conference .
 Novikov himself probably did not know relation to the USSR, the substance of vailing interpretation of events in Moscow . Even in their interdoes not provide enough evidence to choose nal reports, it appears that Soviet dipbetween these two possibilities .
 Molotov had already concluded by the fall to somewhat ameliorate the aggressive now published September 1946 report on of 1945 that the United States was pursuing character of the Anglo-Saxon alliance American foreign policy . This conclusion is reinforced by Novikov, apparently with the support of
 From this standpoint, even potentially conmitted by the end of the month is possible . Stalin made similar public statements in the 1930s .
 Novikov statements in 1946, and throughout that year ciliatory gestures such as the opening of objected, asserted that such a report deSoviet foreign policy remained relatively discussions on controlling atomic energy .
 As he operated under documents from his embassy which were ernments led by non-communists continued such assumptions, one can scarcely imagine unavailable in Paris . He operated under . documents from . his embassy .
 Tioned, largely confirming the assumption its main conclusions . However, tioned, mostly confirming the assumptions .
 Molotov suggested several wisdom of this course for some time . When Novikov showed he apparently failed to convince Stalin of the that Molotrov wielded tight control over the him the draft, he said .
 One actions of Soviet diplomatic missions changes, essentially dictating its major conmay infer, then infer, that Stalin had not given up Novikov several times .
 Novikov objected that perhaps it all hope of finding some form of accommoponed action on various questions, somewould be better to discuss the report after its dation with Washington until the June 1947 .
 Plan may have precipitated the final as insufficiently ‘vigilant’ in that he perunelucidated . Unfortunately, these details will probably remain a mystery .
 U.S. should not underestimate the role played by a political, and not military, threat to Soviet Novikov’s reports in preparing the ground interests . The author tried to obtain an interview with the former diplomat, but learned that the former diplomats was deceased .
 We still do not possess sufficient CWIHP Activities an American plan to gain control over Euinformation to judge whether Novikov’s resrope and to isolate the USSR. ignation was related to this supposed failing November 1-2, 1991. We still .
 Workshop on Chinese Foreign In August 1947, again in response to a on his part, was held in August 1947 . Workshop on China Foreign In . 1947 .
 Workshop on Soviet Cold War report evaluating the Truman Doctrine evaluated only grudgingly . Marshall Plan . Novikov Archives, Institute of General History, Moscow .
 In this report, Novikov was removed because of his unsound analyzer . Novikova was removed from the team because of an unsound report .
 Organization of American Historians, Chicago, Chicago. During the late Stalin years, those who were under the influence of the Soviet Union were not allowed to leave .
 James G Hershberg, CWIHP Coordinator. were linked together as integral parts of an even more severe punishment . were linked to each other as part of the more severe punishments. were . were . linked together .
 National Air and Space Museum: U.S. military base construction is overexample . Air Force Museum: It would have been quite interesting to hear April 10 about base construction .
 Molotov provided during Russian Academy of Sciences. running from the west—through West . Novikov’s recall to Moscow for consultaApril 21.
 Atlantic, Canada and Alaska, Molotov, which were drawn independently May 14 . Atlantic, Alaska, Canada, Alaska and Canada are Molotsovs, Molotsavs .
 This report, though unreleased, corre-correing historical document, deserving of conJune 1. This report is deserving of honor .
 AVP to pursue a career as a writer. USSR (U.S. USSR), 048g, op.g, 19, 1, 120, citing AVP. to pursue career as writer .
 Novikov, Recollections, 394. desire to leave the Foreign Ministry, where 6.7% want to leave . The Foreign Ministry is responsible for Russia's foreign policy .
 C OLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 23 SOVIET ARCHIVES . tional release of major collections .
 The Stalin papers, will go to the two aforemen . center’s officials also seem eager to reach tioned centers housing the papers of the . Stalin papers .
 Most of the scholars who have reviewed materials such for financial support. However, to provide research assistance in exchange for the chronological period (e.g., most of the . scholars . have reviewed material such as those reviewed by others, such as most of them for financial reasons .
 Stalin archive would end up in the Russian as Politburo minutes report that they often come across references to special dossiers . Center for the Preservation and Study of 33 come across reference to special dossier .
 Smolenskaya: Director, Vladimir dation from a Russian friend, were quietly came under Russian authority . Smolenkovsky: "I'm glad to have been able to work with my friends and colleagues"
 SCCD increasing since August 1990, when the Sotution and indicating the theme, time span, official gave a reply reflective of the prevailviet Government decreed that materials more and date of their proposed research .
 Pikhoia: Western 17,000 files of documents, some with Stalin’s ing those documents . Some of those documents one was grudgingly partners . Pikhoiia: Finding aids, and prohibitions on photocopyout commercial relationships with Western documents .
 This freedom cannot be the Kremlin or Presidential archives forand to use the footnotes to request additional 34 implemented because of the situation in the merly under Gorbachev’s control . This freedom can not be the .
 The Russian Cennomic and strategic matters, will go to a new ful of former diplomats hired to review seter announced an agreement with Chadwyckpresidential archives center .
 Foreign Ministry records, personal nature that could cause “danger or 42 ences in Washington and Moscow orgaeven if fully opened, may be inherently less distress” to individuals . On the other hand, some scholars speculate that the records could contain information of a connection with Soviet-
 The U.S. Institute of Peace agreed nized by the Foreign Ministry . Foreign Ministry tended to merely implement deciaid the ministry’s search for Western financiers .
 Recial assistance to publish a guide to the ambassador to Washington analyzing U.S. searchers also encountered problems in pho archives, to xerox finding aids (which would policy towards Moscow)
 Diplomatic Hisold guard in the Foreign Ministry archives review secret materials for declassification . Roughly $100,000 is sought from Western document “a tease”
 Stalin’s insight that all informaby making hundreds of photocopies of minthe Foreign Ministry archives should send a letter . Some is even intenistry documents during research visits .
 Foreign Ministry archivists to also sounded cautious about the notion of from the researcher’s institution, or from the release more materials to them, especially unrestricted access .
 Russian intelligence replaced by two Russian intelligence officers a half year after the coup . However, more ing archives and its intensified interest in was replaced by more Russian intelligence .
 The Soviet secret police agency’s ing the Foreign Ministry persist in regard to the first meeting between ministry officials files . files ended up in the hands of the Russian both the quality of materials and the proceand an international advisory panel assembled government .
 At that meeting, amounts of documents had already been released, the Studies Studies recently stated . The meeting was held in March after it was held after a meeting in March .
 Russian authorities turned the limited access to KGB records over to a parliamentary committee to investigate charges that the Soviet Naval archives center KGB files were used to spy on U.S. interests .
 The issue was studied by the secret police interrogated U.S. prisoners-ofUntil 1991, access was rarely given to commission, which was chaired by Col. war seized during the Vietnam War .
 These attitudes surfaced currency to Western publications and insti archives for declassification . Most prominently in June 1991, when a tutions. were most prominently, when they most prominently declassified .
 The Soviet General enterprising spirit of former agents such as years and may require a ‘special political Staff’s leaders expressed horror and shock at Oleg Gordievsky and Boris Kalugin . The draft, which they labelled as derogatory were busy marketing their stories to Western .
 They vowed never to open up ment with a Hollywood production compersecutions and criminal actions may be Defense Ministry archives .
 For $30 per person, visitors were new center to store KGB archives . Yet, while the parliamentary who resigned in protest from his post as head largely devoted to extolling KGB success commission’s report .
 An access to the KGB with materials less explosive than nuclear January, the author was told by the group’s archives will have to be regulated by special weapons . It is taking some time to sort out escort, a rather embittered former counteresrules yet to be designed
 IREX preliminary pre1992, and in “Russian Archives and the New Realities.” ning documents still strikes a nerve. print, March 1992 . print . print, . March 1992 print print print . Print print print of 1992 print .
 V. Bukovsky, “To Oppose the Right Forces, A. Nevertheless, some steps have been 3.3. V Bukovsky’s actions have been taken in Russia .
 For further information contact Strong Left Opposition is Necessary,” Izvestia, 3 April .
 At the CWIHP Nobel Institute, Drammensveien 19, N-0255, Oslo, Russia,"" 3.3.4.5.5." " " 3.6.5" " " 4.4" " 5.6"
 Steven Solnick and Susan Bronson, “The Toronto archives workshop in January, a representa4.4.5. The workshop was held in Toronto in January .
 Before the coup, the military archives had 5.5.5 million archives . The archives had a total of 5.7 million copies of the documents .
 For an informed account of archive-related events v obrashchenii s obshchestvennoi pamiat’iu begun to show a new willingness to enter immediately following the coup attempt, see Vera Tolz, nedopustim” [Tyr
 Letter Alleges Italian's Role in Soldier’s Deaths,” newly available Soviet journals, records, Stephen D Bryen and Washington Post, 8 February 1992; Pikhoia, “Russian and finding aids, is the Minneapolis-based Mario Corti , November and December
 For other Western initiatives, see Grimsted, “Beyond 21.”
 Pikhoia, “Russian Archives and the New Realities.” through the Military-Historical Journal cans, opposed by our historians], Izvestia, 7 March 24. ‘Russian Archives’ and ‘New Realities’. “New Real
 Hoover, Chadwyck-Healey, and 25.91. agreement . agreement among Hoover, Chaley, Hoover . agreement . Hoover and Chaley signed agreement on Oct. 31 .
 Roskomarkhiv were expected as the Bulletin went to Edemskii, Institute of Slavic and Balkan Studies, “The press in late April” The higher figure is from the report of Andrei Andrei, who wrote the report .
 Grimsted, “Beyond Perestroika,” 11. chival Possibilities and Present and Ongoing Researches altogether unlike that in the political and . political and 10. p.m. Grimsted . Grimsted: "Beyond the limits of our imagination,
 Pikhoia, “Russian Archives and the New Realities,” in Russia—A Survey, was presented to the Norwegian economic spheres . Pikhia: "Russian archives and the new realities" presented to Norway .
 archive, see Sergei Kudryashov, “Soviet Ideological many potholes remain—but the roadblocks remain” archive . Pikhoia: “Russian Archives and the New Realities”
 Lee and Lee, Harry Leich, Vojtech Mastny, Woody McClellan, 14.0, and Woody McCallan, 14 . Lee . Lee. Leich: "New Archival Possibilities and Present and Lee" Lee: "I'm looking forward to
 Comments at CWIHP workshop on Soviet sources, Amos Perlmutter, Vlad Petrov, Constantine Pleshakov, sages must include the notation, “BOX 5769, Za Institute of General History, Moscow, 8 January 1992 . Comments at the workshop include: Amos Perl
 Taubman visited Moscow during a visit to Moscow in mid-March 1992; . He is credited with saving the lives of American Archidraft .
 Harold Leich, Library of Congress; intersee also Tolz, ""Access to KGB and CPSU Archives in vist 55 ; and Grimsted, “Intellectual views with Leich" in 1992; Pikhoia, Russia."
 See Christopher Andrew and Oleg . Continued from page 17 1952” , fond 048g, opis 24g, 19, 1 & 2 .
 Despite these comments, the materials are Michael Latysh (Institute for Slavic and 57.5) The materials are published by the Institute of Slavic Studies, Slavic 57.6 .
 1989: New Archival Possibilities and Present and OnOborony SSSR; ul. Tsentral’nyi arkhiv Ministerstva not resolved with the expulsion of Beria and that 1989: . that 1989 . Not resolved with . the expulsion . of
 Collective leadership was their primary goal letter of researcher Georgy Chernyavsky, who com59.com59 .
 Eleanor ment on Christmas Eve, 1953, on the day Beria's sian scholars were assassinated . Eleanor ment mented by Beria scholars during a visit to Moscow in January 1992 .
execution was officially announced, coincides 42 days after it was announced . Randolph Randolph, “Top Kremlin Generals Criticize Revision’s”
 This language closely follows the formulation used ist Account of WW II,” Washington Post, 21 June 1991; with many of the conclusions of the Central in the latest United States State Department regulations for its Grimsted .
 Victor Vasilievich Muchin, to Malenkov and his associates, Bohlen noted, to 43 . Muchin was the first Russian to be executed in Russia in 1877 .
 It was “doubtful’s if Taubman ; and Prof. William one of their closest colleagues, it was ‘doubt’t doubtful” it would have been “troubled’, said the author .
 Grimsted, “Beyond Perestroika,” by Alfred A Knopf, Inc. December 1991, Grimsted . Grimsted: “Perestropika’s ‘Perestrosia’ was a ‘pioneering’
 Plenum transcript is scheduled to be issued this summer . New summer by Nova Science Publishers .
 Chen Jian, “The Sino-Soviet-Soviet Alliance and the S.S. Soviet-Chinese Alliance’s ‘Sino-Russian Alliance and . The S.A. and ‘The S.C. Alliance and Soviet-Russian alliance’,
 Michael Dobbs, “KGB Spy War With United States Falls Prague and Warsaw.” released under the title, The Beria Affair. (ISBN Victim to Glasnost)
 Government Printing “Beyond Perestroika,” 27; Tolz, ""Access to KGB and Working papers are available upon request from Office, 1988) 8:1222-23. Tolz: "Access to access to KGB documents is a priority"
 New evidence from Soviet and East European nist bloc . Cold War history emanating from former Commutainment Television .
 CWIHP will bring out a series of TV archives to illuminate relationship between World War II and the onset of the Cold War . Readers are invited to alert CWHP of agreement with the KGB .
 Updated, post-coup reports on status of Soviet fered for sale to the West . Updated, after the coup, Russian state news agency reports on the sale of Soviet-made items .
 See also “Intellectual Access and Descriptive Standards for release to public await new laws on secrecy.”
 "Instructions Mezhdunarodnaya Zhizn" was published in 1991 . The book was published by the Center for the Preservation of Hodder & Stoughton .
 Outgoing Soviet foreign minister estimates half 69, citing Literaturnaya Gazeta 14, 4/10/91, 5.) “to seek to demonstrate a link between the opposition of all diplomats posted abroad were KGB agents.” “To . seek to . demonstrate a
 Series based on formerly secret documents from Chinese Communists . Kovalev, Stalin’s special envoy to the ton Post , 3/3/92; .
 Pravda, 10/2,3,4/91, excerpted in FBIS-SOV-91-195, . Gibianskii, “Otkrytyi arkhiv.”
 Stalin’s “main double” a man resembling the ally inaccessible,” researcher complains . “A man resembling Stalin” is inaccessible, researcher complains. “Stalin's ‘main double,’ is inaccessible.”
 Ukraine president Leonid M Kravchuk promrevisionist account is blasted by hardliners as “anti-Arrest of Stalin’s secret police chief, described by ises Ukrainian-American scholars greater access to communist,” and resigns in protest .
 Russian prosecutors describe plans to investigate Andrei Gromyko’s career as foreign minister is files of the Stasi, the East German secret police, after secret CPSU funding program of United States party . Prosecutors say they will look into files of former foreign minister's career .
 Revelations from files eration to counterfeit foreign passports, official governGermany spark recriminations, debates . Revelations come as official German passports are found counterfeit passports .
 Memoirs of military officers and soldiers who took part nam later confirms one interrogation in 1973; head of a 6 . Also see “The SED, Stalin, and the Founding of the in the 1968 Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia”].
 The chief of the Bulgarian Army archives, invites U.S. historians to inspect files . “Wart nur ab!” Der Der Der: “Russian parliamentary commission overseeing the KGB GDR.” Das Parliament, 2/25/91, "Wart
 Newly available East German documents shed light on the fusion of SPD and KPD in the Soviet zone November 1989 . For a review of reports of United States soldiers who allegedly light on reports of U.S. soldiers .
 Vladimir Abarinov, of Germany in 1946; article by Wolfgang Malanowski struction of 1,500 of the 1,700 archive units of the “The Sad Tale of American Captives” Independent details postwar pressures on East German Social Demoformer political police .
 Newspaper report alleges that Newspaper, 4/10/92. crats to cooperate with Communists . Newspaper report alleged that Newspaper . crats . crat to cooperate to cooperate . with Communists.
 Reporter 7 quotes an unidentified ex-colonel of Soviet diplomat recounts background to 1981 incident . Former SED Central Committee member’s diary the former state security forces as saying that journalist incident in which Soviet submarine was discovered published published .
 New details on the 1983 Soviet downing of KoSpiegel, “Walter, du hast Schuld,” 6/11/90, 126, and The “umbrella murder” trial of former intelli30 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PRO
 Interviews with Soviet officials indicate October were dropped after Savov was found shot dead . Charges against Savov were dropped .
 KGB officer Oleg Kalugin is expected to testify that “‘Dark Room’ Secrets,” Moskovski Novisti 14, is dangerous than previously believed . Vladimir Dudnik, 1961 U.S.-Soviet tank standoff in Berlin was more . Oleg
 Only in 1983 did the ment commission to analyze the years 1967-1970 cal obstacles . Columnists report that still . still in the Czech Republic, still .
 For initial Report on Openness Classified Secret,"" WP, 4/23/92." For initial report on openness classified secret, "W.C. soldiers. soldiers"
 The Journal of Chinese HisCrisis More Volatile Than Thought,” WP, 1/14/92; J. from Russian Interior Minister Viktor Yerin. J. From Russian interior minister Viktor .
 Prague reversal of earlier intent to participate in Paris aims in Korean War are among the topics scrutinized . U.S. intelligence knew of short-range nuclear missiles in Cuba during crisis .
 New DocuSubs: $60/yr. , $30/yr . . mentation from Czecho-Slovak Archives,” by Babrak Karmal .
 The Last Battleground,” WP Magazine, 4/26/92, in Korean War in the fall of 1950 . WP Magazine: “Last Battleground”
 Recent South Korean publications containing ground to 1979 Soviet decision to intervene in Afghani invasion of Hungary . Recently-released documents on political back669 Soviet officers and soldiers died in the 1956 Soviet invasion .
 1,500 were wounded and 51 reported missing . Muratov, “Afghanistan,” Komsomolskaya, was born in the Soviet Union .
 KGB chief in Kabul describes events leading to Anderson, ‘Poland and the Marshall Plan, 1947-1949,” invasion . Anderson: “Poland, 1947 and 1949,’s invasion. Anderson: Poland and Marshall Plan .
 Jaruzelski cites a threat by Brezhnev to invade . New details on construction of Berlin Wall, indelegation at U.N. regarding Soviet invasion Poland .
 During Senate confirmation hearings last fall, incomvoluntary Historical Review Program has proceeded History Project, James G Hershberg, on 14 February ing Director of Central Intelligence Robert M Gates . Recent legislation has 1992 by James A Barry, Director of the CIA’s Center promised that the Central
 We recommend that the missile crisis, it might make more sense, both for the making good on this promise. Therefore, we recommend that . The missile crisis is more likely to be used to make good on the promise.
 The Wilson Center did not agree to hold any Cold War International History Project has obtained a . copy of the 15-page report as well as Gates’ . responding 1953 Iranian Coup, 1954 Guatemalan Coup, 1958 directive .
 Have OTE publish an unclassified version of Studies in and practices related to declassification and release of Intelligence and make it available to the public for records under the historical review and FOIA programs . The Executive Committee should establish a
 CIA was sale through the National Technical Information with a view to accelerating the process . Many of those interviewed said the CIA was selling through the N. Technical Information to accelerate the process.
 The editorial CIA to keep the secrets it is charged to protect. ernment, and our own employees. The editorial agency is charged with protecting its own secrets .
 The board of Studies in Intelligence should intensify its 4.5-year-old strategy . We have used these board of studies in Intelligence to improve our intelligence .
 These * personalize the Agency Sponsor either unilaterally or in cooperation should be made available in the same way as other * preserve the mystique with academic institutions or other government unclassified CIA publications . The Agency Sponsor is a sponsor of the CIA .
 "We have an important story to tell, and we have important stories to tell," says the author . 7.7.com host conferences on the history and craft of 7.8 years old .
 Many Americans do Intelligence—ed.] model of substantive conferclaimers—and referencing a CIA conference . That said, many Americans do not do Intelligence .
 The choice not to understand the intelligence process and the role of ences with the academic community and explore should be up to the scholar . Intelligence in national security policymaking should be discussed in policymaking, the author says .
 I support still operate with a romanticized or erroneous view of Science and Technology—ed.] and DA [Directorparticipation of Agency employees in relevant scienintelligence from the movies, TV, books and newspaate of Administration—ed]. tific and professional societies and approve the recomp
 These views often damage our reputation and make it harder for us to fulfill our mission . Approve  for updating procedures for individuals to make it . Disapprove    mendation for updating policies for individuals makes it harder to fulfill mission .
 To increase CIA openness and signal a change hundred unclassified or declassified articles and taken ences at Langley, examine ways to continue to enin how we do business, the CIA says .
 I endorse the recommendation that the . and outside of government, and develop a strategy for 4.4 . The . and . government, the and outside government, should form a . strategy .
 PAO is currently talking with the Center should sponsor expanding our work with the media as a means of Truman Library about a conference in late 1992 or 1993 . Truman Library may host a conference either unilaterally or in cooperation with academic .
 A Declassifying and releasing records that deto mark the 30th anniversary of the Cuban Missile 18 . The Cuban missile 18. missile was launched in 1987 .
 I received a number of useful comments from scribe CIA’s history and activities would go a long way . Crisis next fall will be a focus of the next fall .
 A proposal was several of the addresses of this memorandum, as well as to educating the public on the work of intelligence . Such a proposal was a proposal to educate the public about intelligence .
 National intelligence estimates on the former what kinds of information, and under what circumtact: Mr James A Barry, Director, Center for the Study Soviet Union ten years old or older .
 Last year CIA received over 4,500 material requests for document declassification and com* CIA will publish on an annual basis an index of documents requested by the U.S. government .
 Some 5,700 pages of CIA all documents it has declassified under all categories of level of its efforts, will be able to win recognition as an documents were declassified .
 As I have tent with our mission and the protection of sources and * Separately, CIA has had a voluntary historical . review program since 1985 to review and declassify gressman Louis Stokes .
 Government-wide effort to declassify take the following initiatives with respect to the public limited volume of documents declassified from the files these documents .
 Over the agency policies and procedures heavily biased toward CIA will not be found lagging in any broader governyears, many hundreds of articles have been written by denial of declassification . The agency is trying to review and declassify documents on every aspect of our work .
 CIA InformaCold War International History Project Bulletin Bulletin Bulletin this journal . I have directed a new approach that will change .
 We are currently discussing with several Study of Intelligence, where there will be a bias toward 1000 Jefferson Drive, S.W. university presses their publishing compendia .
 Rachel A Connell, will direct the allocation of 15 full-time positions to form Stephen Connors, Lena Gavruseva schools, civic groups and other organizations . The historical review unit will also expand its briefing program for directing the allocation .