 The author's birth was an accident of the time of his birth . He says he was born in an accident at the age of 16 .
 "I was born about nine months, pretty close to nine months after the war in the Pacific ended with VJ Day," he says .
 "I was kind of conceived, as you might say, under the mushroom cloud, that’s the one up over Hiroshima and Nagasaki," she says . She says she was "conceived" by a mushroom cloud .
 "A number of our relatives were killed in the war. My father was in the Navy, saw combat, was at Normandy beach, also had some very dangerous assignments in the North Atlantic . My father saw combat and saw combat .
 World War II was a big deal and I’ll come back to that, and particularly the use of nuclear weapons, ending the war . I'll come back and talk about using nuclear weapons in the end of the war.
 "My parents were also charter members of something called the World Federalist Organization, United World Federalists, it was called. It was called . My parents were members of the U.S. Federalists .
 It was a highly idealistic movement, based not just in the United States but in other countries as well, to look at the possibility of, if not world government . The movement was then as now a kind of a fighting phrase, more about international cooperation .
 Mom and Dad were both very active in the Dayton branch of that organization in Dayton, Ohio which is where I lived in the first few years of my life .
 "I was very close to my parents, and as I got older they introduced me to Toynbee as a historian and the Saturday Review, and Norman Cousins, who was an advocate of world federalism and that kind of thing . And that loomed fairly large; I was very
 During that period, I can remember being very affected by some gruesome and poignant pictures in Life magazine that must have been when I was five or six years old. During that time, I was very affected .
 There was a cover story on the survivors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, many of them children . Many of them were children of course .
 "I had some sense that there were some pretty terrible things that had happened," she says . "There was some pretty horrible things that might happen including to me, my family, and my hometown," she adds .
 Nikita Khrushchev unleashed the Soviet Army on Budapest to crush the Hungarian Uprising in 1956 . When I was 10, which was in 1956, the name was big in my vocabulary because of the Soviet invasion .
 Hungarian freedom fighter was made the “Man of the Year” of Time magazine . Time magazine which is, of course, a periodical I worked for for 21 years in my career .
 Sputnik was the first step of the Soviet Union’s getting intercontinental missiles . Then there was the flight of Yuri Gagarin and we were behind the Soviets in space technology and all of that. And then came Sputnnik, which was also the .
 As a child, one thing after another in history just before I was born, history pointed me in a particular direction which is world peace and 2 the threats to world peace . The principal threat was Soviet communism, the principal threat being Soviet communism .
 In Cleveland, Ohio, where I was living and going to elementary school, were the drills for a nuclear attack . Then, let’s flash forward, and there is something pretty much anybody of my age and background would remember, certainly in . Ohio, which is where he was
 We had drills for a nuclear attack on Cleveland, Cleveland, and even as a kid I said I’m not sure that climbing under our desks was really going to help but okay, the teacher says that’s what we’re supposed to do . Even as a
 After that, he went off to a prep school in northwest Connecticut called the Hotchkiss School in Lakeville, Connecticut . After that he went on to attend a school in Connecticut .
 Every morning we had a chapel service, pretty every day, certainly every weekday. We had chapel services, pretty often every day. Every weekday. Every morning, we had chapel service .
 Paul Nitze, who was a graduate of Hotchkiss, was honored for his work in Kennedy administration .
 There was a holiday declared in his honor and he had been very much involved in what’s called NSC 68, which was kind of a blueprint for the Cold War . The holiday was declared in him honor .
 Russian literature, novels and poetry was a huge part of his life . He studied Russian literature at Hotchkiss and became infatuated with that to study .
 Khrushchev and his nuclear weapons and on the culturally-rich side, the beauty and richness of Russian culture . So now you had on the scary side, Khrushvic and his nukes, the culture of Russia .
 You’re talking both about the moment in time that you lived with the scary elements of Russian expansionism and so on and the culture of Russia . You're talking about how you lived in Russia with the terrifying elements of that time .
 Many of the great novels, most famously, War and Peace, are fictionalized history, but very good history . "War and Peace" is "a very good novel," says the author of the novel .
 "I also started reading some of the dissident literature that was coming out of the Soviet Union at that time," he says . "I started reading dissident material that came out of that time"
 Poets, sculptors and film directors who were doing stuff that was either right on the edge of permissible, or over the . edge of the permissible, in which case, they were usually in trouble .
 'I was kind of straddling the pre-Soviet cultural scene or origins of Russian civilization and the Soviet period which was the dark side. So, yes, yes I was . So, I was ... straddled the pre and Soviet cultural scene .
 By the time I left Hotchkiss I had two years of Russian language under my belt . I went to Yale where I signed up for a major in what was called Russian Studies .
 "Russia was my thing. I was on the newspaper and that kind of thing," he says . "But Russia was my Russia," he adds . "I was on a newspaper and ... but Russia was always my thing"
 The lens through which the professors viewed Russia/Soviet actions was the Soviet Union's actions . But in terms of the view of Russia, the lens was through which they viewed the Soviet actions .
 "Most of the political ferment on the campus in those days was indirectly connected to Russia but only indirectly," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Most of the politics on campus was directly related to Russia, but not directly .
 There were two big issues that energized the political consciences of my generation and it was the Civil Rights Movement and the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was one of the biggest issues that galvanized my generation .
 Vietnam War was a kind of offshoot of the Cold War . Now on the Vietnam War, of course, it was a sort of Cold War offshoot . CNN's John Sutter talks about the war .
 Many of us, largely because of teachers, said this is a nationalist revolution . "Many of us ... understood with much more subtlety and accuracy the sociology and the political culture and the history of the Indochina nations, particularly Vietnam, to say this . particularly Vietnam."
 Communists are communists, but they're not going to take orders from Moscow or Beijing . They’re communists, they say, but won’t take their orders from Russia or China .
 There were other places in the U.S. where professors took the view all movements that called themselves communist were part of a monolithic threat . Because of the view, there were some professors who thought all communist movements were a threat to the nation .
 Brad Westerfield’s point was that there wasn’t quite such an iron grip of liberalism on the campus of U.S. colleges in the heartland of America, he says .
 Didn't have to burn a draft card because I had an official medical exemption from the draft but a whole lot of my counterparts didn't . Didn’t have to be drafted because of a medical exemption, but a lot of his counterparts did .
 A number of my classmates went to Vietnam and several of them were killed . Several of them died in Vietnam, including several who were killed by the war .
 After Yale, I was the editor of the newspaper in my last year, and I editorialized against the war, editorialized in favor of the “Dump Johnson” movement . So then after Yale, and he was editor of this year, he was editorializing against the
 The Soviets snuffed out Dubcek reforms and all of that, and I spent most of that summer going out to talk to people like Isaiah Berlin, and otherwise heads, who were trying to understand the Soviet mind . And that was the summer when the Soviets rolled into Prague and sn
 The CIA had its eye on what was going on in Sofia, Bulgaria, where there was a youth festival, no doubt under… paid for and supervised by various intelligence services, including the CIA .
 Time's first look behind the Iron Curtain was in the summer of ’69 . Time's Moscow bureau was actually a much more serious job. But that was my first look .
 There, the bureau chief put me in charge of the bureau and then took a long vacation which he was well entitled to . There, he said, "there, he was put in charge and then taken a long . vacation"
 It was a great experience for me because it allowed me to cover stories including what was very, particularly in retrospect, a very important event which was a brief but serious war between the Soviet Union and China along China's northern border .
 There are two rivers that come together, the Amur and the Ussuri rivers and there was a fight over Damansky Island and people were killed and it was a real war . That was a sign of what many had long thought -that the relationship between the USSR and the People
 Kissinger-Nixon concepts of détente with the Soviet Union and rapprochement with China led to Kissinger's ideas . Kissinger's concepts led to the idea of denteente with Russia and China, which led to a dente with China .
 Another major debate going on throughout this time was the strength of the Soviet economy, and the value of the ruble and whether we had properly measured the strength . The debate was over whether we should have used the Soviet ruble to measure the strength and value .
 There were lots of arguments over the question of how long the USSR could survive with an inefficient, centrally planned economy . The USSR could not survive with a centrally-planned economy .
 "I want to get to some key personalities and come back to that issue later," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Time bureau chief, Gerald Schecter, still a dear friend, lives three miles from here . The Time Bureau chief, who is still a friend, still lives in New York City .
 He gave me a small booklet by a dissident Soviet historian and asked me if I would please put it into English which I thought was a pretty big pain in the butt but I sat down and put it in English . He said he thought it was a "pain in the ass"
 CNN's John Sutter says he was already dealing with the Khrushchev family and memoirs . "It turned out that that was a little test for me," he says . Sutter: "It was a test for him because he had already dealt with the family and the memoir
 Khrushchev was under house arrest and there were some friends of the family who wanted to get his dictated memoirs out to the West . The memoirs were dictated to the Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev memoirs were translated into English by Gerald Schecter . The memoirs ended up being two volumes, two 5 big volumes and then a smaller volume later on which goes to Khrushchechev .
 Time magazine was sent to Belgrade, then the capital of Yugoslavia, in the 1990s . Time was Time magazine's headquarters in the city of Belgrade .
 Ironically, I was moved there because they thought that Tito was about to die . Ironically, Tito died shortly after Tito's death, but Tito survived .
 "He outlasted me by 10 years but I did get to know the Balkans very well and Eastern Europe very well," he says . "I got to know him very well, but he outlasted him by ten years"
 The only countries I couldn’t get to were East Germany and Albania but all the others I saw a lot of and my wife was with me. East Germany was the only country I couldn't get to. I was with my wife when I went to East Germany .
 Khrushchev in the meantime had died and we got a whole additional tranche of tapes to be transcribed and translated so I went back and did a second version of the tapes . We traveled a lot and it was a great two years and then it became… Khrushvic in
 Time sent me to Eastern Europe was to prepare me to be the Moscow bureau chief and the Moscow correspondent . Time had sent me in Eastern Europe to prepare myself for the job . Time sent him to Moscow to prepare him to be a Moscow correspondent and bureau chief .
 I was three years at Oxford and working on the second volume of… No. No, no. No. no. I was working on a book at Oxford, I was at Oxford . I was a student at the University of Oxford .
 We didn’t get the second volume until a little later while I was still in Eastern Europe . The second volume was released later in the 1990s . We didn't get the first volume until we were in eastern Europe .
 The Russians, the Soviets, weren’t pleased with the publication of the first volume but they could claim well, it’s a CIA forgery . People in the West said it was a KGB forgery, but we couldn't really prove its authenticity until we shared with
 The Kremlin PNG'd me. We don’t have as many constraints so we kind of shoved it in the face of the critics and the skeptics . That really set off the Kremlin and they PNG' me. "We don't have as much constraints so ... shoved it"
 Instead of going to Moscow, I went to Washington which is where I’ve lived ever since basically . So I couldn’t go on to Moscow and instead of . going to . Moscow, he said, "I've lived in Washington since basically basically basically."
 This now gets into the… slowly but surely, I’m getting towards the State Department. This is slowly but slowly, I'm getting towards State Department . This is not the first time I've heard from the White House .
 I was the junior State Department correspondent in the Washington bureau of Time . I was a junior State Dept. correspondent in Washington .
 The same guy, Gerald Schecter, who had allowed me to take on the Khrushchev project, was the diplomatic correspondent for Time, diplomatic editor he was actually called, and he let me go with Kissinger .
 The reason he let me go is because Kissinger was going to take about a nine-stop trip, nine countries, and the first one was Moscow . The first stop was Moscow so it would be a chance for me to go as a correspondent to Moscow, he says . He says Kissinger
 Half-way across the Atlantic, Gromyko who was the foreign minister, sends a cable to the plane saying, Talbott is not allowed in . Talbott was the last person to be allowed in the plane .
 I think I was finally allowed back into the Soviet Union in ’79 during their invasion of Afghanistan . So that was ’74, he says, "74,’74," and ‘79, when he was allowed back .
 Russia still let me come in and take a trip through Central Asia which was great and that put me back on the track for being able to go back to Russia . Believe it or not, even though they had invaded Afghanistan, they still allowed me to come in . Russia let me go
 Khrushchev called after he was elected president and said I’m coming to Washington and he’d like to talk to you . So I was expanding my portfolio of expertise, as it were, and I stayed a time right up until a guy that I had shared a
 President Barack Obama asked Obama to be his ambassador to Moscow . Obama said he wanted to be the ambassador to Russia . He said: "I said great and I went over to his hotel"
 I said I’d love it but I can’t because my wife has got a job and my kids are in school, he said, “Well, okay, too bad.” He said he'd love it, but he can't because his wife has
 Warren Christopher called in 1993-94 to reorganize the European Bureau to deal with the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union . Christopher: "Would you please come over to the State Department and be my person?" Christopher says .
 When the coke bottle stopped spinning, it was pointing at me and that’s why I was deputy secretary of state for seven years . There was a scramble to get somebody else in and that's why, she says .
 Soviet Union was changing rapidly under Gorbachev and Yeltsin, he says . He says he was deputy secretary of the Soviet Union in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The Soviet Union was a 'giantuan world-changing change' in the Soviet Union itself, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Andropov who had followed Brezhnev. had followed him, he says . I wouldn’t say that I particularly had acute revelations on things that were changing, he adds .
 Andropov was the Soviet ambassador to Hungary when Khrushchev sent in the tanks and he was the head of the KGB so he wasn’t kind of an obvious good guy . He was the KGB head, and he had been the Soviet Ambassador to Hungary .
 At least, he was realistic about the shortcomings, if not the fatal flaws, in the Soviet system . These included the issues about the economy you mentioned earlier, he writes .
 Andropov had already decided that he was going to have Gorbachev succeed him but his health didn’t allow him to stay on the planet for very long . There was another intervening head of the Politburo named Chernenko who died within a year and then came Gor
 "You’d have to be blind and deaf and lobotomized not to know that things were changing very fast and very profoundly," he says . "I was going back and forth a lot during that period," he adds .
 Reagan administration was more skeptical than others in the Reagan administration . So, now you know some people were more skeptical .
 Reagan himself was an early believer in that authenticity of Gorbachev’s vision that the Soviet Union was going to have to change profoundly including giving up violence at home and definitely the use of violence to intimidate and dominate his neighbors .
 And, course, those two things together meant that we’re talking about a 7 whole new Soviet Union . And, of course, that’s a 7-year-old Soviet Union. And, as a result, the Soviet Union was created .
 I assume people interested in my own view and participation in policymaking can read a book that I’ve spent quite a bit of time on. Didn’t remain the Soviet Union very long; that’s a whole other story .
 Deputy Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was deputy secretary of state in 1994 . Clinton made the post in 1994, Clinton says . Clinton: "We’ve now reached the point where you move from solely former Soviet region to broader responsibilities"
 President Clinton needed help with the other policies that he was developing throughout the world, he says . President Clinton also needed help in developing other policies, he adds .
 Tim Wirth was brought on board as the first Undersecretary for G, or global issues, as it was then called . Tim was brought in by the government as a senior minister in the 1990s .
 He was passionate about global issues, particularly climate change, women’s empowerment, and proliferation although that was more in Lynn Davis’ area (Under Secretary for Arms Control and International Security Affairs) but yes, there was a lot of stuff .
 "Vatally important" was reorganizing, "working effectively with colleagues in the Department and in other parts of the government," he says . "That would not have possible without two things. That would have been possible"
 "I don’t mind saying that a lot of people who were careful to defer to me or not give me too hard a time, is because they thought I was talking to the president every day," he says . "I wasn”
 "That’s not how it works but I mean I did stay in touch with him and I’m an early to bed guy," he said . "I’d like to see him go to bed. He’re not an early bed guy. That
 The White House operator came on and said the president would like to speak to you. You know I would always have to have a notebook next to the phone . I've had to turn it over like that when the White House .
 "I didn’t waste a lot of time disabusing people that I had a connection with the president," she says . "It was intermittent, but it was there and it helped"
 I was scrupulous, if I can put it that way, to make sure that both Secretary Christopher and Secretary Albright always knew when the president called me . I can't remember a time when I put in a call directly to him, although it's possible I did at some point
 President Obama would call the president if he called, and the first thing he would do the next morning was answer to the call . "If he called me, I took the call," he said .
 President Obama said he would always tell people what he said so they were always in the loop. Here’s what he says; here’re what I said; here's what I say .
 President Obama says he and his national security advisor were "wired into each other's brains" The former White House deputy national security adviser says he was "wired" into the system .
 "We would talk sometimes six times during the course of a day wherever we were," he says . "I would talk about six times a day," he adds .
 I mean we were always talking and what he allowed me to do, not very many people in that position would do this, he said . "Not very few people would do that," he said of the chair of an interagency committee for two, three, four issues .
 The Balkan Wars and the Balkan peace which was getting Russia to help us persuade Milošević to throw in the towel so we had an interagency group on that . The Balkans were at least this aspect of this aspect, the Balkans War .
 The Indian government set off a nuclear weapon in May of 1999, we set up yet another one of these things. And then when the Indian government . The U.S. set up a nuclear plant in 1999, it set up another one in 1999 .
 It was an interagency group of the sort that is almost always run directly in the White House . The White House was very involved in it. It was the sort of group that almost always runs directly in .
 Nick Burns was at the White House at the time, working with President Obama on Russia . Burns was also working with Obama on the matter of Ukraine .
 Bruce Riedel was working with me from the White House on the South Asia nuclear issue and so forth and so on. He was also working with President Obama on the issue of South Asian nuclear issues .
 "It worked because there was trust, there was transparency, constant gut checking with each other," she said . "There were constant gut checks," she added .
 I’m sure there have been in other examples or other models of this kind in other administrations but I haven’t studied them all that closely closely . I'm sure there are other examples of this sort of model in other Administrations but I'm not sure if there have
 TALBOTT: It was remarkable because typically turf, if nothing else, causes NSC members to be at least hesitant about granting that . TALKALKOWOW: "It was remarkable," he said .
 Trust Q: Trust and organizational development that was unique at least at least in all of those first years . Trust and organization development was unique in the first five years of the presidency .
 When Madeleine took over from Chris, she had her own MO and her own priorities but she was very comfortable with this as long as, which I always did, kept her in the loop in most of what I did . I was a subcabinet officer at the critical
 The transition from outside to inside government helped him learn a lot, he says . "The fact that I had spent two decades essentially peeking through the keyhole of government operations, helped me learn a little," he adds .
 State Department was the State Department's longest assignment, covering the Defense Department, CIA, and the NSC . "I felt I had some acquaintance with its operations before I came on board," he says .
 "I felt like I was in a Bill Murray out-of-body comedy. Nevertheless, when I first got the job, I said “Oh man, this is really terrifying” and I felt like it was really terrifying,” he said .
 "We're going to reveal to you how it's done. That lasted about two days because it’s not as though there is a secret, magic recipe book that says now you’re in the government; now we’ve got a secret recipe book . That
 There's a lot of stuff that's secret but it's common sense and common sense, he says . I mean there’s a . lot of secret stuff that is secret, but common sense . He says he knew a few of the people.
 In fact, early on, like when I was confirmed in April of 1993, and when I started going into these meetings, and particularly later . I would see people in the . room who used to leak to me when I . was a reporter, he says .
 "I would usually go over afterwards or see them in the hallway and say, “Don’t worry.” "Don't worry. And I would always go over afterward," she says. "Don”
 The work did not change dramatically because the president was the same. The work didn't change dramatically, says President Obama .
 Madeleine Albright had a very good relationship with the president, she knew that she had a longer one and that it was working . "She knew that I had a long one," she said .
 I did become more involved in other areas of the world such as India, India. But regarding my work I became more involved with my work in India, I said .
 Madeleine was very, very deep into Russia stuff, much more so than Christopher . Christopher was also very deep in Russia, much of so than Madelein .
 Former Russian President Boris Yeltsin says he and his wife used Russian in meetings with Primakov, Primakov and Yeltsins . He says they used Russian to communicate with the Russian leader .
 On India she never got really into it because she was so busy with Iraq, the Arab-Israeli peace process and so she said, “Go fix India. Go fix India”
 Also, I would like to add Dick Holbrooke’s name to come up in this interview if that's okay,’ says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: ‘I would like the interview to be more interesting than just a few minutes of
 He had done many different things and continued to do all of them rather well, he said . He said: "He had done . Many different things - all the different things he had done rather well"
 "Please go right ahead. Of course, at that moment he was doing Dayton and the resolution of the post Yugoslavia," he says . "Of course, I was ... but please go right now," he adds .
 "I got quite deep into that not least because Dick was a very, very close friend going back to 1977," he says . "Dick was a friend going to 1977. Well, he says. Dick was very close to me," he adds .
 Jimmy Carter was Jimmy Carter’s assistant secretary of state for East Asia . He had known him a little bit before .
 "I had lived for two years in Belgrade, which we were ultimately going to be bombing, and knew the ethnic complexities of the region" "We were very close as worked on the breakdown of Yugoslavia," she says .
 There are a whole bunch of books on this, and there will be more, but one that we put together, called The Unquiet American, makes this very clear . There will be a lot more books on the topic .
 Holbrooke had a lot of rough stuff but it was always based on respect and real love and working with him, he says . Warren Christopher was not hugely enamored of his style, let’s put it that way .
 Former Secretary of State George W. Bush brought him back to be the assistant secretary of state for Europe and the point man on the Balkans . The success that we had is overwhelmingly to his credit, he says .
 India’s relationship with Pakistan is a key part of the whole subcontinent, says CNN's John Sutter . He says when talking about India, you’re talking about Pakistan, you're talking about the sub-continent .
 India set off an underground explosion in May of 1974 . The explosion took place in the country's capital, New Delhi .
 After that, it was just getting cold. Wow and after that, did you continue to try to develop further U.S. relations with India? It was getting cold .
 "I developed one of the most important and gratifying friendships of my life with my Indian counterpart whose name is Jaswant Singh," he says . "Jaswant Singh" is the Indian counterpart of the British Prime Minister .
 The main point was supposed to be us, the U.S., persuading India to join the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty . The treaty is intended to impede, if not prevent, the proliferation of nuclear weapons . CNN's John Sutter says the treaty should be aimed at bringing India closer
 "What we succeeded in doing was not even really part of our original charge," he says . "But what we succeeded to do was not actually part of the original charge. But what we succeed in doing is not really what it was intended to do."
 "What we succeeded in doing was building trust between the two nations so that in '98, it was May of ’98 that they set off their test," he said . "What I said it was ‘98’98, I said . It was '98�
 In ’99, there was a crisis in the Himalayas between Pakistan and India . In '99, the crisis in '99 was between Pakistan, India and Pakistan .
 The snows began to melt and there were unmanned outposts up near Kargil . Unmanned outposts were set up near a town called Kargill .
 Pakistanis crossed the so-called line of control, the ceasefire line and took up positions in what were Indian installations . The Pakistanis came in and crossed the . line of . control, he said . "That was really hairy," he said of the incident .
 There are plenty of second and third acts in Pakistani politics . Nawaz Sharif was once again the prime minister of Pakistan, once again .
 He came to Washington to plead with Clinton to push the Indians back and let the Pakistanis keep this territory . Bill Clinton was absolutely adamant and made absolutely sure that the Indians knew .
 He muscled Nawaz Sharif to give an order to pull back the troops, the Pakistani troops that were on the wrong side of the border, or on the border . It didn’t help his career because he was overthrown in a coup and almost hanged but he’
 Clinton was talking to Vajpayee who was the Indian prime minister at the time . But I think that was a real turning point for the Indians and Clinton was there .
 I think I was for six years the American chairman of something called the Minsk Group which was dealing with NagornoKarabakh . "It’s only worth a sentence or two even though it was six years, because we never got anywhere," he says .
 We came very close with a prime minister named Sargsian or Sarkissian, who was prepared, I think, to make a land swap with the Azerbaijanis .
 Armenia would cede to Azerbaijan a sliver of Armenia down at the 12 bottom so that there could be a land bridge between Azerbaijan proper and Nakhichevan . In exchange the Lachin corridor would be made Armenian territory so that you would connect Armenia with the wild .
 He was assassinated just before we were going to finalize that and I’m quite sure that’s why he was assassinated. But he was . Quite sure that's why he . was assassinated, he said .
 "I did a little bit of stuff in Latin America mostly around Haiti and also our efforts to bring peace to some of the Central American countries," he says . "Now I did a lot of stuff around Haiti," he adds .
 Deputy: Resourcing the Department, everything from personnel to making the case for congressional funding . Resourcing is a big part of the job, including personnel, personnel .
 Republicans were particularly difficult when the Republicans had control of the Congress, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 "Most of my appearances before Senate and House committees were very rough, very politicized," he says . Most of his appearances before congressional committees were rough and politicized, he adds .
 The offset was, first of all, I had terrific help from what I guess is still called H, the legislative affairs office in the State Department . I did have good relations in private with a number of members of Congress even though publicly they would use the klieg lights and microphones
 My only real personnel responsibility for the seven years was the D committee . Tom Pickering would have done a lot of that kind of thing and of course Pat Kennedy were always looking out for the resourcing side of things .
 Final exam question: Looking back, what would you say was the major contribution of the Clinton Administration to U.S. foreign policy?
 Clinton did a lot to strengthen the institutional and rule-based structures that help govern international relations . Clinton helped him do a lot with regard to the sort of macro approach of the Clinton administration to the world, he says .
 We worked to put in place, or reinforce, an overlapping set of rules and multilateral arrangements and institutions to deal with the world as a whole . We worked with the UN to create a framework for the future of the U.N.
 ADST offers a look back at U.S. diplomacy as the longest serving deputy secretary of state . ADST: "On behalf of ADST, thanks for your time and a very interesting look back"