 This addendum consists of 14 pages . NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 HISTORY P1 SEPTEMBER 2019 ADDENDUM . This addamam consists of . 14 pages.
 As early as 1956 Nikita Khrushchev began hinting that the Soviet Union might be interested in an end to the Cold War . The Soviet Union may have been interested in ending its Cold War with the West .
 The United States, however dismissed these overtures as propaganda, and its policy toward the Soviet Union hardened . The U.S. continued to reject the overtures, but its policy against the USSR hardened .
 Cuba overthrew the island’s dictator in 1959 and established a communist government . The small island of Cuba is about 90 miles south of the United States .
 The Cuban revolution had local origins and initially Cuba was linked neither to the U.S. nor to the Soviet Union . Initially Cuba was not linked to the United States nor the Soviet Russia . The revolution was born in Cuba .
 The Cubans moved closer to the Soviet Union in the early 1950s . Economic considerations and the need for political protection soon moved the Cubans closer .
 The United States organised an economic boycott of Cuba by noncommunist countries and cut off sugar purchases from that country . The U.S. then organised a boycott of Cuban sugar purchases by non-communist nations . The boycott was led by the United States .
 In 1961 the USA supported the Bay of Pigs invasion, an unsuccessful effort by the American trained Cuban refugees to overrun the island . The US supported the unsuccessful effort to invade Cuba .
 The failure of the refugees’ invasion made Castro the hero of the communist world . Castro raised the hopes of communist revolutionaries throughout Latin America . Castro's failure to defeat the refugees' invasion made him a hero .
 That same year the Soviet Union sent missiles to Cuba, armed with atomic warheads . The missiles could be launched against the U.S. cities of the United States .
 Khrushchev was motivated by his belief that the Kennedy administration wanted to destroy the Castro regime . He was also motivated by the belief that he believed that the government wanted to kill Castro .
 The administration had launched an invasion of Cuba; followed that with sabotage, paramilitary assaults, and assassination attempts the largest clandestine operation in the history of the CIA . After all, the administration had organized large-scale military exercises in the Caribbean .
 The Soviets installed the missiles to deter ‘covert or overt United States attacks’ in the same way that the U.S. had shielded its allies under a nuclear umbrella to deter Soviet subversion or aggression against them .
 It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response . Sixth: Our resolution will call for prompt dismantling of all offensive weapons in Cuba
 "I call upon him further to abandon this course of world domination," he writes . "He withdraws these weapons from Cuba by refraining from any nation which will widen or deepen the present crisis," he says .
 This extract describes the reasons and nature of foreign involvement in the Angolan civil war from 1975 onwards . It also describes the nature and extent of foreign intervention in the civil war .
 The relationship between Cuba and the MPLA go way back to the mid-1960s . The MPLA was formed in Cuba in the 1960s . Cuba is now the only country in the world to have declared independence .
 Cuban instructors trained and infiltrated large numbers of MPLA combatants into northern Angola to carry out the armed struggle during the second half of the 1960s . Various accounts testify to growing cooperation .
 Cuba sent high ranking officers to the MPLA leadership to establish the nature of assistance they needed . On the eve of the Angolan independence in 1975, Cuba sent a high ranking officer to the leadership .
 The MPLA, FNLA and UNITA signed the Alvor Accords on 15 January 1975 . They stipulated the terms of the transitional government that the three movements were going to form on 31 January 1975.
 MPLA feared that an MPLA government in Angola would provide SWAPO guerrillas with military bases . It feared it would provide the guerillas with bases .
 American Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger, saw Angola as a morale booster for the USA . Kissinger had just suffered a humiliating defeat in Vietnam . Angola was a morale boost for the United States .
 He had hoped to demonstrate that the U.S. was at least able to drive the communists out of southern Africa .
 Similarly, the CIA supplied weapons to FNLA through Mobutu Sese Seko’s Zaire . The CIA supplied arms to the FNLA in Zaire through the same country .
 This was the Cold War and every inch of the globe had to be contested with the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was the dominant superpower in the world during the 1960s .
 They wanted to deny Angola to the Russians not just because of its oil, they said . Angola was denied access to the world's largest oil reserves by the Soviet Union .
 The prospect of a Russian naval base in Angola worried Washington . Angola has good harbours on the Atlantic seaboard opposite America .
 The presence of Cuban and Russian troops in Angola was also seen as a threat to South Africa . South Africa was also threatened by the presence of the Russian and Cuban forces in Angola .
 There was no doubt where America and Europe stood if they had to choose between Apartheid and communism in Southern Africa . There were no doubt in the eyes of the U.S. and Europe if they chose between the two sides .
 The main motive and tactic of the Americans was simply to bleed the Soviet Union by making its Angolan venture too expensive . The U.S. made Angolan ventures too expensive, the U.N. says .
 In practice that meant bleeding Angolan peasants, the main sufferers of the war that lasted more than forty years . The war was fought in Angola for more than 40 years and lasted for decades .
 The Angolan war was actually the continuation of a local historical conflict . Like many small civil wars of the Cold War period that appeared to be ideological, fought by proxies of the Marxist Soviet Union and the capitalist United States, the Angolan conflict was not ideological .
 A Marxist regime armed by the Soviet Union and protected by Cuban troops, is kept going by revenues from oil, extracted by American companies . U.S. companies, whose operations are attacked by American-backed socialist rebels .
 Angola was one of the most bizarre sideshows of the Cold War . Angola was a Cold War side show of sorts . It was also a murderous side of the war .
 It focuses on the fact finding mission of assistance to the MPLA during the Angolan civil war . The mission was part of a fact-finding mission during the civil war.
 We arrived in Luanda, Angola on Sunday August 3rd, and made contact with the MPLA who promptly took us to a hotel . The MPLA is the government of Angola .
 President Neto placed some of us in his home, and others at the residence of another comrade . Some of them were placed in the homes of two comrades, others at another . Neto sent to look for them, placing some of them at his home .
 During the first conversation with Neto we sent greetings in the name of Commander in Chief and the Minister of the Armed Forces, and gave him the present from the commander in Chief .
 The petition was formulated by the MPLA when they were visited by a delegation from our party and our government in the month of January . In the January visit they asked for material aid and preparations of troops in Cuba and Angola . That we came to visit the actual situation in order to properly
 The MPLA knew that the reactionaries and the imperialists would try all possible methods to avoid having the forces of the MPLA take power . This would mean having a progressive government in Angola, MPLA leader says .
 The film depicts the first phase of the Angolan Civil War . It depicts the involvement of the Soviet Union and Cuba in the first stage .
 This source explains the reasons that led to the emergence of the Black Power Movement in the U.S. in the 1960s . This source also explains why the movement was formed in the United States of America . SOURCE 3A: The reasons behind the movement were the reasons for the
 In 1964, the U.S. Congress passed a Civil Rights Act and a Voting Rights Act . In 1965, the voting rights act was passed in the United States .
 The Civil Rights Movement led to progress in gaining equality for black Americans . The new laws that were passed as a result of the movement led to racial equality .
 Not all African Americans were impressed with the Civil Rights Movement . But not all African American were impressed by the movement .
 African Americans still experienced racial discrimination, lower wages than whites and higher crime rates in inner city neighbourhoods . African Americans were still experiencing racial discrimination and lower wages .
 Many young African Americans wanted to speed up real social change, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Many young African American men want real change"
 By the mid-1960s, dissatisfaction with the pace of change was growing . The Black Power Movement arose out of this dissatisfaction . They saw the Civil Rights Movement as too mainstream, and unable to give blacks the same opportunities as whites .
 The Black Power Movement argued that in order to achieve genuine integration, blacks first had to unite in solidarity and become self-reliant . It argued that blacks had to be self-sufficient and unite to achieve integration .
 This meant freedom from white authority in both economics and politics . This was freedom from authority from both the government and the public .
 The political philosophy of Black Nationalism only means that the black man should control the politics and the politicians in his own community . "The political program of re-education to open our people’s eyes, make us become more politically conscious, politically mature," he said .
 It’s not so good to refer to what you’re going to do as a sit-in . An old woman can sit. An old women can sit, says the BBC's former Labour leader .
 President Obama says it's time today for us to start doing some standing, and some fighting to back that up . "You and I have been sitting long enough, and it is time today," he says .
 Don't use the word freedom in your vocabulary. And if you’re not ready to pay that price don’t use it . Don't pay the price of using the term freedom in the media .
 The free breakfast for schoolchildren program was set up in Berkeley, California, in 1968 . Bobby Seale and Huey P Newton set up the program in Berkeley .
 It was the first significant community program organized by the Panthers, and perhaps the most well-known . The Panthers' first community program was organized in 1968 .
 By the end of 1969, free breakfast was served in 19 cities, under the sponsorship of the national headquarters and 23 local affiliates . Free breakfast was also served in 23 affiliates, under sponsorship by national headquarters .
 More than 20,000 children received free breakfast (bread, bacon, eggs, grits) before going to their elementary or junior high school . The clinics were called People’s Free Medical Centres and eventually were established in 13 cities across the country .
 Some clinics were in storefronts, others in trailers or hastily built structures, and most did not last long . Some of the clinics are now located in California .
 Services offered services such as testing for high blood pressure, lead poisoning, tuberculosis and diabetes . But they also offered screenings for cancer detection screenings, physical exams and immunizations .
 Nelson reports that many of the women and men involved in the PFMCs went on to become credentialed health care professionals . Nelson: Many of the people involved with the PMCs have gone on to be a health care professional .