 The background to the crisis was the establishment in Cuba of a revolutionary government led by Fidel Castro . The situation in Cuba was the birth of a new government in 1959 .
 Castro's left wing policies led to conflict with the U.S. and alliance with the Soviet Union . Castro was one of the most prominent figures in Cuba's history . Castro's policies led him to the presidency .
 In April 1961, the United States backed an invasion of Cuba by anti-Castro Cuban exiles . The U.S. backed the invasion, which began in 1961, in Cuba . The invasion took place in April 1961 .
 Castro asked Soviet leader Khrushchev to provide forces to defend Cuba . However, the U.S. was expected to try again .
 The Soviet Union knew the the the U.S. had far more long-range missiles . The United States also had shorter range missiles stationed close to the Soviet border in Turkey .
 Photographs taken by U2 spy-plane reveal Soviet missile bases in Cuba . By installing its own nuclear missiles, the Soviet Union could defend the Cuban revolutionaries and redress the nuclear balance .
 After a week of intense debate within the United States leadership, President Kennedy made a public statement revealing the existence of the missile bases . President Kennedy called for the missiles' immediate withdrawal from the bases .
 Khrushchev announced a naval blockade of Cuba to stop delivery of any further Soviet military supplies . Kennedy announced the blockade to avoid a nuclear war with the Soviet Union . Both sides wanted to avoid war .
 The two sides came perilously close to conflict at sea, and one U.S. aircraft was shot down over Cuba . A face-saving solution was found in private .
 A ""hotline"" was set up for emergency communication between the White House and the Kremlin . The Soviet Union would withdraw its missiles from Cuba and the United States would withdraw missiles from Turkey . The United States promised not to invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev was harshly criticized within the Soviet leadership for having taken such risks . He was criticized for taking such risks during his time in Soviet leadership .