 President Kennedy was informed that the Soviet Union had secretly delivered nuclear missiles to Cuba, capable of obliterating Washington just 15 minutes after launch .
 The world came closer than ever before -or since -to nuclear war . Thus began the famous ""13 days"" during which the world came close to nuclear war.
 Khrushchev had also sent 98 tactical nuclear warheads to Cuba . The warheads were capable of destroying an American invading force and the U.S. naval base at Guantánamo Bay .
 In addition to providing context for the events, I'm live-tweeting the events leading up to those 13 fateful days at @missilecrisis62 .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove his missiles from Cuba, but only after receiving a non-invasion pledge from Kennedy and a promise to remove U.S. nuclear missiles from Turkey . Kennedy also promised to remove United States nukes from Turkey and remove Cuba missiles .
 Before stepping back from the brink, the two leaders unleashed a chain of unpredictable events, culminating in the shoot-down of an American U-2 spy plane over Cuba . The two leaders stepped back from brink, before stepping back .
 As we enter October, the photos offer a comprehensive, day-by-day breakdown of events as Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro hurtled toward the Cuban missile crisis .
 Kennedy signed the order for the naval blockade of Cuba on Oct. 22, 1962, in the White House .
 The Soviet cargo ship Indigirka docked in the port of Mariel, Cuba, with the first shipment of nuclear warheads to arrive on the island . On Oct. 31, the ship docked with a shipment of warheads to Cuba .
 The ship was carrying six atom bombs, 36 warheads for long-range R-12 missiles . A further 36 warheads were carried for short-range FKR missiles .
 Robert ""Bobby"" Kennedy, the president's brother and the U.S. attorney general, calls for ""considerably more sabotage"" against Cuba . While chairing a meeting of the CIA Cuban covert operations group -called the Operation Mongoose committee - in Washington .
 CIA considers plans for the mining of Cuban harbor and capture of Cuban forces . CIA decides to consider plans to capture and interrogate Cuban forces in Cuban harbor .
 At Kennedy's instruction, the U.S. Air Force builds mock-ups of Soviet SA-2 missile launchers to prepare pilots for bombing runs .
 Oct. Oct., 1962 was the first of the ""thirteen days"" - the crucial fortnight at the heart of the Cuban missile crisis . Oct. October, 1962 was a crucial fortnight for the U.S. government .
 President Kennedy is informed by National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy of 'hard photographic evidence' showing Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . From here, we'll go into the events of each day in closer detail .
 Khrushchev calls the premier of the Soviet Union an ""immoral gangster"" to his brother Robert Kennedy . He later telephones Republican lawyer John McCloy, who advises him to take forceful action to remove missiles .
 President Kennedy briefs Robert Kennedy on the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy also claims that the Cuban government has leaked any information regarding Soviet action in Cuba without Soviet permission .
 Kennedy then orders a meeting of 14 advisors, forming the group that becomes known as ExComm . ExComm is the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The group is known as "ExComm" - the Executive Council .
 ExComm meet for the first time and are shown photos of the missiles . ExComm then meet with ExComm and meet again to discuss the missile project .
 CIA estimates that Soviet MRBMs could explode over Washington in 13 minutes if armed and ready to fire . The group is informed that the CIA . estimates that the . CIA estimates . that the U.S. would be able to launch an attack on Washington in just 13 minutes .
 The briefing board used by the CIA to show the range of missiles on Cuba can be found here .
 Defence Secretary McNamara suggests that the nuclear warheads required are not yet present on Cuba so the missiles couldn't be fired immediately . However, McNamara suggest that the nukes are not currently available on Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff had been adamant that the military threat from Cuban was ""so serious"" that the missiles must be ""taken out"" by air strikes .
 ExComm orders six further surveillance flights over Cuba, which are carried out over the course of the day . Robert Kennedy expresses his brother's dissatisfaction with Operation Mongoose .
 President Kennedy tells Mongoose operational team they will meet at 9.30am every morning until further notice . All missiles on Cuba will be operational in two weeks, with individual missiles ready sooner .
 Kennedy thinks that Soviet action is intended as both a ""psychological"" and political threat to the United States as well as being defensive . Kennedy believes that Soviet actions are intended to be both a psychological threat and a defensive threat .
 Adlai Stevenson warns President Kennedy that he can't negotiate with a ""gun at our head" and should be prepared to compromise with the Soviets over U.S. missiles in Turkey and Britain . The debate heats up over whether to launch an air strike at Cuba .
 In a memo to the president, John McCone, the director of the CIA, states that he thinks Soviet deployment of missiles to Cuba should be seen as an attempt to establish a ""trading position" that would force the U.S. into removing their own overseas missile bases .
 He advocates instead that the United States implement a naval blockade of the island . He says the U.S. should implement a blockade of Cuba .
 The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff propose to remove the missiles using 3,000 air strikes against Cuba over five days . However, members of ExComm express concern that a blockade of Cuba might lead to Soviet counteractions . The U.S. Joint Chiefs' conference room, known as
 On Oct. 30, the Joint Chiefs of Staff met to discuss what to do about Cuba . Air Force Chief Gen. Gen. John Defterios: "The U.S. is going nowhere to go to Cuba"
 Curtis LeMay frustrated by lack of progress in deciding what to do with missiles in Cuba . LeMay becomes frustrated by the lack of a decision on Cuba's missiles in the country .
 USSR Minister of Foreign Affairs Andrei Gromyko meets with President Kennedy and accuses him of ""pestering" Cuba . Acheson, however, dismisses the analogy as ""silly"" and advises an airstrike .
 Kennedy requests the preparation of a brief to establish the legal basis of such a blockade . Kennedy subsequently requests the . preparation of . a brief .
 ExComm is presented with the first in a daily series of ""joint evaluations" from the CIA . ExComm also told that nuclear warheads could now be available in Cuba . MRBMs in Cuba could probably be launched in 18 hours .
 Over the course of the meeting, ExComm's original consensus to a naval blockade breaks down . ExComm: The original consensus on a naval blockage breaks down.
 The group splits and begins developing plans for both a blockade and a military airstrike to present to the president . Instead of a military strike, the group develops plans to present the president with their plans .
 CIA identifies three different medium range missile sites on the island with eight missile launchers each . CIA has now identified three different sites with eight missiles each with eight launchers . President Kennedy meets with Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 The Army, Air Force, and Navy chiefs favor an invasion of Cuba . Army chief Maxwell Taylor only wants to prepare at this stage .
 Kennedy is hesitant to take firm military action, predicting that a U.S. attack on Cuba would cause the Soviet Union to retaliate with an attack on Berlin . However, Kennedy is reluctant to take military action .
 Air Force Chief LeMay disagrees with the president, stating that a lack of firm action by the U.S. would ""lead straight into war,"" and compares it with the appeasement of the Nazis in Munich .
 After the president leaves the meeting, the head of the Marine Corps meets with the president . The president is expected to make a speech at the end of the meeting .
 David Shoup states that Kennedy's caution will leave them all ""screwed"" and that they should settle matters with ""that little pipsqueak of a place"" for good . Shoup writes that Kennedy will leave all of his friends "screwing"
 ExComm meets again, with members increasingly supportive of the idea of a blockade on Cuba . Joint Chiefs state that they are willing to accept a 24-hour delay in attacking Cuba in order to inform allies . However, they record it as a ""dry cargo"" ship of little importance -
 Morning Pierre Salinger, the press secretary for the White House, is informed of the crisis for the first time . Morning Pierre . Salinger: "The White House is in full control of the situation"
 Plans for the blockade are outlined -approaching ships will be signalled to stop for inspection . Approaching ships are signalled for inspection and will be stopped for inspection by ships .
 The White House realizes that the press is beginning to piece together information .
 U.S. Marines began evacuating civilians from Guantanamo Bay Naval base, with 2,810 women and children leaving by warship and plane . In Moscow, reports of unusual activity in Washington reach Premier Khrushchev .
 Khrushchev is concerned that this could trigger nuclear war . However, this alarms him, who is concerned it could trigger a nuclear war with Russia .
 The United States plans for a quarantine of Cuba are outlined . The name was changed from ""blockade,"" as it was thought it sounded less aggressive .
 All aircraft are armed with nuclear weapons for the first time in history . Seventeen congressional leaders from both parties assemble at White House and briefed on crisis and quarantine plan .
 President Kennedy is privately furious at these negative reactions, exploding ""if they want this job, fuck 'em, they can have it" President Kennedy exploded, saying: "If they want to this job ... they can't have it. They can have"
 He then increased alert levels for Soviet troops and drafts a statement calling the quarantine "piracy" and accusing the U.S. government of pushing the world to war . However, he then increases alert levels to Soviet troops .
 The Kremlin orders General Issa Pliyev to increase combat readiness on Cuba in order to defeat the enemy, but not to use nuclear weapons . President Kennedy makes a televised statement to the nation, informing the public of the crisis .
 President Kennedy asks Khrushchev to show prudence on Oct. 11, 1962 . President Kennedy says he wants to prevent further escalation of Soviet Union's nuclear program .
 Some fear the presence of these submarines in Cuban waters will increase the risk of confrontation with the U.S. Navy if detected . They are concerned with the four Soviet Foxtrot submarines in the Atlantic .
 The Soviet ship Aleksandrovsk, which is carrying nuclear weapons, docks in La Isabel, Cuba . tactical warheads are unloaded and taken to cruise missile regiments at opposite ends of Cuba .
 Squadron Commander William Ecker and his wingman Bruce Wilhelmy fly over the missile site at San Cristobal and identify an unfinished nuclear bunker . The Squadron Commander and wingman identified the unfinished bunker .
 Other low-level reconnaissance planes photograph other missile sites such as Sagua La Grande shown above .
 The Soviet cargo ships Poltava, Okhotsk, Kasimov, and Kimovsk, heading for Cuba, all reverse course on Khrushchev's instructions . The ships were heading to Cuba .
 The first two were carrying seven R-14 missiles each, with the latter two carrying five missiles each . The latter two carried five R-15 missiles each with the first .
 It was originally unclear whether or not these ships were incoming or outgoing . It was then clarified that they are now heading away from Cuba .
 ExComm is informed that four Soviet submarines remain in the western Atlantic . ExComm also informed that 4 Soviet submarines are still in the Atlantic .
 Power makes an unauthorized address to SAC on open airwaves stating that they are ""ready to meet any emergencies,"" which was picked up by Soviet intelligence . Power makes unauthorized address on open-airwaves stating they are ready for emergencies .
 U.S. Marines plan for an invasion of Cuba with 120,000 troops . United States Marines plan to invade Cuba . The United States is planning to invade the island nation .
 Projected potential casualties in the first 10 days are estimated as being over 18,000, with 4,000 dead . Projected casualties are estimated to be 18,500, with over 4,500 dead .
 Soviet armed forces also placed on high alert -all military leave is cancelled and discharges are deferred indefinitely . Discharges are also deferred indefinitely indefinitely .
 Two saboteurs sent into Cuba by the CIA, Miguel Orozco and Pedro Vera, reach their destination - a ""break over tower"" between the Matahamre copper mine and the sea . Adlai Stevenson makes his case to the United Nations Security Council .
 Orozco places two bombs on the cables from the tower, which will then be carried to the copper mine in one direction, and to the Santa Lucia docks when the tramway starts in the morning . The bombs will be carried out in the direction of the mine and the docks .
 Vera attaches another bomb designed to bring the tower down and disrupt power to the mine . Vera attaches the bomb to the tower to bring it down . The bomb is designed to destroy the mine's power supply .
 Workers at the copper mine discover the bombs and dismantle them before they detonate . President Kennedy sent a message to Khrushchev stating that United States action and the quarantine of Cuba was entirely in response to Soviet deception .
 USS Essex and USS Gearing attempted to intercept the Soviet tanker Bucharest, but it is allowed to continue to Cuba . This is based on an overheard conversation with a journalist in Washington, who insinuated that he would soon be sent to Cuba to report .
 Secretary of Defense Dean Rusk authorizes the U.S. Navy to stop ""non-bloc ships"" and the stopping and boarding of the Soviet tanker Grozny . Meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff earlier in the day, the Secretary . Rusk authorized the United States
 The ship USS Kennedy approaches the Lebanese freighter Marucla and informs her crew that she will be boarded in the morning . Later in the day, the ship tells the crew that the crew of the freighter will board the ship in a similar manner .
 United States reconnaissance over Cuba photographs tactical short-range ""Luna" missiles . U.S. reconnaissance mission over Cuba photographed the missiles .
 The United States government had previously been unaware of their presence on the island . The U.S. government was unaware of the presence of the islanders .
 Adlai Stevenson shows intelligence photos of Soviet missiles to the United Nations Security Council . United States Navy surveillance photographs the Soviet submarine B-130 surfacing near quarantine line .
 Turkish government will reject removal of U.S. Jupiter missiles stationed in Turkey without nuclear substitution . Kennedy administration taunts Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin who refuses to confirm or deny knowledge of missiles .
 A United States guard patrolling Duluth Airport in Minnesota shoots at a figure scaling the fence and triggers the ""sabotage"" alarm . The intruder is later thought to be a bear . On Oct.03, a United States airstrike on Cuba is made .
 All nuclear armed planes are to take off as soon as possible . In response to the alarm, the Air Force begins ""flushing"" its interceptor force .
 Troops across the county think that war has broken out and scramble to prepare planes . Troops thought that war had broken out, scramble to scramble planes .
 The alarm is reversed and planes called back one minute from launch . The alarm was reversed and the planes were called back .
 All F-106 planes were armed with four missiles, one of which had a nuclear warhead . USS Kennedy successfully board the Marucla, a Lebanese freighter under USSR charter .
 All four Soviet submarines have now begun to pull back away from Cuba on orders from Moscow .
 Submarine B-36 is ordered to explore a sea passage between Grand Turk and Hispaniola .
 ExComm meets and is shown low-level reconnaissance photos that had been interpreted earlier in the day . It is spotted 80 miles east of Grand Turk by a United States Navy plane and goes into an emergency dive .
 These show a military encampment of Soviet troops on Cuba along with Luna missiles capable of destroying a U.S. invasion force . Luna missiles can destroy a United States invading force .
 An ABC News correspondent is invited to lunch by the KGB Washington station chief Aleksandr Feklisov . He presents him with an alternative to solving the crisis in Washington .
 Soviet Union dismantling missile bases on Cuba under U.N. supervision . Castro never to accept offensive weapons of any kind, in exchange for U.S. promise not to invade Cuba .
 Feklisov suggests Scali contact his ""high level friends"" concerning this . Scali should contact his 'high-level friends' concerning this, he says . Fekisov suggests contacting Scali's 'high level' friends .
 Khrushchev suggests that Moscow will declare ships bound for Cuba as ""not carrying armaments"" if Washington pledges not to invade or support any invasion of Cuba . If U.S. does not attack Cuba, Moscow would declare ships not carrying arms if Washington does not invade . Khrush
 In Cuba, General Pliyev -head of Soviet forces on the island -tells Moscow that he expects a United States airstrike that night . He then begins dispersing nuclear warheads and begins to scatter warheads .
 A U-2 flight piloted by Captain Charles Maultsby takes off from Alaska to collect evidence of Soviet nuclear tests . He urges Khruschev to consider a nuclear strike against the United States .
 Khrushchev orders General Pliyev to ""not use nukes"" on Cuba without direct authorization from Moscow . Khrushchchev orders general Pliyov to "not use nukes on Cuba without direct authorization from Moscow .
 Khrushchev says he will withdraw Cuban missiles in exchange for Turkish ones . President Kennedy has not yet received this message . Kennedy was not yet aware of the exchange .
 A second message from Khrushchev subsequently begins to be received by the U.S. government . The United States requested that missiles in Cuba be swapped for those in Turkey .
 The Kennedy administration is informed that the Soviets have found the wreckage of a U-2 . Confused by the Northern Lights, the plane piloted by Maultsby in Alaska strays into Soviet airspace .
 As he crosses the border, six Soviet interceptor jets take off from Chukotka to shoot down the plane . The plane was shot down by the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 Picking up Russian folk music on his radio, Maultsby realizes that he is lost and calls for help . The film is based on the book, "Maultsby", which was released in March .
 Cuban anti-aircraft weapons fire upon the remaining four but they return unharmed . The remaining four return to the scene of the shooting . Cuban forces fire on the other four but return to their positions unharpered .
 Kennedy decides not to retaliate immediately, but agrees to attack surface-to-air missile sites if any more planes are shot down . Kennedy decides to attack the missile sites, but not immediately .
 ABC News correspondent Scali meets again with KGB head Feklisov to ask why Khrushchev's second message differs from the latter's proposal on the 26th . Scali later meets with Rusk at Rusk's request to explain the difference in the message .
 Feklisov claims that the introduction of Jupiter missiles in Turkey into the deal was the result of ""poor communications"" with Moscow . The deal was part of a deal between Russia and Turkey, according to the Russian president .
 Khrushchev begs Scali to report that there has been no treachery to ExComm -Scali reluctantly agrees to this . Khrushchen also states that he is waiting for reply from him at any minute . Scali reluctantly agreed to this as he was awaiting reply from Khrush
 This message attempts to negotiate his initial request of a U.S. non-invasion pledge in exchange for a declaration that Soviet ships are unarmed . This message is an attempt to negotiate an agreement to allow the Soviet ships to be armed .
 Kennedy also decides to send an oral message via Anatoly Dobrynin stating that if the missiles are not removed from Cuba, the U.S. will begin to take military action .
 Kennedy's letter, drafted earlier, is transmitted to Moscow and released directly to the press in an attempt to avoid communication delays . However, this message also contains an assurance that while no public or explicit deal will be made concerning the Jupiter missiles, they will be removed from Turkey if the Soviets
 Unbeknown to the rest of ExComm, Kennedy and Rusk begin preparing a contingency plan involving a public Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade . The plan would involve a public trade of missiles from Turkey for Cuba .
 He then sends a message to General Pliyev stating that ""We have taken a decision to dismantle the R-12 missiles and evacuate them"" and ordering the General to begin to implement this measure .
 The Soviet ship Grozny is ordered by Moscow not to challenge the blockade, and comes to a standstill just outside the quarantine zone . The ship is ordered to stay out of a quarantine zone and is ordered not to fight the blockade .
 He subsequently writes to Khrushchev stating that he considers their communications as ""firm undertakings"" to be ""promptly carried out"" by both governments . He then writes that both governments must carry out their communications .
 He orders that no more reconnaissance missions be flown over Cuba and that no further action be taken against Soviet ships . No further action was ordered against Soviet vessels .