 Conference marks the 40th anniversary of the most dangerous moment of the Cold War . U.S. naval officer dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear weapon in 1962 .
 U.S. intelligence only photographed 33 of the 42 SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles placed in Cuba . The nuclear warheads were never located, according to declassified documents .
 On 27 October, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba . Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended to President Kennedy that the U.S. proceed with an air strike and invasion plan .
 According to declassified documents, that day the crisis appeared to be spinning out of control . That day, the crisis appears to have been spinning out .
 The next day, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered the withdrawal of missiles from Cuba . U.S. photographic evidence and a naval blockade imposed on the island by President John F Kennedy .
 Kennedy aide and historian Arthur Schlesinger stated, ""This was not only the most dangerous moment of the Cold War, It was the most dangerous moment in human history" Kennedy aide said, "It was not just the worst moment of Cold War."
 Never before before had two contending powers possessed between them the technical capacity to blow up the world . Never before had a contending power capable of blowing up a world .
 President Kennedy's brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, met with the Soviet ambassador in Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin . The deal included a pledge not to invade Cuba and withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey .
 The destroyer USS Beale was dropping depth charges on the Soviet submarine B-59, one of four at the quarantine line, each carrying nuclear-tipped torpedoes . In the middle of the escalating tensions, the destroyer Beale dropped depth charges .
 The sub's signals intelligence officer Vadim Orlov said in an account issued by Blanton, "They exploded right next to the hull" The sub was attacked by the U.S. Navy in the 1980s .
 According to Orlov's account, the Soviet submarine's crew thought the war may have started and considered using their nuclear weapon, but instead decided to surface . Orlov: The crew of the Soviet sub considered using the nuclear weapon but decided instead .
 Ecker and his 15 pilots flew 82 dangerous, low-level missions over missile bases to take photos . The photos were presented by the United States at the U.N. Ecker's 15 pilots .