 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means, without the prior written permission of the copyright owner . Without limiting the rights under the copyright reserved above, no part of the . publication may
 This is short for the Latin word circa, meaning “around, and indicates that the date is approximate . The date is indicated by the fact that it is around .
 Smithsonian is the world’s largest museum and research complex . Established in 1846, the Smithsonian is home to 19 museums and galleries .
 Most of what we know about this time comes from remains left benind, Sucn as tools, bones, and ruined buildings .
 Until recently, it was difficult to tell now old objects were, but scientific advances nave allowed us to out together a much clearer picture of human history, out also the origin of life on Eartn, ana even of the Universe .
 Dinosaurs become the ancestors of humans dominant life form on Earth. begin to use fire. Dinosaurs are the first humans to begin using fire in the form of fire .
 Known today . dominant animals on the planet . to use tools and make fire . Over time, they began solar system were formed . known today .
 Invented independently by different cultures around the world, the wheel revolutionized transportation . The wheel was the wheel of the wheel, a wheel of art that revolutionized the world's transportation .
 It was also crucial to later advancements in farming, construction, industry, and engineering .
 Early humans moved from place to place in search of food . Early humans had to move from places to places to find food .
 As humans discovered the technology of creating items from copper, bronze, and iron, they crafted stronger tools and weapons .
 These atrillionth of asecond,it leftovers build up to form expands tothesizeofa larger particles called protons football—a process and neutrons— the building known as inflation . Known as inflation blocks of atoms .
 Light travels extremely quickly, it still takes It bIlllons of years to cross the Universe . Peering into deep space allows us to look back In time and study the Universes early years .
 Ci eeWiinva eleliismuallenccimclacrsts of gas into clumps that get iitelalcclarclalemile|aits/em Malis aterclesmuals| mere) goss} dale le
 Not all the material is absorbed by the new star though—a gigantic disk of dust . The planet is not as far as freezing as Venus, but it could be habitable .
 A random chemical reaction between carbon-based chemicals in the Volo) One le lUlexctonemanle)(ceel(omuarcll) can make copies of itself, as DNA anane)mliicn .
 The Big Freeze a Matonelaliclasiem ante \ace)aliialels expanding forever . The heat will vaporize IANA clic. (1imelaumtclalanclare) (possibly our planet's crust) 5 billion years in the future .
 Matter and energy will become ever more thinly dispersed, preventing new stars from forming . Matter will become increasingly thinned, preventing the formation of new stars .
 After the last star burns out, the Universe will be an endless void with no activity . Olen Cleanarclallalenvmerela.q-lare| is freezing cold . After that, the universe will be frozen cold and lifeless .
 The reign of the dinosaurs and other giant reotiies came to an abrupt end in amass extinction 66 million years ago, bUt not every KING of dinosaur was wiped out . The Mesozoic Era is divided into distinct periods .
 Plant-eating dinosaurs are small, nimble animals that scamper on powerful hind gigantic sizes . They are the largest animals ever to legs, using stiff tails to balance and their small arms to walk on Earth .
 Some dinosaurs evolve into plant-eaters, growing longer necks driving a process of natural selection that makes both prey and predator become larger and larger . This successful formula soon leads to variations .
 The smallest dinosaurs evade predators by taking other prehistoric reptiles adapt to life in the ocean and air flight . They evolve into the first birds . The first birds evolved from the smallest dinosaurs to become the first ones .
 There are now more kinds of dinosaurs than ever, including flightless, feathered giants and carnivores with hooklike foot claws that might be used to disembowel .
 At the end of the Cretaceous, all types of giant prehistoric reptiles disappear in amass extinction, perhaps victims of a catastrophic asteroid strike . But birds survive, perhaps because of the extinction, but birds survive .
 66 million years ago, a catastrophic event wiped out more than half of life on Earth, including the dinosaurs . Albertonectes Mosasaurus 17 End of the dinosaurs is a look at the dinosaurs' extinction rate .
 Most experts believe this mass extinction was caused by an enormous meteorite crashing into Earth . The mass extinction is thought to have been caused by a meteorite crash into Earth's atmosphere .
 Such a huge impact would have created a worldwide cloud of dust and fumes, choking animals and blocking out the Sun's light and warmth . Such a massive impact would create a huge cloud of gas and fumes .
 The planet's climate would have changed dramatically, making life impossible for many species . Many species would have been wiped out of existence if the planet had existed .
 In the African forests, apes 'evolve the ability to walk » upright upright'
 The first known ape which may have been bipedal is called Sahelanthropus tchadensis . This frees their hands * for carrying and throwing .
 Fumans originated as African aoes-and are related ~~. tochimps and gorillas . They are related to gorillas and chimpanzees .
 Around 6 million years ago, our closest ape ancestors, called Aominins, began to walk on two legs .
 As hominins evolved, they left Africa to settle all over tne. world. They left Africa and moved on to other parts of the world .
 Homo erectus uses fire, allowing the species to cook, keep warm, and protect itself from wild animals .
 The earliest evidence of fire is a 1million-year-old collection of charred animal bones found in a cave in South Africa .
 Several species of bipedal ape, Australopithecines, spread across the grasslands of East Africa . The bow and arrow, anew i invention, allows them to hunt small game such as deer .
 It invents a new kind of stone tool -- a hand axe with a leaf-shaped cutting blade . The axe is a new type of tool .
 Homo heidelbergensis appears.in Africa, later moving into West Asia and Europe . Species appears. in Africa, then moving into Europe and Asia .
 It is the first hominin species to build shelters and use spears to hunt animals . It is also the first species to use spears and build shelters .
 Last Neanderthals die out, perhaps unable to adapt to the rapidly changing climate . Neanderthal ancestors may have been unable to cope with climate change . Neanderths are thought to be the last to survive in the wild .
 The paintings, created in caves, orobably serve a ritual purpose, such as contacting animal spirits to bring about a successful hunt . The paintings are believed to have a religious purpose .
 Homo habilis left Africa 120,000 years ago, beginning its journey that would take them ae EUROPE to every inhabitable place on Roe ASIA .
 Cape bios bridge of landlinked Asiaand ‘& arn SG pS America’ distance by sea to Australia was far v | he Ee ee shorter than it is today . Cape bios is a bridge to land linked to Asia and Australia .
 Modern humans appear in Africa . They are the firsthominins to bury their dead . They do so in caves with offerings .
 They are the first humans to sew, using bone needles, -and make jewelry from shells and bones . They live on the island of Flores in Indonesia, where they live on Flores .
 Agriculture is essentially the nistory of oroducing food as opposed to finding it . Samuel Johnson, English author Agriculture, was an English author .
 It includes farming, rearing animals for food, and learning how to improve techniques . Learn how to farm animals and improve your own skills .
 Before agriculture took off, oeople relled on hunting and gathering—activities that Involve a lot of chance . Hunting and gathering is still an important part of human history .
 Farmers can Influence food oroduction by sowing seeds and raising animals . By contrast, farmers can influence food production by raising animals and planting seeds . Farmers can also influence food by planting seeds, raising animals or raising seeds .
 The scythe is an agricultural tool used to mow grass and reap crops . It is a tool used for mowing grass and reaping crops .
 It is swung along the ground, and the sharp blade slices the grass or crop at the base . The sharp blade is used to cut crops or crops with a sharp blade .
 In the town of Jericho in Palestine, a huge stone wall is constructed for defense, surveillance, and flood protection . The 3,000 inhabitants of the town are protected by the wall .
 In the Byzantine Empire, public areas and main roads in cities start to become closed off by shops . Public areas around the Mediterranean are closed off from shops . Byzantine bazaars are known as bazaums .
 With more opportunities for trade and work, | the populations of many Increased, eventually . resulting in the growthtn of major cities . The population of many increased, eventually resulting in . the growtn of cities .
 During the Industrial Revolution, walls to contain their growing centers. people move to work in factories. Many other medieval | Factory towns | European cities also rebuild their original walls .
 Mesopotamia's cities become important trading centers, using rivers to transport l goods . Mesopotamian cities were used as trading centers in Mesopotia .
 upward saves space, upward saving space . MVal el0lt-tllealsne)i —— upward saves . space .
 Nobody Knows exactly how the wheel evolved to form the wheel . Archaeologists think it all began thousands of years ago with log rollers and sleds .
 Sumerians realized that they could move bulky objects more easily If they rolled them over round log rollers . Sumerans realized they could roll bulky objects over log rollsers .
 Rollers proved awkward to move around, so the Sumerians developed a curved front that could be pulled along more easly . The curved front of a curved sled could pull along more easily .
 The Sumerians combined a sled and roller to create a sled that glided over rollers . The sled glided more smoothly over the rollers than over the ground .
 Over time, the movement of the sled over the roller wore grooves in the log roller, which helped keep the sled in place .
 Sumerians chipped away at the log to create two wheels and an axle . The Sumerian car was the first vehicle to have wheels built from a log .
 Sumerians later fixed individual wheels onto an axle and attached the sled to it securely by drilling holes in its frame .
 Many Inventions developed over the oast 3,500 years would not have been possiole without It . Many Inventors developed in the past have been able to use the invention .
 This allowed knowledge to be collected and passed on from person to person both reliably and over great distances . Knowledge was passed on to person over long distances, and knowledge could be passed on .
 Its thanks to the written word that we know the thoughts and ideas of people who lived thousands of years ago .
 The Roman alphabet goes on to become and is usually written from left to right . It has 24 letters, and is the world’s most widely used script .
 The system is inspired by contact with the carve monumental inscriptions, paint text Roman alphabet, but uses straight lines, so on vases, and write on fig tree bark .
 Arabic script later adopted across North Africa and much of Asia . With the spread of Islam, the script was adopted across much of the world .
 5th century isa ve “2 ve tS BR BL BR BR OBL gt . The script later inspires the Hebrew, Arabic, and Greek writing systems .
 They invent two other scripts, hiragana and katakana, with signs standing for syllables . They also invent two more scripts,  hirakana and  kataakana .
 Indus people of India invent a script that remains undeciphered to this day . Indus script was invented by the people of the Indus .
 Based on Egyptian hieroglyphs, people only need to learn 30 signs to be able to write . People can only learn to write with 30 signs, according to experts in Egypt .
 Vet we eZ aby eae oth oor wih ot Aw endlos(iiwize hod +3; Af, sand Mrio ws ‘ abe ano asyy ¥ iS iu ens nna re} bi rue Non �
 Pesto At i133 rye or rau rte ier $ ¢ SiSerale Fret “Ay NOW pease arts art fj ~~ Tats ary 5 \"" (3 AY ehcnaniieat va Las THEBATIAT I
 The Rosetta Stone is an inscribed basalt block, discovered by French soldiers in Egypt in 1799 . It is inscribed on a basalt stone .
 Ancient civilizations established their cultures around huge rivers that could support farming . Such as the Tigris and Euphrates in West Asia, and the Nile in Egypt, .
 Great empires alSO Sorang up across Europe and East Asia . Trade expanded after SOOO BceE, and trade expanded after .
 As these new societies took snape, many of them came into conflict with one anotner in competition for land and resources . Many of these societies were in conflict with each other .
 Greek Lagash in Mesopotamia. from Egypt across West Asia. conquer the cities of Greece. cities are founded as far east as India . cities were founded in Egypt, Mesopotamia and India .
 The cultures of this area monuments called pyramids thinkers developed early shared a single culture . The cultures were created in the same area .
 Ohilosophy and democracy were experts at crafting metal. They invented farming and the wheel. to house their royal dead . They invented the wheel and the invention of the wheel .
 The process of creating pottery was first discovered in prehistoric times . In the ancient world, many cultures — particularly the Greeks —perfected pottery design as an art form .
 Objects such as this Greek amphora give historians many visual clues about the fashions, stories, and societies of the ancient world . Objects like this amphora can be found in museums across the world, museums and museums .
 The Tigris refers to the Tigris and the Euphrates in western Asia . The Euphrates is the source of the Nile River in eastern Europe .
 The Amorites, a people from the western deserts, conquer most of Mesopotamia, which they rule from Babylon . It was here, more than 5,000 years ago, that the worlds N1GSIMOIINTSXSM cl Rom OLUIIIONN
 These huge stone structures were ALON Vastsmaalon my-le)ale)alr-lalswrelalemialcy| marci) built as places of religious worship . empire is called Babylonia. empire is known for its religious architecture .
 Hittites and Kassites invade Babylonia using iron weapons and fast chariots pulled by horses . Hittite and Kassite used iron weapons, chariots and horses .
 At first they use It to make tools of Lagash leading his army to victory, The tome also Beene the bodies of IATOMVcts| CLONRISIRoAYAc IMINO ICUINm@lerclalale aprelaeial ale
 Around 2500 BcE and its mosaic decoration shows what life was Ni om Ia stela WalVdlessx@) elo) t-lanltmm alises . The other side shows life during peacetime .
 Players take turns to place white and black stones at the grid intersections . Dice grid board board is a dice grid board with players taking turns .
 People nave been sitting down to play games together for many thousands of years . People have been playing games with each other for centuries . Games have been played by humans and animals for centuries.
 Board games were popular in ancient Egypt, while card games were created in imperial China . Board games are also popular in Egypt and China .
 Today, old favorites are enjoyed alongside new fantastical storytelling adventures . Today's favorite stories are available for purchase on Amazon.com .
 Games orovide nours of entertainment and competition at every roll of the dice or choice of a card . Games are a chance to be entertained and compete at every game .
 Chess is first played in either Northern India or Central Asia . Chess is a skill and strategy game first played by players in either India or central Asia .
 Six or seven cowrie shells are thrown to decide how many places a player moves their pieces . The game is decided by throwing a cowrie shell at the top of each piece .
 Emperor Akbar has a gigantic board built built, on which humans are moved around as game pieces . The game is based on the board, with humans being played as pieces of the board .
 In the 12th century, the Chinese created two-sided tiles with dots to represent numbers on each side . The tiles were created by the Chinese .
 The dominoes were given the name ‘dominoes’ in Italy and can be used to play a variety of games . They were given their name in Italy in the 1980s and are now known as 'dominos'
 Magie’s original 8 GS s £2 board uses made-up street Se ee 43th t names . Later versions of the C century game each use real place names from a city around the world .
 When cards reach Europe, the suit markings are cups, gold coins, swords, and polo sticks . The suit markings have been used in the past for decades .
 In about 1480, the French suits familiar today (hearts, diamonds, spades, and clubs) become standard . The French suits are similar to the ones worn today .
 Mahjong is first developed in China and becomes popular across Asia . Mahjong is a tile-laying game first developed by China in the 1970s . The game is a popular form of puzzle-matching games .
 During the 1950s, it becomes such a big hit that stores ration supplies per customer . Stores ration supplies of the popular snack .
 Players are suspects who must follow clues to decide which of them Is the murderer, where the crime was committed, and what weapon was used . Players follow clues as they try to find out who is the murderer .
 Around 3000 Bce, the people of Egypt created the world’s first united state . Ancient Egyot was the first unified state .
 Known as a pharaoh, who was believed to be the Come, ONile,come™ reoresentative of the gods on Eartn. It was governed by a king “Hail to you O Nilet...” known as a . pharaoh . Known
 Egyptians wore similar white linen clothing, spoke the Hymn to the Nile 22100 BCE same language, and followed a regular cycle of work, — governed by the annual flooding of the River Nile . Egyptians spoke the same language and used the same clothing and language as Egyptians .
 The fall of the Old Kingdom -after a period of political strife and widespread drought Is followed by atime of disunity, called the First Intermediate Period . Dark period . Followed by period of unrest and drought .
 There were few monumental building projects during this time, as the power of the royal authority was In decline .
 At Giza, Pharaoh Khufu builds the Great Pyramid, which remains the world's biggest stone building . The Great Pyramid remains the largest stone building in the world .
 Pharaoh Mentuhotep Il is the founder of what historians would later call the Middle Kingdom . Egypt's first king was the Egyptian king of Egypt .
 This period is remembered for its great achievements in art and literature . Ancient Egyptians left behind clues about the daily 7a lives of ancient Egyptians .
 A people from western Asia, the Hyksos, move into northern Egypt and destroy the Middle Kingdom . TheHyksos are a people from west Asia who move into north Egypt .
 They bring with them the new technology of fighting from horsedrawn chariots . They bring . with them with them . The new technology comes with the technology of . horseshaped chariots.
 While the Hyksos rule the north, Egyptian pharaohs continue to govern | in the south . The Hyksons rule the south of Egypt .
 Alexandria was founded by 4 Alexander the Great on the Mediterranean coast . Egyptis ruled by 15 Macedonian 22 pharaohs, all called Ptolemy . Alexandria was the capital of Egypt during this period .
 During the Late Period, Egypt was conquered by a series of foreign powers . Egypt was ruled by foreign rulers .
 He has many colossal statues built of himself, as wellas a temple at Abu Simbel, where he is worshipped as a god . The Assyrian and the Persians are worshipped as gods .
 Yyy ERKONY villages by the Nile . Cleopatra first settlements . Farming people settle in yyy ERkONY villages .
 They 00,00 XX) XXX % grow wheat and barley, OX) RR ; keep cattle and sheep, AY d make polished red red WO NOan nn’ and make polished . red WN’s . pottery with blackened tops . They
 This early culture is later called Badarian, after the site of El Badari, the remains of which were excavated in 1923 . The remains of this early culture were found in 1923 in the region .
 Pharaoh Djoser was the first ruler of a period that historians call the Old Kingdom . He built the first oyramid, a stepped pyramid .
 This is a royal tomb where the king's body, preserved as amummy, is thought to live on after death . This is the tomb of the king, who is believed to have lived on after his death . It is thought that his body will continue to be found in the tomb
 Djoser's pyramid has stepped rather than smooth sides and is Egypt's first monument to be built out of stone . Djoser’s pyramid is Egypt’�s first monument, built from stone .
 Ahmose, ruler of Thebes, drives out the Hyksos and reunites Egypt, founding what would become known as the New Kingdom . The Egyptian king was ruler of the Thebes and ruler of Egypt .
 Pharaohs are no longer buried in pyramids, but in hidden tombs tn the Valley of the Kings, in the desert to the west of Thebes, Egypt .
 Under the rule of Pharaoh Tutankhamun, the | old religionis restored .
 After his death at the age of around 18, Tutankhamunis buried in a tomb filled with treasures . Tutankamunis was buried in the tomb of his tomb .
 Thetombof — Tutankhamun Is the only unrobbed Egyptian royal tomb ever found . Discovered In 1922, thetomb of Tutankamun was discovered in 1922 . The tomb is the only undrobbed tomb ever discovered .
 Pharaoh Akhenaten closed down the temples to the gods and introduced worship of the Aten, a disk that represents the Sun . Pharaoh Akhetaten made sweeping changes to Egypt's religion, introducing worship of Aten .
 He builds a new capital called Y 0954 8 _ Akhetaten (modern-day E| Amarna), with open-air temples for the worship of the Sun . Amarna was the first city to be built in the city .
 These Arf are carved on stone or painted t Ml iy onsheets of papyrus, awriting & material made from the reeds along the Nile . They are carved or painted on stone .
 A kingdom united Egypt, previously two kingdoms, was united under one king . Egypt was once known as one of the world's two most ancient cities .
 He is shown in art as a warrior defeating enemies while wearing the crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt . The Egyptian king is believed to have been the most powerful Egyptian king .
 Narmer wears the red 4 crown of Upper Egypt. crown of Lower Egypt . Narmer wore the white Narmer . crown of the white .
 Egyptian Empire Thutmose aggressively expands Egyptian rule into Nubia, a country that lies to the south of Egypt, as well as into areas of western Asia .
 For most of orenistory, oeople lived as nomadic nuntergatnerers and left behind little trace of their existence . Orenistorians left little traces of the ancient orenists .
 It was only after oeoole became settled farmers . farmers tnat they began to bulla monuments, Sucn as tombs and temples .
 Most were simple structures, but some were built on an enormous scale that required hundreds of laborers . Some of the structures were built for powertul leaders .
 Unusually, people set up more than 3,000 standing stones in long lines . Built by hunter-gatherers in the process of becoming farmers .
 It is possible that each one was placed in honor of a dead person . It is not known why they were placed there .
 Some stand above ground, but others have an underground burial chamber . Others have a burial chamber in underground chambers .
 About 45,000 are built, giving Korea the world's largest collection of dolmens . Korea is home to the largest collection in the world, with 45,500 of them built .
 Emperor Ashoka built a great stupa at Sanchi in India, a domed monument holding relics of the Buddha . Sanchi Stupa was built by Ashoka in his reign .
 Stupas are places of pilgrimage for Buddhists, who walk around them praying and meditating . Buddhists walk around the stupas praying and meditation .
 In western Europe, people begin to build dolmens—tombs using three or more huge standing stones supporting a flat tablestone . Dolmens are used to build tombs in western Europe .
 At Abu Simbel in southern Egypt, Pharaoh Rameses has a great temple carved out of solid rock . The temple is carved from solid rock and is believed to have been built in Egypt's southern desert .
 Colossal statues of the pharaoh sit outside and line the temple's entrance hall . The temple is located in the middle of the Nile in Egypt .
 The people of Cholula in Mexico build a pyramid in a temple to worship the god Quetzalcoatl . The people built the pyramid to worship their god .
 In Wiltshire, people arrange standing tons of rock to build stones in circles . Newgrange Stonehenge In Ireland, people use 200,000 rocks .
 First pyramid enormous, mound-shaped tomb hauled hundreds of miles from Wales . Some of the stones are stones from the First pyramid .
 The Egyptian pharaoh Djoser built the first pyramid as his central burial chamber . The purpose of the pyramid is unclear .
 It has stepped sides in passage Is aligned with the be used to establish calendar dates . six levels and is made of stone. six levels . It has steps in passage .
 The steps may have been seen as a stairway to the heavens for the pharoah . midwinter sunrise lights up burial chamber for 17 minutes .
 People at Caral in Peru build ; the first pyramids in South “America’s” America .
 They have stepped sides like Djoser’s, but they ~~. serve as temples rather than tombs . Djoser: ‘I’m not afraid of Djoser, but I’ve been here since I was a boy in the womb’
 At Giza, the largest of Egypt's pyramids are built by the pharaohs Khufu, Khaftre, and Menkaure . They are arranged around a plaza in the middle of a great urban center .
 Khafre's is guarded by the Great Sphinx, a colossal statue of alion with the head of a pharaoh . The Sphinx is the most famous statue of the Egyptian pharaohs in the world .
 Ziggurats S In Mesopotamia rulers build stepped temples, called if zigguratats .
 Each is seen as the home of the local god, whose statue is kept inashrine at the very top . The statues of local gods are kept at the top of each shrine .
 These have eyes of white coral with black obsidian pupils, and caps made of red stone . White coral has eyes of    white coral with black obsidian pupils, and black espoke pets .
 Monk’s Mound is an immense pyramid-shaped mound of soil and clay . North Americans build Monk's Mound at the meeting of the Mississippi, Missouri and Illinois rivers .
 In Cambodia, King Suryavarman Il constructs Angkor Wat, a Hindu temple containing his tomb . The temple is located in Cambodia's capital, Wat .
 It takes around 30 years to build and today remains the world’s largest religious structure . The world's largest religious building was built 30 years ago in the 1930s .
 The ancient Egyptians built sohinx statues to guard important areas such as tombs and temples . The Great Sphinx was built to guard tombs, temples and tombs .
 The most famous sphinx Is the Great Sphinx of Giza, situated on the west bank of the River Nile . The Sphinx was carved out of a huge outcrop of limestone that sticks up above the desert floor .
 It was built 4,500 years ago, and is one of the largest and oldest statues in the world . The statue was built in the middle of the Bronze Age, 4,000 years ago . It is the largest statue of all time and is the oldest statue in history .
 The Sphinx has a human head, probably that of Pharaoh Khafre, and the body of alion. wa sharing stories . Many of the earliest stories were composed as A joems, as the rhythm and repetition of poetry ‘made it easier for storytellers to learn
 With the invention of writing around 6,000 years ago, *% tnese stories began to be written down .
 Drama ‘and, much later, tne novel developed as new Hopi American Indian proverb ‘forms of storytelling.’ ‘form of storytelling’ was developed as a novel .
 Books are still a popular format for reading stories, but are also available digitally as e-books or online . Today, books are still an important way of reading .
 In the story, the Monkey King had a magic Staff that could shrink or grow in size . The Monkey King has a Staff that shrinks or grows in size, according to the story .
 Most Icelandic sagas are tales of tales of chivalrous knights going Journey to the West (also known Shakespeare adds many words to ~ historic voyages, battles, and kings on quests and having heroic as Monkey) is a Chinese novel the English language .
 Some sagas adventures are known in medieval based on the true story of amonk’s huge impact on the development tell of alegendary past full of Europe as romances .
 Old French journey to bring Buddhist scrolls of literature around the world .
 It is considered one of the Sherlock Holmes, as well as his haunting poetry . The poem is considered to be one of Sherlock Holmes' most famous works .
 Watson, in his novel of them never come home “now call science fiction that capture the spirit of America. that captures the spirit . of America . Watson . Watson’s novel, in which he wrote, was called science fiction . Watson,  Watson, and his novel
 The Siig of Aladdin and the genie was added by the French writer Antoine Galland in the 18th century . A Study in Scarlet. from the war. A Study of Scarlet.
 Ancient Greek Mien actors wore Pe Teena masks to identify Gilgamesh from oe 2 Be oe Mesopotamia in modern-day Iraq is the oldest 1 Surviving epic . Ancient Greek actors wore the masks for identification of the ancient Greek epic .
 The Tale of Genji by the Japanese world produce long poems called single actor and a chorus (a group is a collection of popular stories) Ancient epics are Greek drama 1001 stories . Societies of ancient Early Greek plays involve only a One Thousand and One Nights .
 Playwrights add a in Arabic folk tales, many of its Written on sheets of paper pasted epics celebrate a civilization’s second and then a third actor to Sinbad .
 Brothers Jacob and Wilhelm Mary Shelley write Frankenstein, English clergyman Lewis Carroll's 3 ‘ oopular form of literature . The novel becomes an extremely Gothic horror .
 Gothic Alice in Wonderland is one of the greatest works of Gothic literature . Grimm collect traditional folk tales such as Snow White and horror . Many Grimm collect stories in serial form .
 Children’s monthly parts to make them more violence of the original stories . Is examples of Gothic horror is books focus on entertainment affordable to the public . One of the last “Golden Age’ in which children’‘Gory’
 J. Rowling attempts to show fragments Africa, South America, and about the experiences of worldwide phenomenon . Rowling's seven — A new style of writing .
 The novels are novels of thoughts and feelings as Asia—particularly India—begin their people . The novels of Asia, particularly India, begin their people in Asia .
 The decade have since been translated into around 80 languages and have sold character’s mind of being colonized . The decade has since seen the rise of female writers and women in 80 languages .
 This decorative breastplate red carnelian, and turquoise was found in the tomb of oharaon . It was used to protect some to display wealth or against evil .
 Tutankhamun is inlaid with blue lapis lazull, 4) tes \e) en . It is made of gold, Tutankamun, an Egyptian in .laid . with blue . lapis lazyulls .
 Modern tenpin bowling will begin in 1841 in the US . Ancient people first started playing ball games thousands of years ago .
 As time passed, new sports emerged, along with competitions and International events at which they were held . New sports emerged as well as competitions and competitions .
 Sports are a major Source of exercise, entertainment for soectators, and a way for milllons of orofessional athletes worldwide to test tneir SkIIIS. re . at 3200 BCE . French aristocrat Pierre de Coubertin arranges a revival of
 Twelve teams take part, with Preston North End crowned champions at the end of the season . The ancient Olympic Games took place in 1888 .
 The American League and the National League competed for the end-of-year championship for the first time in what is today known as the World Series . Events include swimming, cycling, weightlifting, wrestling, wrestling and athletics .
 The first Tour de France was held, lasting 19 days and covering 1,508 miles along French roads . The first race was held in 1903, covering 19 days in 19 stages .
 The race was born to help boost the flagging sales of the cycling newspaper LAuto .
 Beach volleyball first played on the beach in Santa Monica, California . Beach volleyball is a beach volleyball game .
 Today, the sport is played on beaches and artificial sand courts all around the world .
 The Mayans play a speedy ball game called pitz . OD Cre 1903 Ancient ball game .
 The objective is to pass a rubber ball through a stone hoop without using hands or feet . It is then used to pass the ball through the hoop without touching it .
 The National Football League begins with a meeting in Canton, Ohio, in the 1880s . Football leagues were formed in the late 1880s and early 1900s .
 A second football league, named the American Football League, gets underway 40 years later . The league was formed in the 1940s .
 In 1967, the champions of the two leagues face each other in the first annual Super Bowl . At Olympia, Greece, the first recorded Olympic Games are held .
 13 teams contest It, with the host nation emerging as the champions . Host nation will be crowned in the tournament .
 The tournament has been held every four years since, except when World War II twice caused its postoonement . The tournament is now held in Australia and Canada .
 When amessenger named Pheidippides runs from the Battle of Marathon to Athens, Greece with news of a victory, the distance of 25 miles becomes the measurement for a marathon .
 European monks play the earliest version of tennis using their hands to hit the ball . Hand tennis was played by monks in the Monks' hands .
 By the 1870s, a similar game named Sphairistike is played in the UK with wooden rackets . The game is played with wooden rinksets and wooden balls .
 Leonardo da Vinci sketches Cricket the first bicycle design . The Marylebone Cricket Club in with pedals and a chain .
 Bicycles London introduces rules to turn and competitive cycling a16th-century game into the sports do not develop sport we now call cricket until centuries later . FIFA Women's World Cup is held in China with the United States beating Norway 2-1 in the final .
 Present-day mathematicians are amazed by . how complex the Egyptians calculations are . Present--day . mathematicians . amazed by | how complex . calculations are.
 The system Is , i | sexagesimal, meaning it uses Piece of Pl — 60 as its base . The system is based on Piece of P — 60 .
 The Babylonian oeople in Sumerian method of counting on Mesopotamia calculate that a a their hands. This is based on the Sumeric method . Sumerians used the method to count their hands in their hands .
 Each finger circles circles circumference is about segment on one hand to reach three times the size of its diameter . They count each finger circles to three times size of their diameter .
 Any circle of any know that this number Is 3141592... with the numbers after the decimal point continuing forever, This number is represented by the Greek symbol pI . This ratio Is important 42, and multipy hand) to re number of fingers on that by five .
 Renaissance artists discover they can USE math to make pictures look more threedimensional by drawing distant objects smaller . Itis known by the formula a* + Oe ot where the letters refer to the length of each side of the triangle .
 In this, the greatest breakthroughs in numerals O to 9 are used math, as it allows Us to write huge to represent all numbers . In this way, we can write huge numbers to represent numbers .
 The number oogol of Zeros is a googolplex . 1 followed by 1 suggests “goo 4 followed by 29 BF eget — a) nd cet it ee 1 SIME 5, 4202 ; ay e— Fibonacci sequence hematic
 Voters could now choose reoresentatives to make decisions . In ancient world, important decisions were made by the Magna Carta United States .
 The Magna Carta Constitution changes when is Representatives of a statesman from the written by English the 13 former British Independence Greek city-state of barons . Cleisthenes revamps by the king .
 This United States of settled by freed United States the system by giving important document America meet to slaves who had ordinary citizens states . The U.S. settled by slaves in order to establish rules about emigrating to political rights .
 As a monarch Is not above how the new nation Africa, declares result, historians now the law, and promises should be run. As a king, he should not be above how Africa is run, he says .
 Joseph refer to him as “the to protect certain rights leads to the drafting of Jenkins Roberts, the father of Athenian through a council of the United States Constitution, the merchant and politician .
 25 barons, which supreme law of the . becomes the first women, slaves, and . gradually develops into United States . foreigners are not part a parliament . Foreigners not part of a parliament.
 The Civil Rights Act was introduced in 1964, keeping employers from discriminating against people on the grounds of race, religion, or nationality .
 The Voting Rights Act of 1965 gives most black people the right to vote in 1965 . It was the first act of civil rights reform in the United States since 1964 .
 The wall that had split communist East Berlin from democratic West Berlin for 28 years is finally knocked down when East and West Germany are reunited . Fall of the Berlin Wall is the first time the wall has been knocked down since 1963 .
 Nelson Mandela had been imprisoned for 2/ years . Nelson Mandela was imprisoned for two years . Mandela was released from prison .
 apartheid refers to huge restrictions to the freedoms of black people in South Africa that were enshrined by law for more than four decades . The South African word for “separateness, apartheid’s is the S.A. word for apartheid .
 Estonia is the first country to hold elections using electronic voting machines . Estonia will hold elections in the country's first elections using the machines .
 These area way to encourage young and busy people to vote in governmental elections, creating a more democratic society . Young people should be encouraged to vote for government .
 During the Iron Age, the people we now call Celts soread across most of Europe trom their original nomeland north of the Alps . Hise of the Celts during the . Iron Age . During the . century, Celts remained in their nomeland in northern Europe .
 Celtic peoples shared common religious beliefs and spoke related languages . Celts were feared warriors and skilled metalworkers . Still Sooken is still spoken today in parts of northwest Europe .
 Celts lived in hundreds of tribes and nations, and never thought of themselves as one single group . The Celts never considered themselves a one-one-one group . Celts were known as the Celts .
 The name “Celt” comes from keltoi/, the Greek name for a tribe that lived in what's now southern France . The name "Celt" comes from the name of a tribe known as the Celts .
 The Acnaemenid Persian Empire lasted from the 6th to 4tn century Bce, was the worlds Tirst major empire . The Romans called Celts Galli, which led to areas they settled being called Gallia , Galicia , and Galicia .
 Anc, at its height, stretched from Egypt to northwest India . It was vast and powerful anc . The vast and mighty anc was once the world's most powerful .
 Persians snowed respect for the customs of the people they ruled . Unlike many other ancient empires, Persians had respect for their people's customs .
 He sends ambassadors to all Greek cities, demanding they accept him as king . The king is then sent back to Greece .
 Darius sends an army by sea to invade Greece . Cyrus counterattacks, and eventually conquers Lydia and Lycia . Cyrus eventually conquests Lydia .
 The walls were decorated with brightly colored glazed bricks . They showed an imperial guard of archers as well as mythical animals . The walls showed the imperial guard as a mythical animal .
 Brau cA © ( ie A “ Seas tarc, , _ — PASTAS ATT \ SNe 4 /27e 44 URS iat EN EN its 7) Fi 2 NT ees y pe Heh aii wr At HEIL Le . Le .
 Psamtik is initially well treated, but Is later executed for secretly trying to act against the Persians . Is later well treated and executed for trying to protect himself .
 The son of Xerxes, Artaxerxes, allows the Jews to rebuild the Jerusalem Temple, which had been destroyed by the Babylonians . The Jews were able to rebuild their Temple .
 Persian Empire was too large to be ruled directly by a single king . The Persian Empire ruled out of control of the Persian Empire .
 The provinces paid tribute to the king, provided soldiers for his armies, and were punished If they rebelled . The provinces were punished for rebellion against the king .
 Herodotus, a Greek living in the Persian Empire, writes The Histories, the first-known history book . At first he does not have the support of the people, but with his loyal army, he is able to suppress any revolts .
 He describes the rise of the Persians and the customs within the empire . He also describes the customs of the empire within the Persian Empire .
 Darius the Great reorganizes government, creating satrapies, acivil service, and a network of roads for official use . Darius the great reorganizes the empire . Organizing the empire he reorganizes it .
 He issues a gold coin called a daric to be used as money across the empire . The coin was created by King Alexander III of the Roman Empire . He issued the coin as a way to keep the empire running .
 Xerxes II is murdered by his brother Sogdianus, who ts then killed by Ochus . Xerxes I was killed by his brothers Ochos and Odeus .
 His great palace has walls covered with stone relief sculptures, showing the citizens of the empire bringing gifts in tribute to him . The walls of the palace have been covered in relief sculptures .
 Cyrus the Younger tries and fails to seize power from his brother, Artaxerxes II, using 10,000 Greek soldiers . The Greeks in Asia were the first to try and seize power in the Persian kingdom .
 The eastern Greek cities of the region of lonia rebel against Persian rule . They were occupied by the Persian rulers of the area .
 Darius vows to oust the rebels from Athens and Eretria . After the rebels are defeated, he vows to take over Athens .
 The tomb of Qin Shi Huang, the first are carved from stone, bone, or ivory . Some of the first were found in the tomb of the emperor of China . The first were carved in stone or bone .
 Sculptors in Greece portray the human body in a lifelike manner never seen before . Chinese craft Artists of the Shang Dynasty . Greek sculpture of the . Shang Dynasty sculpture .
 Auguste Rodin is the most important sculptor in Europe at this time . Ne Ne Ne “~~ The Thinker’s “
 This In Britain, sculotors Barbara Hepworth and Henry Moore begin to create abstract sculptures and semi-abstract figures inspired by landscape and natural shapes, such as shells .
 Anish Kapoor's Cloud Gate in Chicago, IL, is the first bronze of its kind to be is one of the world’s largest outdoor sculptures since Roman times .
 Confucianism stressed importance of education and respect for parents and elders in creating a harmonious society . Confucanism stressed the importance of educating parents and respecting elders .
 Legalists argued that only strict laws and harsh punishments would make people behave properly . The Legalists argue that only harsh laws and strict punishments would help people behave .
 The First Emperor enforced Legalism, while the Han Dynasty promoted Confucianism . The Han Dynasty was the most successful period of legalism in China .
 His coins are (ore (slacwediclselomsierclion olelanliare) of books, including MishinchaleleleleMccecesciitiate alisiKolaloxsue)
 Confucian philosophy and legalism are permitted in China . Legalism is permitted. Confucians are allowed to express their views of Confucia .
 Han uses the title emperor, Confucianism the state expansion in Central Asia . Han reports his reports lead to Han using the title Emperor . Han used the state of Central Asia to expand his empire .
 China. I Nexelelameviileit-\mar-laarsre Cai SIEVIOUSINAOIVIESSIAVE ALES China. Cai .
 Lun manufactures the first ate\iehel-\.lalelelele)iaitcvenele the book will be known paper, from bark and rags . To later generations, Lun manufactures . manufactures the . first atehel-\-laleellelei)ia
 Emperor believed that these soldiers would protect him in the afterlife . Emperor believed they would be protecting him in his afterlife .
 Jimekeeping became more accurate with tne Invention of mecnanical clocks about /OO years ago . In fractions of seconds and nave instant access to digital Clocks on Our Computers and pnones .
 People in Egypt use water drips out of the bottom container, clocks . Water drips from the bottom of the container . Water clocks are used in Egypt .
 Water a small hole in of aconica causing the wa ter level to nside the drop . Water a hole in the aconica caused the water level to rise .
 German clockmaker Peter Henlein makes mechanical clocks that are small enough to fit into pockets . Markers | how much container show ed. time has pass _ The first Wristwatc EMS of jewelry .
 Clock's wheels are driven clock’s wheels as it unwinds by a steel spring that turns the remaining five days were considered unlucky days . Clock's clock's wheels were driven by a spring that turned the remaining days as unlucky days are considered unlucky . Clock clock's clock�
 The 20 days of a month were represented by 20 symbols around the central face . The 20 symbols of the month were used to represent 20 days a month .
 Under the Romans, Europe and Europe and tne Mediterranean world Saw great technological advances .
 Often the Romans Used the inventions of earlier oeoples, but on a greater Scale . Romans used the invention of earlier people, but at a greater scale .
 Romans used arches, mass-produced oricks, and concrete, the Romans constructed hundreds of massive structures, many of which remain today .
 Hot air from a furnace is fed through the space under a raised floor that is Supported on columns of tiles . Hot air is fed into the air under the raised floor by a furnace .
 Romans were able to plot the routes of dead-straight, long-distance roads and figure out the precise yet gentle slope of aqueducts that carried water for many miles .
 Surveyors used simple tools to make careful measurements . Surveyors made the measurements using simple tools before building structures .
 The chorobates was a wooden table with a trough on top, filled with water . Measuring slopes was one of the world's most famous water table measurements .
 Keeping the water level allowed surveyors to check that structures were built to the right height . Surveyors kept water level at the height of structures .
 Roman surveyors ensured roads were straight by using a tool called a groma . The tool was used to make roads straight and ensure they were straight . Surveyors used the groma to plan roads and build roads in Roman times .
 This had across with weights hanging from it that helped keep it upright and level when lining up distant points . Hero in. gy, Hero in . gy, was created in the 1930s .
 Engine INVe tsa tsa O O °F Sphey; Pe (Cong; that sping act Water boijgy Sop So Steam eo ""Und whe, Oe. Sphey," says that sponger .
 The Romans built amphitheaters to watch gladiators fight . The Colosseum was a Roman arena for gladiator fights .
 Unlike earlier amphitheaters, which were dug out of hillsides, the Colosseum in Rome was a freestanding structure . Three stories supported by 80 arches made of brick and concrete .
 In eastern India, a wealthy prince renounces luxury and embarks on a quest to overcome human suffering . Siddhartha Gautama renounced luxury and became a Buddhist monk . He is believed to have died in a Buddhist temple in eastern India .
 Buddha is known as Buddha and dedicates his life to guiding others, founding the religion of Buddhism . He becomes known for his role in Buddhism .
 In northern India, a wandering holy man named Mahavira establishes Jainism . Zoroastrianism om centur Ve In Persia, a priest named Zarathustra has a series of visions that inspire a Jainsism .
 Followers of the faith, which has no god, reject worldly pleasures and lead nonviolent, vegetarian lives . Followers reject world's pleasures and live nonviolent lives .
 Confucianism has existed since orenistoric times, wnen our ancestors began to bury their Confucanism . Confucius, a Chinese scholar and philosopher, is compiled in five books .
 Confucianism is a way of life based on values such as kindness and respect for family . Confucanism is based on the values of kindness, respect and kindness .
 Since then, hundreds of religions laa cercere| nme have develooed, many growing from older ones . Hundreds of religions have been created, including Christianity and Islam .
 Nearly all religions teacn belief in life after deatn, but not all religions involve a Supernatural being SUCN as a god or goddess .
 The first major religion based on a single god develops among the Hebrews, a group of seminomadic farmers and herders in Israel . Hinduism Hinduism Judaism Judaism .
 Vedas are a collection of hymns and chants that form the oldest texts of Hinduism . The Vedas were written in northwestern India and are believed to be the oldest Hindu texts .
 Hindus follow many gods and goddesses and believe in reincarnation after death . Hindus believe that reincarnation is possible after death and are reincarnated through reincarnation .
 Followers of the ancient religion of Cao Dai after being religion, which is thousands of years contacted by aspirit during a seance . Followers worship invisible spirits at seance.
 Cao Dai believes shrines bring good aspects of Christianity and luck . Cao Dai combines shrines with shrines, believing them to bring good luck .
 Shinto spirits are everywhere, Buddhism and promotes peace, and shrines can be natural features tolerance, and vegetarianism such as rocks, trees, or mountains .
 Daoists believe there is an invisible force —the Dao —running through the Universe and controlling it . The Dao is believed to be the world's most powerful force .
 Followers try to live in harmony with this natural force and lead peaceful, unselfish lives . Followers live a peaceful life with the natural force of nature .
 Baha'is believe in the unity of all religions and the equality of all people, whatever their nationality or faith . Baha’is believe that all people should be equal .
 Jesus of Nazareth is executed by establishes the religion of Islam after mystical experience after bathing In a river the Roman government see him as a an angel .
 The angel's commandments are that combines elements of Hinduism and religion of Christianity . Hinduism begins teaching a new faith forgiveness and peace, give rise to the angel's .
 It will eventually soread recorded in the Qur'an, the holy to become the world’s biggest religion .
 Sikhs believe in a single god and book that all Muslims follow reincarnation after death . Sikhs are Sikhs who believe in the concept of reincarnation and reincarnation .
 The Bay of Naples experiences a series of destructive earthquakes as gas builds up inside Mount Vesuvius . Then on August 24, 79 ce, the mountain unexpectedly erupted, shrouding 15,000 unsuspecting people .
 The violent tremors are felt in the nearby towns of Herculaneum and Pompeii . Pompeii, 6 miles to the southeast, is 6 miles away .
 Pliny the Younger spots a towering cloud rising from the quiet Aalelelaitcliamrelesim-litcim alele . The cloud of hot ash, rock, and gas rises to more than 12. miles in the sky .
 Winds start to carry super-hot ash and rocks southeast toward Pompeii . Pompeii was one of the most famous sites in the world .
 volcanic rock, known as pumice, rains down on surprised Pompeii citizens . Later, harmful oFeWouslelulaccmicelaamiatcuaulanie)iiaenanelelairclia as lightweight volcanic rock rains down .
 They start to panic, e)ialemialci|mVscllUlo1em ele \sisiorsss) le) aloerels) they flee toward the beach looking for a way to escape .
 MoMialle)@lc\clmelmclmclsianelale, elUlanlierom el0||Celsmelemlamlamaxe)aa] els) mere lelsiare olUi Ce lialefsmremEx)i
 WMalsullelelalavusselaimelelpaliexcmilerciecnlamialcmclicle aatcldiarepimarslcemie)mial-me)V1/ to flee the horror.
 Pyroclastic flows flow down from the gaelUlaltcliaMm MAlismilaalomualonaclisvenalcrcle southeast toward Pompelil . The dust settles after the dust settles .
 Herculaneum has vanished, olUlamolonim mevm-lciamelelanliersy and volcanic rock .
 The Bay of Naples is shrouded in darkness for several days as the volcanic cloud finally settles . Mount Vesuvius is quiet once more .
 The first historically recorded ZOO Is created in the Egyptian city of Nekhen . Rulers and royalty The first zoo was created in Egypt .
 Visitors come to see baboons, leopards, hippos, gazelles, and crocodiles . Visitors come from all over the world to the park .
 The mummified remains of these animals will be discovered thousands of years later . They will be found in the form of mummies, mummies and mummies .
 Many museums begin as private collections of art or artifacts displayed in wealthy homes . Wealthy homes also created spectacular shows to reflect their own oower and wealth .
 Singing and storytelling have been important for along time in many cultures, O and theaters and music halls out performers on Stage In front of paying audiences . Singing has been important in some cultures, but not everyone knows it .
 Over the centuries, millions of people have gathered to enjoy the greatest snows on tne planet .
 The world’s oldest opera house opens in the Italian city of Naples . Opera house is located in Naples, Italy, and opened in 1883 .
 The Real Teatro Di San Carlo showcases the work of leading composers, orchestras, and singers . The real Teatro di San Carlo is located in San Carlo .
 The building later survives a fire and bombings during World War . Circus survives fire and bombing .
 Eventually, he adds clowns, musicians, and other performers, resulting in a circus . Eventually, the circus becomes a circus, adding clowns and musicians to it .
 The first public cinema screening shown to a paying audience is presented by the French brothers Auguste and Louis Lumiere in Paris, France . The first colored fireworks are invented in Italy in the 1830s .
 The first international World's Fair was held at the Crystal Palace in London . The first world's fair was held in London at the Palace Palace .
 Industrial, scientific, and cultural exhibits are displayed for months at a time . Industrial and scientific exhibits will be displayed at the National Museum .
 The world's first public aquarium, called The Fish House, opens at London Zoo . World's first aquarium opens at the London Zoo on Monday .
 In Mayan culture, there Is a games are watched by up to theater, and musical festival every 20 days . The games are . watched by . up to . theater and musical festivals every . 20 days.
 The classical music crowds gather at the local continue to be held until and dance styles from this era . Central plaza for religious rituals, live music, and intricate dances .
 Performers entertain in Asia today by dressing up as gods and mythical creatures . Performers still practice in Asia by dressing as mythical creatures and gods .
 Ww Carnival The Globe Theatre opens in Brazil . Based on spring festival from Royal festivities . Shakespeares plays ancient Greece, the world’s French king Louis XIV .
 The program includes operas, concerts, fireworks, light displays, and theater. Rio de Janeiro every year . Crowds gather outside to million people celebrate on the streets and beaches .
 Copacabana Beach Radio features rides and attractions with the gay community . Santa Claus Land to promote the equality and rights of performance on the island .
 Theme parks celebrations have since been held 3. million people gather there on Reginald A Fessenden . Theme parks have since become popular across the in cities around the world .
 Disneyland Ee. invents an electric generator country that can produce continuous becoming the world’s leading sound waves . New Year's Eve for the free concert. New year's Eve .
 His first public theme park by the 1950s was Brent Rock in Massachusetts on Christmas Eve . The radio broadcast is from Brent Rock, Massachusetts, on Christmas Day .
 The Kushans, a nomadic people from Central Asia, conquer northwest India and modern-day Afghanistan . YY Al Kushan Empire was founded by the Kushans .
 They follow anew form of Buddhism called Mahayana, which spreads to Central and East Asia . Follows a form of Buddhist Buddhism known as Mahayanas .
 Brihadratha, the last Mauryan king, Is assassinated by Pushyamitra Shunga, the chief of his guard . Brihadaratha was the last king of the Mauryans .
 Shunga founds an empire in his own name that covers the central area of the Maurya Empire . The empire was found in his name that covered the central part of the empire .
 After conquering Kalinga in eastern India, Ashoka decides to stop waging war . Ashoka decided to end his war against the gods . Peace pillars are pillars of peace .
 He sets up pillars across the empire, topped by sculptures of lions, elephants, and bulls . He sets them up pillars of the empire topped by statues of lions and elephants .
 He also warns those who will rule after him not to conquer new territory . He also tells them to not conquer new territories .
 Buddha Is thought to have found enlightenment while sitting under a bodhi tree . Bodhi tree is thought to be one of the most important trees in the world . Buddha is believed to have been enlightened by sitting under the tree .
 Mauryan expansion °—~ Ss NX Bindusara, the second Mauryanking, © © expands the empire into southern India . S NX Binduara was one of the first Mauryankers to come to India .
 Bindusara maintains good diplomatic relations with the Greeks and enjoys the sweet wine and figs they bring . The island nation has a good relationship with the Greek people .
 Chandragupta defeats an invading Macedonian army, led by King Seleucus . The elephant exchange took place at the end of the last century .
 Inspired by Greek art, sculptors in Gandhara make statues of the Buddha . In previous times, Buddha had been represented only by symbols such as the dharma wheel .
 The defeated kings are allowed to continue ruling, but must send tribute to Gupta . The defeated king is allowed to keep ruling but must pay tribute to him .
 The Gupta Empire is at its peak under Chandra Gupta Il, a patron of art, literature, and science . On his inscriptions, he boasts that he is “invincible” af ‘Classical Age’
 AG Aryabhata, the mathematician-astronomer, writes the Aryabhatiya, the earliest-surviving Indian book about mathematics . It is thought that Kalidasa, the greatest poet and playwright in the Sanskrit language, may have been one of the court poets
 Bed ees ae a | argues that Earth is a rotating sphere . He correctly argues that the Moon and planets shine because of reflected sunlight .
 Hindu and Buddhist temples throughout the subcontinent are covered with intricate carvings of people, animals, and nature . Carvings are made of Hindu sculptures of people and animals .
 The sculptures are full of activity, giving an impression of what life was like in ancient India .
 Empire of the sack of Rome, written in 412, was the Roman Empire of Rome .
 From the 4th century, the Roman Empire started to fall apart as Germanic invaders swept into western Europe . The Roman Empire fell apart as the Germanic invasion of western Europe swept in .
 J oreserved many Roman institutions and customs . These / Germanic conquerors establisned new kingdoms tnere, out of Roman institutions .
 In the Middle East, the new religion of Islam took nold, and scnolars made great strides in the study of matn, astronomy, and medicine . In the Mideast, scnologists took on matn and astronomy .
 Advanced cultures alSO appeared across the Americas, Africa, and Southeast Asia . During this period, advanced cultures appeared across Africa, Asia and the Americas .
 Chain mail was popular throughout medieval Europe and other parts of the world . Chain mail offered protection against blades, and was popular in medieval Europe . Chainmail was used to protect against blades in medieval times .
 It was cheap enough that soldiers other than knights could afford It, and the mesh made it very flexible and easy to wear .
 Hundred Years’ War ends in an established settlement in New Zealand . Peru is established in Peru . Peru's Inc Inc Incultual Inc Inculca is established .
 Trade with North Africa brought invaded as with it the religion of Islam . far as Europe and China .
 Nomads from the Jurchen Jin invade and conquer China adopts a new ee northern China, forcing variety of early ripening the Song Dynasty to rice from Champa move south .
 Pete 16 1g “e194 O} 8q . 8q =IM 8H ‘WeUlsl/ WIL S8OJOJ ‘UILWIYS JoJedwy epensued O} sjrej oy YBNoULY
 According to Its teacnings, tne archangel Jioril first revealed God's Word to the Proonet Munammad. Munammad .
 Within a Nnundred years, Arab armies nad carried tneir religion to otner parts of Asia, North Africa, and spain, creating powertul Islamic empires . Within a hundred years, the Arab armies had taken over the world .
 By the time of his death, Muhammad had united the whole of Arabia under Islam . Muhammad was the founder of the Islamic state of Arabia .
 Islamic teaching does not allow pictures of humans or animals in holy places . Islamic teachings do not allow images of people or animals to be taken at holy sites .
 Mosques and other religious buildings throughout the Islamic world are richly decorated with geometric patterns of tiles . 93 -moires of the Americas aMaromilasimalelantclarseclaaniclem|am@rslalieclnelalemeyelelsaw-
 There they built thriving civilizations on Siide)ale mcelel are rsidle)alcne mas) ile . These great empires eventually fell at the arclaleicneicne .
 People throughout the empires of the ancient Americas believed that their gods desired human sacrifices . Bs 9 P stern hb st PP it, y <a ri cae hs & 2s"" Ae 9 ©) ie oH * S VA .
 Priests would remove the victim's heart and present it to the gods as an offering . Priests removed the heart and gave it to them as a gift of the gods .
 These sacrifices are usually performed inside temples and on mountaintops . These sacrifices were usually performed in temples .
 Aztec priest sacrificed two victims to appease the gods . Aztec priests sacrificed victims in an Aztec sacrifice to appease gods .
 The arrival of Soanish conquerors during the 16th century brought an end to the Aztec and Inca Empires . After the death of the Inca and Aztec, the Soanish conquered the area .
 The Spanish soon destroyed both civilizations . Driven by greed and with little concern for the natives, the Spanish destroyed both .
 Hernan Cortés took over the Aztec Empire, while Francisco Pizarro overthrew the Incas . Hernán Cortés was the first Aztec to take over the empire . Francisco Pzarro was also the first to overthrow the Incahas .
 This is areplica of a helmet that was buried with a 7th century cavalry helmets, its decoration is Germanic in style . Based on late-Roman This is based on late Roman documents .
 The last Wester Emperor, Romulus n Roman Augustulus, is overthrown b y Odoacer, a Germanic chieftain w himself king of ltaly . Augustulus was overthrown by Roman Augustus .
 Vikings founded new kingdoms across Frankish King Charlemagne as by the Liffey River . Vikings built a fortified camp in Dublin . Viking raids broke apart the Western Roman Empire .
 Charlemagne unites much of western Europe in his Carolingian Empire . He gained authority from the Church, which taught that rulers were chosen by God .
 The Vikings go on to found settlements at Limerick, Wexford, Waterford, and Cork . The Vikings also found settlements in Limerick and Welland .
 Pope Urban Il proclaims a crusade against the Muslims, who rule the Middle East . The First Crusade was the 12th Crusade .
 In Europe, the Medieval period, or Middle Ages, lasted ‘our Chllii,states in the Middle East . Om Ine Stn 1 Ine 1S Cenlunes. In 1099, the . Medieval period of the Middle Ages lasted in 1099 .
 This begins the Hanseatic League, a great trading more than acentury of on-and-off association of northern German towns between England and France . The League was formed in 17th century and lasted until 18th century .
 Henry Henry stands barefoot in the snow for three days at Canossa in Italy . Henry stood barefoot to earn the pope's pardon . Henry's story is published in the Vatican City State Library .
 Joan of Arc, afarmer’s daughter who claims to hear the voices of saints, leads the French to victory over the English . Joan claims to be the daughter of the afarmer's daughter and claims to have heard voices from saints .
 She Is eventually captured by the English, accused of witchcraft, and burned at the stake for It . She is eventually captured and eventually burned at stake .
 Medieval Europe shaken by a series of events at the end of the 15th century . Medieval Europe is shaken by the events of the year 15th and 16th .
 Christopher Columbus lands in the Americas in 1492, changing Europeans view of the world . Christopher Columbus landed on his first voyage to the Americas . Columbus was the first European explorer to discover the Americas on the continent .
 New theories spread by printing also lead to the rejection of many long-held ideas and beliefs . Theories spread by print can also be rejected by the public .
 Englisn KING, Edward Ill, orepared a strategy that would surprise and overwhelm the dominant force of nis attackers . However, as the combat-nunary French attempted to charge at the French, King Edward Ill prepared a strategy to surprise the enemy .
 In February 1328, the death of the French king Charles IV leads to a Succession dispute between the kingdoms of France and England . The Hundred Years’ War was the first English-French invasion of the Hundred Years' War .
 King Philip VI of France lays claim to the throne, as does the English monarch, Edward lll. King Philip IV of France and King Edward VII of England lay claim to their throne .
 The Hundred Years’ War began in May 1337, 1337 . This is the beginning of the epic conflict that will become known as the Hundred Years' War .
 These include the control of the valuable wool trade and disputes over areas of land . These include disputes over land and ownership of valuable wool .
 On June 24, 1340, Edward Ill and his navy are victorious against the cumbersome French fleet at the Battle of Sluys . Edward Ill's navy is victorious at the battle of the day .
 The English navy dominates the English Channel, allowing invading forces to be transported efficiently to the continent .
 In July 1346, an invading English army lands in Normandy and takes the town of Caen . The English invade Caen, Normandy, in 1346 .
 Philip VI rallies his troops and with the assistance of King John of Bohemia, who is blind, and around 6,000 mercenary crossbowmen from Genoa, they move north to engage the English . Philip VI rallied his troops, with the help of the blind King John .
 In August, Edward Ill and his invading army of about 14,000 men gather in preparation for battle on the hills between the towns of Crecy and Wadicourt .
 Word of the marching French army arrives, so the English dig trenches and construct barricades to protect their position . The English dug trenches and staked barricades in order to protect them .
 Edward Ill orders his knights to dismount, and the English divide into three units of spearmen, knights, and longoowmen . The English division is divided into two units: Spearmen (spearmen) and knights (Knight) and longowmen (Knight
 They are under the command of the king, his son , and the Earl of Northampton . The king's son and his son are also in charge .
 At noon, a unit of horsemen report back to the king about the English position and recommend that his army rests and attacks the next day . At noon of the day, the king's horsemen recommended that the English army rest and attack the following day .
 French noblemen persuade Philip VI to attack immediately . Philip VI is captured in the Battle of the Wallisis in 17th century .
 At around 4:00m., as the French army marches toward the English, arainstorm hits the battlefield and the Genoese crossbowmen are unable to shield their crossbows from the pouring rain .
 The English longobowmen are prepared and protect their bowstrings from the downpour . The longbowmen are preparing for the rain in England .
 Crossbowmen launch an attack, but their arrows land short as their range is reduced by their damp weapons . The crossbowmen are attacked by a group of men in a bid to defend their land .
 English longobowmen step forward and bombard the misfiring crossbowmen with their arrows . The French retreat . The English longbowmen are led by the longbowman .
 Their much greater range and their ability to reload faster creates chaos in the enemy ranks . They can also reload faster than anyone else .
 Many crossbowmen fall, and in a state of panic, the French army starts to flee the battlefield . The French army flees the battlefield, with the help of the French troops .
 The cowardice of the Genoese is punished by the mounted French knights who slay their retreating allies . The Genocese were punished for their cowardice by the French .
 English archers bombard their attackers with arrows and many horses tumble . Many horses tumble, taking their riders with them with them . Many of the attackers were killed in the battle .
 A second charge on the English Is led by blind King John, who is tied to his horse and pointed in the direction of his foes . King John led the charge with a second charge led by a blind King .
 This charge is more successful, beating back the Black Prince's troops . But help from the Earl of Northampton neutralizes the French offensive and the English manage to hold their position .
 Edward II watches from the top of the hill as Charge after charge by the French fails to break through his troops’ defenses . The French failed to break into Edward II’s defenses .
 The English longbowmen dominate the battle as more French soldiers fall on the muddy battlefield, including Philips brother Charles II of Alencon . The battle was fought in France in 16th century .
 The wounded Philip VI abandons the battlefield and seeks refuge at the castle of La Boyes . Just before midnight, the wounded Philip V. II seeks refuge in the castle .
 French soldiers and remaining knights follow suit, leaving more than 21,500 dead on the battlefield . The French soldiers follow suit and leave the battlefield, leaving the battlefield dead .
 A huge haul of Viking treasure was after a Viking leader buried it for safekeeping . It’s made of solid silver, covered witha found in 2007, more than 1,000 years ago .
 Pope Urban II declares the First Crusade, calling upon European Christian knights to help take Jerusalem from Muslim control . Crean call for the First Crusades is called to take Jerusalem .
 Hundreds take a holy vow to join the Crusade and wear across as a sign of their commitment . Hundreds of thousands of people pledge their allegiance to the Crusade .
 Crusaders set up four Christian kingdoms in the Middle East . Capture of Jerusalem captured in 1096 . Crusaders captured Jerusalem three years later .
 A Muslim army captures the Crusader city of Edessa in 1144, a leading French churchman, St. St. Louis was killed in the Second Crusade .
 Third Crusade led by King Richard | the Lionheart of England and King Philip Il Augustus of France . They defeat a Christian army at the Battle of Hattin, and storm most of the Crusader kingdoms, including Jerusalem .
 Crusader-controlled F thc d conquering the powerful a treaty with the Sultan of Saintly Crusader stronghold in Palestine, falls SAL rusade Muslim state Egypt .
 Crusaders trapped by Jerusalem to the Christians leads two unsuccessful the end of Crusader recapture Jerusalem . The annual flood of the Nile floods the Nile for a short time . It marks This crusade .
 Egypt in 1254 during the No further crusades are army reaches the Orthodox seventh Crusade, he dies in organized to Jerusalem . No further Crusades are are seen in the world .
 Christian city of Tunisia in 1270 while on the Constantinople, the capital of the Eighth Crusade . Tunisian city of Tunisian capital of 1270 during the crusade .
 From tne 1st century ce, wealthy kingdoms farmers, as well as skilled . metalworkers of bronze andiron emerged here . Wealthy kingdoms farmers and skilled metalworkers emerged from here .
 The Portuguese were followed by the Spanish, the Dutch, the British, and the French, all conquering separate territories . The Portuguese, the Spanish and the Dutch conquered separate territories in 16 years .
 Hidden for centuries by jungle, it was rediscovered by Europeans in 1860 . Hidden by the jungle for centuries, it has been rediscovered in 1860 by Europeans .
 The outer walls represent the edge of the world, and the moat the cosmic ocean . The moat represents the cosmic oceans, the outer walls .
 In tne late 12tn century, tne elite warrior class Known as the samurai became the real bower behind the throne .
 This began a time of contlict between warlords that would only end with the unification of Japan in 1603 . This was a period of conflict that would last until 1603, when Japan was unified .
 The transfer of power from the emperor's capital at Kyoto is the beginning of an era in which the samurai class would become Japan's military and social elite . The samurai class became the military, social elite of Japan .
 Two years after seizing control, Ashikaga Takauji is formally recognized as shogun . Two years later, he is officially recognized as the Shogun .
 The Kamakura Shogunate is brought down with the help of one of its former generals, Ashikaga Takaujl . The Genko War is based on the events of the Kamakura War .
 On both occasions, the kamikaze is credited with saving Japan from foreign invasion . The kamakaze was credited with stopping Japan from invasion .
 The first European explorers Oda Nobunaga dies in an attempt by 7 F to reach Japan are Portuguese merchants, one of his own men to seize power . 7 F is one of the first Europeans to arrive in Japan in the 13th century .
 Shogunate gt Oda Nobunaga brings the ma “AGO Ashikaga Shogunate to an end when he drives the shogun out of Kyoto .
 The long, curved, two-handed sword known as the katana becomes popular among the samurai class . Katana is a long curved, curved sword that has a curved edge .
 The katana is worn blade-side up so that it can be drawn and used in one swift movement . The kata is worn with the intention of drawing and using it blade side up .
 Tokugawa leyasu finally unites Japan under one ruler . Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi Hideyoshi were defeated in Sekigahara .
 The samurai class was bound by a strict code called bushido . They were bound by the strict bushido code, a code of honor and loyalty .
 Death was seen as preferable to living without honor and discipline . In this unwritten set of laws, death was seen to be preferable to being disciplined .
 A daimyo Nagashino was forced to give his allegiance to the combined forces of shogun, the leader of the military government . In turn, a daimy Nagasino gave his allegiance . The combined forces were able to defeat the daimo .
 For much of this period, the Tokugawa leyasu devastate true ruler of Jaoan . The emperor was a Oda Nobunaga their enemies with powerless figurehead . The shogun was the shogun's true ruler, and was the true ruler .
 As part of his plan to unite innovative firearms tactics Japan under his own rule, that change the face of Oda Nobunaga installs Japanese warfare . The Japanese warlord is known for his innovative weapons tactics .
 Roman fort all protected by a wooden fence . Roman fort . consist of amound topped by a tower . and a yard at the foot of the mound .
 Roman army construct stone forts, or camps, throughout their empire . The Roman army constructed forts throughout the Roman empire .
 "They build them all to asimilar layout, containing barracks, workshops, baths, and stores," says the builder .
 Each fort is called a castrum, which is where the word ‘castle’ comes from . Castles throughout Europe are now being built of stone .
 At first the towers are square in shape, but later they become circular as this means they are more difficult to attack . The towers are circular, meaning they are harder to attack than square ones .
 Knights returning from the Crusades bring back new ideas about castle building . Knights back from Crusades (see pages 104— 105) bring back ideas about castles .
 Castles are now built on cliff tops or surrounded by moats © to make them stronger . Castles have now been built on cliffs or on moats to protect themselves .
 Castles are home to the lord, his family, and their gatehouses Aaa te servants . They have thick walls, tall towers, thick walls and tall towers .
 Their huge stone walls exploit the natural Vauban forts mA features of the land . Their huge th —_ stone walls .
 They are low in height, and protected by sections called bastions coming off the center . The low-height, low-in height, they are protected from the sun .
 Rival warlords in Japan build themselves strong castles as symbols of their authority . Japanese castles are symbols of authority .
 These castles are mostly made of wood, standing on tall stone platforms surrounded by rings of moats . Castle is mostly made up of wood and is surrounded by a ring of mats .
 Castles are now being built for show as much as for defense . Castles being built as well as for show . Castle is now being used for show rather than defense .
 Towers are covered with battlements and battlements to make them look PS impressive . Towers have round i holes to fire guns through. Towers have battlements covered in battlements, and they have round holes .
 Malbork Castle, in present-day Poland, was built by the Teutonic Knights, a religious crusading order . It is located in the middle of Poland, near the city of Warsaw .
 Like their ancestors, they were nunting mammotns and other animals, following them along the Siloerian coast and across the land bridge between Asia and North America .
 Once in Alaska, over the following thousands of years, these people gradually soread across what is now North America . Over the years, they slowly spread across the continent, eventually becoming more and more .
 During the last Ice Age, Asia and America are connected by aflat, grassy, treeless landscape called Beringia . The landscape is a flat, grass-covered landscape . The land bridge was created during the Ice Age .
 Hungry humans make their homes in Beringia for generations . Hungry humans live in the land of the Great Barrier Islands .
 Ice hunt animals and follow melts, they will move south them across the tundra into modern-day Canada . Some historians believe and the US. people also arrived by boat .
 In the Eastern Woodlands (a large part of modern-day eastern Canada), people hunt, fish, and gather, while in the desert regions of the Southwest, people learn how to grow corn and other crops .
 Crowfoot Chief Siksika Bridge closed . Sea levels start to rise and Beringia begins to be submerged . Sea level levels rise .
 Hunters spread throughout the North American grasslands into the American Southwest . The American Southwest is the most populated area in the United States . Hunters spread across the North America grasslands .
 In the Pacific Ocean, skilful sailors made voyages of up to 3,000 miles to settle on tiny islands . Skilled sailors in the Pacific often sailed to islands in the region of the world .
 The Lapita people spread through Micronesia and part of Polynesia . People can travel to these new regions by a combination of sailing and walking .
 All voyagers use canoes that have one or more supports, called outriggers . All of the Pacific voyagers are using canoes with one or other supports . The outrigger is a support system for the voyagers .
 On Tahiti and Hawaii, chiefs have great power, receiving tribute and labor from ordinary people . On densely populated islands, such as Tahiti, they receive tribute from ordinary citizens .
 More equal societies are created on the thinly populated smaller islands . The islands are thinly populated and more sparsely populated than many of the world's islands .
 Modern day experiments show they were probably transported upright from quarries using ropes and log rollers . Modern-day experiments show it was likely transported upright using ropes .
 By 1300 ce, Polynesians nad settled a vast area of the Pacific, from the Hawaiian Islands to New Zealand and Easter Island . By 1300 c, they had settled an area from Hawaii to the New Zealand .
 Wnen Europeans arrived later, they were amazed to find such widespread Islands inhabited by Polynesians . Europeans arrived in the 1900s, when they discovered the islands .
 1722 Easter Island visit Jacob Roggeveen from the Netherlands is the first European to visit Easter Island .
 He finds a thriving society, where Moai are still standing, and people still use Canoes . The Moai is still standing and people are still using Canoes, he says .
 The Tahitians used the Sun, and stars to navigate, and canoes, to navigate . At first, he that the islanders used the sun, is attacked by warriors In war Moon .
 Easter Island society had collapsed — one theory states that the islanders way of life ruined the island’s environment . One theory says that one theory is that the way of living in the island ruined the environment .
 During this time, France colonizes Tahiti, and Fiji, Kiribati, and Tuvalu come under British control . During this period, the French colonized Tahiti .
 By 1900, the United States controls Hawaii, and by 1835, Germany has claimed Samoa . By 1835 Massacre Germany had claimed Samoa, and the U.S. controls Hawaii .
 The Chatham Islands, where they kill treaty brings the country into or enslave the local population, the British Empire . The treaty was signed in 17th century .
 The palace craftworkers of Benin in West Africa are the workers of the Songhai Empire . Benin queen was queen of the Benin kingdom .
 Ben; Rej nin E . his 1468 conquest of i Ob 7; nbir e Timbuktu, he takes over the Se ae founder io Ewuare m Mali Empire, and controls “Ware he enin e trade along the Niger River with a
 The Songhai Empire is the largest state in West African history . Askia the Great ruled the Songhai empire .
 He creates a centralized state with a professional army, which is later able to fight and defeat European forces . He creates state with professional army . He later creates a central state .
 This begins a “scramble for Africa’ among the European powers, which ends in the conquest of all the African states, except for Liberia and Ethiopia . and empires rise and fall. This begins in the “Scramble’s” among European powers
 Sub-sanaran Africa has seen a series of powerful kingdoms great rivers such as the Niger and the Congo . Wealth of the kingdoms was based on trade, mostly of gold, ivory, salt, and slaves .
 Jne nomadic trioes known as the Mongols joined together to bulla the largest land empire in history, stretching across Europe, the Middle East, and Asia . African kingdoms —6 |}ne Mongol Empire .
 He was skilled in military Strategy and led his army, which consisted almost entirely of horsemen armed with bows and arrows, to many victories . He led his horsemen, who were armed with bow bows, to victories .
 Genghis's horsemen lead his rise to oower, but in early 1227, he falls off of his horse . He falls off his horse in 1227 .
 After his clan 79 with bows and arrows, modern-day Russia (Russian) becomes leaves his family to fend for themselves targets China . After his family is killed, he targets China and leaves his clan with arrows .
 Temujin goes on to the Xi Xia Empire in central as the Golden Horde, perhaps gather his own tribe of followers . It is known or else starve to death, or else .
 China, then attack the Jin because of the Mongol rulers 99 Dynasty of the north . China then attacked the Jin in response to the attack .
 Genghis and his warrior Arrows in warfare leaders across the huge ' new empire need to . Mongol warriors fill the skies communicate with each with deadly arrows .
 Yam delivery service called Yam, set up hit targets up to 1050 ft a relay messenger and away . These can other quickly, so they set up hits quickly, and so the victims never see them .
 Hollow meaning “checkpoint.” whistle arrows sing like flutes, so commanders can send signals to troops across a noisy battlefield . Hollow meaning "checkpoint" is Hollow meaning .
 One by one, new territories fall, but when he hears about his uncle Ogedei'’s death, he gives up his quest . When he hears his uncle's death, the quest is over .
 Genghis Khan . ee & founder of the Mongol Empire ] L499) trhiher OD ae. ee . Genghi Khan . Ee .
 Three invasions fail, but the Tran Dynasty rulers decide to surrender anyway, in order to put an end to the fighting . The Tran dynasty rulers surrender to put a end to their fighting .
 An ancient network of routes, known as the Silk Road, connected travelers and traders from East Asia to the West . The Silk Road and the Pax Mongolica were established in the early 1400s and early 1600s .
 Mongols took control of this route at the beginning of the 18th century . The Mongols made sure people could travel safely in the region .
 These pests carried the Plague from the East to Europe, wiping out about 25 percent of the population .
 The Mamluks of Egypt under their general, Baybars, work out a clever strategy to outsmart the Mongols . Mamluk's general Baybars worked out a brilliant strategy to defeat the Mongolians .
 The underdogs win at the Battle of Ain Jalut, which ends the Mongol expansion to the east . The Mongol expansion ended in defeat .
 In China, he founds the Yuan Dynasty and Is the country’s first non-Chinese ruler . He found the Yuan dynasty and is the first person to rule China .
 Last big show of military ‘| power, Kublai’s forces attack 5 southern China . Intheir last big show . show of . military '| power', Kubl .ai's forces attack five southern China cities .
 Kublai brings nearly all of China together . They capture most of the territory and bring together most of China's territory .
 On the ground, his army throws grenades— metal jars filled with gunpowder . On the floor, he throws grenades . Metal jars filled in gunpowder are thrown by his army . The bombs explode in the air .
 Ina second invasion, typhoon winds wreck most of Khan’s Venice, Alexandriae . Typhoon winds wreak most of the Venice .
 The Mongols are harsh rulers, and a series of natural disasters make things even worse for the Chinese . The end of rule in China is seen as the end of the Mongolian rule .
 Early maps did not portray the world as It was, but instead reflected the beliefs of those who made them . Robert Louis Stevenson Essays in the Art of Writing .
 As people learned more about tne world around them, maos became more realistic . AS people learn more about maos, people became more aware of the reality of the world .
 By the Age of Exploration In Europe, maomaking, or cartography, was used extensively by ocean explorers to ‘a, Chart unfamiliar shores.’ In modern technology, no part of Earths Surface remains unmapped .
 Gerardus Mercator devised a projection that still dominates the way we see the shape of the world . In 1569, Mercator created a projection of the image of the globe .
 His projection exaggerates the size of countries near the poles at the expense of those at the Equator . The projection is based on a projection of countries at the equator at the poles .
 Modern medicine has wioed out many threats to human neath . Although several Infectious Illnesses remain oroblematic, modern medicine has eradicated many of them .
 When the New World is invaded by Spanish and Portuguese explorers, local people are exposed to new diseases . As people begin living in towns and villages, Mexican epidemic occurs .
 A smalloox epidemic kills many millions of people in what is now Mexico and the Andes over the next 2 years . The epidemic will kill millions over two years .
 First cases of poor sanitation help bubonic plague diseases to spread . Cramped conditions and poor sanitation contribute to the spread of the disease .
 Rat fleas have been reported in China . A mysterious disease Is first With limited medical treatment . A mystery disease is first with limited medical .
 Symptoms are knowledge, people blame responsible for bleeding sores, high temperature, evil spirits or angry gods . Symptoms are . spreading many and vomiting, leading to rapid historic plagues .
 Antonine Plague takes its name from Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, the ruler at the time . Antoninus was the ruler of the Roman Empire . The plague is the most common plague in Roman history .
 Experts now believe the disease was smallpox . About 5 million die over 15 years, and experts now believe smallpox was the disease .
 Plague of Justinian Disease spreads through the city of Constantinople (now Istanbul), killing 40 percent of the population . Disease kills 40% of the city's population, killing 40% .
 Ancient plague carried over plague from Egypt on grain ships . It had been carried over by rats coming over from Egypt .
 The city of Athens in ancient Greece is hit by a plague that kills more than 30,000 people . The city was hit by the plague that killed more than a million people .
 The bubonic plague, or Black Death, wipes out half the population of Europe (around 40 million people) in just 4 years . The writer Thucydides describes terrible symptoms that lead to death within a week .
 Rules introduced following the Great Fire of London a year later to improve sanitation and congestion . Rules are introduced to improve the city's sanitation and traffic .
 Scottish scientist Alexander bleeding. Scottish scientists believed these would restrict contact with the di eee Ebola outbreak . Ebola is a fast-spreading virus causing fever and fever .
 Fleming accidentally discovers penicillin, which becomes the first ever antibiotic . Penicillin is the first antibiotic ever developed in the world .
 This epidemic throughout discovery saves millions of West Africa from bacterial infections . Final outbreak that would once have been fatal. people would have died . This epidemic has saved millions of people in West Africa .
 The bubonic plague hits Europe again, this time in the busy port of Marseille in France . The plague is believed to be the first to strike in the Mediterranean since 2003 .
 Doctors and surgeons begin washing their hands to stop infections from spreading . The move comes as sanitation standards improve .
 The outbreak begins in India, arrives in Europe on merchant ships, and later reaches the Americas . Spanish flu starts to spread in India and arrives in the Americas on ships . HIV/AIDS anges anges A k dj ine Malaria is a killer .
 AIDS still has a devastating impact in Africa and Asia, killing 2 million people every year . It becomes Meas i . he More deadly than the Black known as AIDS (acquired developed world in the 1980s)
 More than 20 million people die from AIDS, but drugs later developed to control it . Drugs later developed later to control the disease .
 The Black Death quickly made its mark across Europe, Africa, and Asia . It spread across Europe and Africa .
 Bacteria contracted from flea bites was the reason for its rapid ASIA spread . The bacteria was contracted from a flea bite bite .
 Rats carried fleas along streets and aboard ships, passing the fatal disease to populations far and wide around the world . Rats carried the deadly disease along the world's streets, aboard ships and on streets .
 Recent studies suggest that human fleas and body lice helped spread the epidemic . Recent studies also suggest that fleas also helped to spread the disease .
 The earllest weapons and armor were designed to hunt animals, but it is very likely they could have been used to attack humans too .
 WF Warhorses were used in Europe and Asia about 5,000 years ago . The earliest warhorse was used in Asia and Europe and Europe . The oldest warhorse used in the world was called Coll Py .
 Using horses in battle became easier when saddles, stirrups, and the horse collar emerged . The horse collar was the first horse collar to be used in battle .
 Later on, the Mongol Empire's military power rested on the success of its light cavalry and riders . The light cavalry could fire arrows with great accuracy from horseback .
 The use of horses in battle declined as distance weapons continued in the early 1900s .
 New inventions and discoveries led to the oirth of modern science, and voyages of discovery sailed to uncharted lands . New discoveries and inventions led to modern science .
 European nations built mignty overseas empires to rival the older empires that continued in the Middle East, China, and India . European nations . built m sovereignty overseas empires .
 Michelangelo unveils his statue of David, a masterpiece of the Renaissance . Michelangelo's David is the work of the 16th century artist .
 Voyages of discovery throughout this period were made possible by advancements in navigation technology . Voyage technology enabled navigation technology to enable discoveries .
 It allowed sailors to measure the angle of the Sun or the Moon above the horizon to work out their location . It was used by sailors in the early 1900s to find their location in the dark .
 Mughal India and Qing people take control of France, and Britain quickly took control of the Islamic China . European nations such as Spain, A revolution in scientific thought spread across the Indian subcontinent .
 As far back as the 3rd millenium BceE, the Chinese and Egyptians made inks using soot, water, and gum . Egyptian and Chinese inks are still being used today .
 Ne technology that allows peoole to write things down i i cacao tn tbe IS as Important as tne invention of scriots and alonabets and tannic acid (taken from growths)
 It was used first to print Clay tablets pictures on silk, and later for words on paper . It was later used to print words on silk .
 Sumerians of Mesopotamia in modern-day southern Iraq begin to write on soft clay tablets . Sumerans began to write with a piece of reed on clay tablets in Mesopotamian clay .
 Modern paper, made from wood pulp, will not be invented until the 1840s . Modern paper will be made from pulp pulp . Paper was invented in 1840s, but paper was invented by the 1800s .
 The earliest evidence of Egyptian writing is of hieroglyphs carved on ivory and ee 1st Century ce oy bone tablets . Writing begins in the earliest known Egyptian writings .
 Egyptians also write on papyrus, using areed brush, with ink made from soot, water, and gum from trees . Papyrus is made from papyrus .
 Each book is called a codex, and is more portable and easier to use than along scroll . The codex is a more portable book than a scroll scroll .
 Writing on parchment made from dried, stretched animal skin becomes common across the eastern Mediterranean .
 It is made of powdered graphite mixed with clay, pressed between two half cylinders of wood .
 Bi Sheng invents the first printing system to use movable type in China . Each letter or symbol can be moved and reused to make different words . Each word can be printed with different letters or symbols .
 HewlettPackard produces their first desktop laser printer . People can now type onto a digital screen instead of directly onto paper .
 Word processor programs allow users to produce high-quality printed documents on demand . It allows individuals with word processor programs to produce .
 Johannes Gutenberg invents a printing oress with moveable metal type, using oil-based ink . Gutenberg’s printing press was invented in Germany in the 17th century .
 By 1500, by 1500, 20 million books will have been printed in Europe .
 Oceans were first navigated by ancient people on wooden rafts . Ancient people navigated the oceans on wooden boats .
 Travelers from Asia arrived in Australia on rafts around 50,000 years ago . They are believed to have arrived on the shores of Australia on a raft from Asia .
 Steam engines and paddle wheels propel the boats through the water . Steam powers the engines, and giant paddle wheels power the boats . The boats are powered by steam engines .
 The first boats to replace rafts were built by the ancient Egyptians for transporting cargo along the Nile . They were built to replace the rafts built to transport cargo .
 These fast-moving ships have multiple sails and narrow hulls ae to cruise the waters faster . The ships have a narrow hull and multiple sails to cruise faster .
 Hese warships feature a superior strength, sturdy bases strong hull, multiple masts, and heavy beam, called a battering called keels . The Chinese equipped with multiple sails and feature overlapping planks for junk .
 Giotto di Bondone begins painting ina . . yo 4."" more realistic style . Giotto began painting in a realistic style in the 16th century .
 Classical revival in Constantinople (modernay Istanbul), capital of the be Empire, captured by the Ottomans, many scholars flee to Italy . Many scholars fled to Italy to escape the capture of the city .
 They bring along ancient Greek and Roman texts, which shave long been lost in the West . The texts are brought along along with ancient texts from the ancient world .
 It is carved from a single with mechanical wings, block of marble and is more than even if it could never be 17 ft high work in practice .
 The term “Machiavellian’s from the author's name, comes to be associated with gaining political power by clever but dishonest methods . The term comes from the name of the author, the author of the novel .
 Raphael painted The School of Athens, a fresco for the Pope's rooms in the Vatican in Rome . The fresco was painted by Raphael in the 15th century .
 He uses vast wealth to soonsor great artists such as Sandro la 14th-century mer. ode Italy, el Botticelli and Michelangelo . Uses vast wealth of wealth to pay for great artworks such as Michelangelo.
 Painting moved away trom the sti inven Ba forms of medieval Christian art to Teicical texts cae —— a more realistic style .
 Ambassadors by Hans Holbein, then working in England, is one of the greatest works of the Northern Renaissance . The colors sink in, allowing a Northern Renaissance to spread across Europe .
 Vasco da Gama's expedition heads south down the west coast of Africa . The expedition was led by his brother, Paulo, with the help of his brother .
 Da Gama follows a similar route that was plotted by the great Portuguese sailor Bartolomeu Dias . Instead of closely following the west coast, da Gama heads out into the Atlantic Ocean .
 After four months at sea, da Gama passes the Cape of Good Hope, rounds the tip of southern Africa, and sails into the unknown waters of the Indian Ocean .
 da Gamass fleet heads north along the east coast of Africa, and makes landfall in Mozambique in December 1497 .
 Da Gama and his men were met with hostility from the local Muslim sultan . Da Gamas was killed by the sultan, who was a Muslim Muslim .
 da Gama bombarded the port and heads north along the coast to Mombasa . After fleeing to his ship and bombarding the port, he then heads north . Da Gama then fled to his boat and headed north along .
 Da Gama loots several unarmed Arab trading vessels and angers the local Mombasa people . The local people were angered by the looting of the unarmed vessels .
 After torturing several Muslim sailors, da Gama flees north to continue his search for India . Da Gama learns of a plot to avenge his actions in Mozambique so he flees .
 In April 1498, da Gama keeps heading north and finally makes an ally at the port of Malindi on April 14 . Da Gama kept heading north to find a new ally in the port .
 Malindi is at war with Mombasa, and its leader offers to help da Gama with his expedition . Da Gama's expedition takes place in the early 16th century .
 Da Gama and Malindi sign a trade treaty and, as a sign of friendship, give da Gama a local navigator to help the Portuguese fleet through the unchartered and treacherous waters of the Indian Ocean .
 Vasco da Gama and his fleet sail into the port of Calicut (modern-day Kallicote) on the southwest coast of India on May 20, after several weeks crossing the Indian Ocean and more than 10 months at sea . The ship's fleet sailed into Calicut on
 The Zamorin is unimpressed with the oresents and, as tensions rise between the local Muslim traders and Christian explorers, the Hindu ruler becomes less receptive to da Gama’s trade offerings .
 After three months, da Gama and his men leave without a trade agreement, but carrying cargo worth nearly 60 times the cost of the expedition . Da Gama's men leave with cargo worth more than 60 times cost of their expedition .
 The journey home is ill-fated as monsoons, scurvy, and exhaustion take their toll on da Gama's crew .
 In September 14939, two years and 24,000 miles after he first left home, Vasco da Gama sails into the port of Lisbon . The ship is the first to arrive in Lisbon .
 Portugal honors Vasco da Gama with the title “Admiral of the Indian Seas” Pedro Alvares Cabral was sent to establish a trading post in India .
 Cabral is forced to leave after an uprising by local Muslim traders destroys his encampment . Cabral was forced to flee the encampment after the uprising .
 In 1502, da Gama sets sail for India for a second time to re-establish Portugal's trading post in the region . Portugal's trade post was established in 1502 .
 da Gama uses excessive force to persuade Zamorin of Calicut to sign a trade treaty . Da Gama used excessive force in order to get a treaty signed by Calicut . The treaty was signed in 17th century .
 Da Gamais seen as a villain in the Indian Ocean, but when he returns home once again with more precious cargo, he Is celebrated as ahero . Da Gamas returned to the surface of the ocean with a cargo of gold and other treasure .
 Vasco da Gama made his final journey to India in 1524, which also happens to be his last-ever voyage . The Portuguese was the last man to reach India . He made his last voyage to India, which was his first voyage to Europe .
 He arrives at Cochin in India, but eventually dies on December 24, 1524 . He arrives in Cochin, India, and eventually dies at the age of 16 .
 In the past, they painted them directly onto the walls of tneir caves, temples, or nouses . In the future, they used to paint them on the walls .
 Artists nave since experimented with different styles of painting .
 Painters continue to be Inspired and influenced by artists from the past . Painters are inspired by artists who have influenced them .
 Renaissance masterpiece The Mona Lisa, a hauntingly flaxseed or walnut oil, is introduced in typical of the Baroque style of art . The Arnolfini Portrait by Jan van Eyck, 1434, is considered a masterpiece by the 16th century .
 Rembrandt van Rijn is the most famous miniature paintings full of color and painter of the Dutch Golden Age, a time of detail become popular . The Mughal Empire flourishes in India .
 Illustrations, personal portraits, or for The Night Watch Is characteristic of art at Keeping in art aloums the time, full of color and realistic detail .
 American Modernist artist, best reality, finding a new kind of art that reflects reality . Known for her studies of flowers and the changes that are occurring in science exploring how to paint skin tones, such as cityscapes such as East River .
 Woman with Eyes Closed is a portrait of the 30th Story of the Shelton Hotel . Artist uses simple shapes, and lines to create effects .
 They are common in the Eastern Orthodox Christian Church, a Catholic religion practiced in Eastern Europe and Asia . Catholic religion is practiced in Asia and Eastern Europe .
 The Death of General Wolfe 3,000-300 sce Sennefer’s burial ——\ A OSS chamber Portrait of Venus Pye
 Deceased people are portrayed performing everyday tasks or making offerings to the gods . Deceases people are shown performing tasks or performing offerings to gods .
 British painter Turner is admired for his depictions of the shimmering effects of sunlight . Turner's 1839 painting The Fighting Temeraire is one of the world's most famous works of art .
 Impressionists include Monet, Renoir, and Degas . They come to be known as Impressionist artists . Monet and Renoir were among them .
 Artists like Van Gogh, Cezanne, and Gauguin add their own ideas to those of the Impressionists . Post-Impressionism is a form of modern art .
 Settlers and American Indians battled over lana, leadersnip, and local resources . Conflicts resulted as settlers and Native Americans battled over resources and lana .
 Spanish influences are stil present in North, Central, and South America today . Almost two million Spaniards moved to the Americas in the 300 years before .
 Silver is shipped back to Spain to pay for its wars in Europe . Weapons mismatch is used to fund Spain's wars against Europe .
 Large numbers of Spanish settlers come to South America . Spanish colonization led to the creation of the Americas .
 Cocoa beans are used like money by both the Maya and the Aztec peoples of Central America . Beans from the cacao tree are shipped to Spain from the Trade triangle of South America .
 These nails are sent to Europe and exchanged for guns and THE SPANISH EMPIRE nails, which are then sold in Africa for slaves . The nails are then sent to Africa and sold in Europe and Africa for guns .
 Hernan Cortés, 1485-1547 Americas. New foods, . flowers, and animals arrive from the . Americas .
 In1500, Portuguese navigator Pedro Alvares set sail for India . The Spanish introduce a system called Cabral set sail to India . Sadly, they also bring with » them diseases such as measles, smallpox, and influenza .
 Cabral was blown westward across gold, labor, and land, as long as they protect the American Indians and convert them to the Christian religion . Instead of traveling “encomienda, in which settlers receive east, Cabral traveled westward . the Atlantic, ending up
 Spain’s King Charles V gives permission for 4,000 Africans to be forcibly brought to the New World to work as slaves . He claimed the land for Portugal, beginning a widespread colonization of the country .
 Pineapples, chiles, potatoes, and turkeys are seen in Europe for the first time . New foods include pineapples and chiles .
 Those who survive are treated . like slaves, working long hours in poor conditions for little or no pay . Those who survived are treated » like slaves .
 Father Eusebio Francisco Kino is one of many religious figures Nae to introduce Christianity to the . colonies .
 Americas —New Spain, New Granada, Peru, and River Plate — continued to be ruled by Spain .
 The Aztecs surrendered on August 13, 1521, when an army of Spanish and Tlaxaclan warriors, led by the Spanish explorer Hernan Cortés, captured the Aztec ruler of Tenochtitlan, ., ti sma Cuauhté
 Selim was acknowledged as caliph in 1517 . After conquering Iraq, Syria, and Egypt, Selim claimed the title of caliph .
 End of the Ottomans Ottoman Sul | tanate tanate j Olished and the last ‘ an, Mehmed VI, flees . The last Sultan of the Ottoman Empire was killed in the 18th century .
 A tughra is read from right to left because it is in the Arabic language . How to read a tughara is read by right-to-left and left .
 The words of the sultan’s title, shown here by different colors, have been combined with the shapes that make a tughra . Each of these shapes reflects a feature of the Ottoman Empire, each of which reflect a feature .
 It was used by the sultan as a seal or signature on important documents . The sultan used it as a signature or seal to seal important documents.
 Three S shapes indicate the Key Ottoman winds, which blow @ Mahmud from east to west . Ziilfe Three S shape indicate the key Ottoman winds which blow from west to east .
 At Its height, It stretched from Eastern Europe and the Black Sea to Arabia and North Africa . rulers of the Ottoman Empire were known as sultans . rulers were known by sultan .
 He regularly attacks Sg ints who convert to the Islamic the neighboring Byzantine religion and to work for the sultan .
 The Ottoman Empire almost collapses when the Central Asian ruler Timur defeats Sultan Bayezid | at the Battle Battle of Kosovo . Osman’s grandson, Sultan Murad |, leads an army against Prince Lazar of Serbia at the “Field of the of Ankara”
 Timur kept the Sultan ina killed, but the Ottomans win SS golden cage the battle, giving them control of southeastern Europe . Both leaders are killed in the battle .
 The late Mian sarousiiclaaleniielale a ul center of the Universe . It is the JUlelelelswsiilalemiarcimiarcrelelay largest and best of its r y rather than Earth, is the best of the
 Many think it was used to mark dalomalsiialemclalemsio1illalep ele )ialisne)miaionelela at the summer and winter solstices .
 The observatory on top of the Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii is the largest in the world . Hans Lippershey of the Netherlands is the first to try to register a telescope design .
 This invention reveals that stars are much farther away from Earth than they are from Earth . The invention was created to reveal the existence of the universe .
 These explosions spread material elc@ le ale MialonUlal\Viclesiomiarcimersla form new stars . They spread material around the world .
 He shows that all galaxies are moving apart, which aalerelalsmiarclmialom@lal\Viclaciouisuey . A very large red giant explodes .
 A white dwarf has no source of energy, so it cools and fades away . White dwarf is one of the smallest stars in the solar system . White dwarfs have no energy source, so they cool and fade away .
 A red giant from a smaller star creates a glowing shell of gas in a planetary nebula . The nebula was formed by a red giant and a smaller smaller star . It is the first time the two stars have been seen together .
 Even before the earliest civilizations began, families and tribes went to war with eacn other . Families and tribes often fought each other before they died .
 As cities and states aopeared, rose, and fell over many tnousands of years, decisive battles fougnt on land, at sea, and In the air changed the course of nistory again and again .
 Persian navy is defeated by the Athenians, led by Themistocles, in a naval battle off Salamis . The Persian navy was defeated in the battle by the Greek city .
 An alliance of Greek cities defeats the Persian army at Plataea . The following year, the alliance of cities defeated the Persian forces .
 Alexander the Great wins a decisive victory over Darius Ill of Persia . Gaugamela is Alexander's most famous conqueror of the Persian Empire . Alexander defeated Darius Ill in a decisive battle .
 The Persian army greatly outnumbers the Macedonians, but Alexander's men are better trained and led . Alexander's forces were better trained than those of the Persian army . Alexander defeated the Persian forces in the battle of Alexander III .
 The Roman politician Octavian defeats his enemies, Egyptian army of Pharaoh Cleopatra of Egypt and Mark Antony of Egypt, in a naval battle Hameses land the off Greece .
 The victory allows Octavian, now renamed hittites, led by Mutawalli ll. ll., to rejoin the hittite forces .
 Rameses claims victory in and become emperor of Rome . Inscriptions on Egyptian temples provide the earliest detailed account of a battle .
 Qin defeats the state of Zhao at Changping . Qin defeats Zhao in the battle . Qin defeated Zhao in Changping, China . Qin was defeated by Zhao .
 Mounted Norman knights fight the charging many men that his victory is as bad as At Cannae . He uses Anglo-Saxons, who fight on foot, standing in a defeat .
 French-speaking Normans take victory’s victory” to mean a hollow triumph . ‘Victory’ to mean an army of 80,000 Roman soldiers. control of England. control .
 Battle diagrams have been used throughout history to help plan battles . Battle diagrams are used throughout the world to help strategise .
 U.S. General William Tecumsah Sherman defeated Napoleon Bonaparte in a major battle that brought the Napoleonic Wars to an end in 1879 .
 Wellington fights off repeated French attacks until Blucher arrives with reinforcements . Wellington fights a defensive battle, holding off repeated attacks . Wellington was defeated in the battle .
 The German army fought to seize the Russian city of Stalingrad during the Second World War . The battle was the first major battle to take over the city .
 Three-day battle, the largest ever fought in America, sees the Union captured the city of Gettysburg . In November, when the Germans have almost med) ety Gettysburg, they have almost Medd med . The Somme a counteroffensive.
 During World War |, the British and yan 72.000 men. Robert E Lee, numbering 72,000 men, were killed in the war .
 French launch a major attack, but fail to break through the German lines at the Somme . French launch major attack in front of German troops at Somme, but fall short of victory .
 Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces launch a massive offensive against the cities of South Vietnam . The Tet Offensive took place during the Tet Offensive .
 In the US, the scale of the attack shakes public support for the war . But in the U.S. public support remains strong, despite the threat .
 The United States defeats Japan in the first World War I ocean battle in the Pacific . The battle was fought mostly by planes launched from aircraft carriers .
 Japan loses all four of its carriers, while the U.S. loses just one . The Americans lose just one of their carriers .
 The Holy League, an alliance of Catholic Mediterranean states, wins a great victory over the Ottoman navy (see pages 150— 151), in the waters off Greece . Lepanto. Lepanto .
 Painting shows the Battle of Lepanto, between the Ottoman Turks and the Holy League of Spain, Venice, Genoa, and the Pope . The Ottoman Turks were defeated in the battle .
 The battle took place on October 7, 1571, and was the last battle to be fought entirely from rowing vessels called galleys . The battle was fought on a rowing vessel called a "galleys"
 A golden age of peace, prosperity, and production followed, known as the Edo period . New forms of Japanese art flourish during this period, which saw new art flourish .
 Edo, Kyoto, and Osaka catered for the wealthy, who could spend their money on new entertainments and luxury goods . The major cities of Edo and Kyoto catered to the wealthy .
 Christopher Columbus reached the Americas in 1492, a land mass unknown to Europeans at the time . Christopher Columbus was the first European explorer to arrive in the Americas . Columbus discovered the Americas on Columbus Day 1492 .
 After his return, many more people made the journey to this — “New World,’ eventually establishing omanent settlements there . After his . return, more people . made the . journey to the . ‘New World’ Eventually establishing o permanent settlements there.
 As soon as Europeans became aware of the existence of the . Americas, many were eager to visit what they called the . New World .
 Cartier first explores the eastern edge of es IS now Canada, going on to 5 aim the land for France . Lots of people imagined a land of untold riches, / others saw an opportunity for a new life .
 French America eventually stretches from the Hudson Bay to the Gulf of Mexico . The St. Lawrence River, in present-day Quebec, is the source of much of French America . The river eventually stretches to the coast of Canada .
 John White returns from a three-year trip back to England to find everyone gone . In 1590 their Settlement leader | John White . John White returned to England after three years in 1590 .
 Virginia town is the first permanent English settlement in North America . Town was the first permanently English settlement of North America in 1607 . Their disappearance remains a Mystery .
 The colony faces frequent food shortages, especially during the winter of 1609-1610 . The colony was founded in 1609 and 1610 .
 Virginia colonists plant cotton seeds for the first time . Virginia plants the seed fora GOOD HARVEST .
 Cotton, tobacco, rice, rice and indigo (a plant used to make blue dye) become the major crops in the southern English colonies . Cotton was the major crop of cotton and tobacco in southern England .
 Plymouth was named after the English town that they had sailed from . During the 16th and.th centuries, Europe was the center of revolutionary scientific progress .
 Establishedideas . “were rejected and religious thinking was challenged,’s author says . Established ideas were rejected .
 The first slave-carrier ship, contracted servants, who can Desire, is built here . The first cheaper source of labor than American slave carrier ship .
 All former slaves living in Canada are free and will be protected by law . The Canadian Attorney General says that all former slaves are free .
 Harriet born into slavery, Sojourner Truth becomes a leading Abolitionist . She gives a famous speech in Ohio eG irccherameae: orgs eae trade . The United States passes a law that takes spokesperson for women's rights .
 It highlights the need for rights for to helo rescue slaves from black women as well as men traders . It sends ships to Africa that highlight the need to . to . rescue slaves and return them to their . homelands .
 Abolitionists were campaigning to free all slaves, in the face of opposition from many American . Many American . impulse to see it tried states .
 This resulted in civil war, with the north fighting to on him personally . This led to civil war between the north and the north, which led to the death of many .
 In Virginia, the General Assembly takes a lot of work to grow, so European Ee A passes a law stating that any child born settlers need slave labor to tend the See | to an enslaved mother will also become crops and help them make it protitable .
 The Sor yee ye ee so pe oe se Quakers are Christians, who believe in treating others a 5 —_ bar dr ee Fe HE fairly . Quakers believe that treating other people fairly .
 Later, the Quaker Church prevents members from . profiting from the slave trade and from owning slaves . Later, members of the church were allowed to own slaves . Quaker members were able to purchase slaves .
 Many more slave Spain and join the Catholic Church . es Re AE AE EE EE EE narratives follow, one of the most popular narratives .
 The 13th Amendment to the United States oe yr ye 34 ie oe ye aaieY a ‘ at : is poe oe Constitution brings a permanent end to slavery in all of the U.S. States together .
 Ships from eon 4 Britain carried manufactured goods such as iy cloth, ironware, and guns to West Africa . Ships carrying manufactured goods to Africa carried iycloth and ironware such as guns .
 ATLANTIC 2, AFTER These were exchanged for men, women, and OCEAN a fc lion I feeraa .
 Red sandstone arches provide cool shade and calming Berney symmetry around doorways and along ae ai 7 open-sided pavilions Arab ; end SOs .
 President Vladimir Putin executes thousands of officials who are accused of plotting against him . He executed thousands of people who he accuses of plotting to kill him .
 The Ming Dynasty is at the height of its power under the Yongle Emperor .
 He repairs China's Grand Canal and restores the system of Civil service exams, which the Mongols had discontinued . He also restores China's system of civil service exams . The Mongols were discontinued .
 The Wanli Emperor is buried in a great tomb outside Beijing, which holds thousands of items of silk, porcelain, and jewelry . Feng Guifen, Chinese reformer, 1861 Ming tombs .
 The tomb will be excavated in 1956 . It is the only one of 13 Ming royal tombs to have been excavated .
 Military revolts lead to the proclamation of the Republic of China under President Sun Yat-sen . The last emperor was the last emperor of China .
 On February 12, 1912, the last Qing emperor, a six-year-old named Puy), abdicates, ending more than 2,000 years of Chinese imperial history . Puy was the last emperor of the Qing dynasty .
 Dowager Empress Cixi controls the Chinese government . She controls the government of China .
 China is traditional and resists attempts to modernize China with Western-style industrial production of ships, railroads, and firearms . She is traditional, resists attempts .
 The Ming Great Wall of China was mostly built between 1570 and 1583 . The Great Wall is mostly built in China's capital, Beijing, in China .
 The rebuilding was overseen by the Ming general Qi Jiguang, who wanted to keep out the Mongols . The Ming general wanted to protect his country from the Mongolian invasion .
 Ming Dynasty is famous for milky blue and white porcelain, which they oroduced on an industrial scale . Ming ceramics were made in the Ming Dynasty in China and China .
 The imperial kilns at Jingdezhen made enough porcelain to supply not just the whole country, but also the rest of the world .
 In the West, porcelain became so identified with the country that we still call it china . Porcelain is still identified as a symbol of China's identity .
 Following the discovery of atoms, | Slant Kolo fe Wasnelalclaalislisiel komo @)(mc hc IU LON oe ic substances .
 He invents the first carbonated fizzy water after seeing a reaction between gases at alocal brewery . The water was created after a reaction to gases at the brewery .
 Democritus thought that a piece of claysplit into . smaller and smaller . This marks the startofthe . atomic theory of the Universe .
 Scottish chemist Joseph Black couldnt be divided . Shows that a gas called ‘fixed air’ is exhaled by people . It is called fixed air .
 Made of one part Carbon and two parts oxygen, It becomes Salen Viairstsners la ele) anelle).drels) } .
 At constant . temperatures, he discovers that ann in¢reasing the pressure on a gas IN squeezes it . Else Teg gees HKSAVo) Ul ante Early alchemy Ngele) scientist Ar mtcV4h (store oxo) .
 It is so'accurate that he leaves gaps in ‘the:right places for elements still tobe discovered,’ he says .
 The periodic table receives an TH haa) update with the inclusion of ty four new elements . Sorensen (1868sKeKeto) ue) mesitcl are loure) am ole (am ole) and me)manvielcelel
 Like many dance styles, it blends African and European influences . Like many others, dance blends African, European and African influences .
 Peoo danced to nonor tneir gods, to celebrate important moments, or simply for the sheer joy of It . Peoo dancing to gods, or celebrating important occasions, or dancing to them, was a part of It.
 Many Styles of dance nave emerged over the centuries, evolving troms, and comoining, traditional dance steos . Many Styles emerged from the Dance Nave .
 African slaves living in Brazil develop a dance they call the capoeira . Some forms of dance, such as ballet, take many years of training . Forbidden from following their own customs and traditions, African slaves .
 Combining martial arts with music and dance allows them to secretly practice combat moves . The galliard aa Popular at royal courts throughout Europe . Is a lively dance with kicks, leaps, and a 1600 hops .
 Queen is said to dance six galliards every morning in order to keep fit . Queen ——r C er er ¢/ \ Elizabeth —— Elizabeth | of England is said —_ to dance . Queen .
 Classical ballet Se, e 1500s cE Swan Lake is first performed at the Modern dance American |sadora Duncan, a ploneer of modern dance, creates a sensation by performing barefoot and wearing a tunic .
 Her free- flowing dance movements are supposedly based on classical Greek dance . Her free, flowing dance moves are supposed to be based on Classical Greek dance.
 A new ballet, The Rite of Spring, causes a near riot at its first performance in Paris . Ss 1900 Ballet outrage African highlife . A near riot caused by the performance of the ballet .
 It stars Russian dancer Vaslav Nijinsky and has music by Igor Stravinsky . The film stars Russian choreographer Vaslav Niklovsky and is set in New York .
 The audience was outraged by the daring choreography and shocking sounds . The audience is outraged at the daredevil performance .
 Combines Western dance steps with local rhythms . Influenced by American jazZ music, it is also influenced by local music .
 The ballet is choreographed by Marius Petipa and features typical elements of classical ballet . It features turnout of the leg from the hip, high leg lifts, and dancing en pointe .
 King Louis XIV of France establishes the Royal Academy of Dance in Paris to train dancers are the leads in ballet performances . In 1661 Ballerina Marie Taglioni dances the ballet La Sylphide “en pointe” (on the tio of the toes)
 In European high society, men and women dance side-by-side at balls, seldom touching . Social dances are common in Europe's high society .
 The first written accounts of flamenco, the traditional dance of Andalusia in southern Spain, date from this time . Such dances are often based on traditional country dances .
 The arers ior trenehz involve hand. oe ustria, soreads rapidly wie through the ballrooms of e. o ~ flamenco may be much earlier .
 They bring Hollywood glamour to the world of dance . drying their backs with a towel. drying their back with towel .
 They combine classical dance traditions of India with the disco dance styles of the West . They combine the classical dance tradition of India and the disco style of the west .
 The Pirate Round bountiful booty, and cutthroats, swashbucklers, and The Indian Oceanis scriminals sailed the seas in a Golden Age of Piracy . r ihomBetew den dee ~ %. to sail around the Cape of Good Hope in Africa
 In 1697 they shared proceeds with the crown for protection to the town . They gave their home base a French follow in 1697 .
 Soon It Is packed with treasures to bring home . Explorers often pilfered treasures to Soon It is packed home .
 Mcieval bringin th ee a French pirate ship while it largest city aie joe is being chased by an WE Hemisphere fone eet English navy vessel . He grinning skull is hoisted over — Mcieval .
 The United States War of Independence was the Tirst in a series of political revolutions in which old governments were overthrown and new nations formed . Ihe U.S. was the first nation to be overthrown in a revolution .
 During the Industrial Revolution, oeople left the countryside and flooded into towns and cities to work in factories . steam engine and electricity transformed peoples everyday lives, and offered new modes of transportation .
 United States War of Independence to start a British colony. leading to the Napoleonic Wars. to start British colony . United States to start colony of America .
 The rule, leading to a revolutionary that powered the Industrial to establish colonies there, led to a revolution in the Industrial Revolution .
 The people of Central and South America fought for independence from Spain inaseries of conflicts that saw the end of Spanish colonial rule . Latin America is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Many American Indians die in a forced march to new territories known as the Trail of Tears . American Indians were forced to leave their homeland for new territories .
 As the U.S. gained more territory, pioneering settlers moved into the new lands . Pioneering settlers were pioneers in the early 1800s .
 The issue of slavery causes a civil war in the U.S. between the northern and southern states . The issue was the issue of the slavery issue in slavery .
 Three provinces in North America unite to form the Dominion of Canada within the British Empire . Canada was formed from three provinces in the North American colonies .
 A meeting between Europe's most powerful nations marks the start of major colonization in Africa . A meeting in Africa is the first meeting between the two countries .
 New Zealand becomes the first country in the world to give women the right to vote . New Zealand is the first nation to allow women to vote in the country's history .
 Newton's work transforms people's understanding of the ohysical universe . Newton was the first scientist to discover the existence of the universe . His work transformed people around the world .
 Jean-Jacques Rousseau argues that laws are strong only when they are supported by the will of the people who must live under them . In The Social Contract, Rousseau challenges traditional views of society by arguing that laws must be supported by will of people .
 His ideas concerning liberty, government, and the rights of individuals are deeply influenced by Locke, Montesquieu, and other Enlightenment thinkers .
 Scientists in different countries can be certain that they are describing the same plants . It means that scientists from different countries are able to identify plants in different ways .
 Adam Smith published The Wealth of Nations, the first modern book on money matters . Adam Smith's book was published in Smith's first attempt at making money more accessible .
 Smith is a leading figure of the Scottish Enlightenment in Edinburgh at the time when the city is a center of scientific and philosophical debate . Smith is one of Edinburgh's leading figures in the Enlightenment . Smith was a leading Scottish Enlightenment figure .
 Immanuel Kant asks challenging questions about how we think and how we know things . In The Critique of Pure Reason, Kant asks questions about the role of Idealism . Kant was a German thinker and philosopher of the Enlightenment .
 Benjamin Franklin found the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia with the aim of ‘promoting useful Knowledge’ and spreading Enlightenment ideas in North America .
 French nobleman and scientist Antoine Lavoisier’s Elements of Chemistry lays the foundations for the modern study of the subject . Lavoisiers’ Elements of Chemicals lays the foundation for modern study .
 In 1794 he is executed by guillotine during the French Revolution . However, in 1794, he was not killed during the revolution .
 Playwright and feminist activist Olympe de Gouges oublishes a pamphlet declaring that women are equal to men and have the same rights of citizenship . The female citizen .
 It is 17 books in total and contains thousands of articles by the leading French thinkers of the day . It is a collection of 17 books and is published in 17 languages .
 Many Chu rcones, Chapels, ana cathedrals a celebratory mood as they mark All Saints’ Day in the capital of the kingdom .
 After midnight mass, King deeo below the waves of the Atlantic . Joseph | of Portugal leaves Lisbon with his family to celebrate outside the city .
 Large cracks up to 18 ft wide tear across the streets of Lisbon . The religious heart of Lisbon collapses, killing thousands of celebrating churchgoers . Thousands of people were killed in the collapse .
 People flee through the shuddering streets, heading toward the seemingly safe harbor to seek refuge on departing boats . People flee into the water, heading to the harbor to take shelter on boats .
 The people of Lisbon gather at the harbor and witness a curious marine event . Waves of destruction were seen by the Portuguese people .
 The sea withdraws away from the city, revealing sunken shipwrecks scattered across the exposed seabed . Sunken ships are scattered scattered around the city .
 A series of devastating waves arrive with tremendous impact, flooding the harbor and city streets, and drowning the crowd . The waves drown the crowd, drowning the crowds .
 Overcrowded boats traveling out to sea and up the Tagus River capsize as the ocean surge swells the river, killing even more people . The ocean surge kills even more than 100 people .
 As Lisbon crumbles and floods, religious candles in churches and homes tumble with the falling debris . The religious candles tumble with falling debris as Lisbon's buildings crumble .
 Broken buildings block the network of narrow streets and prevent the survivors from putting out the growing flames . Broken buildings blocks the networks of narrow roads and prevent survivors from helping put out the fire .
 On November 6, a stillness falls over the city, the fires burn out and the survivors of the disaster return to count their dead . Soon the fires spread, and the city's residents begin to count the dead .
 Around 60,000 citizens of Lisbon are estimated to have lost their lives in the Lisbon disaster . Around 60 per cent of Lisbon's population is believed to have been killed in the disaster .
 The earthquake was So strong, it was felt throughout Europe and North Africa . It was felt in North Africa, Europe and Africa .
 The quake was also destructive In Morocco, where approximately 10,000 people were killed . The quake also occurred in Morocco, which is also known for its devastation .
 The church proclaims the disaster “an act of “*** *+amee God’ to punish the sinful.” Church proclaims it an act of God to “punish” the sinful .
 Lisbonians struggle to understand why so many churchgoing people had suffered . People struggle to explain what their citizens had done to deserve such dramatic punishment .
 It is the largest explosive volcanic eruption in the last 25 million years . It is also the largest explosion in the past 25million years .
 The Great Dying is the worst mass extinction in Earth's history . It occurs just before the Age of Dinosaurs . It is the first mass extinction to occur in the history of Earth .
 Around 95 percent of the planet's species vanishes over a period of about 80,000 years . Around 95 per cent of the world's species disappear over the course of time, scientists say .
 An asteroid at least 6 miles wide hits the Yucatan Peninsula in Central America, blasting rock into the sky and blocking sunlight for years . The asteroid is believed to be the largest in the history of the planet's history .
 Nearly all large animals are wiped out, including all types of dinosaur except birds . Nearly all of the dinosaurs were wiped out in the early 20th century .
 Much of the Greek island of Thera is destroyed by a massive volcanic eruption . The eruption is believed to have destroyed much of the island's population .
 The eruption triggers tsunamis and earthquakes that devastate surrounding islands . The city of Akrotiri is buried under ash, and the eruption triggers tsunami and earthquakes .
 Toba supervolcano ihe Sha buried the town of Pompeii in ash and killed thousands . The town was buried in ash by Toba, burying thousands of people .
 A catastrophic earthquake hits the city of Lisbon in Portugal, triggering tsunamis and fires that cause further devastation . Hollows in the ash are filled with Lisbon earthquake .
 Mount Vesuvius erupts, later, reveals the dead . Later, the site is rediscovered, revealing the dead.
 The following year, Europe and North America experience a ‘year without summer’, with heavy snow in June, July, and August . Europe and N. America experienced a 'year without a summer' in the following year .
 Traditional dwellings in the area are artificial caves excavated from loose, dusty solls . The death toll is very high because the traditional dwellings are artificial . Traditional dwellings are made of artificial caves .
 American journalist Charles Kuralt a » 2 we a Ft he ° a > . oy ane ee oo Se Se , “By ae ot. “% ri 7) ae MR Zz nT A a a a oe oe .
 Earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, and nurricanes nave occurred tnhrougnout nistory, and their unoredictable fury reminds us that we are small and vulnerable . Earthquakes and volcanoes remind us of our vulnerability .
 History shows that natural onenomena only rarely clash with human populations on a disastrous scale . But history also shows that these natural onenomenas only rarely clash with human population .
 A massive hurricane hits the village of Coringa on the coast . A massive storm surge is expected to hit the area .
 Two-thirds of the island of Krakatoa In by 40 ft and submerging Indonesia . Is obliterated by a volcanic the land with seawater . It causes a disastrous storm surge .
 Around eruption that can be heard more than 300,000 people are killed.,000 miles away, making it the loudest eruption in recorded history . Around 300,00 people were killed in the eruption .
 Heavy rain causes three major 2 Se rivers to flood 70,000 square 7 miles of land ‘ — _inGhina—anareaaboutthesize ‘ bs > of Florida .
 A prolonged drought in city of San Francisco is northern China leads to destroyed by an earthquake three years of failed crops that kills 3,000 people . At least 10 million people population homeless . Between 1 million and a A million people die .
 The most powerful earthquake on the earthquake on record seabed off the coast of Chile hits Chile . The Asian tsunami was the most powerful quake on the world's history .
 Sumatra sends a series of 10 minutes, kills several tsunamis across the Indian thousand people, and Ocean, causing devastation leaves 2 million homeless . Tsunamis caused by the Thailand, Sri Lanka, and quake hit Hawaii, Japan, India, Hawaii, India .
 European music cevelooed during tne Middle Ages, but other traditions can be traced to earlier dates . European music began to be recorded in the Middle Ages .
 Officials from Japan travel to China to learn about its culture . All forms of music are used to express Japanese court music emotion, to mark religious ceremonies .
 The rise of Christianity metalloohones hit with mallets, spreads music throughout Indian ragas hand-played drums, gongs, and xylophones . An Indonesian gamelan orchestra consists of
 Plainsong (asingle Gamelan music) is played in traditional ceremonies unaccompanied melody . Plainsong is sung in church services in India .
 Ragas are particular patterns of notes, associated with certain moods and times of day . Ragas is a particular pattern of notes associated with specific moods or times of the day .
 Guitar-based popular Debussy composes becomes more popular . Modern music Jazz Age Umm Kulthum Rock and Roll Frenchman Claude Claude America’s new musIc, jazZ, Egyptian Umm .
 It Kulthum sings in the music, Known as “Rock Prelude a /apres-midi dun is a blend of African and first broadcast on and Roll,’ emerges .
 His works use features improvisation, expressive vocal style stars of performers new kinds of harmony, and create moods where performers each makes her one of the such as Bill Haley & His .
 Johann Sebastian Bach is considered one of the greatest composers of the Baroque era . Bach's works include works from 17th century to 18th century . Bach was a German composer who died in 17th Century .
 Bach is the master of “counterpoint, where different melodies weaved together. Bach is master of counterpoint,’s ‘counterpoint.’ Bach is a master of 'counterpoint’
 Beethoven's Ninth Symphony revolutionizes this type of Clara Schumann orchestral piece by including the human voice . Ludwig van beethoven wrote his Ninth Symphony in 18th century .
 Despite being totally Influential German Clara Schumann deaf he conducts its first is one of the most respected pianists performance . He conducts his first performance at the Opal in Berlin .
 He has to be turned of the Romantic ies she has a 60year career . Women around to see the enthusiastic applause from the audience rarely perform in public .
 Works of this period are longer, richer in | . sound, and full of emotion . Works by this era are longer and richer in . sound and full-hearted .
 Austrian pianist Mozart begins a concert tour of Europe at the age of six . Lana 1762 ; soyotom 1819 .
 He becomes one of the leading composers of the Classical period, in which music has anew simplicity . Composers of this period are known for their simplicity and simplicity .
 His many works include the operas Don Giovanni, The Marriage of Figaro, and The Magic Flute .
 Emperor Xuanzong founds the first opera school in China, called the Pear Garden . Emperor found the school in the first place in China . The Pear Garden is the name of an opera school .
 Developments in instrument-making, and the availability of printed music, allow more people to play .
 The stave is a set of five horizontal lines that Western composers use to write their music . It is a stave that is used to write Western music .
 Beyonce is the highest-paid black musician in history . She is 73 million musician in the world and 73 million musicians . Beyonce's popularity makes her the highest paid black musician .
 Her album oeople watch them on Lemonade encompasses a The Ed Sullivan Show. range of musical styles . Fans often scream such a reggae, hip hop, and faint at their and funk .
 Czar Alexander Il, March 30, 1856 “It is better to begin to abolish Yo) acelolemmineleneslelelel ** ¥ ¥ of the United States a Ralsw-\aalslalerclanm, ore laalom
 The Second Continental Congress names George Washington as Commander of the Continental Army . The Continental Army will become the foundation of the United States army . George Washington was the first president of the Revolutionary War .
 On July 4, the Second Continental Congress votes to adopt the Declaration of Independence . The 13 American colonies now see themselves as independent from Britain . The Declaration was adopted in 1777 .
 This inflames anti-British feeling, giving the patriots (who oppose British rule) a boost of support . The country's anti-UK feeling is given a boost by the pro-UK sentiment in the UK .
 The first conflicts of the Revolutionary War take place in the towns of Lexington and Concord . The towns of Concord and Lexington were the birthplace of the Revolution .
 British troops try to capture and destroy the colonists supply of weapons, but the colonists have been warned of the attack . British troops attempt to capture the colonists .
 Thomas Paine writes anonymously published essay in Philadelphia, arguing in favor of U.S. independence . Paine wrote anonymously published in Philadelphia in 17th century .
 Every rebel against British rule gets a copy of Yorktown . After a stalemate in the north, the battlefront moves south .
 British forces surrender at Yorktown in Virginia, trapped by French warships off the coast and overpowered by the Continental Army . The Continental Army overpowered the British forces .
 Representatives of the 13 American states meet to approve an official Constitution . October American Constitution was approved by the 13 states .
 The Constitution establishes the government of the United States. Called “the supreme law of the land,’ the Constitution established the U.S.
 French architect LEnfant to design a grand city to become the capital of the new nation . Washington commissions French architect to design the grand city .
 African-American James Armistead works as a spy for the Continental Army . He was born a slave, and later worked for the U.S. Army .
 This treaty formally ends the Revolutionary War and sets the boundaries of the United States . He will help them to secure a victory at Yorktown . The treaty was signed in 1777 .
 Britain agrees to recognize U.S. independence, and British troops leave for home . British troops return to Britain .
 George Washington was elected president of the United States in 17th century . Washington was the first president of America . George Washington became the first President of the U.S.
 George Washington led his troops across the icy Delaware River to deliver a surprise attack on Trenton, New Jersey, in 1776 . The attack captured in this iconic painting .
 Washington hoped a quick victory would boost morale within his army following a series of defeats during the Revolutionary War . Washington hoped that the victory would help boost morale in his army .
 Despite the dangerous conditions, they crossed successfully and marched into Trenton the following morning . They achieved an important victory over the troops fighting for Britain . The British Army crossed the border to Trenton, Trenton .
 In the 1/60s, technology revolutionized farming, factories, and travel . It brought develooments in technology that revolutionized farms, factories and travel.
 For the first time, more people are living and working in towns than in the countryside . The results of the British census show that more people live and work in town life .
 British industrialist Richard Arkwright builds a village to house workers for Canal mania . His cotton spinning mill in Cromford, originally built to transport coal from mines England.
 It eventually includes a to Manchester, England, the Bridgewater school, market, and church . The Bridgewater school is located in Bridgewater, England .
 The success of this long-distance canal kicks off a period of construction known as canal mania . British inventor Edmund Cartwright builds the first power loom, a weaving machine that is driven by water .
 Textile laborers attack factories and destroy machines they fear will replace them . Textile workers attacked factories and destroyed machines they feared would replace them. Textile factories are attacked by textile workers .
 The Geordie lamp and Davy lamp 1842: Britain's Mines Act bans are created . Britain's mines Act bans were created in the wake of the Great Depression .
 A piece of gauze covers the women and young children, preventing explosions from working underground . The women and children are covered by the gauze to protect them from the flames .
 Swedish chemist Alfred Nobel invents dynamite, which provides a safer way to blast holes in mountains or the ground rather than simply lighting black powder . Alfred Nobel invented dynamite in 1903 .
 Dynamite is important in clearing paths to build things such as roads and railroad tracks . Britain’s Public Health Act requires Thomas Edison creates a light bulb that lasts longer than other designs .
 Edison's light to increasing demand for power in that housing and sewer systems bulbs allow factories to continue operating after dark . Edison's lights help factories in central London continue to operate after dark.
 More than 85 percent of Australian megafauna (huge mammals) wiped out in Australia by this time . They take advantage of the sea levels being much lower at this time of year .
 A change In climate about 70,000 years ago may also have contributed . It is likely that humans preyed on them, but a change in climate may also contributed .
 Aboriginal engravings are found on rocks in Murujuga, featuring ancient pictures and symbols of animals, figures, and ceremonies . These creatures included tortoises as big as a small car and carnivorous kangaroos .
 Mungo Man's body was carefully laid out, the earliest example of Aboriginal burial traditions . His body was laid out carefully in an Aboriginal burial tradition . It is believed to have been the first burial tradition in Australia .
 It is played by blowing into one end of along tube to produce deep, resonant sounds . The tube can be blown into by blowing in one end to make deep sounds .
 Red pigments are made from Iron-rich clays, elalemclkon Cau sialcreme)m ee) isamice)aamialouanleleleliamcenere .
 Life for both jailers and convicts was tough in Australia, especially in the early years of the colony . Life for convicts and jailers was tough for both both men and women .
 At the end of a convict’s sentence (which was usually seven years long), they were given a Certificate of Freedom . The certificate of freedom was given to the convict at the end .
 They were allowed to leave to return to Britain, or stay on the colony and start life anew . This meant they could return to the colony or stay in the colony .
 The first Europeans turned Australia into a jail— a place for British convicts to serve time . Many decided to stay, and as the colony grew, it offered them a better standard of living than they could have hoped for .
 Aboriginal inhabitants of the land were mistreated, a legacy that is still felt today . In the orocess, Aboriginal people of the Australian land were often mistreated .
 90 percent of Aboriginal population will be wiped out by disease and conflict . Within the first century of settlers arriving, settlers arrived in Australia, 90 percent were wiped out . The majority of the Aboriginal population is wiped out within 100 years of arrival .
 Abel Tasman sails around It in 1642, but mistakes it for another place . Another Dutchman, Abel Tasman, sails around it in 1641 . Abel Tasman mistakes Tasman for a different place .
 Cook maps eastern Australia for the first time, and claims the land for Britain . Cook claimed the land in eastern Australia . Cook claims the area for Britain in his map .
 From 1822 onward, renewed violence will end in hundreds of Aboriginal casualties . The violence will continue from 1822 onwards .
 In 1/789, thousands of angry people crowded around a fortified orison called the Bastille in eastern Paris . The tense standoft turned into a violent battle that would kick-start the French Revolution and end the Kings reign .
 In 1370, Charles V reinforces Paris's walled defenses during the bloody conflict known as the Hundred Years War . The imposing Bastille was built to guard the capital's eastern approach .
 The summer of 1789, France is in turmoil as taxes rise and food is in short supply . France was in turmoil during the summer of the French Revolution .
 French commoners demand political change . French people want political change. They want a change in the government .
 In angry opposition to the nearly bankrupt King Louis XVI, they form a revolutionary organization that they call the National Assembly . They demand changes to the French constitution and demand changes .
 On July 11, 1789, Louis XVI dismisses the finance minister Jacques Necker . Necker was seen as sympathetic to the revolutionaries . The search for gunpowder was the focus of the revolution .
 French troops move into strategic positions around Paris as the monarchy tries to reinforce its grip on power . The French government is trying to strengthen its grip over the French monarchy .
 In the early morning of July 14, a mob of commoners loots the Hotel des Invalides, searching for weapons . The hotel was looted by commoners searching for a weapon .
 The mob leaves with thousands of rifles but very little gunpowder, rendering the weapons useless . Unchallenged, the mob leaves without any gunpowder . The weapons are left useless .
 The mob surrounds the Bastille and demands gunpowder and weapons . A firm standoff takes place in the late morning, when the mob surrounds it .
 The Marquis de Launay stands firm inside the heavily defended stronghold . The prison’s governor, the Marquis of Launay, is standing firm inside .
 Delegates from the swelling crowd of commoners surrounding the Bastille are turned away by the marquis as the angry governor refuses to listen to the mobs demands .
 By early afternoon, with frustration and impatience spreading through the crowd, a small group of raiders gain entry into the prison’s courtyard . The raid is the latest in a series of attacks on the prison in Iraq .
 Fearful of losing his grip on the fortress, the marquis orders his men to fire on the invading force . The governor surrenders . The marquis is forced to surrender to the invaders .
 More people join the assault, including defecting French troops . The gunfire angers the crowd, and more people join in .
 A battle begins as the mob storms the building, bolstered by several cannons . The mob stormes the building with the help of cannons .
 Marquis de Launay, sensing defeat, threatens to light his stock of gunpowder and blow up the Bastille and most of Paris . The revolutionaries call his bluff, but he fails .
 At 5:00m., as the Bastille’s garrison switches sides, the fortress is lost and the governor Surrenders . The governor surrenders and the fortress loses its power .
 The Bastille, for years a symbol of tyranny and terror, is liberated by the victorious masses . Bastille is liberated from tyranny by the triumph of the masses . It is the first time the Bastille has been liberated in France .
 The few prisoners that were imprisoned are released as the mob loots the armory and gunpowder stores . The mob also steals the gunpowder and armory stores in the town .
 The Marquis de Launay is transported to the Hotel de Ville to stand trial . But en route he is captured by the furious crowd and is beaten and killed .
 In August 1789, the National Assembly abolishes feudalism . feudalism was a social system that gives the aristocracy control over commoners .
 On September 3, 1791, King Louis XVI is forced to agree to a constitutional monarchy, limiting his powers, but this lasts only a year . The king was forced to resign from the throne in 1791 .
 In September 1792, France Is proclaimed a republic, its power held by the people instead of the monarchy . France is now a republic of the people .
 At this time, it was wrongly thought that having too much blood causes illnesses, SO doctors use Avicenna Persian scholar Ibn Sina, better Hearing heartbeats bloodsucking leeches to Nursing pioneer .
 The by French doctor Rene 7 million leeches a year. dying from disease rather medical schools . British nurse Florence Avicenna, basic wooden tube created . Hospitals in London use Nightingale sees soldiers .
 Laénnec to listen to than injuries in the military . Two earpieces are later War. hospitals of the Crimean adopted by many . hospitals .
 She reforms hospital care, improving Survival remains one of the most 1833 rates . Survival remains a top hospital in the world, with a record of 1833 survival rates .
 Nursing becomes an important works in the new profession. history of medicine. history . Nursing becomes a . important works . of medicine . history . history of . medicine. Nursing .
 He is the first to suggest that diseases are not caused by the supernatural . He stresses the importance of a healthy diet and regular exercise to prevent disease .
 This is the world’s first vaccination, bringing an end to smallpox in 1979 . successful blood transfusion in 1979 was the result of the first vaccination in the world . The world's first vaccination was brought to an end in 1979 after a successful transfusion .
 Many of the earliest transfusions caused the death of patients on the basis of her gender . She eventually graduates from Geneva Medical College as the first woman to graduate with a medical degree .
 French microbiologist Louis Pasteur shows that bacteria and other microscopic germs cause disease . Instead of bad air being the cause of infections, bad air is actually bad air .
 Infection rates drop when surgeons start boiling their instruments to remove bacteria from them . He soon develops vaccinations against the deadly diseases anthrax and rabies .
 The first full body scanner was designed by American professor Raymond Damadian . The first body scanner is designed by an American professor .
 Magnetic resonance imager scanner fertilization creates a picture of the England's Louise Brown body's internal workings . The world’s first “testusing the principles of tube baby” born from an magnetism .
 Stem cells have the potential to grow into any Stem cell advances pe oreel . Scientific research reveals that stem cells can be altered to become different types of cells . First IVF baby is born following in vitro Cell division in vitro cell division .
 Scottish scientist Alexander Fleming was studying bacteria in petri dishes when he spotted mold growing there . Fleming was working on Penicillin when he spots mold growing in the petri dish . Fleming's work was the first time the bacteria had been found to be able to treat mold .
 This mold had killed the surrounding bacteria, and this first antibiotic, Known as penicillin, is mass produced by the late 1940s . Penicillin was the first antibiotic ever mass produced .
 X-rays are still used to locate broken bones and spot problem areas inside the body . X-ray technology is still being used to diagnose broken bones, diagnose problems and spot problems .
 An electric shock can start a stopped heart, leading to the invention of the defibrillator . Defibrillators are a device that passes an electric current through the heart to start a heart beat .
 In 1965, British doctor Frank Pantridge designs a defibrillator small enough to fit inside ambulances . Breakthrough provides the potential to transplant stem cells to treat a range of blood and bone diseases .
 Invention allows scientists to work at the nanoscale, moving even the tiniest atoms . Invention allows them to move even the smallest atoms in nanoscales .
 Tests show the replacement kidney works successfully in rats and pigs . But further research is needed for humans to receive artificial kidney transplants .
 Britain and France signed tne Peace of Amiens treaty to end the conflict . The treaty was signed by the two countries .
 When France falled to keep the agreement, Britain declared war in 1808, marking the start of the bloody Napoleonic Wars . When France felled France, the British declared war .
 As the French Republic comes to an end (see page 201) Napoleon announces himself the new emperor at the Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris .
 The Battle of Trafalgar took place off the southwest coast of Spain on October 21st . Admiral Horatio Nelson died while fighting in the battle .
 Napoleon offers a financial reward for budding inventors to find a way to preserve food for his army . In 1795, Napoleon offered to reward inventors for preserving food for the army .
 A French confectioner claims the prize in 1809 for his design for sealed bottles .
 68,000 French troops beat the combined forces of nearly 90,000 Austrian and Russian troops at Austerlitz . Napoleon's greatest victory occurred on December 2nd, 18th December 18th 18th century .
 Much of Europe is now controlled by Napoleon and the French army . Much of the European continent is now under the control of the French Empire .
 After 1,000 years, the Holy Roman Empire finally ends as France conquers ltaly and parts of Germany . France conquered parts of the Roman Empire in 17th century .
 Hundred Days End of Peninsular War 1814 sees the end of six-year war . French fought Spanish, Portuguese, and British for control of the Iberian Peninsula . Napoleon and asmall army head for Paris to overthrow King Louis XVIII .
 French defeat at the Battle of Vitoria in 1813 eventually leads to the end of the war . French defeat in the battle of the Spanish capital leads to an end to the conflict .
 Hundred Days sees Bitter end to the throne in 1814 . Invasions and battles result in Battle of Napoleon being sent Waterloo into exile .
 Napoleon launches a army Is beaten by disastrous invasion of Russia, so other armies do . Napoleon launched a army in Russia, but was defeated by British and Prussian invasion . Napoleon was defeated in Russia by British invasion .
 King Louis XVIll returns to the on the now weakened French throne . only to escap to France seek of Europe again . King Louis declared war XVIll declares war against France .
 His ambitions drove him to military success, but ultimately ended in failure . His ambitions drive him to success but he was ultimately unsuccessful .
 Napoleon dies on May 5th . Napoleon is Ter Bae a . Following six battle of the years In exile, Napoleonic Napoleon dies in exile .
 The first railroads were snort links between neighboring towns . So igi Trains Jrains have come a long way since early horse-drawn wagons .
 Whetner going underground or overnead on monorails, rail iS. Now one of the worlds too modes of transportation. Whetners going aeeo underground .
 It will travel nearly 1. million miles (2. million km) before retiring in 1963 . It will be the first time the plane has flown more than a million miles .
 English inventor Richard Trevithick develops the first steam locomotive . He developed the first locomotive in the early 1900s .
 Basic railroads called wagonways are used for the first time in European mines to transport heavy rock and coal . Wagonways are the first railroads to be used in Europe's mines .
 Completed in 1904, Russia's Trans-Siberian Railway becomes the world’s longest rail system . Carts are pulled along wooden rails by horses .
 France's Traina Grande Vitesse service uses electric motors to reach the world's highest speeds for wheeled trains . At atime when most trains are powered by diesel engines, most trains use diesel engines .
 English engineer Robert Stephenson designs the Rocket, the most advanced steam engine of its day . It becomes a byword for luxury travel .
 The world's first public railroad opens in England . World's first passenger trains open in England in 1903 .
 The Stockton and Darlington Railway carries passengers in horse-drawn carriages at first, but these are replaced with steam locomotives In 1833 .
 The first intercity railroad opens, connecting Liverpool and Manchester in England . Liverpool is the first city to open an intercity rail link .
 The world's first underground rail system opens in London, linking the east and west coasts via a 1,777-mile (2,860by steam engines) The First Transcontinental Railroad opens in the US, linking US and UK with wooden carriages pulled west coasts .
 His eons ae by Gea arlus j ians, are use SyStem, leleven United States IMpro eae arovantonicelnanstecelacerclenia modern-day Iraq . The eons were created by the U.S.
 Daily newspapers before both television and radio —— the Now ayaaa Oba brought the news directly into their homes . The Now-a-yaa-Oba news was delivered directly to their homes.
 As history demonstrates, well-engineered bulldings can stay standing for centuries . Well-engineering bulldads can be built to stay standing .
 ChannelTunnel gives breathtaking views over the sandstone pillars and gorges of the Wuling Mountains . Sixteen ~~ lt ascends a 1,070 ft cliff, giving breathtaking views of the .
 Channel Tunnel, the world’s longest » continuous undersea railroad tunnel, opens between England and France . Channel Tunnel is world's longest undersea railway tunnel . Tunnel is also world's largest undersea rail link between England, France .
 Frontier ideas of individualism and self-reliance are still influential today . They were explorers, traopers, tracerists, and ordinary oeople .
 They will be joined by Sacagawea, an American Indian woman who will act as an interpreter and guide . The group will be accompanied by Sacawea as a guide and interpreter .
 In 1860, the Pony Express mail service completes Its first delivery from St. Louis, Missouri . The Pony Express was the first to send mail from the town of St. Charles .
 The history of the ‘Wild West’ will be full of deadly outlaws and their run-ins with the law . "The Wild West" is full of outlaws, including outlaws from the 1800s .
 Frontier towns such as Tonopah, Nevada spring up all over the west . It joins Sacramento, California to Council Bluffs, lowa (itself connected to the east coast train lines)
 In 1876, they inflict a major defeat on the United States army, led by Colonel George Custer, by the Little Bighorn River, Montana . The battle was fought by the U.S. Army in 1876 .
 Relations between European settlers in the U.S. and American Indian tribes were difficult from the start of the 1800s .
 Both cultural differences and the settlers insatiable demand for food and land caused conflict . The settlers eventually seized the land, but only after a series of bloody wars and massacres .
 She marries an Englishman in 1614 and travels to London, England, in 1616 .
 Broken treaties, hunger, and stress cause the Sioux people to rebel against settlers . Their long walk will be known as the “Trail of Tears” —e 1862 Sioux Uprising .
 Other native peoples, such as the Arapaho and Cheyenne, soon follow him .
 A few tribes go peacefully to the specially designated ‘Indian territory’ across the Mississippi, but many resist . Many resist the designation .
 The situation explodes when the U.S. army and settlers massacre hundreds of tribespeople in Sand Creek, Colorado . The massacre is the first massacre of hundreds of people by the United States Army and settlers .
 In France, protestors called for 3 January 12 — economic reform and the right to vote . Protesters called for economic reform in France and right to the vote .
 In parts of the Austrian Independent state F raosourg Empire, they demanded independence . Following an uprising Siy. whichhasbeenunted wih B_CQVernments promised reforms, but very little changed .
 Riots in Vienna force Prince Metternich to resign . Fearing revolution, the Chancellor of Austria and a hated symbol government calls in the army, of repression .
 Hungary demands independence and Is granted its own parliament . Hungary demands but the protest is peaceful. Hungary demands . independence . Hungary has its own . parliament .
 Written in German by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, it calls for a revolution of the working class . It calls for the working-class to be transformed .
 As copies spread through Europe, it encourages angry people to protest against governments .
 Soldiers fire shots into & Protestors in the German Confederation (an the crowd) killing 52 . 52 people were killed in the shooting .
 The rioters © ~ organization of separate German states) call for overthrow of King Louis Philippe and German national unity . The riots call for an overthrow of the French king .
 This map shows the location of the revolutions that are mentioned on this timeline . It also shows the locations of some of the most important revolutions mentioned .
 Berlin yd Xe, 3 le ¥ Zz POLAND Paris FRANCE 2 Ut ge f & % _ { ay Budapest PAPAL STATES Rome a SEARS KINGDOM Mediterranean 5.5 .
 After the army has retaken control, the leaders of the uprising are executed . The leaders are executed by the army .
 H+ Minister assassinated The Pope flees Rome . Minister of the Papal Ace tthe parts of Italy ruled by the Pope) is aSSassinated .
 Protesters fill the Streets demanding Social reform and a democratic form of government . Demonstrators fill the streets demanding social reform . Protesters also want to see a democratic government .
 In April 1849, the Frankfurt parliament offers Frederick William | of Prussia the imperial crown of Germany . Frederick William William was the first German monarch to take over the throne .
 He organizes olfelaleseclalemelaliaarslismialce alerse-lalemarelaaess) different species . Different species. different species. .
 The invention helps scientists . Our interest in the natural world began more than 40,000 years ago .
 Over time, zoology, the study of animals,and botany, the . study of plants, orolanleliatc\enconielgaateualeni) science 2 Save
 By studying these © jumping genes, she finds that’’ genes can be switched on or off, ~~. changing the characteristics of misono) aap eee .
 Today, itis better tp gg known as s deoxyribonucleic Elelle . rey late ats weakest die. rey rey ats weakened die .
 The origins of the Britisn Empire were in trade New Zealand with the signing a of the Treaty of Waitangi . The British Empire ee Britain takes control of New Zealand .
 It with the East, but its ambition soon-spread to guarantees thenative Maori . Maori ; thei other areas of the world .
 Over time, its mission Enteg GetA TACO expanded beyond commerce to total political control, eventually making It the largest empire In history . Over time it became the world's largest empire .
 The empire went into decline after World Warl, wnen it became clear that oeople were no longer willing to accept British rule .
 Queen Victoria becomes Empress of India in 1870, although she never visits . Queen Victoria never visits India . She is the first Empress to become Empress to India in India .
 The Boers, settlers of Dutch descent, fight a bitter war against Britain for control of lands in Transvaal . South African War ™ was South African in South Africa .
 The 13 colonies in North India are home to a large army of soldiers called “sepoys” The soldiers are sent to overseas colonies . From there, they use their private army to fight for their country's sovereignty .
 At the end America revolt against British — at the end of the war, Britain gains New rule . At the beginning of the year, the U.S. began to take control of much of India .
 Independence led to the creation of the United States of America . They declare their YY a Vv independence .
 The British seize the Cape of Good 1800s, there are nearly 400,000 Hope on the southern tip of Africa, settlers in Australia, which has been a Dutch colony since 1652 . By the mid-1800s, the British had already seized the Cape .
 Sees nae ae ae the first British presence tn Africa . They will lose it again, but win it Singapore back in 1806 .
 Raffles founds a trading port on the island of Singapore in Southeast Asia . The port is on the main trade route between India and China . Raffles was found in Singapore in the 18th century .
 The ‘Easter Rising’ is mainly Hindu India, and Pakistan, which is quickly put down, but the fight World War | is mainly Muslim . The “Easter rising’s” was mainly Hindu . India and Pakistan are mainly Muslim.
 Ea Free State, forerunner of the Republic, will be founded in 1922 . The Irish settlements known, forces millions of people to migrate, leading to riots and thousands of deaths . Thousands of people were forced to migrate .
 Nearly all Britain's colonies and possessions became independent states between 1957 and 1980 . After 1957, nearly all of Britain's possessions were independent states .
 Many joined the Commonwealth of Nations, a voluntary association of states with previous ties to the empire . Many of them joined the voluntary association, which is voluntary association .
 Years of conflict over slavery and the rights of individual states eventually led to the American Civil War . Others operated as individual republics .
 This was more than tne combined total of American soldiers tnat nad died in all otner wars to date . This is more than the combined total killed by American soldiers in all wars .
 Confederate spy Belle Boyd passes on information that helos Confederate general Stonewall Jackson's army recapture Front Royal, Virginia . Boyd was one of several female spies in Civil War .
 Gettysburg is a turning point in the Civil War, ending Confederate hopes of invading the Union states . Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, was a pivotal battle for the Union and Confederate forces .
 Washington States to create their D.C. is fortified for own Confederate protection . Washington States built their D C. in order to protect themselves from the Civil War . Washington C. C. was fortified for its protection .
 Confederates Jefferson Davis as will win the Second Battle president . In August 1862, with 1862, Jefferson Davis will be president .
 Confederate forces attack Fort Sumter in South Carolina, and the Civil War begins . Confederate forces attacked the fort in 1877 .
 Lincoln introduces the Emancipation Proclamation, an order to free every slave in the Confederate states . Lincoln's order freed all slaves in Confederate states after a Union victory in 1863 .
 Napoleon Field Gun Named after the French emperor Napoleon Ill, this type of cannon was widely used in the Civil War . Named after Napoleon Ill .
 A cannonball could hit a target up to 5,250 ft away and fire a cannonball at 1,440 ft per second . It could then fire at a target as far away as 5,000 ft away .
 President Lincoln delivers Surrender meeting meeting his most famous speech . Confederate soldiers attempt to break through at the dedication of the Union lines fails .
 Union general Ulysses S Grant declares that the Appomattox Court House Civil War Is a struggle for to sign a document of surrender. freedom and equality. freedom . Union general Grant at He declares that . He declared that the . Appomatox Court . House House Civil
 Around half are recaptured, but the others make their way back north . The Union started conscription in March, and people feel the system for drafting men into fighting favors the rich .
 The Hunley is the port of Savannah, dies the next morning . First combat submarine to sink bringing devastation Andrew Johnson an enemy warship, but it doesn’t to Confederate declares the official survive the attack .
 American Civil War divided the country during the Civil War . The Civil War was the first two years of the war . It was also the first time the war was officially declared .
 The Union had more soldiers and money, but the Confederates had cunning and strategic generals . The Confederates were more cunning than the Union, but had cunning generals .
 Neither side claims victory cannonballs, but no victor. army defeats them. in this brutal Virginia fight. Virginia Fredericksburg April-May 1863 .
 April 1862 May — July 1863 July 1864 Shiloh Vicksburg Atlanta . The battle blazes for two days in The Union army is victorious as it General Sherman .
 In 1870, European powers controlled just 10 percent of Africa's population . The slave trade had ravaged Africa for centuries . European powers control just 10% of the continent . The next SO years saw from local communities .
 It would take more than half a century for these countries to gain their indeoendence .
 By 1900, European powers had seized 90 percent of African land . By 1900 they had taken over the continent .
 France and Britain colonized the largest areas of land across the continent . The two countries colonized most of Europe's land .
 British soldiers set the S co Kingdom of 0’ stealing thousands ot local valuables . Stolen treasures were stolen from native Africa .
 With the invention of the telegrapn, teleonone, radio, and the internet, oeople Could send messages and converse across countries, and even continents, for the first time .
 The television transported scenes into the nomes of milllons, Shaping the way oeople spend their free time today today .
 Nikola Tesla is the first first person to produce and transmit radio Wheatstone makes long-distance messages possible . Nikola Tesla’s transmission was the invention of an electrical telegraph .
 Electric signals are sent along wires attached to Ocean Ocean . He is also the brains behind many Electric signals from Ocean .
 By 1902, cables have been placed inventions, including the electric motors that needle pointers, which can be made to point to under the Pacific Ocean too, allowing modern machines to be sent all around the globe .
 Samuel Morse created Morse code to interpret electric signals being sent along telegraph wires . Morse code was created by Samuel Morse in 1903 to interpret electrical signals . Morse codes were used to interpret signals from telegraph lines .
 It uses different lengths of signal to create patterns of dots and dashes, which represent different letters and numbers . The pattern was created by combining signals to create different shapes and letters .
 Heinrich Hertz is the first person to discover radio waves . Hertz discovered radio waves in Germany in the early 1900s .
 He recognizes potential of electromagnetic waves to transfer information . He recognizes the potential of these electromagnetic waves .
 Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi sets up his own company to investigate radio waves . Marconr’s message: Marconi's radio waves can be heard in the world .
 He devises Telephone call a wireless telegraph, which uses radio waves to send Morse code through the air without any wires . He also devises a radio-based telegraph using radio waves .
 Scottish inventor Alexander Graham Bell experiments with sending sounds through telegraph wires . Bell was the first telegraph telegraph operator to send sounds from telegraph wire . Bell invented the telegraph system in the early 1900s .
 These can be heard at the other end, in an early version of a telephone call . These can also be heard in the early versions of a phone call .
 French inventor Claude Chappe devises asystem of movable wooden arms . Position of the arms indicates letters or numbers .
 These arms are placed on tall masts so they can be seen from far away, allowing messages to be passed from town to town . These arms were placed on masts to be seen by far away .
 Canadian-American inventor Reginald Fessenden is the first human voice to be broadcast via radio . He is credited with inventing the first voice for radio .
 This sparks the construction of radio transmitters to create an exciting new form of entertainment that many people can enjoy, gathered around their radios in their homes .
 Inventor John Logie Baird creates the world's first mechanical television . The device uses rotating discs to generate a video signal .
 He constructs this from random objects including Knitting needles, cookie tins, and a tea chest .
 The first color television is unveiled in 1928, but it is not until the 1950s that color televisions become affordable . First color television was unveiled in the 1930s, but color TVs were not available until the 1960s .
 The first mobile phone is launched, but it is too large and expensive for people to use . First mobile phone launched in 1950s, but was too big and expensive to be used .
 The first mobile phone call is made on a phone that weighs a massive 2. lbs and takes 10 hours to charge . The phone weighs 2.5lbs and takes a massive 10 hours a day to charge.
 Email will become one internet resources across of the world's most popular websites . Email will be one of the most popular internet resources in the world . It will be a tool to help people around the world find out what to do with email .
 This informationforms of communication system of communication. sharing system of linked webpages can be accessed NN A from any computer. This information forms of communication can’t be accessed by any computer .
 The DynaTAC becomes the world's first commercial mobile phone . Heavyweight phone is the first commercial phone to be launched in the world .
 Nicknamed “The Brick,’ this device goes on the market for a Jawdropping $4,000 (equivalent to around $9,000 today), which few can afford . Nicknamed "The Brick," the device is available for around $5,000 .
 Analog television technology manipulates electrical signals to create sound and color . Digital technology provides high-definition images and huge choice of channels . Olasma screens replaced by olasma screens .
 The first digital television broadcasts take place in the early 2000s . Imagine a world without onotos—no selfies, no breaking news snots, and no way of recording tne most important events .
 Louis Daguerre photographs this street scene using his invention, the daguerrotype . The daguierrotype is a type of photograph that was invented in 18th Century France .
 The only person to appear is aman having his shoes cleaned, as he stays still for the seven minutes .
 Photojournalism golden age of photojournalism NS, as technological advances make cameras more portable . More portable. NS .
 In the US, Magazines such as Time and Life Start to include “photo essays,” Which reveal SOCial injustices .
 Self-portrait nga daguerreotype e the €xposure, he for 15 minutes. To tak Must sit stil] the first Self-Portrait . The first Self Portrait was published in 1903 .
 Edwin Land invents the Polaroid 95 instant camera, which develops photographs in 6O seconds . Land's invention came after his three-year-old daughter asked why she must wait for a picture .
 E. Re, Ke) EP x © * time of avictims death by Oo on <O™ ~\ OO studying the life cycle of x . Now SS OS se maggots found on the corpse .
 The headshot can be quickly matched against a database of millions of faces . It can be easily matched against millions of people's photos .
 Montgolfier send a sheep, a chicken, and a duck soaring in a hot air balloon . The sheep, the duck, and the duck are among the animals sent into the air in a balloon .
 Leonardo da Vincari sketched designs for flying machines based on eT lalla's studies of birds . The Montgolfiers’ balloon will later be sketched by artist Leonardo da Vinci . In the 15th ce rulliey, Italian artist Leonardo Da V
 The Wrignt Brotners historic flight at the dawn of the 20th century began . For the next four centuries, inventors continued to set their signts on the skies .
 The first practical helicopter is invented in Supermarine Spitfires, fight in the by Russian-American Igor Sikorsky, and skies with the German Luftwaffe in the Battle of Britain .
 The design features a main become known as “dogfights.” rotor on top and a tail rotor for balance . Like modern . close-range aerial combats that helicopters that helicopters, the design features .
 World's first fully functioning jet-powered aircraft, Heinkel He 178, takes off for the first time . He 178 is the first fully-functioning jet powered aircraft to fly .
 Piasecki invents twin-rotor helicopters, De Havilland DH106 Comet can carry including the famous Chinook design . These are used to carry soldiers into quickly than any other aircraft .
 The Harrier Jump Jet is the world’s first vertical takeoff plane . Jump Jet was designed to be the first vertical take-off plane .
 French inventor Louis Bleriot becomes the first person to cross the English Channel by air . He crossed the Channel using a specially adapted version of the invention .
 Douglas World Cruisers, specially designed aircraft operated by the United States Army Air Service, become the first Jet SROMIS. planes to circumnavigate the Earth .
 The British engineer Frank Whittle covers 27,500 designs plans for the jet engine in six months . Whittle's around-the-world trip covered 27,000 designs plans in about six months in total . The engineer's around the world trip covers nearly 30,000 miles in six
 He patents the design and e makes this first working version seven years later . The first working prototype is released in 2007 .
 First nonstop flight across the Atlantic completed by British a | F aviators John Alcock and Arthur * Brown . They cross 1,890 miles in less than 16 hours in under 16 hours . The first nonstop crossing of the Atlantic Ocean was completed by the pair .
 British-French turbojet-powered supersonic passenger jet airliner Concorde takes off for the first time . Concorde was the first jet to take off from the Concorde jetliner .
 Ancient Greeks first held elections 2,000 years ago . Ne yy travels at up to twice the speed of sound until 2003 . The ancient Greeks first used the vote in ancient times 2,500 years ago. Ne y yy remains in service until 2003.
 In the 1/tn century, the idea of reoresentative government emerged—that the public snould vote for, and be represented by, elected officials . The idea of voting for elected officials emerged .
 The Declaration of the Rights of America’s laws comes into effect . The Rights of Man Over Tine 26 oeople nave FOUG Nt .
 The Man is written by France's National VOIGeS tO De a Ara . Decision about who can and can't vote is left Constituent Assembly, states to the states .
 Most states only give the right that all men, not just those with to vote to white males, can vote and participate in lawmaking . White males who own property, money and property, are allowed to vote .
 When the Soviet Union collapses, anew wave of democracy Sweeps across Europe . New democracies e–e . New democracy e–took hold of power in Europe .
 With more people going to the polls, teams of international observers begin to monitor elections to keep them far from the polls . Teams of observers will monitor the elections in Kenya .
 1965 Voting Rights Act is aresult of the U.S. Civil Rights Movement campaigning for change . The 1965 act was the result of the United States Civil Rights movement .
 It outlaws discrimination against African-American voters, such as turning people away on election day, or making voters pass literacy tests . It also outlaws making people turn people away from election day or passing literacy test .
 Austria becomes the first country in the now have the right to vote . South Africa holds its first election with universal Young voters suffrage . Austria is first country to have universal Young Voters suffrage in the world .
 South Africa's European Union to open the vote to 16-year-olds . System of racial separation, known as “apartheid,” meant that black people could not vote . In most states, voters are 18 or over .
 Emmeline Pankhurst found the Women’s Social and After decades of struggle and protest, U.S. women Political Union in England. The 19th Amendment was passed in the United States in 1913 . Pankhur found the Social and Political Union .
 Campaigners use Stanton, Susan B Anthony, and Alice Paul to win support . Campaigners like Elizabeth Cady words, iS acall to action for suffragettes .
 In 1918, women over worked for years to improve opportunities for 30 years to get the right to vote . In 1928, women of all ages do. women in education and employment in education, as well as for the right .
 Those over the age of 18 must pay a fine . If they fail to vote four times in a row, they lose the right to vote .
 Australia follows in 1902, then women gain the right to vote . In Scandinavia, Canada, and parts of Europe, then Australia follow .
 Universe is made up of tiny aalenvilaren er-laileitorsmrelinalelelela aloerslanme . Tiny particles aliressre) e)aleys Democritus das\e4ersmuarolmalcy . Universe is
 He drops orelalaveyalarcllisneimelinicicicclalasivcstomicean great heights .
 Pane elaicelcia produces the first X-ray after discovering electromagnetic electromagnetic rays .
 When an atom SPINS sat it Gives off radioactivity, either as tiny or as tiny chunks of thearticle or waves of énergy .
 The Higgs boson, iplkei,dalclaalsvomtalcmn olen ey-lalle(ommaleNVclaleers Ulallikere mils emuatcre) Avan aelleaieliaaismlens).4e
 Erwin Schrodinger imagines a cat inside a ‘box with radioactive material’ in a 'box with a radioactive material' Erwin .
 It took more than 5,000 years for the first norseless WC Od even tou carriages to hit the road . But the real breakthrough was the invention of the internal combustion engine .
 American businessman Henry Ford starts the Ford Motor Company . Mass oroduction followed, forever changing the way we travel .
 The Model-T, nicknamed Tin Lizzie, is produced at Ford’s factory in Detroit . It is the first affordable car to be produced in the world's first affordable vehicle .
 Ford introduces a moving assembly line to his factories, using a conveyor belt to haul parts past teams of workers . The first electric traffic lights are installed in Assembly line .
 Mercedes-Benz brings the first diesel passenger car to the market . The German car manufacturer has unveiled a new model of the car . The first diesel car will be available on sale in the UK .
 In the Unimate is a robotic arm that —-——__— , a3 interest of safety, Volvo makes the welds parts and stacks metal . patent open so that all car on the production line at U.S. manufacturers can use It. car giant General Motors.
 English engineer Samuel Brown patents an internal combustion engine tueled by hydrogen . The engine could be used to create an explosive design .
 German engineer Nikolaus Otto aie cart invents the four-stroke engine, an up a hil in Greenwich, internal combustion engine that Carriage a short distance .
 Dunlop invents pneumatic first commercial gas-powered rubber tires for his automobile . Inflatable tires were the first commercial gasoline-powered tires . Karl Benz invented the invention in 1823 .
 Driverless cars use a computer assisted by a GPS unit, laser sensors, cameras, and other devices to find their way without human intervention .
 Italian car manufacturer Lamborghini was established by Ferruccio Lamborghinini . Lamborghinis is the largest Italian car maker in the world .
 Luxury sports cars become popular on both sides of the Atlantic, but only a small number of people can afford them . Only a handful of people in the United States can afford the luxury cars .
 The Toyota Prius is one of the earliest and most successful hybrid cars . The Prius goes on sale in the U.S. today .
 It is powered by both a gas engine and an electric motor, improving efficiency and reducing toxic emissions . The vehicle has a mixture of gas and electric motor to reduce emissions . It will be the first time a car has been driven by a car with a dual engine .
 Within the next decade, more than one million hybrid cars will be sold . More than one | million hybrid vehicles are expected to be sold in 10 years .
 Altnougn scientific and technological advances heloed to make these endeavors possible, their Ultimate Success was due to tne inspiring courage and resilience of extraordinary men and women .
 Orville Wright flies the first powered plane, which he designed with his brother Wilbur Wright . The Wright brothers designed the plane together in 1903 .
 Edmund Hillary from New Zealand and Tenzing Norgay from Nepal successfully climb Mount Everest, the world's highest mountain, for the first time . Everest conquered Edmund Hillary  from New Zealander Edmund Hillary . Hillary from NZ, Tenzing from Nepal and Hillary from Kenya successfully climbed Mount Everest
 Charles Lindbergh flies solo across the Atlantic Ocean nonstop in his plane the Spirit of St. Louis . Lindberggh was the first American to fly nonstop over the Atlantic nonstop nonstop . The flight is a dangerous and grueling experience .
 Amelia Earhart takes off from Oakland / Airport, California, on the first leg of her journey to become the first woman to circumnavigate the globe . Earhart was flying from Oakland, California on the way to the end of her life .
 The 6.8-mile (11.8 km) descent into the Mariana Trench is the first woman to fly solo in the western Pacific Ocean . The trip is almost six hours long and takes almost five hours .
 They spend just 20 minutes on the ocean floor with 21 stopovers . The flight takes just three days to complete .
 Diana Nyad becomes the first person to swim the 60 mile distance from the Bahamas to Florida . She encountered crocodiles, jellyfish, and sharks along the way . Nyad swam at the age of 64 .
 Experts argue that Peary missed the pole by about 30 miles . Later, experts argue that . experts say that . Peary's incredible story remains an incredible story of courage .
 Famous explorer Roald Amundsen and his crew find a way through the Northwest Passage . The waterway links the Arctic and the Pacific Oceans .
 The unsolved mystery of his disappearance makes international headlines . His disappearance makes headlines around the world . His body has never been found .
 Shackleton’s extraordinary leadership skills helped him survive . Shackleton led the Antarctic Antarctic expedition to the Black Sea in 1916. Shackleton was the only person to survive .
 British explorer Ed Stafford walks the length of the Amazon River, 6,000 miles in total from its source to the ocean . The Amazon River is 6,500 miles long and 6,800 miles long .
 Five years after navigating the Northwest Passage, Roald Amundsen sets off on arace against Britain’s Robert F Scott to reach the South Pole . Race to South Pole starts at the end of the year .
 Amundsen gets there first and Scott dies on the harrowing journey home . Scott died on the journey home after being killed by a plane crash .
 The highest jump is Na alslalerclaWaliclanmlelsirclexcmlecliclis to the edge of Space ina balloon . The highest jumped was Na als alsalalcla .
 Two days later, olaw.\ el di mC muanlelacom(es1el-1cem\-laallalelseclas received .
 Captain Smith tells the managing director of White Star Line, the owner of the Titanic, Joseph Bruce Ismay, about the LeromyiVclaalialialelsy .
 The message Is ignored by the operator, who is busy transmitting passenger messages to shore . The operator is busy with other passengers . The message is not heard .
 At 11:40m., ona anlelolallcxsiswrers li naualle|alemualon , <elU)micllismre spot an iceberg until it is only 1,000 yds away . At 11.40m. ona
 First Officer William Murdoch orders the engines into reverse . “There is no danger that Titanic will sink," he says .
 Californian, which is only 5 miles ENN Aran 4740 A POlOWA\ eo) a] mi ho mi ho mO@rcloliclia Smith orders use of the lifeboats .
 Survivors disembark amid crowds of eagerly awaiting family, friends, and photographers who followed the story that shook the world . Survivors disembark at the scene of the plane crash . Survivors are expected to be reunited with relatives and friends .
 European nations were weakened by the cost and destruction of these conflicts, and lost control of their overseas empires . European nations are weakened by tne cost of these wars .
 Invention of computers led to a digital age tnat continues in the 21st century . Humans ventured into soace, wnile tne Invention of Computers led to the digital age .
 World War II colonies in Africa and Asia spread to colonies around the into the Soviet Union . World War I The Soviet Union engulfed successfully fought for world .
 It wasn't until the late 20th century that the age of computers really got underway . Computers were the first computers to be developed in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Between 1914 and 1918, Russia, France, and Britain fought against Austria-Hungary and Germany, with both sides Using devastating new weaponry and tactics .
 British, French, Australian, and New Zealand troops mount a huge attack on the Gallipoli Peninsula hoping to capture Turkey . But the plan is a failure and the attack fails .
 Allied troops halt German advance across western Europe . German advance halted by Allied troops . Two Western Front The German advance was halted by Allies .
 World War | is the first major major hundred thousand Allied Austria-Hungary blames form the Western Front . Serbia was killed in the war during which aircraft troops are killed Serbia for the Archduke's .
 From early 1915, or wounded . assassination and declares stretches from the Swiss planes used for war . Swiss planes were used for . war .
 Germany declares war on Russia BEFORE Germany to declare war on . They are later deployed to drop bombs Russia .
 Country after and fight against one Hey Seat Ee country rushes to defend another in the skies . Country after . fight against . one of the Hey Seat . Ee countries rushes to . defend another .
 Archduke Franz Ferdinand is assassinated on a visit to Sarajevo, Bosnia . Russian army spontaneous truce is called at ee Hungarian throne .
 Gavrilo Princip is a nationalist who believes that Bosnia should be part of Serbia, not Austria-Hungary . Princip was killed in the attack on Germany in September 1914 .
 The Russian commander commits suicide and the army never really recovers . The army never recovers from the suicide of its commander .
 Soldiers enter ""No Man's Land" between the trenches to play soccer, sing carols, and swap simple gifts . Soldiers die as gas seeps into the trenches, and 10,000 are injured . Soldiers play soccer and exchange gifts between trenches .
 Each side dug aline of trenches along the Western Front . Trench warfare involved trenches between 1914-191918 .
 The trenches ranged from small dugouts to sophisticated structures, but living conditions were horrendous . The trenches were filled with trenches, dugouts and sophisticated structures .
 Known as “No Man's Land’s Land, it was criss-crossed in miles of barbed wire . The open space between, known as ‘No Man’ land, was known as No Man's land . Known as 'No No. Man
 U.S. troops now helping the Allies, the Germans are overwhelmed . Germany is overwhelmed by the Americans' efforts to help the Allies .
 Battle of Jutland sees 600,000 casualties during four-month battle campaign near Ypres . Both sides agree to end the Passchendaele .
 The Allies gain only 5 miles officially on the 11th war is fought off the Jutland U-boats of land . The only naval battle of the war was fought in the early stages of the Second World War .
 Use U-boats to fire torpedoes at unarmed British merchant ships carrying vital supplies of food and ammunition between the British and German navies . The horrendous conditions and terrible death toll .
 The Uary 2iTreaty of Versailles, December 16, 1916 November signed in 1919, ends 18, 1916 the Austro-Hungarian and Turkish Empires . The treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1919 .
 America has stayed neutral, Offensive and angry . USA joins the war The Spring ey Sale . America has remained neutral and angry.
 The war in France is at a Somme Lusitania on May 7, 1915, series of huge attacks . Despite all but all but the German sinking of After Russia surrenders, leaders promising Battle of Verdun .
 More than 700,000 men lose their lives in the ensuing battle, which is the longest of the war . The Battle of the Second World War was the longest and most intense of the conflict .
 More than 19,000 British troops die on the opening day, killing Americans on board, Changes public opinion. More than 20,000 soldiers die on board .
 When America discovers that Germany Is urging Mexico to start a war with them, America Joins the Allies against the Allied forces, which now include United States soldiers . America joins the Allies .
 Economic boom there meant people had money to enjoy the finer things in life . Economic boom meant people were able to enjoy cars, culture and culture .
 Music, writing, and fashion all buzzed with new ideas, and the powerful artistic medium of film began . Film is a form of art that has never been seen in the world .
 Criminal gangs grow rich by illegally making and selling their own alcohol and running bars called soeakeasies . Gangs illegally make and sell alcohol and sell it in bars called 'sneaked bars'
 Production for World War | switch to making consumer goods . Factories that had increased increased in Germany .
 Logie Baird demonstrates the first television images to scientists in London . The first images of television were taken by scientists in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The Academy of Motion | Picture Arts and Sciences hand out the market on Wall Street, as the first awards (soon to economic boom) turned into a be called “Oscars’) bust .
 Flappers wear shorter skirts, bob their hair, and listen to jazz . Flappers are seen as rebellious by older generations, but older generations are not .
 Many rely on charity to survive, or jobs, or both . MTaliave me. omielmceyere, aM atoxsvore .
 Long lines gather at bakeries and soup kitchens in order to receive free food . Long lines of line up for free food are common in the U.S.
 The Wall Street Crash spelled the end of the Roaring | wenties . The 1930s were to prove a decade of hardship and conflict like no other before .
 “New Deal’ got the U.S. economy back on track, and comic books entertained people all over the world. Tnere were some positive aspects of the New Deal, however. ‘New Deal' got the United States economy .
 Millions lose jobs, homes, and ability to pay for basic things, such as food . Millions lose their jobs, . homes, . ability to . pay for basics . Millions also lose their ability to afford basic things such as basic food .
 Austria's largest commercial bank collapses in May, triggering a financial panic in Europe . Austria's biggest commercial bank collapsed in May and this triggers a panic throughout Europe .
 Slums—mockingly called “Hoovervilles’ after President Herbert Hoover, who fails to helo — start popping up . Slums begin popping up after the president fails to get a plane to get on the job .
 A huge social welfare package to 1934 Dust Bowl help ease the Great Depression helped ease the Depression . This includes jobs and a huge social welfare package to help ease it .
 Years of severe drought across the prairies of the U.S. and Canada cause winds to whip up the light, dry soil into dust storms . Dust storms are destroying agriculture and worsening the problems of the Great Depression .
 Pro-government supporters unite against nationalists, and a civil war breaks out . Pro and nationalists unite against each other, and civil war erupts in Ukraine .
 Around the world, archaeologists have uncovered entire buried towns, discovered the existence of long forgotten civilizations, and unearthed spectacular treasures . Archaeological findings have revealed fascinating details about the lives of past kings and queens, but of everyday people, too .
 Uruk, founded in around Assyrian palaces of Nimrud and orehistory into the Stone, 4500 sce, is the world’s oldest city .
 Bronze, and Iron Ages, that have human heads, bird wings, SSS based on human tool use. r and the bodies of lions or bulls. He finds statues of gods a ——— Bronze, . Iron Age, and . Iron Ages. that have heads, . bird wings
 Archaeological discoveries are still Chinese archaeologists begin . Two brothers cutting turf at Tollund being made .
 In 1991, hikers in the Alps found the 5,300-year-old frozen body of 7,000 life-size terracotta warriors . The discovery was made by hikers in 1991 .
 His stomach held handwritten tablets ever found in tomb of China's First Emperor . ‘ his last meal, a gruel of barley and Britain are discovered. ‘ His stomach contained handwritten tablets . His stomach was found in the stomach of the Chinese Emperor .
 In India, John Marshall excavates the cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro . He finds many thousands of animal ‘ton Pi Gees | ee bones, inscribed with the earliest found wearing a beautiful jade known Chinese writing. mosaic mask .
 Leonard Woolley excavates the Sumerian royal tombs at Ur, dating from27502400 sce. He reveals the existence of the forgotten Indus, or Harappan, civilization, which flourished here from 2500-1800 BcE. e—_—e
 Among the Machu Picchu treasures oe golden and “, In the Andes of Peru, Hiram eee ee Bingham finds the lost Inca eM eat oh etal Oba od citadel of Machu .
 Howard Carter discovers the tomb of Pharaoh Tutankhamun . It is the only unrobbed Egyptian royal burial ever found .
 The king was buried in 1327 BCE wearing a solid gold mask inlaid with blue glass . He was buried wearing the same mask in the 1327 BC .
 In Egypt, Flinders Petrie develops Arthur Evans excavates the Palace sequence dating. Sequence dating The Minoan Civilization . Sequence dating .
 In the early 20th century, Russia transformed—its monarchy ended, and there were two revolutions . The government should take control of resources such as land and farms and share wealth among the people .
 In the wake of this political uoheaval, the Soviet Union was formed in 1922 . The Soviet Union is now the world's largest and most populous country .
 Aialc West drops supplies into West Berlin by ey efeelialallare mule mule . Cold War contlic between East and West . East dropped supplies into Berlin during Cold War .
 At the time, European leaders fail to oppose Hitler, who becomes more aggressive . At the same time, Europe fails to oppose the Nazi leader . Hitler becomes aggressive and becomes aggressive .
 Invasion of the Balkans was the first invasion of Yugoslavia . Invasion of Yugoslavia was a major event in the Balkans .
 Germany is defeated at the Battle of Stalingrad on February 2, 1943 after a bitter winter . Russia invaded Germany with a huge force, but after almost two years of fighting, it is defeated .
 The Battle of Stalingrad Is a crucial turning point in the war . Operation Torch is a successful invasion of North Africa .
 After seven months of fighting, German and Italian troops are forced to surrender . The battle was over for seven months .
 Around 17, 1945, the Allies divide Germany, and and Berlin, into controlled zones . The United Nations is created, with start to push across France, liberating towns and finding peaceful cities from Nazi occupation as they go .
 The Women's Land Army is re-established to provide extra labor for farms . The Women’s Land Army played a crucial role during World War I . The women's land army is now being re-opened .
 Operation Pied Piper moves almost three million people, mostly children, to rural areas as well as overseas . The British government evacuates almost 3 million people as a result of Nazi bombing raids . The evacuation is part of Operation PIED Piper .
 In France, the entire population of Strasbourg is evacuated to avoid German bombs . In the 1940s, the city was evacuated to prevent German bombs from hitting the city .
 Germany introduces food rationing, but Hitler, fearing a drop in public morale, keeps the restrictions to a minimum . Hitler feared a drop of public morale would be a drop .
 In Britain, bacon, butter, and sugar are rationed in January 1940 . After the Nazi occupation of France, Charles de Gaulle, a junior general, flies to London and makes an appeal on the radio for France to resist the Nazi invaders .
 German U-boats sink three million tons of vital supplies carried by Allied merchant ships traveling from North America to Britain . Battle of the Atlantic was fought in the Battle of Atlantic .
 Men, women, and children were forced to adjust to wartime conditions and their daily lives changed dramatically . Men and women were able to adjust their lives to cope .
 In London, the first of many air attacks, Known as the ‘Blitz,’ takes place on September 7 . Known as “Blitz’s’, the attacks take place in the UK .
 The raids force people to seek cover in air raid shelters and underground rail stations . Air raid shelters are used to shelter people from the air raid .
 Soviet 2 posters urge young men to join the military encourage workers to produce more for the front, and inspire Civilians to carry out acts of sabotage to halt the invasion . Each country depends on keeping its war machine going .
 Harbor, Hawaii, United States, is home to a group of men who have left for the front line .
 The step work as mechanics, welders, engineers, iS controversial; many at the time believe this drivers, and machine operators type of work is only suitable for men .
 During the Blitz (September 1940May 1941), Germany launches 71 nighttime bombing raids on London . The Blitz was Germany's first night-bombing campaign of the Blitz .
 Joy Bulpiooes ‘YBNoUy ‘PaAlAuns UONEZIUBDIO JEONNOR O1ilWUeS-l]ue Ue ‘AUC AJEIP JOH ‘owUIG94
 Troops landed on the beaches of Normandy, France, including the code-named Omaha Beach, seen here .
 They moved inland, allowing more troops to land over the next few days . More troops are expected to land in the coming days . Troops have been deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan .
 World War II began in Europe, by 1941, conflict nad eruoted worldwide . This marked the first step towards freeing Europe from Nazioccupation .
 Mucn of the fighting took place in Asia and the Pacific between the Allied forces and Japan, suoported by the Axis powers Germany and Italy . Allied forces fought against Japan in the Pacific .
 Hitlers invasion of France and the Netherlands in 1940 left European-controlled territories in Southeast Asia vulnerable as Japan attempted to expand Its empire in the region .
 With astonishing speed, Japanese forces attack Hong Kong, the Philippines, Malaya, Thailand, Guam, and Wake Island, taking vast areas of land .
 Japan enters into a military alliance with Germany and ltaly, Signing a document Known as the Tripartite Pact . The document is known as the "Tripartite pact"
 Allied forces halt Japanese plans to invade New Guinea . Battle of the Coral Sea was the first battle of the World War II . Allied forces were able to stop the Japanese invasion .
 This is the first sea battle in which neither side's ships catch sight of each other . The battle was fought in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 The battle is fought between planes sent out from aircraft carriers . Instead of aircraft carriers, aircraft carriers carry out the battle .
 Japans ruled the skies until 1943, when American air capabilities improved, overtaking them . The U.S. became dominant in the world of air travel .
 The tide starts to turn as U.S. forces fight back and begin to defeat Japanese troops one island at a time .
 Many Japanese soldiers refuse to be taken prisoner, choosing to commit suicide instead . Many soldiers in Japan commit suicide after being taken prisoner .
 Japanese cities Hirohito pressures them to Z Japanese cities . Japanese pilots adopt are attacked, too .
 U.S. troops land on Iwo Jima, meeting fierce resistance from Japanese troops hiding in tunnels . Japanese troops hide in tunnels that criss-cross the island . Japanese navy’s attempts to take control of Battle of . lwo . Jima .
 Hiroshima and Nagasaki are destroyed when the United States drops two atomic bombs . The cities were destroyed by the U.S. bombing of the atomic bombs in 1945 .
 Tens of thousands are killed immediately, and tens of thousands more die later from the effects of radiation . U.S. refuses to surrender, but the United States declares victory that kills 100,000 people .
 Japan tried to invade India from Burma from Burma . Burma and India to rise up against Its British colonial rulers, Japan tried . Its colonial rulers .
 Expecting the Indian population British fought back, however, and the jungle conflict became one of war finally ends . The British fought against the Indian people .
 Both the INC and Muslim League feel that these concessions dont go far enough, and the independence campaign rolls on . The INC and the Muslim League want to see more concessions .
 As the INC is mainly Hindu, Indian Muslims form the Muslim League in 1906 to campaign for them . The Muslim League was formed by Indian Muslims against the Hindu party .
 Many are arrested, but the march draws more attention to the independence movement . The march is a symbol of independence movement in Mexico .
 The British Empire declares India's entry into World War II without consulting India’s leaders . India's leaders were not consulted by the British Empire .
 Although 2. million Indian soldiers fight, the decision only increases Indian resentment . India has 2 million soldiers fighting in the US .
 Gandhi is arrested and the movement is banned, but this only increases its support . Gandhi was arrested and banned from the movement . Gandhi's arrest only increases the support of the Gandhi movement .
 It simply did not have the ability or the desire to attempt to hold on to India, and so it sets about negotiating an end to its control . India is one of the most powerful countries in the world, but it has not been able to keep control .
 It was agreed that largely Muslim populations in the northeast and northwest would become Pakistan . It was later agreed that the largely Muslim population in the north and northeast would be Pakistan . Pakistan is now Pakistan .
 Later on, India and Pakistan go to war over the disputed Kashmir region . The two countries go on to go on war in the disputed region .
 The partition of the colony in 1947 turns millions of Muslims in India, and Hindus in Pakistan, into religious minorities . Hindus and Sikhs in Pakistan are also religious minorities.
 Sikhs are leaving Pakistan to make it to East Punjab, northern India . Sikhs say they want to live in the region of East Punjab .
 Kwame Nkrumah becomes the first president of an independent Ghana in 1957 . He was Ghana’s first president and the first Ghana president .
 He immediately sets about improving conditions in the country by opening schools and establishing a social welfare system . He also sets about opening schools, establishing social welfare systems .
 Pan-Africanism is an intellectual movement dedicated to studying, understanding, and communicating African culture . Perhaps one of his most enduring Ideas is his oromotion of Pan-Africaism .
 Some African countries fought for freedom, but otners were granted it democratically . Some African nations fought for democracy, but were granted freedom democratically .
 Kenya will finally gain independence in 1963 . About 138,000 of them were killed, but Kenya will gain independence .
 Rwanda also gains freedom from Belgium, and Uganda Its independence from Britain this year . Rwanda and Uganda also gain independence from Belgium .
 In 1964, Malawi and Zambia go, followed by Botswana and Lesotho two years later . Malawi, Zambia, Botswana, and Botswana also leave the country in 1964 .
 Mauritius and Swaziland gain independence in 1968, along with Equatorial Guinea, which cedes from Spain . Mauritius becomes first African nation to become independent in 1968 .
 The British Empire's grip on the country is finally loosened by a revolution led by Colonel Gamal Abdel Nasser . Colonel Nasser becomes the country’s first president .
 Morocco achieves independence after a short period of unrest, but Tunisia’s transition comes in a largely peaceful fashion . Tunisia's transition was largely peaceful .
 The dictatorship that had led Portugal since 1933 is overthrown in 1974 . It aims to improve the lives of ordinary Africans through cooperation and discussion between member states .
 Angola, Sao Tome, and Principe, Mozambique, and Cape Verde, all seize their opportunity and gain independence from Portugal .
 The ancient Chinese general Sun Tzu advises that spying Is necessary In wartare .
 Using spies allows you to learn as much as you can about your enemy and their battle plans . Using spies will help you learn more about your enemies and their plans .
 Some of the earliest spies operate during the war between the ancient Egyptians and the Hittite Empire . The Egyptians and Hittites were at the time of the war .
 Most spies work for governments, finding out the secrets of enemies or potential enemies . The most important part of soying, or espionage, Is to keep the activity secret .
 In order to avoid their communications being read by the enemy during the Peloponnesian War, the Spartans develop the scytale . A USB flash drive is able to store vast amounts of data on a tiny stick, making it easier than ever to obtain secret information .
 This was one of the earliest systems for coding and decoding secret messages . It was used to code and decode secret messages in the early 1900s .
 It becomes one of the world’s most effective intelligence organizations, says CNN.com .
 CCTV cameras can be used to monitor traffic and crime, but are also an important tool for spies and intelligence agencies . The French Resistance groups emerge within France to Resistance sets up escape routes .
 Shinobi (later known as ninja) are trained secret agents employed by oowertul Japanese warlords . Ministry, known as the Stasi, Is impressive technology, such as 1467 ceE-1603 cE .
 Also known as throwing blades, shuriken could be thrown at a shinobis enemy or used by hand to slash . Shuriken is also known as a throwing blade or throwing weapon .
 Frances Walsingham was the principal secretary and spymaster of Queen Elizabeth II of England . She was the first spymaker of the first spy network . She became the most powerful spy in the world .
 Walsingham builds up a network of spies whose aim is to uncover plots to overthrow the queen . The spy network is set up to uncover plot to overthrow Queen Elizabeth II .
 The Spymaster Walsingham had conspirators tortured in order to get them to confess to their plots . Used during World War I, these timedelayed pencil fuses allowed the person setting the bomb to escape .
 Secret agents use tiny cameras concealed in everyday items, to observe people of interest . Secret agents conceal cameras in everyday objects to keep tabs on people in their homes .
 Camera Stasi soles would use this secret camera to gather intelligence . Camera would be used by the Stasi to gather information .
 Middie East conticts Altnougnh the Middle East is nome to many identities, Muslim Araos make up the majority of Its people . Muslim Arao make up a majority of its people .
 After Worla War |, EUropean empires that nad power in tne region collapsed, and tne Arabs regained control . Soon after World War Il, Jews were granted the state of Israel in Palestine .
 Age-old tensions, Arabo—Israeli conflict, and intervention by the West, have combined to make the Middle East a volatile region .
 From the 1890s, a political campaign called for a Jewish homeland in Palestine . The campaign was called Zionism . It was a political movement for Palestine .
 In the Balfour Declaration of 1917, Britain pledged to help create this nation of Jews .
 The conflict ultimately leaas to Israel gaining more land . 750,000 Palestinians flee or led from their homes, becoming a refugees .
 Arab forces from Egypt, Jordan, and Syria attack Israel . Israel emerges victorious, capturing swathes of Arab territory . 250,000 Holocaust survivors settle in Israel .
 The monarch of Iran, Mohammad Reza Shah, is overthrown and forced to leave the country in the Iranian Revolution, also known as the Islamic Revolution . January 1978February 1979 Iranian Revolution took place in Iran .
 Ayatollah Khomeini's regime was replaced by a new regime based on strict Islamic law . The nonreligious way of life he promoted was replaced with a strict Islamic regime . The new regime was headed by Muslim leader Ayatullah Khomini .
 March 26, 1979 Israel and Egypt peace deal . Hosted in the United States by President Carter . Leaders of both countries attend peace talks .
 June 6, 1982 Israel invades Lebanon in an attempt to attack Palestini . In a bid to attack a rebel force in Lebanon, the Israeli government invades the country .
 Palestinians continue to call for independence for the occupied territories . Conflict still rages across the region, with conflict still raging .
 In 2010, a period of uprisings across the Middle East known as the Arab Spring challenged leadership and called for democracy . The Arab Spring took place across the region in 2010 .
 The worst violence was In Syria, which descended into brutal civil war . The worst was in the country's civil war, which began in April 2011 .
 Some of the key players are listed here, with the year they were founded . Some of them are listed with the date of their birth .
 This movement aims to create a permanent Jewish national state in Palestine . This movement is aimed at creating a permanent national state of Palestine .
 This Islamic military group is dedicated to destroying Israel and creating an Islamic state in Palestine . The group is also dedicated to creating a Palestinian state .
 Al-Qaeda wants to rid Islamic countries of Western influence . Formed by Osama Bin Laden, al-Qaeda was formed by Osama bin Laden .
 ISIS seeks an lslamic state across lrag, Syria, and beyond . Also known as ISIS, this terrorist organization seeks to establish a state across Syria, Syria and beyond.
 In 1950, conflict between North and South Korea threatened to explode into a wider war .
 It became an International concern when the U.S. supported the South Koreans, and the communist countries of China and the Soviet Union championed the North Koreans .
 After Japan’s defeat in the war, the Soviet Union occupies the north of the country, while the United States controls the south . The Soviet Union is now occupying the northern part of Japan .
 The North makes great gains, and captures the South Korean capital, Seoul . The North captures Seoul, South Korea .
 The border between the two countries stays where it was before the war, and a demilitarized zone is set up between them . The border stays where It was before .
 By October, they have driven the North back and have even taken the North's capital city, Pyongyang . They have driven back and even taken Pyongyang, North Korea .
 A stalemate emerges, with each side's territory reverting back to the prewar borders . The result is a stalemate .
 The Korean peninsula remains divided to this day with a communist North and democratic South .
 By 1951, about 500,000 refugees crowded into the South Korean city of Busan, with the overall number of refugees created by the war believed to be between four and six million .
 The United States found fighting in Vietnam to be incredibly difficult . The U.S. found it incredibly difficult to fight in Vietnam .
 The Vietnamese communists were guerilla fighters, which meant their attacks were Sporadic and unpredictable . The Vietnamese communist was guerillas fighters, meaning their attacks would be unpredictable and unpredictable.
 Vietnam War was one of the major conflicts of the late 20th century . Vietnam War raged for almost 20 years . The Vietnam War is one of many major conflicts in the world .
 It destroyed large swatnes of the country and led to the deaths of millions of soldiers and civilians . Millions of people were killed in the war in Afghanistan .
 As the conflict dragged on, an international antiwar movement protested what seemed to be a senseless, bloody war . The movement protested the senseless war .
 Communist leader Ho Chi Minh declares North Vietnam independent, and his Viet Minh guerrilla fighters take on France, Vietnam's old colonial masters . North Vietnam is now an independent state .
 They use this to support pro-communist rebels in the South, Known as the National Liberation Front . They use the funds to back pro-Communist rebels .
 This causes long-lasting health issues for civilians and troops on both sides, and ruins large swathes of Vietnamese soll. It causes long lasting health issues .
 South Vietnamese and U.S. forces regroup and retaliate . Initially surprised by the assault, the South Vietnamese are able to regroup . The South Vietnam and United States forces were able to retaliate .
 North Vietnam launches another attack and the South's capital, Saigon, falls . North Vietnam launched another attack on the South Vietnam in April 1968 .
 The People’s Republic of China (formed in 1949) and the Soviet Union support North Vietnam . North Vietnam was formed in 1949 . The Soviet Union supported North Vietnam.
 Vietnam is divided in half, with Ho Chi Minh taking control of the North and Ngo Dinh Diem ruling in the South . Vietnam is now a divided nation .
 The United States issues the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, committing the country to defending itself and South Vietnam . In response, the U.S. issues the resolution . The resolution committed the United States to defend itself and Vietnam .
 These show the government felt the war to be unwinnable, but had lied about it . The government felt it was to lose the war, but was lying about it, it says .
 The United States had begun to pull out troops in 1969, and secret peace talks began in 1970 . The U.S. had begun pulling out troops and pulled out in 1969 .
 The world fears full-scale nuclear war, but, after 13 days, the Soviet Union offers to remove the weapons . In return for aUS promise not to invade Cuba, Soviet Union promises not to attack Cuba .
 John F Kennedy becomes youngest-ever United States president in the tightest election since 1884 . The protest is led by the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament organization .
 New attitudes ee ea aoe la about freedom of expression and SOL Mss ec lmers equality were reflected in muSIc, fashion, and politics .
 It is attended by more than 400,000 people, causing massive traffic jams and road closures . It is the first time the event has been held in more than 40 years .
 Musicians such as Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, and Ravi Shankar perform . Musicians like Janis, Jimi, Jani, and Jani Shankar performed .
 Betty Friedan launches the modern feminist movement with The Feminine Mystique . The book discusses the role of women in society and promotes equality . Friedan was a pioneer of the feminist movement in the 1960s .
 British invasion British bands such as The Beatles, The Who, and The Rolling Stones storm the U.S. charts . British invasion of the United States was British invasion .
 The United States becomes involved in along war in Vietnam to prevent 8 > ' ' it from falling under communist rule . The U.S. became involved in the war to prevent the fall of communist Vietnam .
 Pop art takes inspiration from comic books around the world and advertising . Pop art movement flourishes in the face of mass protests in the streets .
 Andy Warhol is the most distinctive pop artist, using bold images and bright colors a to depict everyday objects . New publications develop for parents .
 This causes a young people who don't agree revolution in the fashion with the traditional views of the world, with designs aimed at their parents . The designs are aimed at people who want to challenge their parents' views .
 Ae Oz is dedicated to poetry, music, and promoting political change . These include these new customers .
 A movement of young people known as "hippies" emerges in San Francisco . Hippies emerged in the 1960s and '90s .
 They promote ideas of nonviolence and love . They are recognizable by their long hair and colorful clothing, and they are recognizable .
 In many olaces, there was also corruption, military COUupS, CIVII war, and division among different ethnic groups . Although there was freedom, there were also corruption and war .
 In the 21st century, optimism is growing, with greater wealth and improving political stapllity . However, inthe 21st Century, optimism has also been growing in Russia .
 Kwame Nkrumah becomes the country's first independent prime minister after years of British colonial rule . Ghanaian independence took place in 1945 .
 Ugandan president Amin expels Asian minorities from Uganda and launches attacks on Tanzanian enemies . Jonas Savimbi, Angolan politician, inaspeech in 1975 Idi Amin .
 The Congo (modern-day Democratic Republic of Congo) dissolves into crisis after becoming independent from Belgium in June 1960 . Congo became independent of Belgium in 1960 .
 A breakaway state of Katanga exists until the United Nations intervenes in 1963 . The United Nations intervened in the fight for Katanga in Katanga .
 Organization of African Unity is established by 32 African states to encourage and protect Africa's interests . African Unity was established following the independence of many African nations from European rule . 32 African nations are represented in the Organization of Africa Unity .
 The Republic of Angola is rich in diamonds and oil, but is impoverished by a civil war . Angola becomes independent from Portugal in 1975, but becomes impoverished by the war .
 More than a million people of the Tutsi ethnicity in Rwanda are killed by members of the neighboring ethnic group, the Hutus . More than one million people were killed by the Hutu in Rwanda .
 Nelson Mandela is elected the first black president of South Africa . After decades of apartheid (racial segregation) in his country, Nelson Mandela was elected president . He spent 27 years in prison for protesting against this .
 Decades of war and extreme drought cause starvation in Ethiopia . More than ‘fet 400,000 people die and millions more are left hungry and poor .
 The United States helps to rebuild western 4945 ~~ European countries . World Chess becomes cut off from a World Chess Championship .
 This ends 24 years of 4 Soviet domination G of the World Chess Chess Championship . This ends the 24-year-old Soviet domination .
 Three of them are forced to move to the Soviet Union, and one shares Soviet secrets in exchange for his freedom . One of them is forced to share Soviet secrets with the Soviets . Three of the three are forced out of the country .
 Berlin Wall “German communists erecta wall dividing East Berlin from West. -Itbecomes an oN ""sy VG wo wo Cold and economic power of Wa Hideals. — each country.” Berlin Wall .
 The USSR unites the Eastern Bloc through the Warsaw Pact which, like NATO in the West, creates an agreement that the countries will support one another . It ends 7 nea ewallseparates when American many p Sperone spacecraft Apollo 11 a homes, Apollo 11 homes .
 The world looks on in amazement as the USSR disintegrates into 15 separate countries . The USSR was one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 As the USSR weakens, East Germans are astonished to finally be allowed to travel freely to West Germany . East Germans were astonished to be able to freely enter West Germany in the 1970s .
 Fruit flies are launched on board a German-designed V-2 rocket from World War II . They are fruit flies, launched on a German designed rocket from WWI . Fruit flies were launched on the V-1 rocket from a German design .
 The USSR's Sputnik 1, the world’s first artificial satellite, orbits Earth . First satellite orbit of earth was the USSR's first satellite orbit .
 Laika, a stray dog from the streets of Moscow, is the first animal to orbit Earth, on Russia's Sputnik 2 . Laika is a stray from Moscow, Russia's first animal in orbit .
 Neil Armstrong Is the first human to walk on the Moon, and his co-pilot Buzz Aldrin is the second . Neil Armstrong is the first man to walk the Moon . Buzz and Neil Aldrin are the second men to have walked the moon .
 Apollo 11 was the first crewed mission i to land on the Moon . Apollo 11 landed on the lunar surface in 1969 . The mission was part of the Apollo 11 mission .
 In the fall of 1962, the U.S. and the Soviet Union were in a diplomatic deadlock . The two superpowers of the world's superpowers were at odds .
 During the 1950s, former World War ll allies — Relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . On October 23, 1962, Premier Khruschev the United States and Soviet Union met for the first time . Tensions rise .
 all weapons on Cuba are defensive . Soviet Union continue to decline with ~ “replies to President Kennedy, claiming that become rival superpowers, and they each
 U.S. secretly backs a military coup in Cuba, weapons in Turkey, close to the Soviet ~*~ submarines close behind . In 1952, the . finalizes a deal to make ready their nuclear approach .
 The United States reacts elgelelareml@lOhanll Reni taleKever-s1ae)i lofelgel-leulan’ ""1 \’aulanccitellteui ready hisweligerctsicrsn
 This allows military dictator © — Kona) isnecele laldavamiarseeve)va¢cianiieys Ova 0) clelale pO lene lieclicre . Fulgencio Batista to regain power .
 U.S. Sen. Kenneth Keating warns his government of the Soviet — through the United Nations . Castro to build Soviet missile bases on the island . Over the next two days, Cuban nationalist Fidel Castro overthrows the government .
 Cuba's isolation encourages Castrotoseek . The crisis begins 3 war looms. Tam k2\oX¢ MUlswel¢e\sife .
 Law change September 3 ROSA PAR KS Little Rock Nine . Some states ignore the new rules. Some states ignored the law change .
 Nine African-American high school students enrollinan all-white school in Little Rock, Arkansas . Arkansas governor calls the National Guard to stop them .
 Later, the United States government sends troops to escort the Little Rock Nine to school . U.S. troops escort the nine to school in Little Rock .
 The Givil Rights Act of 1957 was the first civil rights law in more than 80 years . The act was passed by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1957 . It was first act of civil rights legislation since the Civil War .
 The legislation helps to protect ime voting rights of African-Americans and signals support for change . The legislation is a first step to protect African-American voting rights .
 FebruaryJuly 1960 DINERS PROTEST G reensboro sit-in . Students in Greensbo ro, North ata ene take their seat counter at Woolworth’s Iy S Fe SOON, peaceful “sit-j nch S like this one take
 A night of bombings targeted at civil rights 1964 peaks turns into 8 days of April 3 . July 2 rots in Birmingham, Alabama i ivil Ri Act of 1964 . Local police respond violently, Malcolm X givesspeech | Civil Rights stunning the country .
 Shock spreads quickly, and riots break out in several U.S. cities . The United States has been hit by a wave of violence .
 President Johnson asks Americans to reject violence and puts Pressure on Congress to pass new legislation quickly . President Johnson calls for Congress to act quickly on the issue .
 Congress Signs this act to give everyone fair and equal aCCess to housing . Congress signs this act . The act will give everyone a fair, equal housing .
 The impact of civil rights legislation like this IS huge, but the march for Equality continues . The impact is huge, and the impact of the legislation is huge .
 The Selma march in Alabama from Selma to ‘mn Montgomery was organized to draw of, ~~ PUBLI 8 attention to the difficulties African Americans faced when registering to vote . The march in Selma was organized by the Selma "mn Montgomery"
 African Americans had the right to vote, but state Officials tried to stop them from registering . African Americans were not allowed to register in the state of South Carolina .
 Registration offices were rarely open, and officials made people complete unnecessary literacy tests, fill in long forms, and pay fees . Registration offices in the U.S. were rarely closed, and people were made to fill out long forms and fill out forms .
 A simple chiton (along sleeveless shirt tied with a belt) is worn by men, women, and children . Ancient Greeks wore a chiton .
 It can be short or long, printed or plain, gathered or loose, and topped with a cloak for extra warmth . It can also be printed or printed, or plain or plain .
 People nave always been interested In what they wear, from the ancient Egyptians and their caretully crafted wigs, to todays Ssnoppers, wno can buy the latest fashions online . People nve always been . interested in what they . wear .
 Its nistory IS as long and colorful as some of its most sensational creations . It is also as colorful as the most famous creations .
 Concerns grow about working conditions in factories, and the environmental impact of cheap, disposable clothes .
 In the 1980s, fashion designers became superstars, and models became celebrities . The 1980s was a decade of fashion designers and celebrities .
 If a celebrity appears in adress, It can sell out in moments on the other side of the world . It can be sold out on the next few days, even if it's in the other world .
 The Romans wore simple tunics and togas made from wool and linen . The Romans were known for their simple togas and tunics .
 Trousers are more popular with women than ever before . Flares and heels are wider for men and women .
 Platform shoes influenced by oerformers such as David Bowie and Elton John . Platform shoes inspired by the likes of David Bowie .
 Hose (thin, fitted trousers with feet with feet, much like tights) begin to become popular for men . Hose is thin and fitted trousers that are fitted with feet .
 As wealthy people begin to travel the world, fashions from different countries influence each other . Fashions are influenced by different countries' fashion choices .
 Many copy the style of Queen Elizabeth, known for her full-skirted Youthquake style . Teenagers now with their own money to spend, break free from their parents .
 Young designers lead the way, such as Mary Quant, who shocks older generations when she designs the miniskirt in 1964 . After World War I ends, travel and leisure, once just for the wealthy, become more affordable .
 The Ottoman Empire, stretching from southern Europe to Asia, inspired European fashion . Ottoman Empire was one of the world's most successful empires .
 This includes turbans and long, flowing robes, crafted from beautiful, expensive fabrics . The world's most expensive fabrics include turbans, robes and long flowing robes .
 France (and to a lesser extent, England) leads the way in fashion, with the rest of Europe following . The rest of the European continent follows suit .
 The rich splurge on the latest fashions in hand-decorated silk and velvet . The rich splash out on hand-made silk, velvet .
 Edo period in Japan sees a rise in the kimono, a robe with flowing sleeves and a wide belt . The Edo Period in Japan saw the rise in kimonos .
 Wealthy people compete for the richest fabrics, expressing their status and style . Wealthy fabrics are a way of expressing the status of a wealthy person .
 Rococo is an artistic movement known as rococo inspired by lighter, more flowing clothes . Rococo was an expression of freedom and freedom of expression .
 Fitted dresses are replaced by full-skirted gowns known as mantuas . Later known as open robes and petticoats are replaced with open robes .
 The United States Navy introduces the iconic item of clothing, meant to be worn as an extra layer under a shirt . The U.S. Navy introduced the T-shirts to the public .
 It is stretchy and holds its shape, as well as being easy to clean and inexpensive . It's stretchy, and holds shape, and is easy to maintain .
 The introduction of vacation in the 1800s gives people more leisure time to do sports . Blue jeans Sportswear is now a popular sportswear brand .
 Rich people adopt outfits for soorts such as hunting, riding, and archery . Rich people dress up for hunting and riding, such as riding, archery, and hunting .
 African prints a new printing technique is Jazz age . Following World War, practical, comfortable clothes become popular .
 Many young women, Known as flappers, cut their hair short, smoke, and dance to jazz to rebel against oldfashioned society . developed, which prints fabric with wax to create colorful patterns . Skirts become shorter, and many young women cut hair short .
 Print fabric is a huge hit in Ghana, and soon is being used to make clothes across much of West and Central Africa .
 The jeans have metal fastenings at the seams, making them tough and long-lasting . The jeans are made of metal .
 They become popular with laborers across the US, and by the mid-20th century will become a key feature of wardrobes across the world .
 A financial crash puts an end to the fun of the jazz age . Film star fashion is the result of a financial crash in the 1930s .
 Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers are famous for their glamorous clothes . Normal people admire the clothes of film stars such as Ginger Rogers and Fred Astair .
 The women wear long, fitted dresses, and mens suits have narrow waists and wide shoulders .
 During World War II, money and material is in short supply, meaning few can afford new suits or dresses . Wartime fashion during the war can be seen on the cover of the war .
 It is the first craft to fo)gie)torelgeleaneueue)claiers other than Earth . The craft is first craft from Earth to take off from Earth .
 Dennis Tito is the the stars, we have dreamed of exploring in space . on the Moon. a first space tourist. ; the universe. on the moon. . The universe. .
 In 1961, the first person ee entered space in his spacecraft, marking the beginning of an extraordinary journey for humans . In 2003 2003, astronauts took part in the first mission to the moon .
 After World War Il, many East and Southeast Asian countries orogressed from poverty to extreme wealth . P rings to send stunning | images back to Earth .
 This develooment began In the 1960s, as Asian countries, starting with Japan, started developing computers .
 They symbolize British rule to help Hong a million people to leave their struggles to make money . They symbolized British rule .
 Itis a ol ate lalexcmie)a @valiarcmconianl elicits the rest of the world—more idatslanay are |lielan eXs1e)e)(-mnVclceie the events on televisions
 Its decision is based on amialsnere.nere)an] er<lalsrelane)miaices)74e) elm alexe)aalesulanerelelaliatcys across the world .
 Before 1935, the word computer referred to a person whose job It was to do mathematical calculations . A computer is a machine that takes Inout, stores and orocesses data, and gives outout .
 Computers were Initially built from mecnanical components such as levers and gears until electronic parts were used in the 2OtN century . Computers are now made from electronic parts such as gears and levers instead of levers .
 Smartonone in your pocket is juSt aS DOwerTul. Now, the computing power of the Smart on one is ju st aSDOwerTUL. Smartononone is now available for purchase .
 The massive 30-ton computer glowing with 18,000 tubes is intended to ers a a Turing machine make more calculations than all of humanity has done up to this point . Is intended to be able to make more . calculations .
 Ada Lovelace punched in a card using electricity to read a pattern of holes in a pattern . Ada used to punch holes into a card to make it easier to read .
 Babbage's programming invention saves millions of dollars . His invention saves both time Babbage shows math whiz and money .
 She works out how the computer can Babbage's manipulate letters and symbols . Difference Engine as well as numbers can be manipulated by the computer .
 Historians consider her the first mechanical device that can do complicated calculations . Babbage drew up plans for the future . Historians say she was the first machine that could do calculations .
 The Difference Engine is a computer programmer . He imagines that this machine will store data in the future, anticipating the Artificial Intelligence his Difference Engine .
 Computer scientists and inventors with access to oTratk ,ic\ ‘clef ror our mings’ are coming closer to achieving Turing’s goals of creating a machine with the intelligence of a human .
 Two players use buttons language that lets users share cee and dials to bat a blob of light data quickly . The language is still in use today today .
 Thousands of Jobs create and sell one of the first desktop first smartphone, created years later controlled with a mouse . Thousands of jobs created and sold one of first desktop phones .
 Drop-down menu makes it simple word processors, spreadsheets, and enthusiasts . A software programs, such as computers, Apple |, as a kit for computer .
 Microsoft releases a games, are released for the machine, and appeals to a wider audience with its users to make calls, email, and mouse-friendly Windows . Windows is one of the highest-selling keyboard, game controllers, and manage schedules. operating system the next year .
 A Vindication of the Rights of Woman by British writer and philosopher Mary Wollstonecraft is published. lt sets out the reasons why women and men are equal and deserve equal rights and opportunities .
 Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz is known as the first feminist writer of the Americas . She is also known as a Mexican nun who wrote about women's rights .
 Her work La Respuesta is a letter written in response to a priest who has attempted to silence her and other women, and deny them education . Her work is a response to an attempt to silence women and girls .
 Two million people will join, and it will play a key role in passing the 19th Amendment, which will guarantee women’s right to vote In the U.S. in 1920 . Two million will join and play a major role in the passing of the amendment .
 She writes some of the first feminist works of literature, which argue for equal rights and treatment, and celebrate female heroines from history .
 Russian womens rights leader and social campaigner Anna Filosofova leads amovement to provide women with work, education, and low-cost housing . Russian women's rights leader is a social campaigner .
 Feminism is the belief that women and men are equal, and snould nave equal rignts and opportunities . However, men nave been given more powertul roles than women .
 International Women’s Day was created to promote women's rights and support suffrage . Early feminists focused on getting women tne right to vote, but over time the movement has come to address tne role of women .
 It is initially only marked in a few European countries, but will soon spread across the world . It will initially only be limited to a few countries .
 The National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies forms in the UK, under the leadership of Millicent Fawcett . UK suffragists formed in the 1920s .
 It believes that a nonviolent approach will show that women are respectable and responsible enough to participate in politics . The nonviolent approach is needed to show women are responsible enough for politics .
 They march, stage hunger strikes, break windows, and chain themselves to railings outside important buildings . many more areas, from politics and nome life to music and sports, they have staged hunger strikes .
 India becomes independent from British rule, and the government writes a new set of laws, with the involvement of women . Women's movement led to the formation of the Indian women's movement .
 These support freedom and nondiscrimination for all, helping to inspire a women's movement in India . These support free speech, freedom of expression and nondisidentity .
 In 1951, she stormed the Egyptian parliament with a group of women, demanding the right to vote . She stormed the parliament demanding the vote in 1951 .
 A week later, a bill is passed allowing women to vote and become members of parliament . A week after the bill was passed, women were allowed to be allowed to vote in the UK .
 Billie Jean King writes The Feminine Mystique, a book that insists women deserve to go to college and have successful careers, just as much as men .
 It is all a show of support for women's when half of us rights, and equality more generally, across gender, are held back . Race, religion, and more. race, religion .
 Riot Grrrls is a feminist musical movement in the state of Washington . It is estimated that seven million Malala Yousafzai. people take part in the 2013 in speech to the UN .
 Frustrated with being surrounded by all-male bands, women begin to form their own bands . Women form bands in order to escape the male-dominated bands .
 They make music, create magazines, and hold meetings to express their thoughts on feminism and politics . They also make music and create magazines to express and discuss their thoughts .
 Simone de Beauvoir wrote The Second Sex, a book that discusses the treatment of women throughout history . It attempts to define what It means to be female, inspiring generations to follow .
 Tennis star Billie Jean King founds the Women’s Tennis Association . It campaigns to give female tennis players equal pay to male players .
 It is a Start in breaking a trend in breaking the trend in sports where female athletes are paid less than men . It is the first time women have been paid more than men in sports .
 In its early years, the first email internet was a tool for scientists and the military to share coronene information . It was used to share information with the military .
 Leonard Kleinrock figures out a way of enabling an| lui Kelasmcem ral | e@kenctc(eanelialcia ON me) aereldiaremiacelanar-tuelaniaire small blocks .
 Viral video wc. Delaliaarcticeane)i a baby dancing goes AVIEclMAVAcMle)Al\cclaeaarell chain messages . Viral . video w.c.i a child dancing goes .
 Video-sharing YouTube is created, and becomes one of the fastest-growing sites on the internet . YouTube is one of YouTube's fastest growing sites .
 Researchers rig up alive shot of coffee machine oni alo\ mers lansicionelamials)is Computer screens when a fresh pot has been brewed . Eric Schmidt, former head of Google, inaspeech at Internet World Trade Show, 1999 .
 Protesters can quickly ce felalp4onelssanlelarsiacctilelarars elalonsy elccr-lenlaelaanrclllele on the sites . Protesters are encouraged to quickly flee the site .
 Estonia is the world’s il esimexellaliavmcOnelsyoulaltslaatc| voting in a governmental election . Estonia is also the world's largest country to vote in a government election .
 KOMVelKoy encouraging more people to participate in the election . This makes It easier. This makes it easier.
 The Internet roy am Mallar ts a als.comslaonanlelelecnel\ulerers ore) alalsieitcre mon ialoulalic)aalcimearcla.com .
 Scientists in the United States develop a robot that can make copies of itself . The Reproducing robot can be made to replicate itself .
 Japanese company, Honda, will introduce ASIMO, a humanoid robot able to walk, climb stairs, and change direction . The technology could be used to create robots that repair themselves while working in difficult environments such as outer space .
 The goal of the race is to kickstart research into the develooment of a future fleet of even better robot cars .
 Scientists trek for miles across the planet, searching for information about its surface . They search for clues about conditions that could have once supported extraterrestrial life .
 United States car company General Motors installs Unimate on its assembly line to do tasks such as stacking hot pieces of metal and welding car bodies . Unimate was installed by General Motors to help with the assembly line's tasks .
 Elektro and Sparko builds a metal person for the New Shakey York World's Fair . AUS company builds the metal person, Elekro, for the fair .
 7 ft tall, it rolls on mobile robot to see and move around wheels, moves Its fingers and in its environment . Basic artificial intelligence allows this “I visualize a ttme when we will be to robots what dogs are to humans”
 Sparko begs, barks, and wobbly walk becomes iconic . Sparko is a robot named for Sparko named for his Sparko . The robot dog, person, but the robot named Sparko, begs and barks .
 Claude Shannon, mathematician, wags Its tail in an article in Omni Magazine, 1987 {ne story of ropotics .
 Atlas’s strength and agility can be put to use in search and JIBO rescue operations in the future . Atlas is being trained to be used in rescue and rescue operations .
 Face and voice recognition technology allows JIBO to recognize up to 16 people . Face recognition technology can be used to recognize 16 people in a row .
 The blue ring around Its waist lights up when it hears someone talk to it . The ring around its waist light up when someone talks to it.
 Saudi Arabia grants citizenship to Sophia, a humanoid robot, to Sophia . Saudi Arabia has been granted citizenship to the robot . Sophia is the first robot to be granted citizenship in Saudi Arabia .
 She can hold simple conversations 4 and has more than 60 different facial expressions . She has been able to communicate with her friends and family members .
 Amazon Baxter makes its first delivery of popcorn by drone to arms to perform a task . This industrial robot can be programmed by a human moving bag of popcorn .
 Baxter a customer in the UK memorizes these motions so it is delivered able to repeat the task independently . The package is delivered . amere 13 minutes after lt can be programmed by anyone .
 To be eligible, a person has to be at least 35 George Washington John Adams John Adams Thomas Jefferson I Led anarmy against the British | Helped draft the Declaration .
 Established Declaration of Independence, os then became the first the naval department, so he Is which stated that the OVElSEds tO United States CItIzen parents were president . Established Independence, then became first naval department .
 The peace many and edged the US ever — but by the end of his term, civil without being elected to office . Died of cholera states, but the peace many, but also the peace .
 The only president ever to Grandson of President Oversaw expansion of United States . Took the United States into World War .
 After the war, he terms—he terms— he terms — he lost an election, during his term the country and Puerto Rico . During his term, he lost a war with the government and Puerto Rican government . Puerto Rico and the U.S. are still at risk of losing
 Nobel Peace Prize in 1906 and passed a law allowing proposed the formation of . the . formation of then was voted back in again expanded and expanded and six new states into his second term . was assassinated .
 His work to reform civil rights Brought in the Civil Rights Ended Vietnam War Ended the Vietnam War and Unexpectedly became vicePresident during a difficult period .
 He was cut short when he was sending more troops into the Soviet Union . He was killed when he sent more troops to Russia .
 After his was shot by a would-be shot dead in Texas war in Vietnam in disgrace after political honesty helped restore the term in office, he became a assassin but recovered . Corruption was uncovered but recovered. in disgrace in disgrace .
 After his presidency, he became a campaigner against slavery . The U.S. would resist attempts by other countries to establish colonies in the Americas .
 Ulysses S Grant was an inexperienced politician whose presidency was overshadowed by scandal and corruption . Grant was a hero of the Civil War, but was a scandal-ridden politician .
 Andrew Jackson was the first president to die in office . He was shot dead by John Wilkes Booth .
 After financial panic and stock market crash led to economic depression, Van Buren became unpopular . He was not reelected . He became unpopular and was not elected .
 Before he took office, he led the army that defeated the British at the Battle of New Orleans . He was the first president to take office .
 Chester A Arthur Brought in a law that meant civil servants were hired ourely for their ability rather than because of their political connections . Chester A. Arthur brought in the law that allowed civil servants to be hired without political ties .
 Herbert Hoover fought to end corruption in politics and public life . Shortly after his election, the U.S. entered an era of serious economic depression .
 Harding was an unpopular president who was dogged by rumors of financial wrongdoing . Harding was the president of the Harding administration . Harding died in a landslide landslide in July 1918 .
 After the terrorist attacks of 9/11, he ordered the invasion of Afghanistan and declared the War on Terror . George W Bush has been President of the United States .
 Bill Clinton's reputation was damaged by a with Iraq scandal over a relationship with a White House intern . Presided over a time of peace of the CIA .
 Harry S Truman Authorized the dropping of two nuclear bombs on Japan, which ended World War I . Truman authorized the drop of two nukes, ending World War II .
 Franklin D Roosevelt led the U.S. through the Great Depression and World War I . FDR led the United States through World War II and the Depression . FDR was the only president to lead the country through the Depression and WWII .
 He funded a plan to revive the U.S. economy and help people out of poverty . The plan was funded by a fund to help the United States economy .
 Before entering politics, Trump was a wealthy oresident . Donald Trump is the first African-American president of the United States .
 His healthcare reforms were disliked by opponents, and led to stalemate in government . businessman, and famous television personality .
 Richard of York oe ial Lani fostered national pride after he was killed in the Battle of Wakefield . His son Edward became the ; and prosperity strength under them . Lani's son Richard became the .
 The manufacturing and merchant classes rose in Status, and architecture, literature, and theater blossomed . The status of the Status class rose in status .
 A plague killed more than 100,000 people and a great fire destroyed most of the city . The city was devastated by a plague and a fire that destroyed it .
 James Il tried to restore the Catholic faith but fled when William of Orange was invited to restore rights in the Glorious Revolution . James Il fled to England in 17th century when he was invited into the revolution .
 Robert Walpole became the first prime minister to German-speaking George . Walpole was the first to become a prime minister in Britain .
 For the first time in Its history, England was a Commonwealth (or republic) without a king or queen . England was the first and only time in its history to have a queen or king without a queen .
 Oliver Cromwell took Jamaica from the Spanish and defeated the Dutch at sea . Cromwell ruled by puritan Cromwell and his parliament . He ruled the country until his death .
 This dynasty was dominated by political battles between king and parliament, which ended with a civil war and a beheading . This dynasty ended with the death of the king, who was beheaded by the king .
 The Stuarts believed they had a god-given right to rule, but were tolerant of Catholics . They made peace with Spain and made peace between them and the Catholic kingdom .
 The couple were patrons of the arts and left a legacy of beautiful art and architecture . They were patrons for the arts . They left behind a legacy for beautiful art .
 He in Scotland then the throne . by Oliver Cromwell in own council of 15 and a keen interest in scandal when a South the Civil War, he was tried and executed by his parliament of 400 .
 He was followed by his son Richard, who introduced yachting to England . He followed him into architecture and science .
 William the Conqueror claimed the throne after he defeated Harold Il at the Battle of Hastings . He claimed the title after defeating Harold I at the battle of Hastings and claiming the throne .
 Normans built castles and brought with them a feudal system of lords, who held land, and peasants, who worked it . Normans held land and peasants worked it, and lords held land in feudal system .
 Confessor was crowned king on Christmas Day 1066, but his reign was short-lived . He was crowned King of England in 1066 and died of his injuries shortly afterwards .
 This dynasty took its name from a yellow flower an ancestor wore in his hat . Originating in Anjou in France, this dynasty took their name from an ancestor's hat .
 Wales and Ireland came under English rule during their rule . During much of their rule, England was at war with France and Scotland . During that period, the English ruled Wales, Ireland and Wales .
 Plantagenets laid the foundation for law and government by creating justices of the peace and the first parliament . The Plantagenet created justices of peace and parliament .
 French territory was recaptured and then lost, and in the War of the Roses, the royal houses of Lancaster and York fought over the throne for 30 years .
 Edward ll of Germany, he was returned at the Battle of reign was marked by Scotland . His battles to unite Englandand the rights of people, 1327-1377 . He was returned to the throne of Germany .
 A model parliament Church Church, and 1377-1399 Richard Il for a huge ransom and was Agincourt. many rebellions. was formed during his reign. eventually killed in France .
 The Americans won independence Saxe-Coburg-Gotha Windsors and England fought France in the Napoleonic Wars during Georges reign . Many more people got the vote under William lV .
 After her husband Prince Albert died, she went into mourning but was coaxed back into public life . She went from mourning to public life after her husband's death .
 This dynasty of just one king is named after Queen Victoria's husband Prince Albert . Prince Albert was the son of the Duke of SaxeCoburg and Gotha . He was Prince Albert's son, Prince Albert, who was born in Germany and died in 1901 .
 Edward became king at the age of 59 and reigned during the first years of the 20th century . Edward was the first king to reign during that era, when inventions like the first automobile were taking Britain into the modern age .
 He helped restore relations between France and England and built anew royal estate at Sandringham in Norfolk . He helped rebuild relations between England and France and built a new royal estate .
 George V changed his surname to Windsor during the World War because of the strong anti-German feelings of his people . He changed his name to Windsor after the war because he was anti-Germany .
 Prince William and managed to overcome his — Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge, speech impedimentand — and their children lead anew became popular during generation of royals and after the war .
 Blockage is isolation of an area so as to prevent supplies from entering or leaving . This abbreviation has largely replaced sc . blockade . Blockage largely replaced by blockade .
 A period of ancient history when people mostly used bronze for making tools and weapons . Caliph is the title of the religious and political leader of Islam .
 The act of sending settlers to establish a colony in another country involved taking political control over the people already living there . It lasted from shortly after World War II until 1989 . Communism is a belief in a society in which ownership of property and wealth is shared .
 Congress The law-making branch of the United States government . conquistador One of the Spanish conquerors of American Indian civilizations . constitution A set of laws that determine the political principles of a government .
 Counter-Reformation, the period of change in the Catholic Church after the Protestant Reformation . Counter-reformation was the period when the Protestant Church began to emerge .
 Coup is sudden violent or illegal seizure of power by a group . This included internal reform and opposition to Protestantism . Coup is a sudden violent, illegal seizure by group .
 Crusades, the Eight military expeditions of the 11th to 138th centuries, in which Christian knights tried to seize back the city of Jerusalem from the Muslims . daimyo is a Japanese lord . A leader who rules a country alone, with no restrictions on the extent of their
 Deoxyribonucleic acid stores genetic information inside living cells . domestication The taming of wild animals to make them useful to humans . empire A group of lands or peoples brought under the rule of one government . dynasty A royal family ruling a country for successive generations .
 Mesoamerica “Middle America’ is the name for the region stretching from central Mexico in the north, to Guatemala in the south . The region is known as “Mesoameric,’ the name of the region .
 Mesopotamia is the region of modern-day lrag lying between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers . A group of atoms linked by chemical bonds .
 An independent country or one or more countries whose people share historical, linguistic, or cultural ties . The belief that the interests of one’s nation are more important than those of other countries is considered .
 Neanderthal is an extinct species of early human closely related to Our Own Species . Neanderthal was an early human related to our own species . Neanderthals are the closest relatives of modern humans .
 A form of Christianity, resulting from the Reformation, in which allegiance is no longer offered to the Pope, is Protestantism . A recession is a decline in a country’s economic activity, but less serious than a depression .
 Reformation, the reform movement of the 16th century, saw many churches break from the Catholic Church headed by the Pope in Rome . Reformation was a reform movement in which many churches broke from Catholic Church .
 Renaissance period of European history, beginning in the 14th century, when far-reaching changes occurred in the arts and intellectual life . Renaissance is a country without a hereditary monarch or emperor .
 Solar System, The Sun, together with its orbiting planets, including Earth, and smaller bodies such as asteroids . Sovereign A ruler or head of state exerting Supreme power . Species A type of organism, such as a horse or leopard .
 The members of aspecies can breed with each other, but usually not with other species . A stockade is a line of stout posts or logs set inthe ground to form a defense against attack .
 Vaccination is usually given by injection to keep people from contracting a disease . Virus is tiny life-form that can invade body cells and multiply .
 West, Europe and North America or their ideals when seen when seen in contrast to other civilizations . West, the Europe and . North America . Or their ideals . West .
 Zionism is the movement to create and maintain a homeland for the Jewish people in Israel . Zionism is a movement for the creation of a homeland .
 Vikas Chauhan, Rachael Grady, Baibhav Parida, Sean Ross, and Heena Sharma for design assistance . Ed Meritt for cartography; Mohd Zishan and Mohd . Mohd. Zishani for illustrations; Steve Croz
 VANNINI/ De Agostini ; Tim Graham; Tim Graham . Tim Graham ; Tim . Graham ; DEA / A DAGLI ORTI ; In Pictures Ltd.