 Enterprise was involved in every major U.S. conflict for 50 years . It is now scheduled for decommissioning . Enterprise is scheduled to be decommissioned .
 Cid Standifer is a freelance reporter, web designer and translator based in Arlington, Va. Standifer: "I'm not sure what I really want to do"
 Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George W Anderson Jr. was part of the inner circle of military officers advising President John F Kennedy on how to deal with the Soviet Union’s shipping missiles to Cuba .
 At this time of extreme challenge for U.S. leadership, there were serious disagreements within that echelon . "There are serious disagreements" within the U.N. leadership echellon, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Excerpts from those recollections presented here are of enduring value . Excerpted from the recollections of those who attended the school of the day .
 President John F Kennedy and a new generation took office in January 1961 . President Kennedy was assassinated in February 1961 .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev soon found themselves on a road turning rocky . Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchekchev soon had a rocky relationship .
 In April, the United States move to oust Fidel Castro from Cuba in the Bay of Pigs invasion failed miserably . The U.S. failed to oust Castro in April, and the invasion failed .
 President appointed Army General Maxwell Taylor to take over for General Lyman Lemnitzer as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . On 1 October, the President appointed Taylor as the new chairman of Joint Chiefs . Taylor replaces Lemnitz, who was appointed by the President in October .
 Taylor had been serving in the White House as military representative to the President . Taylor was serving as a military representative for President Obama .
 Flanking Taylor are Army Chief of Staff General Earle Wheeler, Air Force Chief of . Staff General Curtis LeMay, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George Anderson, and Commandant of the Marine Corps General David Shoup .
 A critical factor during the blockade was the presence in the area of several Soviet Foxtrot –class dieselelectric submarines . The blockade was a critical factor in the blockade .
 The strengthening of naval and military ties between Cuba and the Soviet Union no doubt pleased Prime Minister Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro pictured with some of the task force’s officers and sailors .
 The Soviets planned to base a massive naval force in Cuba, Cuba . The few boats were to have been the precursor to the Soviet naval force . Those few boats would have been a precursor to a massive force .
 Operation Anadyr was one of the most remarkable undertakings of the entire Cold War . The Soviet codename for the movement of strategic missiles and protective air, ground, ground and naval forces almost 8,000 miles from the USSR to Cuba was the most dramatic undertaking of the Cold War
 Earlier, Great Britain, Japan, and the United States had transported hundreds of thousands of troops and their weapons across oceans and seas .
 The Soviet Union had neither a major surface fleet nor a large merchant marine in 1962 . It was the first time the USSR had a large surface fleet .
 The U.S. Navy did not possess a single ceangoing amphibious or landing ship . Indeed, its navy did not have a single ceangoing ship .
 The USSR had never sent troops great distances by sea by sea . Further, beyond military advisers, the Soviet Union had never deployed great distances . The Soviet Union did not send troops by sea during the period .
 The Soviet Union had begun the massive movement of troops and weapons from its home ports to Cuba . Under these severe limitations, the Soviet Union began to begin the massive move of troops .
 Soviet leadership realized that the shipments could not be hidden from the prying eyes of the United States and other NATO nations’ intelligence services . Kremlin officials believed that their precise contents could be kept secret .
 Special efforts were made to keep numbers and identification secret from Cubans as well as Americans . The weapons and troops would be kept secret even after they arrived .
 Unarmed Navy photo-reconnaissance jets were speeding over the Cuban landscape on their way to photograph an intermediate-range ballistic missile site being constructed by Soviet technicians .
 Jerry Coffee flew sorties with the first VFP-62 low-level reconnaissance missions on Oct. 31 . The mission was part of the classified operation codenamed Blue Moon . Jerry Coffee, who flew the first missions, was a pilot for the first time .
 Coffee spotted a military encampment and broke formation with his flight leader to get a closer to take pictures . Coffee broke formation to get closer to the encampment to take photos .
 This evidence of battlefield weapons of mass destruction got submerged in the flood of intelligence reaching the president . The president was briefed on the intelligence reaching him .
 The aircraft carrier USS Enterprise made the largest contribution to victory in the Pacific .
 The ship was soon decommissioned, and in 1959 she was scrapped . In 1959, efforts to pre-serve her as a museum and memorial were unsuccessful . She was later scrapped .
 Her legacy was perpetuated, however, in that she bequeathed her famous name to the world’s first nuclear-powered air-craft carrier, which was commissioned in November 1961 . The carrier was commissioned by the U.S. Navy in 1961 .
 The namesake carrier, originally CVA-65 and later CVN-65, is now on her 22nd and final overseas deployment . She is serving with the 5th and 6th fleets .
 When she returns to the U.S. this autumn, she will be inactivated and then defueled .
 The current Enterprise, like its World War II counterpart, will be scrapped . It will be the first time the Enterprise has been scrapped .
 The process of removing her eight nuclear reactors will so disfigure the ship that she will not be recognizable as an aircraft carrier and thus not suitable as a museum . The process is so disfigured that the ship is not suitable for museum purposes .