 Approved: Professor Helen Vassallo, Primary Advisor, Dr. Dr. Helen . The author of this article has been awarded the title of the award-winning book, "Vassallo"
 This report represents the work of one or more WPI undergraduate students submitted to the faculty as evidence of completion of a degree requirement . Christopher Yeaw, Co-Advisor, is the co-advisor of the report .
 WPI routinely publishes these reports on its web site without editorial or peer review . The reports are published without peer review by WPI . WPI has published these reports without editorial review .
 The views of the author do not necessarily reflect the positions or opinions of the U.S. Naval War College or Worcester Polytechnic Institute . The views expressed herein do not reflect the views of those of the United States Navy War College .
 Professor Christopher Yeaw from the Naval War College, Newport R.I., for sponsoring my project . Professor Helen Vassallo from the WPI Department of Management, for being my project advisor . Professor Yeaw also provided an advisor for the project .
 This was done taking into account the differences in Eastern and Western cultures, each government’s decision making structures, and the differences between the past and present situations . This was taken into account .
 Knowing, or being able to predict how your opponent will react to a sequence of events is a prized asset . Knowing how to predict your opponent's reaction is a valuable asset in chess .
 The People’s Republic of China is one of these nuclear capable nations, whom the U.S. would strategically have to consider as a potential opponent in modeling global threats . Yet they are highly secretive about the inner workings of their higher levels of government, therefore an easy analysis on
 Only limited data exists about internal decision making process during critical or crisis situations . It is unknown how the U.S. might react to a crisis involving strategic nuclear assets .
 The Soviet Union and the PRC have similar authoritarian style governments, so that an analysis of the incident could be extrapolated to the current situation .
 Using this analysis and a study of the PRC’s more recent history, we may be able to better “predict’t predict’ how the PRc will respond in crisis now, and into the future .
 Historical research of the CMC was compared to the PRC of today to check for similarities and differences to determine how accurate a comparison could be made . Historical research was compared for today to be accurate .
 Introduction................................................................................................................1 2.2.3.4.5.1.5 .
 Problem Statement.................................................................................................. 3.3 3.4.3.5.3 . 3.5 . 4.6.3 4.4 .
 Methodology...............................................................................................................4 3.5.4 . 4.5 . 4 3.6 . 4 . 5.6.4. 5.3.5 (4.5)
 Historical Research .........................................................................................4 3.3.4 . Historical Research . 4 3.5.4.5 .
 4 3.4 3.3 . Databases.com is the world's most comprehensive database, complete with more than 3,000 pages .
 Analysis ................................................................................................................5.5 4.5 . 4.4 . 5 . 5.4.5. 5.5 for 4.6 .
 Literature Review Review: 4.6 4.4.6.6 .
 References .................................................................................................................... i iv 1.1.2.3.4.5. References: References . References: i iv iv 1, iv iv1, iv2, iv3, iv4, iv5, iv1.5 . i iv1 . iv
 The creation of weapons than can obliterate entire cities, fleets, or armies in mere moments require that the nations who posses them to pause and consider their actions before deploying them .
 The United States has been the leader of the Western World in nuclear deterrence since the inception of the atomic age . The U.S. has been a leader in the nuclear deterrence of the West since the 1950s .
 Its ability to maintain a balance between the growing numbers of nuclear capable nations comes from superior technology and extensive intelligence networks .
 The U.S. can predict the actions of its competitors based on knowledge gathered from past incidents of high tension or conflict . One of the strengths of the United States is its ability to predict its competitors' actions .
 This strength has been continually tested since the end of the Cold War . The strength of the U.S. military has been tested since then-Cold War ended .
 The United States Naval War College has been a leader in developing national strategy for over a century . The U.S. Navy War College is a major source of national strategy .
 A large part of the NWC is devoted to attempting to predict, or at least better understand, an enemy’s actions . The NWC aims to predict or better understand the actions of an enemy .
 NWC is renowned for their war games, in which faculty and students attempt to create possible scenarios that have the potential for escalating conflict . The school is a graduate school for officers of all branches of the military and those in national security community .
 This is done to better understand the strategic and operational ramifications of the varying thought processes of opponents and how they might react to the United States’s actions .
 Understanding how decisions are made in the highest echelons of governments with nuclear capabilities is of great strategic importance for the U.S. Understanding how governments make nuclear decisions is important for the United States .
 Knowing how an opponent will react to a sequence of events is a prized asset . Knowing how to react to an opponent's reaction is an important part of the game .
 The People’s Republic of China is one of these nuclear capable nations . It is highly secretive about its higher levels of government . The People's Republic is one nation that is highly highly secretive .
 Only limited data exists about the internal decision making process during critical situations . The U.S. government does not reveal how much of its decision-making process is internal .
 The Soviet Union and the PRC have similar authoritarian style governments, so that it may be valid to extrapolate an analysis of the 1962 incident to the current situation . The USSR and PRC are similar authoritarian governments .
 The contrast between the two styles could highlight possible key friction points in how the U.S. and the PRC come to a decision .
 Both the U.S. and PRC decision making processes would then be compared to existing decision making models . Both the United States and the PRC would then compare to existing models of decision making .
 If a model is noticeably similar with the research findings, then future predictions of their behavior could become more accurate .
 The highest echelons of government within the People’s Republic of China are highly secretive, and it is unknown how they might react in a crisis involving strategic nuclear assets .
 Using this analysis and a study of the PRC’s more recent history, it may be possible to gain insights into the future of their strategic decision-making processes .
 The Naval War College needs to be able to better predict the actions of the People’s Republic of China in a situation that presents the risk of escalating conflict . Methodology was used to assess China's actions in the United States .
 The synthesis of the historical investigations and the development of recommendations was achieved . In order to accomplish these objectives, multiple data gathering strategies were implemented . The synthesis was the synthesis of historical investigations .
 An analysis of the Open Source Center was used to develop what the PRC might do today and the near future .
 The first part of the research was the historical research into the CMC and strategic theory . The second part was the research into CMC .
 This required the use of multiple sources of information, including numerous books and academic journals, to be accurate .
 Journals were used to provide expert analysis of specific events and minute details . Journals were also used in the analysis .
 Databases such as the Open Source Center were used and analyzed to look for trends in the PRC’s recent past that may allude to their decision making process .
 These trends can be seen in how the PRC’s leadership interacts with other countries and how it deals with internal issues . The PRC's leadership is seen to be in a strong position in China's economy .
 The first was to confirm the validity of making a CMC to modern China comparison . The first is to confirm that it is a valid comparison of the modern China .
 The information generated by the research gave a great deal of insight into the possible structure of PRC decision making . Analysis of the PRC's decision-making process was carried out in a bid to understand the structure of the organisation .
 Through the process of analyzing the data given from these various sources, comparisons could be made between theory and action, and between past and present .
 The Soviet leadership’s decision to place Medium Range Ballistic Missiles and Intermediate Range ballistic Missiles in Cuba came as shock to the Kennedy Administration . The decision was made by Soviet leadership .
 On October 16th photo reconnaissance from U-2 spy plane over flights of Cuba was delivered to President Kennedy, and the crisis began . The crisis began when the U.S. sent a photo reconnaissance of Cuba over flights .
 The opinions Khrushchev and Kennedy had of each other were not very positive . The opinions of the two men were not all positive .
 The two leaders met face-to-face once prior to the crisis, at a summit meeting in Vienna in June 1961 . The two presidents met face to face once before the crisis .
 Kennedy: Khrushchev was a bully who lectured him on the superiority of communism and American misdeeds . Kennedy: 'Khrrushchev lectured me on superiority of communist communism' Kennedy: "Krushchev, in Kennedy’s view, was the bully who
 Khrushchev thought Kennedy was weak and could be pushed into accepting Soviet actions with little resistance . Kennedy thought he was weak enough to be pushed back by the Soviet Union . Kennedy was pushed back into accepting the actions of the Soviets .
 Nikita Khrushchev had repeatedly reassured President Kennedy in the months preceding the crisis that he would do nothing that would provoke the Americans in the lead up to the November elections . The crisis occurred in the weeks leading up to November elections in the United States .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev had built up a level of trust between each other . Their personal relations had improved since the Bay of Pigs incident .
 Based on previous Soviet behavior, the Kennedy Administration had little reason to believe that missiles would be positioned in Cuba .
 The Soviets had never positioned strategic nuclear weapons outside the Soviet Union, not even in the Warsaw Pact nations of Eastern Europe . The Soviets never positioned nuclear weapons in Eastern Europe, even in Warsaw Pact countries .
 It would be difficult to communicate with and supply in a time of war, and was of questionable stability having gone through its own communist revolution just three years earlier . The Soviet Union had gone through a communist revolution in 1953 .
 The Berlin Crises had also been a victory for the West with Khrushchev threatening and backing down each time . The West had also backed down in each case .
 Kennedy had also made public statements that the U.S. would not stand for offensive weapons being based in Cuba . Kennedy had said that the United States would not tolerate offensive weapons based in the country .
 Khrushchev and his ministers had a number of motivations for choosing to place the missiles in Cuba . The missiles were placed in Cuba by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 These motivations include the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, the summer 1961 speech by Senator J William Fulbright which said that Soviet missiles or bombers in Cuba would not alter the balance of power greatly . The Kennedy Administration’s discovery in the fall of 1961 that the missile gap was overwhelmingly in
 The placement of missiles in Cuba was a solution to a number of problems facing the Soviet leadership . It was also a problem for the Soviet leaders in Cuba, according to a report .
 They had been requesting Soviet guarantees of their security which the Soviets were reluctant to give . The Soviets refused to give them the guarantees .
 The missile gap was very much in America’s favor and the existing Soviet ICBMs were unreliable and inaccurate . The missile gaps were in the U.S. favor in the 1950s and 1960s .
 It’s possible that the Strategic Rocket Forces suggested the need for immediate measures to close the gap by stationing their more numerous and higher quality IRBMs and MRBMs in Cuba .
 Khrushchev had tied his personal prestige to finding a solution to the Berlin issue on Soviet terms . The Soviet leader's personal prestige was tied to finding an agreement on Soviet-Russian terms .
 His two earlier bluffs on Berlin had failed which had reduced his and his supporters’ standings . He had earlier bluffed on Berlin which had failed .
 He could finally resolve the issue if he could apply pressure on the Americans using a new tact . He could use his new tact to use the U.S. to pressure the Americans .
 The Soviet economy had been growing at a slower than calculated rate . But demands from the Strategic Rocket Forces, the army and their satellite states had been increasing .
 The decision to place missiles in Cuba would cost much less than to start production of the ICBMs the Strategic Rocket Forces were clamoring for . The decision would be much cheaper than the decision to put missiles there would cost .
 Various conflicts such as Stalinists vs. anti-Stalinists, whether or not the economy should take predominately over politics all had their influences . The economy should be more of a focus on politics .
 Khrushchev’s support of the idea to place strategic weapons in Cuba was influenced by the revolutionary spirit he felt that he shared with Castro . The revolutionary spirit of the Soviet Union was inspired by his revolutionary spirit, he said .
 Both men were fervent communists whose bombastic personalities meshed well together . Both men are passionate communists whose personalities meshell together .
 On October 16th, the President brought together a small group of his most trusted advisors to discuss the situation . The President is expected to make a speech at the White House on Thursday .
 He chose not to convene the more formal National Security Council because that would involve bringing in the entire cabinet, such as the Secretary of the Interior or Education . A large number of Cabinet members have no experience with military or foreign affairs .
 Keeping it to a smaller group would better 7 prevent leaks and surround the president with advisors that had the most relevant experience . Keeping a small group of advisors would better protect the president from leaks, experts say .
 This group would officially become known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . Ex-Committe would be known as "Ex Committe"
 Technical experts from the CIA and Pentagon would be brought in at times to share their expertise . While not members of the Ex Comm, a number of technical experts were brought in to share expertise .
 The most Hawkish of the Hawks was Air Force Chief of Staff, General Curtiss LeMay . General LeMay was one of the Hawkish Air Force Chiefs of Staffs .
 He strongly advocated a first strike against the Cuban missile sites and that anything short that would be seen as a sign of weakness by the Soviets .
 The members of the Ex Comm shifted between the two groups, from those favoring direct action against the missile sites to those hoping for a more diplomatic solution . The Ex Comm shifts from those who favor direct action to those who want diplomacy .
 On the morning of Saturday October 20th, they were in agreement on a blockade as a middle ground compromise between the two groups . The blockade was agreed on by the two sides .
 An airstrike on Cuba would certainly involve a Soviet reprisal, which could involve the launching of the missiles from Cuba, the Soviets seizing Berlin, or all out nuclear war . The U.S. could launch a missile strike on Cuba in retaliation for the strike .
 A diplomatic solution would involve sending an ultimatum to Khrushchev or presenting him with an offer to remove missiles in exchange for the removal of United States missiles from Turkey and Italy .
 These ideas were dismissed on the grounds that they would make the Administration seem weak; providing the Soviets with the option to stall their response until all the missile sites were complete, and, in either case, give control of the situation to the Soviets .
 A blockade would normally be considered an act of war, unless the Kennedy Administration had approval from the Organization of American States that this was an action to preserve the security of the entire hemisphere . The Kennedy Administration would normally have approved the blockade .
 The blockade would only screen for weapons, it would allow fuel and food and other supplies to proceed . It would allow food and fuel to proceed, but it would also screen out weapons .
 The blockade would prevent the delivery of any more warheads and missiles to Cuba . It would also keep the option of an airstrike open . The option of a strike is still open .
 Both the President and the Premier bypassed formal structures for ad hoc groups . President and Premier bypasses formal structures to form new groups .
 The full Presidium was not summoned to Moscow for the duration of the crisis . Full Presidium did not arrive in Moscow for duration of crisis .
 Khrushchev was a lone actor in deciding to place the missiles in Cuba as much as Kennedy was one during the crisis .
 Players assisting Khrushchev can be divided into two groups, the military and intelligence group, and the international communist movement group . The players involved in the coup are the military, intelligence and international communist groups .
 Khrushchev, Kozlov, Mikoyan, Kosygin, Brezhnev, Gromyko, Malinovsky, Semichastny, and Ustinov . In the first group there were Khrushches, Kozlans and Mikoyans .
 Second group consisted of Khrushchev, Kuusinem, Suslov, Ponomarev, and Andropov . The second group was the second group of Soviet leaders .
 Khrushchev outlined what he believed the options were under the belief that an American attack was inevitable . On October 22, almost the midpoint of the crisis Khrushchchev outlined his options . The crisis was at its midpoint .
 The first option was to announce a security treaty over the radio that placed Cuba under the same nuclear protection as the Soviet Union . The second was to transfer control of all weapons to the Cubans in case of attack, or the third option of permitting Soviet troops in Cuba to defend themselves with
 At the time, most American officials thought there were five possibilities that could’ve brought us to nuclear war . Most American officials believed there was five possibilities of bringing us to nuke war . The U.S. government thought there was no such a scenario .
 The first was if the U.S. attacks the Soviet missiles in Cuba . The first would be if the United States attacked the Soviet missile in Cuba.
 The second was if the Soviet Union attacks U.S. missiles in Turkey and Italy . The second would be if the United States attacked missiles in Italy and Turkey .
 The third way was a reprisal attack by NATO on the bases from which the attacks 9 on Turkey and Italy were launched . The attacks were carried out in Turkey, Italy and Turkey . NATO was attacked 9 on 9 on September 9, 2001 .
 The fourth way would be if the Soviets, fearing an American attack, launch their ICBMs and bombers preemptively against the United States . The U.S. would then be able to launch ICBM and bombers against the Soviet Union .
 The last way was if the United States decimates the Soviet Union preemptively .2.2.3.4.5.5 . The last one was if U.S. decimates Soviet Union .
 The National Security Council had its first meeting of the crisis on Sunday, October 21st to formally ratify the decisions made in the Ex-Commitration . The first meeting was held in the wake of the first crisis .
 The morning of the 22nd the U.S. notified its allies of its intent to implement a blockade . That evening Kennedy announced the crisis in an announcement to the world . The United States announced the blockade .
 One hour before the speech was given; a copy of it was delivered to the Soviet ambassador to Washington, Dobrynin . The speech was delivered an hour before being given .
 This would allow U.S. decision makers time to decide whether or not a vessel should be boarded and keep United States vessels out of range of land based MIGs . This would be a way to keep U .S. ships out of . range of . land based . M
 The Soviet leadership responded by sending orders to 16 of the supply ships headed towards Cuba to return to the Soviet Union . The Soviet leaders ordered the return of the ships to Cuba .
 The Foxtrot class submarines were sent to Cuba to set up a submarine base . They were now a few days sailing from Cuban waters .
 If detected by the blockade they would likely increase the chance of conflict . Each submarine carried one nuclear torpedo in addition to its conventional ones . If detected, the blockade would increase the chances of conflict with Russia .
 The decision was made to keep the subs two to three days sailing from Cuban waters, outside of the blockade . Subs are allowed to sail from Cuba for up to two days outside of blockade .
 Unbeknownst to them, the United States Navy was already in pursuit of them . The U.S. Navy had already been in pursuit .
 Questions concerning the blockade were of great importance to secretary of defense McNamara and the President the day before it went into effect . The blockade was the first time the blockade was allowed to go into effect.
 McNamara believed the information he was getting from the Navy wasn’t as timely or as accurate as it could’ve been . McNamara believes the information was not as accurate or as timely as possible .
 He went straight to Navy Plot in the Pentagon where the positions of the blockade and Soviet ships were being monitored . Circumventing the chain of command, he went to the Pentagon .
 Admiral George Anderson is the Chief of Naval Operations . Admiral Anderson is a member of the U.S. Navy . He is the son of Admiral James Anderson .
 The admiral felt that McNamara was meddling in Navy affairs and resented him for it . McNamara felt that he was meddling with the Navy . He resented the admiral for it.
 The discussion between McNamara and Anderson nearly reached a shouting match . McNamara lost confidence in Anderson after losing confidence in him .
 Knox was summoned by Khrushchev under the belief that as a high level businessman he was part of the secret capitalist group that actually ran America . Knox was believed to be a high-level businessman . He was summoned under the guise of being a businessman .
 Khrushchev told Knox that Soviet submarines would sink any American vessel that committed an act of piracy . The Soviet Union would sink the American vessel, Knox said .
 Khrushchev was sixty-eight Kennedy was forty-five, saying that Kennedy is no older than his own son . He went on to say that he couldn’t understand Kennedy due to the large age gap between them . He said that he can't understand Kennedy because of the
 In the Atlantic, half of the Soviet chartered ships bound for Cuba stopped or changed course . That afternoon, in the . Atlantic, in . the Atlantic . Half of the . Soviet charted ships . stopped or altered course, changing course .
 Air Force General Thomas Power commander of the United States Strategic Air Command brought the force to DEFCON 2 while the rest of the American forces remained at DeFCON 3 . On the 24th at the same time the naval blockade came into effect the U.S. remained at DE
 At that time, a force of 2,962 nuclear weapons would be in the air or on 15 minute alert . At the time of the Cold War, the U.S. had 2,000 nuclear weapons on the loose .
 Power announced to his commanders that they were in heightened state of readiness over high frequency radio for the benefit of Soviet monitors who intercepted the message . The message was intercepted by the Soviet monitors .
 By the 25th Khrushchev was beginning to realize that he had miscalculated what the U.S. response would be to the missiles . The missile launch was the first time the Soviet Union had launched a missile strike .
 His assumption was that Kennedy would accept the missiles in Cuba as he had accepted American missiles in Turkey and Italy . Kennedy had accepted missiles in Italy and Turkey as he did in Turkey .
 He was definitely worried about SAC moving to DEFCON 2 and the President’s continued demand that the missiles be removed from Cuba . He was also worried about moving SAC to DeFCON .
 If Khrushchev could get Kennedy to promise that America would not invade Cuba then he believed a deal would be possible, he believed it would be a deal .
 One of the greatest impediments to a peaceful resolution was the Soviet and American Cold War policy of not conceding anything . The Soviet and U.S. Cold War policies were not to concede anything .
 The first ship intercepted by the blockade was the Marcula, a Soviet chartered ship, Panamanian owned with a Lebanese registry . It was the first ship to be intercepted in the blockade .
 The ship was carrying industrial cargo such as paper and truck parts . The ship did not carry any weapons, only industrial cargo .
 The Navy would demonstrate its resolve in upholding the blockade by boarding it. It would be the first time the Navy has boarded it .
 The captain was highly cooperative to the American boarding party which arrived unarmed and in service 11 whites . The captain of the ship was highly cooperated with the boarding party . The boarding party was armed and unarmed .
 In Washington, John Scali, a diplomatic correspondent in the American Broadcasting Company, was contacted by Alexander Fomin, a suspected KGB colonel . Fomin was a Soviet Embassy Counselor and suspected KGB Colonel .
 The missile sites would be dismantled and shipped back to the Soviet Union under UN supervision . 2.000 missiles would have been sent to the USSR under the supervision of the UN .
 Castro would pledge himself to accept no offensive weapons in the future 3. Castro would also pledge to take no weapons to Cuba . Castro would be the first president to accept the idea of accepting offensive weapons .
 The United States would pledge itself not to invade Cuba . Khrushchev wrote a letter to the Ex Comm that night .
 "It was a long emotional letter and at times it seemed to ramble on and off the topic," she said . "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not sure how long it was," she wrote .
 It was clearly written by Khrushchev himself as it lacked the official editing characteristic of the Soviets . It lacked official editing characteristics of the Soviet Union .
 It did say that if Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba or support any force with the intention to do so then there would be no need for the Soviet specialists to remain in Cuba .
 Khrushchev read a letter over Radio Moscow that changed the agreement as provided by Fomin . Fomin: "The morning of the 27th changed everything with a letter read over the radio" Fomin was the only person in the Soviet Union to agree to the agreement . Khrush
 The Soviets demanded that the United States remove missiles from Turkey . The U.S. also promised not to invade Cuba . The Soviets also demanded that they also remove their missiles from the Turkey .
 Adding to the tension of the negotiations was the news of a U-2 being shot down over Cuba, killing the pilot . The pilot was killed in the attack .
 The Ex Comm was unsure what to make of this new demand from Khrushchev . The ex-Communist government was unsure of what to do with the new demand .
 The Jupiter missiles in Turkey were obsolete, but removing them under Soviet pressure could cripple NATO . Removing them could be seen as the United States trading domestic security for Turkey’s missile defense .
 Tensions mount further when a U-2 on an air sampling flight over the North Pole drifted into Soviet airspace . Tensions mounted further when the U.2 on a U.S. air sampling mission drifted into the Soviet airspace.
 Khrushchev replied over Radio Moscow on the 28th; saying that the Soviet Union would dismantle the missiles under UN supervision . The Soviet Union said that the missiles would be dismantled under the supervision of the UN . The missiles were eventually dismantled by the Soviets .
 Kennedy accepted over the Voice of America . Kennedy offered future negotiations involving NATO and the Warsaw Pact . Kennedy accepted the offer .
 In addition to the radio message, Kennedy sent a private letter saying he was willing to discuss the disarmament of critical areas . In the letter, Kennedy made an allusion to Turkey and Italy . In addition, Kennedy said he would discuss disarmament .
 There have been numerous changes in how strategic nuclear weapons are viewed and their possible uses . The U.S. has been involved in the development of nuclear weapons .
 The backbone of American strategic policy is based on a strategy of preventing nuclear war by deterring it . The U.S. has been in the lead in the fight against nuclear war since the 1980s .
 The primary tenet of MAD is the threat of retaliation with nuclear weapons if the U.S. or its interests are attacked first . MAD is a threat to the United States' interests if it is attacked first by a nuclear strike .
 The United States may commit to the use of nuclear weapons first if enemy forces seem to threaten our or our allies’ interests and cannot be contained by conventional means . However, the U.S. could commit to nuclear weapons if enemy conventional forces threaten our interests .
 The use of nuclear weapons can be speculated to fall within three types of retaliation; all-out, controlled, or flexible response . All-out or controlled response could fall within a range of three different types of response .
 All-out retaliation is the worst case scenario where enemy forces strike first, targeting American cities and military installations simultaneously . The U.S. military bases in the region could be targeted simultaneously .
 This act would generate a comprehensive retaliatory response from the United States, with the goal being the complete destruction of the enemy . The goal is to destroy the enemy, and the U.S. would destroy the entire enemy .
 Controlled retaliation is a variable response that the National Command Authority can decide upon in proportion with the attack suffered . Controlled retaliation can be controlled by a number of factors, such as the size of the attack .
 If an enemy nuclear strike targeted only United States Pacific naval bases, the U.S. would likely respond in kind by targeting the enemy’s naval bases . The United States would likely target the enemy's naval bases in a similar way .
 Having the option of a controlled response increases the level of deterrence provided by the nuclear weapons by increasing the potential of their use without total devastation, describes a nation’s credibility of use .
 Each side has experienced some level of attack and may be less likely to risk being bloodied any further . Each side will have experienced some of the most bloodied moments of the game .
 The key to this strategy being a viable option is ensuring the attack is both effective and recognizably limited . The key is to ensure the attack on the UK is successful and recognisable .
 This requires some level of the enemy’s command and control systems survive the attack in order to monitor the attack and report the results . This requires that some level . of the . enemy's command and . control systems survived the attack . This . requires that . some . level of
 Certain constraints must be placed on the manner in which the strike is executed, to ensure that it is recognized by enemy warning systems as being limited . The strike must be executed in the way that it can be seen by enemies as limited .
 The targets should be limited to certain areas and away from major population centers, officials say . Targeting should be restricted to certain parts of the country .
 The time that the attack takes place in should be limited as well, giving it a discernable end that will allow the enemy to assess the damage . The attack should also be limited, giving the enemy time to assess damage .
 Flexible response is the policy of threatening to use nuclear weapons, starting at the theater level, in response to an enemy attack . The policy is to threaten use of nuclear weapons if conventional means of deterrence fail to prevent an enemy strike .
 This type of response would normally be targeting enemy conventional forces or their theater nuclear forces . The U.S. has not been able to target the enemy's nuclear forces in the past .
 In addition to the theories and strategies of escalating a nuclear war are the theories for ending them short of total annihilation . The theories are also included in the theories of escalating nuclear war .
 The motivation behind war termination is that each is state is concerned for its welfare and has an instinct for survival that would continue after a limited exchange . Each is state concerned for the welfare of its own state and would be concerned for survival .
 Its failing is its assumptions that nations have innately similar values that will be adhered to during a potentially devastating conflict, it says . The failing is that nations must adhere to the same values during a war, it argues .
 In ending a conflict, communication must be possible between the combatants, which would be highly difficult but necessary . Communication must also be possible, says President Obama .
 "There would need to be a trust that whatever leadership survived the attack would be able to speak for the whole of their forces," he says .
 Ending a nuclear conflict would be no easier than ending a conventional conflict . Each state would have a number of internal political issues to resolve before hostilities could end . Ending nuclear conflict no easier .
 The planning process of selecting targets is a straightforward but a technically complex challenge . It is a simple but technically complex task to select targets for the project .
 The US arsenal is so large that the numbers of weapons with ensured survival require that they be matched to enough high value targets to avoid wasting them . The numbers are so high that the US arsenal needs to be matched with enough high-value targets .
 Targeting for a controlled 14 retaliation requires the creation of a menu of different response packages . Targeting a controlled response package requires a number of different responses to the attack .
 These targeting packages need to be tailored to be considered a proportional response, says David Cameron . The targeting packages must be tailored, he says .
 Targets can be of at least four different classifications, nuclear weapons, conventional forces, political leadership, and economic targets . Targets include nuclear weapons and conventional forces . Targeted targets include political leaders, military leaders, political leaders .
 The goal is not to inflict casualties on civilian populations, but they would undoubtedly suffer great losses in the pursuit of these targets . The U.S. would probably suffer great casualties in pursuit of the targets, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 Retaliating against an enemy’s nuclear forces such as silos, submarine bases, bomber bases, and nuclear storage facilities is done with the goal of tipping the nuclear balance in U.S. favor . Retaliators aim to topple the balance in America's favor .
 Striking at conventional forces prevents the enemy from having an improved battlefield position after the initial exchange . Striking conventional forces stops the enemy of having a better battlefield position . The U.S. military says it will not be surprised by the result .
 While conventional forces are decidedly harder to hit because of their level of mobility, destruction of their support structure can be very damaging . The destruction of the support structure of conventional forces is very damaging.
 A controlled strike could target conventional forces in a certain geographic area creating an area of vulnerability . The attack clearly demonstrates the limits of the attack, writes CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Targeting political leadership and economic centers is the most difficult to accomplish, says Obama . Targeting them is difficult, Obama says, but it's possible to target them .
 The idea of decapitating the enemy’s leadership in a precise attack is appealing . But having precise intelligence in war or crisis on an enemy's leadership is doubtful, it is doubtful .
 The targeting of economic centers requires the destruction of their associated populations, the author says . This may be judged as the deliberate targeting of civilians, he says .
 Warning that an attack is coming is a key piece of information used by decision makers in deciding what response to the attack is needed . Warning is key to decision makers' ability to decide what response should be made .
 An example of “strategic” warning would be the outbreak of a conventional war or crisis involving nuclear armed states . An example would be an outbreak of conventional war involving nuclear arms states .
 These situations greatly increase the possibility of the use of nuclear weapons but may have the uncertainty as to when or to what degree they would be used . These situations may be the most likely to be used in nuclear warfare .
 In a prolonged crisis it would be difficult to keep strategic forces at a high state of readiness without the risk of their performance suffering for it .
 In a conventional conflict it’s likely that peacetime intelligence gathering networks will be disrupted or destroyed, decreasing the accuracy of any perceived warning . In a war, intelligence gathering systems will be destroyed or destroyed .
 Strategic radar systems and satellites are used to monitor enemy bomber and missile activity .
 It’s important to have multiple sensor readings to measure the scale of the attack and to ensure that the report is credible and is not in error .
 The time before impact can be used to ensure the survivability of mobile forces . Mobile forces and the NCA can be evacuated or their successors designated .
 Post impact data would report the locations and scale of the attack, assuming that the means of reporting the damage inflicted survives the attack . The data would be used to report locations and the scale of an attack .
 In response to the assessment of the attack, a decision must be made concerning the response to it . A decision to respond to the attack will be made in the coming days, CNN.com reports .
 This is the most difficult stage of a nuclear operation because it may be constrained by time, the person making the decision may be of questionable legality . The amount of information available may be limited, and the amount of time available is limited, the author says .
 In deciding on an all-out attack, the only information required is that an attack has occurred . In deciding an attack on the U.S. is considered an act of terrorism .
 A controlled response would require information on the attack and what assets are available for a response . The attack would require a controlled response to the attack to be controlled .
 The time constraint is the primary factor if a Launch Under Attack order is given . The time constraints are the main factor in the decision to launch under attack .
 The decision is made before the enemy’s nuclear attack hits, and gives the NCA full access to their nuclear forces . This decision gives them access to nuclear forces, especially if they are already on alert . The NCA is already on active alert .
 ICBMs are the most likely choice under this circumstance, as they require the least amount of time to authenticate a launch order and by launching avoid their destruction before deployment . ICBm are most likely to be deployed under the threat of being destroyed .
 LUA makes it difficult to determine the target and scale of the attack, making it more biased towards an all-out retaliation . Choosing LUA means it is more likely to choose an attack on the U.S.
 If the decision to retaliate is made after the attack has occurred, time will still be a factor . Time is still a factor in deciding whether to retaliate against the attack .
 Back-up communication systems have limited operating times before their fuel or batteries is exhausted and communications cease . The same is true for strategic bombers and the generators that would be powering ICBMs .
 The additional time provided by retaliating after the attack has occurred can prove beneficial by using the surviving weapons efficiently and allow for better consideration of possible responses . Retaliation can provide additional time to use surviving weapons .
 Once a decision has been made by the political NCA, orders must be dispersed by the military command and control structure .
 The dispersal of launch orders must be made with authentication codes from the commanders to the various units that will commit the strike . The dispersedal of the launch orders can be made using authentication codes, the commander says .
 Two-way communications is vital, as it allows for verification of orders and can allow for clarification of them as well . Two way communications allows verification of the orders, as well as clarification .
 Communications under attack are subject to a number of technical issues, including physical destruction and disruption from nuclear effects . Communications under nuclear 16 attack subject to technical issues such as physical destruction .
 The only way to mitigate this issue is to have sufficient variety and redundancy of communication systems, to make it improbable that they are all inoperable after an attack . The only problem is to mitigate is that all communication systems are not inoperative after attack .
 In an all-out retaliation it is unnecessary, but it is important for any lesser exchange in order to control further escalation . In a lesser exchange it is necessary to control escalation, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It is used to determine the outcome of the exchange, if the war should be continued or concluded . It also determines the state of remaining nuclear weapons and coordinating a response to the devastation brought on civilian and military centers .
 It is important to recognize the value of how individuals affect the decision making process within bureaucratic organizations . Decision Making Strategies and Theories are important to understand .
 A decision starts at the individual bureaucrat level and is then brought up to the policy making group level . A decision is made by a decision being made at the policy-making level .
 Stevenson suggested that they make a deal with the Soviets at the start of the Cuban crisis .
 His suggestion was to trade the Soviets the missiles in Cuba for the removal of outdated Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 This would prevent the Soviets from being backed into a corner where they would be unable to save face . This would keep them out of danger, and not backing up, says the British Foreign Secretary .
 Stevenson was ridiculed by the others for providing a suggestion that could have made the U.S. seem weak . After Stevenson left the room, he was ridiculed .
 In proportion to the general interest of the head of state in foreign policy 2. 2.2.3.4.5.5 . 2.6.4 . 4.3 .
 When the foreign policy organization is less developed and differentiated 6.6.5% of foreign policy organizations are more developed and more developed . When the organization is more developed, it will be more difficult to deal with foreign policy issues .
 When the external national situation is perceived to be ambiguous, the information processing systems of the head of state play a key role . 8.5% of the country's national security systems are used to deal with the external situation .
 The cognitive styles and beliefs of the head of state will affect foreign policy in relation to the degree of training in foreign affairs . When national leaders attempt to predict the actions of their enemies in crises, there are two major theories .
 The older theory is known as the Past Actions theory . It holds that decision makers assess their enemy's credibility by evaluating their history for keeping or breaking commitments .
 Current Calculus theory postulates that decision makers pay little attention to an enemy’s past actions . New theory says decision makers don’t pay attention to the past actions of an enemy . Theory is based on the theory that the enemy's past actions are overlooked .
 They pay attention to the threats and promises they believe are backed by sufficient power, and serve clear interests7.7. Instead of paying attention to them, they focus on the threats they believe they have enough power .
 If we were to operate under the notion of Current Calculus theory, then all decisions would be based on a nation’s current credibility .
 Credibility is a perception; it is dependent upon the nation perceiving and the nation being perceived . The nation's credibility is dependent on the nation's perception of the nation, the president says .
 "Credibility is not tangible and cannot be compared against a set metric," says CNN.com . Credibility can't be measured against a metric, says CNN iReporter .
 Credibility is not synonymous with seriousness; a threat can be credible and not serious, vice versa, or a combination of the two . Credity is not a serious threat; it is a threat that is credible or not serious .
 "Credibility can lie anywhere along a continuum from totally unbelievable to entirely credible," says the author .
 When leaders calculate credibility in a crisis, they focus on the balance of capabilities and the interests at stake . Leaders calculate credibility when calculating credibility, they must consider the interests of the country, experts say .
 An enemy’s capabilities or power is determined by figuring if he can do what he threatens to do, and if it can do it at a reasonable cost . The U.S. should be wary of the threat of using its own military might .
 Interests can be categorized into three levels, vital interests, important interests, and concerns, according to the author of the book .
 Vital interests are the highest level and are connected with the state’s survival . Vital interests have been vital to the state's survival, says the governor .
 Important interests do not involve the survival of the state, but do have real material value . Important interests are important interests in the state's survival, but also important to its own survival . The state is in danger of losing control of the country's finances .
 Concerns are the lowest level and are not connected to the state’s survival . Concerns have little or no material cost and are ideals or values held by the state . Concerned concerns are the state's lowest level .
 In crisis, a nation’s interests are prioritized, with material interests winning over values . Material interests usually win over values7.7. But in crisis, the interests of a nation's interests are often prioritized .
 The President and the Executive Committee hardly considered the past when making their decisions . The decision was made by President Obama and his Executive Committee members .
 First was balance of conventional forces in the Caribbean, second was balance in Europe, third in the U.S. and Russia . Third and most importantly was the strategic nuclear balance between the United States and the Soviets .
 The United States had the advantage in the Caribbean and the Soviets in Europe, specifically Berlin, but Soviet gains in the strength of their nuclear arsenal had begun the age of mutually assured destruction . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were at the top of the world's nuclear arsenals
 The U.S. could no longer guarantee through the use of a first strike the complete elimination of Soviet nuclear assets . The United States could not guarantee the . use of the U.N. strike the . complete elimination . of Soviet . assets .
 The Ex Comm had to develop a response to the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Their planning produced five different options for the response to Soviet missiles .
 The first of which was to send an ultimatum to Khrushchev, but was quickly disregarded as it was presumed that the Soviets would only acknowledge some form of action . The first attempt was sent to send a message to the Soviet leader, but it was ignored .
 The second option was to impose a naval blockade of Cuba to prevent further shipment of missiles and warheads . The other option was imposed by the U.S. was imposed a blockade of Cuban territory .
 The third option was a limited airstrike targeting just the missile sites, with the fourth option being a large airstrike targeting missile sites and other military targets . The fourth option was to target missile sites .
 The last and most dramatic option would be a large airstrike and a subsequent invasion of Cuba . A large airstrike would be the result of a large military strike on Cuba .
 The Cuban government installed a naval blockade of the island to remove missiles from Cuba . They did not believe that a blockade by itself would be sufficient to have the missiles removed .
 They predicted the Soviets reaction would be to escalate the situation . They predicted it would be a reaction to the Soviet reaction .
 The Soviets could have accelerated construction of missiles sites with materials already in Cuba . They could have moved to squeeze the U.S. out of Berlin .
 The first offered the removal of the missiles for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba . The second letter which replaced the first added the requirement of the removal from Turkey .
 The first was choosing to blockade rather than strike at Cuba, and the second was accepting the deal with Khrushchev despite the fact that a U-2 spy plane had strayed into Soviet air space .
 They generally come in three types; the rational actor, the organizational process, and governmental politics . The rational actor and the organization process are key to success in politics .
 The rational actor is the most simplistic of the models by attempting to explain international events based on the aims and calculations of a nation . The rational state is a model of the nation's aims and calculation .
 This approach oftentimes oversimplifies by depending heavily on rationality, that nations make consistent, value maximizing choices within specified constraints . This approach often oversimplies that nations must make consistent choices within constraints .
 At the opposite end of the spectrum is the governmental politics model which sees no unitary actor but rather many actors as players . At the same end, the government politics model sees many players as players, rather than a single actor .
 Players focus not on a single strategic issue but on many diverse intra-national problems . They act in terms of no consistent set of strategic objectives but rather according to various conceptions of national, organizational and personal goals .
 Players that make government decisions decide not by a single rational choice but by the pulling and hauling of politics . Players make decisions by pulling, hauling and pulling politics, the author says .
 Governmental action as political resultants in the sense that what happens is not chosen as a solution to a problem but rather results from compromise, conflict, and confusion of officials with diverse interests and unequal influence . The decisions and actions of governments are resultants, not chosen to solve a problem
 Their decisions and actions are political in the sense of bargaining along regularized channels among individual members of the government . The activity from which decisions and . actions emerge is best characterized as bargaining . among members of government .
 There are numerous factors that influence the dynamics of a government’s decision making body . Organizing Concepts Organize Concepts is a government-led organization .
 The Players and their Positions define the formal role of individual, what they can and cannot do . The Players are the basic unit in any group, the player being the most important to analyze .
 The individual’s perceptions and interests are what will lead him to take a stand on an issue . B The Players’ Stands and Perceptions are what makes them stand for the cause .
 "Their interests are a combination of national security, domestic interests, personal interests, and their personal conception of their role in the government," the author says .
 A stand is the result of a deadline or event forcing a player to choose a side of an issue depending on their goals, interests and which channel the issue is raised on . A stand means a player is forced to choose between a team's interests and that of his own .
 A players’ impact on results is a direct result of their level of power in the organization, or their effective influence on government decisions and actions . C The Players’ Impact on Results: A player’s role in an organization can influence the outcome of an organization’
 Power is a blend of bargaining advantages, skill in using bargaining advantages and other players’ perceptions of the first two . Power is the result of a combination of bargaining advantage, skill and skill .
 Bargaining advantages stem from authority, responsibility, control over resources, expertise and expertise . The ability to affect other players’ objectives in other games, and personal persuasion via personal relations or charisma .
 Power that is wisely invested yields enhanced reputation for effectiveness and effectiveness . Poor use of power depletes capital and reputation . Power is wasted on capital, reputation and capital .
 The Players’ Game is where a player’s stands, influence, and moves combine to yield governmental decision and action . D The Players' Game: Where a player's stand, influence and move can yield a government decision .
 The game depends on action channels, rules, and action as political resultant to exist . The game must be played by action channels and rules to survive .
 Action channels determine who the power players are and whose organizations will be responsible for the action when a decision is made . Action channels decide who the action is going to be made .
 The rules can be the laws of the nation, court rulings, culture, culture or international laws such as 21 treaties . They can be a combination of them . The rules are a mixture of laws and culture .
 All government action that involves players is the result of political action . All government actions involve players in government action . Political action is a result of government action, not just political action.
 How the politics plays out depends on the environment and the structure of the game, the game's pace and the reward . The politics of politics depends on how the game plays out, says CNN's John Sutter .
 If a nation performed an action, that action was the result of bargaining among individuals and groups within the government . The government's bargaining power was the source of the nation's actions .
 This model’s explanatory power is achieved by displaying the game, the action channel, the position, the positions, the players, their preferences, and the pulling and hauling that yielded as a resultant . The action in question is the result of the pulling, hauling and ha
 A Political Resultants Depends on the preferences of individual players, advantages and disadvantages of each player from one action channel to another, and the B Action and Intention Action does not presuppose government intention .
 Most resultants emerge from games among players who perceive quite different faces of an issue and whom differ markedly on the actions they prefer . The resultants are likely to emerge from the games between players who are very different .
 Actions rarely follow from an agreed doctrine in which all players concur . Actions rarely take place from a doctrine that all players agree on . Actions often follow from agreed doctrine, not necessarily agreed doctrine .
 Actions consisting of a number of pieces rarely reflect a coordinated strategy . Actions are difficult to read as conscious signals . Actions consist of a series of pieces that have emerged from a game rarely reflect coordinated strategy and thus are hard to read .
 Players focus not on the total strategic problem but on the decision that must be made today or tomorrow . C Problems and Solutions: Players focus on the fact that the decision is likely to be made in the next few days . Players focus more on the strategic problem than the total problem .
 When confronting a deadline, Chiefs focus on an issue and look for a solution . Indians, having become committed to a solution for an earlier, different problem, seek a solution that somewhat fits . Chiefs are looking to solve an earlier problem, but Indians are looking at a problem that fits .
 The diverse horizontal demands on each player shape his priorities, perceptions, and issues . D Where you stand depends on where you sit depends on the position you sit .
 The interaction between a player or Chief, and his subordinates or Indians is an important factor on how the player will decide amongst his options . E Chiefs and Indians are an important part of the player's decision .
 Indians need to attract the attention of their Chief and be able to promote confidence in the option they present . Indians must attract attention from their Chief, and be confident in their options .
 Other Chiefs look sideways on an issue to determine which option among the Chiefs they can commit to . Chiefs coach Todd Boweldock says he's not sure if he'll commit to the same thing .
 The actions of one nation affect those of another to the degree that they result in advantages and disadvantages for the players in the second nation . G Inter and Inter and Intra-national Relations are based on the actions of a nation .
 H The face of the issue differs from seat to seat I Misperception J Misexpectation K Miscommunication L Reticence Hesitant silence, partially intended soft-spokeness; reduces leaks, provides an ill focused target of attack .
 The decision to use nuclear weapons is less likely to occur when the political leader has control than when the military leader has . 2.5% of nuclear weapons are likely to be used by political leaders, the authors say .
 The probability the U.S. will use more force increases when the President, the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Director of the CIA favor military action . The probability of more force being used increases when President, Secretary of State, Director of
 In a nuclear crisis formal decision making groups will not be used such as the National Security Council, rather an ad hoc group will be used . Ad hoc groups will also be used to make decision-making decisions .
 The individuals’ perceptions will differ radically on the issue B Military Action 1. The individuals' perceptions of the issue will differ dramatically . The issue B is the issue of the U.S. military action .
 Short of nuclear war, decision and implementation will be delayed . Decision and implementation delayed while proponents attempt to convince opponents 2.2.3 .
 Major military decisions involve decisions by large plurality, not simple Presidential decision . 3. Major military decision involves decisions by a large plurality of voters .
 The Soviet and American approaches to strategic issues are similar in the weapon systems that they employ and the diplomatic techniques used in arms limitations . No military action is taken without extensive consultation of military players 4.5 .
 The two sides differed sharply on the uses, limitations, and purposes of military power, as well as the rules to govern it . However, they differ sharply on how to govern military power .
 The Soviets disagreed with Western theories of limited war and the idea of a limited nuclear exchange . For example, the Soviets strongly disagreed with the Western theories .
 The Soviet purposes of war are drawn heavily from the writings of Carl von Clausewitz and Marxism-Leninism . The Soviet purpose of war is based on the writings by Karl Marxists and Marxism Leninists .
 Unlike western strategists, they find it impossible to remove the politics from conflict . War is the continuation of politics under different means, they say, under the theory that war is continuation of war .
 This is why the western policies of keeping the status quo by mutually assured destruction seemed unfamiliar to them . This was why they were unfamiliar with western policies .
 The Soviets believed that the superpower relationship between themselves and the U.S. was dominated by irreconcilable conflict and laden with dangers of war .
 They took steps to ensure victory even when considering the results of a nuclear engagement . Operating under the belief that war was inevitable, they believed victory was inevitable .
 The Soviets focused on developing their conventional forces and insured against anticipated needs by acquiring large numbers of men and material . The Soviets were able to buy large numbers and material in advance .
 The SALT treaties allowed them to keep strategic forces even while pursuing advances in their theater forces . The treaties allowed the U.S. to keep their strategic forces .
 In their nuclear planning, the U.S. made sure that under a limited strike they would damage Soviet C3I systems . The United States wanted to damage Soviet systems .
 The Soviets had no intention of conducting a limited strike in a nuclear war, unless is served to achieve the war aim or to re-establish the initiative in conflict .
 If it came to nuclear war, the Soviet strategy was the exact opposite of the American one . The Soviet strategy is the opposite of that of the U.S. strategy .
 Their objective was the rapid and wholesale destruction of the U.S. and its allies’ ability to wage nuclear war . ‘They wanted to destroy the United States’s ability to war,’ says historian John Avlon .
 They planned on attacking command and control systems at the outset of any strategic nuclear exchange in an effort to disrupt and degrade American military, political, and administrative control, and our industrial capacity, they said .
 The Soviet perspective on making strategic decisions was very different from how they viewed similar elements . The Soviet view of the Soviet policy was very much different than that of Russia's .
 The first was a surprise nuclear attack against the Soviet Union with few prior indicators and little time to implement countermeasures . The first nuclear attack was against Russia with little prior indicators .
 The second was a prolonged superpower confrontation or crisis that resulted in nuclear war which would provide Soviet leadership adequate time to prepare for a possible attack . The second would provide the Soviet leadership with enough time to deal with a nuclear war .
 Third contingency is nuclear war as a result of escalation from a major conventional war with the West . The third contingency is a nuclear war resulting in a major escalation from conventional war .
 Soviet strategic leadership can be divided into three categories; intelligence, political decision making and control, and military decision-making and control . Intelligence, political . decision making . control and military . control . control of the Soviet Union .
 Intelligence in this context refers to the ability of Soviet political and military leaders to know what is happening in an accurate and timely manner . Intelligence is used in the context of Soviet intelligence .
 Political decision making and control is the ability of the political leadership to understand the intelligence they receive, issue directives based on that intelligence, and to see that their directives are carried out . Political leaders must be able to make decisions based on intelligence, political leaders must understand that intelligence and issue directives
 Military decision making and control is the implementation of political decisions as military action . Military decision-making and control of the military is a key part of the U.S. strategy .
 It is not entirely certain what the National Command Authority of the Soviet Union might have been, if it had to transition from peace time to nuclear war under surprise attack conditions .
 There are three possible political structures that might fill the role of the NCA, the Politburo, the Defense Council, or the Secretary General . NCA is one of Russia's most powerful political bodies .
 Its closest American equivalent would be if the President and his cabinet ran the country with limited, to no congressional oversight . It's the equivalent to a President and Cabinet running the country without congressional oversight.
 The most likely candidate is the General Secretary, as he is the commander in chief of their armed forces much like our President is to ours .
 What is unknown is how the Soviets would handle a transition of nuclear release authority, if the primary NCA were eliminated or out of communication .
 Since peacetime political succession has proved to be difficult for the Soviets, it is uncertain if the minister of defense or a second secretary of the party would take over as their commander in chief .
 It is possible that their belief in the surprise attack is the least likely scenario, that they have put off this decision until the time comes . It is also possible that they believe in the most likely scenario of an attack .
 Political control during a surprise attack involves redundant measures that include prevention of unauthorized nuclear weapons use . Political control is a form of control during an attack by surprise attack .
 Advances in American ICBMs meant that the Soviets no longer had the luxury of early warning from U.S. bombers, and risked the destruction of their forces before a retaliatory strike could be launched .
 The KGB continued to have a covert rather than overt role in ensuring political control over nuclear weapons . The KGB placed large numbers of agents and informants in the officer corps .
 Soviet analysts believed that the possibility of nuclear war arising from a superpower crisis was much more likely than that of a surprise attack . The possibility of a nuclear war emerged from the superpower crisis more likely, they said .
 The factors that Soviet intelligence gatherers looked for, in determining the escalation of a crisis, are essential to understand . The factors they looked for were important to understand, including the factors that were looked for .
 The types of intelligence gathered can be classified as either hard or soft . The information gathered is either classified as hard, soft or hard .
 Soft intelligence is based on unfolding political developments, information gathered by Soviet embassy personnel, or Soviet journalists with sources in U.S. political circles . Soft intelligence can be based on ongoing political developments and information gathered from the Soviet Embassy personnel .
 Soft indicators will most likely precede hard indicators, say experts . Soft intelligence is by nature less accurate than hard intelligence, they say . Soft indicators are more likely to be followed by hard indicators such as hard indicators .
 Hard intelligence includes signals intelligence from military and command and control sources, satellite photoreconnaissance and the reports from base watchers . Base watchers monitor base security, movement of personnel and weapons .
 The Soviets believed no one factor can indicate with absolute certainty that a crisis is escalating, which is why they gather information from such a diverse spread of sources . The Soviet Union gathered information from a diverse range of sources.
 Political and strategic decisions in times of crisis are made by the Politburo, and are a product of group dynamics, says the official .
 All political power is usually concentrated in a few key individuals creating an inner circle and outer circle of Politburo members . The power is concentrated in the inner circle of a few individuals .
 Their political power is most likely personal rather than positional, as the membership of this inner circle has changed over time . The membership of the members of the inner circle have changed over the years .
 The existence of the Defense Council has skewed its members towards the inner circle . It has skewed the membership of the defense council towards its members .
 Individuals who disagree with the views held by the inner circle are oftentimes expelled from the Politburo . Individuals who repeatedly disagree with views are often expelled by the party's leadership .
 The protection of the NCA is held in high regard by the Soviets with numerous hardened bunkers in the Moscow area for NCA and their support staff .
 Their behavior during a crisis can be construed as a message towards the West of their intent . The behavior of the West can be seen as a signal towards the west of their intentions .
 Since their people were largely unaware of the crisis as it was happening, this gesture could not have been directed at them .
 Military preparations would increase from peacetime levels during a crisis . Military preparations for a crisis would increase during that time .
 A detectable indication of this would be the activation of redundant communication systems . A detectable sign would be activation of numerous redundant communications systems .
 Radio communications in the low, high, and very high bandwidths systems would activate and mobile radio relay systems would be dispersed . Radio communications would be used to communicate in the very high, very high and very low bandwidths .
 The activation of cable communication systems which may be hardened could also be activated . Each service has its own system, with each service having their own system . Cable communication systems could be hardened .
 The Strategic Rocket Forces would be brought to a 27 higher alert level and may disperse some of their mobile launcher units . The move would be a move to the 27th highest alert level in the country .
 Soviet naval planners have taken the opposite approach for ensuring the survivability of their SSBNs at sea by creating bastions for them . The Soviet Navy has taken a similar approach to ensuring the survival of its SSBN's at sea .
 These bastions would be encirclements of surface ships, attack submarines and naval aircraft in Soviet controlled waters . The bastions were encirched by surface ships and attack submarines .
 Deployment of these bastions would be clear indicators of how serious the Soviets viewed the crisis . Deployment would be a sign of seriousness of the Soviet response to the crisis, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Strategic bombers would be dispersed in a similar fashion to their American counterparts in order to make them a smaller target . Strategic bombers were dispersed in the same way as their U.S. counterparts .
 A nuclear attack from the Soviets in a crisis state would consist primarily of their Submarine Launched Ballistic Missiles and their Intercontinental ballistic Missiles . As they provide the least amount of warning time, these missiles would be used by the Soviets .
 SLBMs provide a maximum warning time of approximately 15 minutes and as little as five . ICBMs can provide approximately 30 minutes of warning time . SLBmMs provide approximately 15-minute warning time, ICBm provides approximately 30-minutes warning time.
 Soviet planners will have targeted American Command, Control, and Communications facilities with the first wave of SLBMs, before the arrival of their ICBMs .
 The ICBMs would be designated for hardened targets such as American ICBM silos and their control centers . The U.S. would use them to target hardened targets, such as the silos of American ICMB silos .
 If a conventional war between the West and the Soviet Union were to begin, Soviet military thinking indicates they would prefer not to use their tactical nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union would rather not use tactical nukes than conventional weapons .
 Their fear of NATO tactical nuclear weapons would have them be a primary target early in the conflict . They would include the destruction of NATO nuclear storage facilities air bases, air bases and air defenses .
 The Soviets will be monitoring for NATO preparations of their theater nuclear weapons, using their intelligence resources placed in NATO countries prior to the conflict and through battlefield analysis .
 Movement of missile troops, suspension of tactical aviation, and implementing measures to protect their own troops would all be signs monitored by the Soviets . Movements would be signs that the Soviets were monitoring .
 Some factors could be easily misinterpreted, such as the dispersal of NATO cruise missile systems to protect them from a Soviet strike, looks the same as dispersal prior to launch . Some factors may look like dispersal before launch .
 Political control of the situation would be held entirely by the State Defense Committee and any ministers selected to join them . Political control would be limited to any members of the state defense committee .
 They would be in constant communication with General Staff, receiving updates on the progress of the war . 28 issuing directives concerning missions of the armed forces and the means to fulfill them .
 If theater nuclear weapons were exchanged between NATO and the Warsaw Pact nations, Soviet leaders believed escalation beyond this level could be avoided by the U.S. and Soviet Union refraining from making strikes on each other’s homeland . The United States and the Soviet Union believed escalation could be
 This belief caused considerable tension between the Soviet Union and Eastern European nations . However, the resistance to having nuclear weapons placed within their borders was squashed by the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 .
 During wartime a dramatic shift occurs at the highest levels of the Soviet military with the creation of the Headquarters of the Supreme High Command . The State Defense Committee is advised by the Supreme Defense Committee on military affairs .
 Its membership would include the General Secretary of the Communist party, the minister of defense, the chief of the General Staff . The membership would also include the ministers in charge of the armed services and deputy defense ministers . The Communist party's general secretary would be the party's chief .
 It is through the General Staff that the Supreme High Command will issue the release of nuclear weapons on whatever scale they see fit . The General Staff is responsible for the decision to release nuclear weapons .
 A number of Soviet ground and air forces would hold nuclear weapons at or near the front but they do not have the authority to release them on their own .
 Front commanders can request the release of nuclear weapons for use in theater by devising a battlefield nuclear strike plan . Front commanders have to decide if they want to use nuclear weapons in theater. Front commanders must also devise a plan to release weapons .
 General staff uses battlefield nuclear strike plans from their front commanders to create and update the general nuclear strike plan . The general staff uses the battlefield nuclear . strike plans .
 The Soviets would have a number of factors to consider when committing to a nuclear strike . The Soviet Union would have to consider a variety of factors when deciding whether to strike .
 They could decide to strike early in the conflict, while more unlikely, with Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles . They could use theater weapons to take advantage of tightly grouped NATO forces .
 The more likely scenario would be if a conflict between the Soviet Union and NATO lasted for a month or more . Front nuclear systems are out of communication or used delivering conventional weapons earlier in the conflict or destroyed .
 The use of IRBMs would certainly result in nuclear strikes against the Soviet Union and further nuclear escalation, writes Peter Bergen . "IRBMs" would certainly lead to further escalation, he says .
 The control of the U.S.’ nuclear weapons can be divided into two distinct Clausewitzian groups; provincial control and political control . Provincial control is provincial control; political control is political control. Political control is a key part of the United States decision making structure .
 Provincial control is the control of the armed forces from the perspective of military objectives and the efficient use of their resources . Provincial control means control of armed forces in a province .
 Political control is the command system of statecraft and grand strategy . Political control means statecraft is a command system for statecraft . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's most powerful and most powerful .
 A simple example of this is that the civilian government makes the decision to go to war, not the military, but it is the military that controls the details of its execution . This is a simple example .
 The command authority of nuclear weapons is held by the commander in chief of the armed forces, the President of the United States . Command authority is the power of the U.S. president .
 During peacetime operations, the President has full control of all strategic assets . The U.S. President is in charge of most of the country's military operations .
 The President can communicate his orders through the proper chain of command, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense in order to accomplish his goals . The President's orders can be communicated by the proper chains of command .
 If the President were to be destroyed or out of communication, the nation would lose its ability to launch a retaliatory strike . The President would be out of contact with the nation .
 Each President is briefed on their available options if such a situation were to occur . That is why each President is informed of his available options, CNN.com reports .
 Ignore the idea altogether by the belief that the possibility of nuclear war is so minute 2.2 . Ignore the problem altogether by believing that the . possibility of . nuclear war was so minute-by-minute that it's so minute .
 3. Retain personal control of all nuclear weapons and make no provisions for the transfer of authority . Retain control of the nuclear weapons .
 Rely on political succession as specified by law starting with the Vice President . 4. Rely rely on the political succession of the President . Rely depend on the succession of Vice Presidents .
 Authorize the establishment of an alternate mechanism of authority different from political succession to be used only in dire circumstances . Authorize an alternate system of authority that is different from that of political succession . The first two options can swiftly be eliminated .
 The first choice would result in the president tacitly approving past procedures by the act of not changing them . The other choice would be to allow the president to continue to approve past procedures .
 The second option is eliminated by the fact that it would be illegal for the President to prevent his successor from having all possible options available . The President would not be able to keep his successor out of all options available, he says .
 It invites attack on the President as the means of preventing any retaliatory strike . It also invites attacks on the . President as a means of . preventing any . retaliatory . strike .
 After the President and Vice President, executive authority would be transferred to the Speaker of the House, then to the president pro tempore of the Senate, and then to Cabinet executives in the order of their office’s creation . After the . President and . Vice President of the .
 The risk with this option is that most of these individuals work in the Washington D.C. area, and a surprise attack has the possibility of eliminating most of them .
 President Barack Obama has been criticized for not briefing the nation’s national security team . The White House has a history of briefing people who may have no experience with the military or the nation's strategic assets .
 The fourth option would be that the President has pre-delegated a replacement NCA to handle strategic decision making if all the presidential successors were eliminated or could not be found in a timely manner .
 If the nation were to fall under nuclear attack, time would be a critical factor in getting orders to commanders before communications or retaliatory systems were eliminated .
 If the entire political leadership of the country were eliminated or out of communication, the President may delegate second strike authority to a military commander . Second strike authority can be delegated to military commander by President Obama .
 This act has the intention of ensuring a response, but has as many risks as the political succession listed above . This act is intended to ensure a response to the crisis, but there are many risks .
 A political statesman is supposed to have the best interests of state as their primary motivator in decision making . A military officer may have a different mindset and order a counterattack greater than the enemy’s initial attack in order to punish them .
 This could prevent war termination in a way that is favorable to the U.S. and the world, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Another risk would be to have delegation too decentralized and have a number of officers with the command authority to release nuclear weapons . Another risk is to have too many officers in command authority with the release of weapons .
 The process of alerting America’s nuclear forces in times of crisis or war is based on the judgment of the president . The president is responsible for alerting U.S. nuclear forces .
 His orders are passed to the secretary of defense, then to the Joint Chiefs of Staff . The Joint Chiefs have the orders carried out by the various weapon commanders .
 The chain of command for conventional and nuclear weapons was outlined in the Defense Reorganization Act of 1958 . Different levels of defensive conditions were established in the act .
 The DEFCON levels range from 5 to 1, with 5 being lowest level at peacetime and 1 being troops are deployed and conflict is imminent . The highest level is 5, with 1 being deployed and 1 is deployed and war is imminent in the U.S. DeFCON
 DEFCON is set to 3 or higher when the military command and control structure begins to tighten . It is when the command structure of the military is tightened up . The U.S. military has been in touch with the Obama administration since 2001 .
 DEFCON orders are to the interpretation of the commander beyond their minimum requirements . DeFCON is to be interpreted beyond the commander’s minimum requirements. It is not only possible to interpret orders beyond that .
 This allows political and military leaders of the NCA some flexibility in adjusting forces . This allows them to adjust forces depending on the situation, says NCA .
 Intercontinental Ballistic Missile crews become more vigilant and the materials required to prepare for launch are brought to their consoles . The materials required for launch were brought to the consoles .
 STRATCOM is the military organization responsible for America’s strategic weapon systems . The organization is responsible for the U.S. military's strategic weapons systems .
 SAC would order strategic bombers to be placed on strip alert . Strategic bombers would be ready to fly at short notice .
 Redundant communication systems are activated and prepared for use . Secondary command and control stations are prepared in case of evacuation of the primary . Redundants communication systems activate and prepared to use . Primary communication systems also activated .
 The Navy would prepare to put to sea its ballistic missile submarines that were in port at the time . The Navy's ballistic missile submarine was in port when the attack occurred .
 During the Cold War, the United States kept large numbers of tactical nuclear weapons in NATO countries . The U.S. kept many of the weapons during that period, including tactical nuclear arms .
 At DEFCON 2 the government and the military deploys troops for combat in order to achieve maximum strength if war does occur . The government and military deployed troops to combat in the event of war if war breaks out .
 Civilian and military leaders would be disbursed to a number of protected facilities in the Washington DC area and around the country .
 Most important groups could act as a number of emergency governments in case of attack . The most important groups would act as an emergency government .
 The Vice President, as the President’s immediate successor would likely be transferred to an emergency airborne command post or other undisclosed location . Vice President is likely to be moved to a command post .
 SAC would attain as close to full strategic bomber strength as possible . Aircraft would be dispersed to a number of airfields nation wide, with the exception of any dual purpose aircraft .
 The Navy would surge any submarines or ships that were not under extensive overhaul or deployed at the DEFCON 3 level . The Navy has not deployed any of the ships or submarines that are not under overhaul or at the highest level .
 Tactical nuclear weapons would be dispersed in Cold War Europe to field storage sites away from their storage bunkers . The weapons would have been dispersed in the Cold War era . They were dispersed from their Cold War storage sites .
 The storage sites would be a considerable distance from units designated for using the warheads, until authorization for their employment occurs . The storage site would be located far from the warheads .
 In a conventional war with Soviet Union both sides would target the other’s military command and control resources which in turn support their nuclear operations as well . In a nuclear war with Russia, both sides target each other's military command, control resources .
 A casualty on the onset of conflict could be the ballistic missile early warning system . The U.S. or the Soviet Union’s ability to accurately gauge the strength of a nuclear attack could be a casualty .
 It is also likely that anti-satellite weapons will be employed to blind the U.S. and wreak havoc on its communication network .
 NATO strategy for tactical nuclear weapons in this scenario is to use them only as a last resort if Soviets use them first or if a Soviet victory appears likely . NATO strategy is to only use them as last resort in a scenario .
 At the declaration of DEFCON 3, Soviet forces would likely increase their reconnaissance of U.S. forces and ready their forces .
 Examples of increased anti-carrier forces, tracking carrier task forces or adding to the protecting elements of their SSBNs . Examples of these actions would include increasing anti-air force, tracking carriers task forces .
 Their nuclear forces would likely be prepared for, but would not disperse until the situation changed . The U.S. would be prepared to, but not disperse, if situation changes .
 Unlike the U.S. system of DEFCONs, the Soviets are able to heighten the alert status of their conventional forces without raising the alert of nuclear forces an equal amount .
 At DEFCON 2 it is harder to predict how intense a Soviet reaction would be. At DeFCON2 it is impossible to predict the reaction of Soviet reaction .
 It is likely that they will activate their war time command and control systems and disperse their nuclear forces . The U.S. is likely to activate its war time .
 The first option in defense against a NATO invasion is to have their nuclear forces fully prepared with general mobilization declared . General mobilization declared. The first step would be to prepare for an invasion of NATO .
 This stops just short of war, but with both sides in such heightened states and close proximity, the possibility of an error occurring and starting the conflict is very high .
 The second option involves the Soviets using their tactical nuclear weapons in a disarming first strike . The option is more drastic and involves the use of tactical nukes .
 This option would provide the opportunity to eliminate NATO’s nuclear infrastructure while it is more vulnerable . This option is highly unlikely, but would give the Soviets the chance to kill NATO's nuclear infrastructure . The Soviets are unlikely to do this, but it would give them an opportunity to kill
 The People’s Liberation Army is a concept known as War Control . War Control is a new military strategy being discussed by the Chinese military . PRC Decision Making Structure .
 War control 33 includes preventing and delaying the outbreak of war, and avoiding the escalation of war once it breaks out . War control is aimed at preventing, delaying and avoiding war, including avoiding escalation .
 It stresses the comprehensive employment of military, political, economic, diplomatic, and other means . It does not neglect the role of the military in realizing the strategic objective, it says .
 There are three stages of War Control; resolution of the dispute before war, preventing or postponing war, and once war has broken out controlling the scale, pace, scope or intensity of war . War Control is the third stage of the War Control .
 Chinese military thinkers have noted changes in the global context for armed conflict . China's military thinkers noted several changes to the world's global context .
 The advent of war under high-technology conditions facilitates the ability to direct large military operations from afar in real time . High-tech conditions can also enable direct military operations in real-time .
 Also, among nuclear-armed states, unlimited warfare is far too dangerous, says President Obama . "Unlimited warfare" is too dangerous to use, says Obama .
 "No major power faces such a grave threat to its existence that it would be willing to escalate uncontrollably" No major power is willing to take action against the U.S. in response to a threat that threatens its existence, experts say .
 It is the PLA’s belief that the era of total war is over, and a shift to War Control, which was first recorded in 1998, will be brought about as they modernize around 20209.9.
 China’s nuclear posture in the 1950s was shaped by the need to defend itself from American hegemony, and after the Sino-Soviet split, the Soviet Union . The country's nuclear posture was shaped in China's 1950s and '60s .
 They viewed American deterrence as coercion, by the United States policy of reserving the right to commit a first strike . They viewed U.S. policy as coercion by the U.N. policy .
 The Chinese goal is to maintain nuclear weapons as a means of defense only, and to stockpile a number of nuclear weapons that they deem to be the minimum reprisal . The Chinese want to stockpile nuclear weapons for defense only .
 PLA writings indicate that the Second Artillery, the Chinese military organization responsible for their strategic nuclear weapons, would conduct retaliatory strikes . Maintain control of the overall situation .
 It would do so for the purpose of de-escalation, and perhaps, war termination . The U.S. would be willing to use the U.N. to end the conflict in Syria .
 The Chinese views on the use of retaliatory nuclear strikes with the intent of de-escalation are explained through a number of concepts .
 The PLA is said to be committed to no first use of nuclear weapons . But the difficult issue is determining when an enemy crosses the first use line .
 It is plausible that the Chinese may interpret the detection of missile launches or strikes against strategic assets as a first use, and would conceivably respond with nuclear arms .
 The second core concept on the use of retaliatory nuclear strikes is self protection, or ensuring the survival of their strategic assets for a retaliatory response . Self protection is a key concept for a nuclear strike, according to experts .
 This entails choosing enemy targets that if struck, will cripple the enemy’s war effort and provide a psychological shock to dissuade them from continuing . If struck, the enemy's war effort will be crippled .
 The Second Artillery has a system of three classes of readiness to which its units must adhere to .
 In this status, forces train, conduct exercises and conduct normal maintenance . The status of this status has been suspended .
 If the Central Military Commission receives some intelligence that the enemy may use nuclear weapons, the CMC directs units to raise their readiness level to “Second Class” warning status . The CMC orders units to increase their readiness levels .
 At this status, units must either prepare to move into firing positions or deploy to firing positions . Many of these can be tunnels or prepared underground protected positions . At this point, units are either preparing to deploy or preparing to fire .
 At “First Class Warning” status, missile forces are fully ready to fire and are either deployed, or in combat positions, waiting for a launch order . At First Class Warning status, missiles are deployed or deployed .
 Of the five original nuclear armed weapon states, China alone is believed to be increasing its nuclear arsenal . China has increased its numbers by roughly 25 percent since 2005, according to the report .
 Actually estimating the size and composition of the Chinese nuclear stockpile is exceedingly difficult . China does not publicize details about its nuclear forces .
 Over the coming decade, China is expected to deploy more warheads on new systems . China is also expected to retire others as it phases out older systems . Over the next decade, it will also phase out some of its warheads .
 The most important nuclear development of the last two years in China has been its deployment of the new DF-31 and DF-32A missiles . The DF31A missiles were deployed in China's first two years of nuclear development .
 China has only one Xia-class nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine at this time . China is building at least two and possibly five, Jin-class SSBNs .
 This has the potential of providing China with a constant at sea SSBN presence . The 35-year-old vessel could provide China with an SSBN .
 China has no experience with operating SSBNs, as its single operational SSBN has never gone on patrol . This would be a dramatic change, as China has never had an SSBN on patrol, as it has never been deployed .
 It is uncertain how many DH-10s China possess, though estimates range from 50 to 250 . What fraction of these are nuclear capable is unknown, and how many are .
 China will seek to maintain a status quo power relationship with the U.S. China is seeking to maintain the status quo with the United States. China will want to maintain its relationship with Washington .
 China will most likely increase its stockpiles of nuclear weapons to a point where they feel that they can overwhelm U.S. defenses . If the United States continues to improve its ballistic missile defense systems, China will increase its stockpile .
 At the very top are 2535 policy makers, the Preeminent Leader, elder advisors, a small number of generalists, and several clusters of specialists . At the bottom of the pyramid is a group of policy makers .
 It is composed of the Premier, VicePremiers, State Councilor, Ministers in charge of ministries and commission, the AuditorGeneral, and the Secretary-General .
 The Premier is nominated by the President, Vice-Premiers and State Councilors . Except for the Premier, the State Councilor is nominated for the premier . The President is the only person nominated by a Premier .
 They are appointed by the President upon the approval of the National People's Congress . They are all appointed by President upon approval of approval by the national people's congress .
 The Standing Committee consists of only the Premier, Vice Premiers, and state councilors . It is a state councilor .
 The Preeminent Leader appoints people at high levels of government . He is responsible for enunciation of ideological principles and identification of primary tasks facing the nation .
 The elder advisors are highly influential, semi-retired leaders who command the loyalty of select bureaucracies and ideological allies . The elder advisor is typically four to seven people in the U.S.
 They are the chief lieutenants of the Premier and have widespread responsibilities . They include the chief of the Cabinet and chief of staff .
 The generalists seek to integrate the diverse Chinese bureaucracy into a coherent whole . They want to resolve major 36 bureaucratic conflicts and decide major policy issues . They aim to solve major problems by resolving major conflicts and deciding major policy decisions .
 Specialists are generally beneath the generalists . However, there have been cases of individuals having roles in both areas .
 The influence wielded by policy makers is not based entirely on their formal title . The influence of a policy maker is not always based on a formal title, it's the power of a politician .
 There is a significant amount of overlap between decision making bodies. There is also significant overlap between the decision-making bodies.
 The State Council directs and administrates national defense work, and the Central Military Commission directs and assumes unified command of the nation's armed forces .
 The Chairman of the CMC has a superior level of authority, if not the ultimate authority, for the use of nuclear weapons . He has been in charge of the U.S. since the 1980s .
 It is unlikely that his decisions would require a consensus within the CMC, or among senior military leaders, to be unanimous .
 The Chinese military does not seem to have a pre-delegated power to launch nuclear weapons, when the political leadership is unavailable . The political leadership does not appear to be able to launch nukes when political leaders are not present .
 Politburo or CMC decisions become operational orders at the DGS level, flow through Military Regions and arrive at a main-force unit . In general, strategic and military decisions from the Politbur or the CMC become operational decisions .
 Previously it had been dependant on Soviet style ground forces and tactics that used their overwhelming manpower to defeat their enemy .
 Three events occurred that changed their attitudes and brought about the start of the current Chinese modernization movement .
 The first was the Tiananmen Square incident in 1989, and the resulting legislation that placed restrictions on China that were seen as a threat . The first restrictions were placed in place after the incident, the first in 1989 .
 The second event was the overwhelming U.S. and allied victory over Iraq in the first gulf war . The first Gulf war was the first Gulf War, and the second Gulf War was the Gulf War .
 Iraq and China used similar Soviet hardware, and that war demonstrated what a high tech force with air superiority could accomplish . China and Iraq fought each other in the 1980s .
 The last factor was the perception that Taiwanese leaders were moving towards irreversible separation15.15.
 This was unacceptable to Chinese leaders and would be the most likely cause of a conflict between China and the West . This would be most likely to cause a conflict with the West, says the Chinese leader .
 Foreign deliveries to China of major conventional weapons totaled $2.58 billion from 1992-1995, $3.59 billion from 1995-1999, $10.26 billion from 2000-2003 . The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute estimates that foreign deliveries of major weapons to China totaled $10
 In 2006 the Pentagon reported that China now has the third largest defense budget in the world . The Pentagon estimates that China spent between $70 and $105 billion on defense that year .
 The Chinese attempted to cover up their total expenditures, reporting the spending of $35 billion on defense for the year15.15. The Chinese government reported the total spending on defense was $35.3 billion .
 The United States and China will continue to be economic partners for the foreseeable future, but the relationship will not rise to the level of a friendship or alliance . The U.S. and China are not likely to be friends or allies in the long run .
 This is due to the difference in values between the U.S. and the PRC being an autocratic police state . The PRC is a democracy and the United States being a democracy .
 China has taken steps to improve its relations with the West, and has made internal reforms . China has also taken steps in recent years to improve relations with Western countries .
 They have adopted pragmatic capitalistic economic policies which have resulted in unprecedented economic growth . They are adopted by the government, which has adopted 'priceless capitalistic policies'
 In dealing with other countries the Chinese have become more cooperative . However, they still have a tendency to blame adversaries for any impasse . The Chinese are more cooperative with other nations, but they still blame adversaries .
 They view their offers as generous, and the objections of others as narrow minded and mean spirited . They always view their offer as generous .
 The PRC is very sensitive about how it is treated in the international community . It demands that it be treated with equality due to a great power .
 The United States and PRC are dealing with each other with two handed policies . The U.S. and the PRC have a two-handed policy, the U.K. says .
 Both nations are highly dependant on each other for their continued economic success . But both their militaries train in exercises simulating the other as an enemy .
 Both involve two nuclear superpowers with a serious risk that the nearby superpower will attack the island in a manner the distant superpower would find unacceptable . Both involve a risk of a nuclear attack on the island .
 Preventing Taiwan from declaring independence is necessary in China’s view to maintain their sovereignty and cohesion, China says . Preventing the move is necessary to maintain Taiwan's sovereignty, says China .
 In the American view, defending Taiwan is important to maintaining U.S. credibility in that we will protect democracy and fulfill promises to protect friendly nations . The American view is that the United States will defend Taiwan, and fulfill its promises to do so .
 The United States and China differ greatly in their NCAs and the way they view nuclear weapons . The U.S. and China have very different views of nuclear weapons, experts say .
 The explanation for this may be found in basic cultural differences that lead the peoples of the U.S. and China to think and act differently .
 Eastern and Western peoples have distinctly different thought processes . Eastern peoples have distinct thought processes, such as Eastern thought processes. Eastern peoples thought processes are very different .
 Traditional Western thought, as found in the U.S. and other English speaking nations, can trace its origins back to the philosophers of ancient Greece . Ancient Greek philosophers are thought to have influenced Western thought .
 Traditional Eastern thought, which is similar in China, Japan, and Korea, has its origins in Confucian beliefs . Traditional eastern thought, similar in Japan, Korea, and China, has origins of Confucan beliefs .
 Parents in both cultures shape how their children's minds will work . Parents shape their minds before they even learn to speak .
 Neither thought process can be deemed superior to the other, as they both have advantages and disadvantages when compared to one another . Neither process is superior to one, as it has advantages or disadvantages .
 This land promoted the herding of livestock, fishing, trading, and hunting . This land was used to herding livestock and fishing .
 These ways of life were highly independent, as tasks could be carried out by either a single person or by a small group of people . The ways of living could be highly independent .
 This independence carried over into their early forms of government where the debate and election became central to deciding issues . The debate and elections were central to their early government, leading to their independence .
 They believed that the world consisted of discrete parts which could be broken down and analyzed separately . The world was broken down into parts that could be analyzed separately, they said .
 From this belief came the concept of elements and the scientific method . The scientific method is based on elements and scientific principles .
 The Greeks were also exposed to a number of outside cultures and races, and were willing to learn from them as long as the foreign ideas could be tested in debate .
 Crops such as rice, were very labor intensive and required large numbers of people in order to properly cultivate them . Crops like rice, such a rice, are very labor-intensive and required a large number of people to cultivate them.
 The head of a family was typically the elder and their instructions were followed without question . This resulted in a more hierarchal formation of society, where the head of the family was the elder .
 Persons within the family would feel very connected to each other, but feel very different from those outside it, says the author of the book .
 The Chinese viewed the world as a complex place where it was impossible to isolate one part of it, the author says . The Chinese view the world in a way that it is impossible to separate one part from it .
 This belief, in the harmony of all things, would become the core of their thinking; as logic was to the Greeks . This belief was to be the belief of the Greeks, as well as logic, they would believe .
 This manner of thinking does not lend itself to breaking down things, but rather understanding the big picture . This way of thinking is not to break down things but to understand the big, rather than break things down . This sort of of thinking helps you understand things better than breaking things down,
 China was also more isolated than Greece, and those cultures who they did encounter were not as advanced as themselves .
 This resulted in the Chinese developing a lack of curiosity in outside cultures and a strong belief in the superiority of Chinese ways . This has led to the belief that the Chinese are superior to other cultures . The Chinese have developed a negative view of the outside world .
 This is exemplified by the fact that they referred to themselves as the Middle Kingdom, or the place between heaven and earth, which is another way of saying that they are at the center of the universe . The Middle Kingdom was the place where they were at the middle of the world,
 Modern eastern and western societies reflect differences of history . Modern eastern societies reflect these differences in history . Western societies reflect this difference in their history .
 American families instill a sense of independence very early, starting with having children sleep in a room or bed separate from the parents . Eastern families’ children often start by sharing a bed with their parents, where as Eastern families' children often share a bed .
 Westerners raise their children to communicate as transmitters, while easterners raise them as receivers . Easterners use their children as receivers rather than transmitters . Westerners use children as communicators, but easterners use them to communicate .
 English is a ‘subject prominent’ language, with nouns being the most distinguishable part of sentences . Nouns are the most 40 distinguishable parts of sentences in English .
 Sinitic languages such as Chinese, Japanese, or Korean are “topic prominent” languages where context and verbs are more important . Context and verbs more important in these languages than in other languages .
 Westerners are more concerned with advancing themselves than easterners . Easterners are concerned about advancing the group as a whole . Westerners want to advance themselves, while easterners want the group to advance itself .
 Easterners see change as constant, that everything is in motion and impossible to isolate while westerners see it as limited . Easterners think change is constant, but westerners think it is limited . Westerners think that everything in motion is impossible to isolated .
 Confucian ideology is based on the concepts of hierarchical relationships, respect for authority, harmony, and conflict avoidance . Confucians believe in the concept of hierarchy, respect and harmony .
 Leaders in this perspective are to be role models for their followers, exemplifying the values of benevolence, duty, wisdom, and reliability . Leaders should exemplify these values as exemplifying their role models . Leaders must also exemplify their values of goodness, duty and reliability, says
 Relationship between leader and follower is described in a number of ways, including ruler/subject, father/son, husband/wife, older brother/younger brother . The relationship between ruler and subject is described as ruler, subject, ruler, father, son or subject .
 Ruler/subject denotes the absolute loyalty a leader demands from followers . The ruler/subject is a leader who demands absolute loyalty from his followers .
 Older brother/younger brother describes how age and seniority can predict who is allowed to become a leader . Seniority, seniority and age can be used to predict who will be a leader, says brother/sister .
 By assigning tasks with clear expectations, followers are less likely to feel ambiguous about their role in the organization . Followers should be assigned clear expectations of their roles in the workplace .
 Questioning their decisions can be viewed as a challenge to their authority . Conversely, a leader asking for the opinions of his followers can be potentially judged as weak . Questioning a leader's decision can be seen as challenging their authority, or weak .
 Confucian culture has a large power distance between the leader and his followers . Confucians have a large distance between their leaders and their followers .
 This distance can be seen materialistically materialistically such as a larger office, bigger salary, and in speech by addressing superiors with their title followed by their last name .
 Demonstrations of authority create a strong hierarchy, but have the negative impact of limiting the perceived freedom of followers to provide feedback to decision makers . These demonstrations of authority creates a strong .
 Confucian beliefs based on their views of filial piety . Practice of taking actions to “save face” between leaders and followers is an important tenet of Confucan beliefs . Leaders and followers should take actions to save face between them, Confucians say .
 Subordinates ingratiate themselves with their leaders by providing them with compliments, gifts, and conforming to their opinions and behavior, they say . Subordination is a form of formality in order to get around the world's top leaders, such as President Obama . Sub
 Leaders save their follower’s face by not critiquing them publicly and by using indirect language . Leaders save followers’ faces by not criticising them publicly, by not criticizing them publicly .
 They prefer a system of positive rewards rather than punishments to enhance performance . They also prefer to use a positive rewards system to enhance their performance .
 Social beliefs are used in order to keep a harmonious leader/follower relationship in an organization . These social beliefs are believed to be used to keep an organization harmonious in order .
 This experience allowed us to form some perceptions about the Soviet Union that we have been able to base our Cold War policies on . This experience helped us form some of the perceptions we have had to form, says the author .
 While it may be possible to overlay some of the Soviet decision making processes as hypothetical PRC decisions, it's imperative to keep in consideration the differences between the modern situation and 1962 .
 The person holding this position is then simultaneously the head of the executive decision making body for national defense . The Soviet Defense Council is analogous to the Chinese Central Military Commission . The position is similar to that of the Soviet Defense council .
 The purpose of these groups is to advise the Chairman on matters concerning national security . They provide a clear line of communication for disseminating directives from the NCA to military commanders .
 Chairman has ultimate decision making power and dictates the use of strategic weapons . In both groups, the Chairman has the ultimate decision .
 Both countries have established military command structures outside of those for their conventional forces to maintain direct control over nuclear weapons . Both nations have established .
 In the Soviet Union this was the Strategic Rocket Forces, and is the Second Artillery for China . In China, this is the second Artillery of the country .
 Khrushchev had little in the way of a formal education, but was highly respected by his peers for his political savvy and his many years of experience .
 Age could be a factor in relations between the U.S. and China in the future . There is almost a twenty year age gap between Barack Obama and Hu Jintao . Age played a role in Khrushchev's ability to relate to Kennedy .
 Khrushchev had a number of advisors from diverse specialties with him for the duration of the missile crisis . The crisis was the height of the Soviet Union's nuclear weapons program .
 All public responses by the Soviets were approved by senior leadership including Khrushchev . All responses to the Soviet Union's response to the crisis were approved of by senior leaders .
 It was in private that Khrushchev showed that he had the power to communicate with the Kennedy Administration beyond the control of the bureaucracy . In private, he showed the power of the Kennedy administration beyond control .
 The letter was likely dictated by Khrushchev himself, without vetting by officials . The letter sent on 26 October was probably dictated by the former Soviet leader .
 Khrushchev wanted to ensure the security of the Cuban’s by having his missiles on their island, but on the other hand he did not want to provoke the United States into invading the island .
 He likely felt that the situation was deteriorating so quickly that he needed to bypass the usual diplomatic process, and make an independent and more personal gesture .
 The control of Cuba's nuclear weapons in Cuba never left the control of the Soviet Defense Council . Cuba's control of nuclear weapons was never fully controlled by the Soviets .
 The Soviet commanders on the island had explicit orders that under no condition were the MRBMs or IRBMs to be used without permission of the Council .
 They did have permission to use tactical nuclear weapons in order to stop an invasion of Cuba . The U.S. did not use nuclear weapons to stop a Cuban invasion .
 Strategic weapons would be kept under the direct control of the CMC at all times under all conditions, with tactical weapons at the discretion of the local commander if certain conditions are met . Tactical weapons would also be kept in the hands of local commanders .
 Conditions may include destruction of tactical weapons or imminent invasion . These conditions may include the destruction of the tactical weapons and imminent invasion.
 The relationship between the Soviet Union and the U.S. to China and the United States. What differs is the relationship between Russia and China to China, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There was little communications between them outside of diplomatic channels . Almost no trade was taking place between the two countries .
 China in comparison is one of America’s most valuable trading partners . Thousands of Chinese students come to the United States to study each year .
 While the U.S. and China won’t be entering a full military alliance anytime in the foreseeable future, our respective leaders are not calling for the other’s destruction . The United States and China will not be able to enter a full alliance in the future .
 There was no direct means of communication between Khrushchev and Kennedy . The two men were in touch with each other at the time .
 The closest they had to it were speeches made over the radio, or messages sent via teletype through their embassies . They had to rely on teletype messages from their embassies.
 Both of these methods required a considerable amount of time to prepare, and in the case of the teletype the message had to be encrypted before it was sent, and decrypted when it was received, which was lengthy process at the time .
 American and Chinese Presidents and their staffs have access to near instantaneous telecommunication systems, from video conferencing to the simple telephone . Today the U.S. and China Presidents and . their . staffs are able to communicate with each other via the phone .
 When making a comparison between actions of the Soviets and the PRC in a modern-day situation, we can model this around a crisis involving Taiwan, and the ongoing issue of its sovereignty .
 China considers Taiwan to be within its sphere of influence, much like how the U.S. viewed Cuba in the 1960s . Taiwan is considered within China's sphere of power, like Cuba .
 China would fill the roll of the United States, the powerful nation attempting to control events over its smaller neighbor . Comparatively, the U.S. would be more interested in controlling events over China .
 The United States would be the Soviet Union, the distant super power that has seemingly invaded the other’s back yard . The U.S. would be a distant super-power that has seemed to invade the other's back yard.
 Taiwan is not integral to the defense of the U.S. just as Cuba wasn’t to the Soviets . Taiwan isn't an integral part of the United States' defense, as is Cuba .
 If something were to happen to either of the island nations, their supporting superpower would not be directly harmed . The U.S. has not been directly harmed by the island nation .
 Defense treaties helped forge partnerships between the Soviet Union and Cuba . The United States and Taiwan were also forged through defense treaties .
 The differences in this scenario can be found in a comparison of the relationships between Cuba and the U.S. and that of China and Taiwan . The differences are found in the relationship between the two countries .
 Cuba was a foreign nation, ideologically opposed to the United States, and was labeled as our enemy . Cuba was an ally of the U.S. and labeled as an enemy, but was labeled an enemy .
 Taiwan is not considered a foreign nation by the PRC; they consider Taiwan to be a renegade province . The PRC does not recognize Taiwan as a foreign country . Taiwan is considered to be Taiwan's most populous province .
 Chinese leaders have made it clear through their One-China policies with other nations, that unification is their ultimate goal . Unification is the ultimate goal for the Chinese people .
 If Taiwan were to formally declare its independence, China would have to react with 45 force . China would react with force if Taiwan formally declares independence .
 If Chinese government failed to act to prevent Taiwanese independence, they would risk large scale rioting by the Chinese people who felt betrayed by it .
 China’s expansion is motivated less by ideological ideals of international communism, and more by the needs to acquire trade relations . The PRC is actively courting other nations and geographic regions .
 China needs new sources of raw materials and energy to fuel its economic expansion, as well as growing markets to satisfy its exports based economy . China needs more raw materials, energy and other sources to fuel expansion .
 China is also attempting to expand its territorial borders, and in the case of the South China Sea region it’s to ensure lucrative undersea energy resources .
 PRC is taking steps to increase its power projection by constructing a number of conventional aircraft carriers . 6.6.6 aircraft carriers are expected to be built in the PRC .
 The developing world has been seeing a growth in the amount of attention it has received from politically and economically . China’s Geopolitical Expansion has seen a rise in the number of countries China has received attention .
 Two regions that have witnessed this growth are Africa and South America . Two regions have seen this growth in the past year .
 Soviet Union’s partnerships in these locations were made primarily for military aid to fend off what they viewed as Western imperialism . The Soviet Union's partnerships with these countries were primarily for defense .
 Many nations that once were allied with the Soviet Union are now looking to China for trade and investment to fuel their development more so than military aid . China is a major source of investment in the Middle East and Asia .
 This may change in the future as it becomes more in China’s interest to promote stability in its partner nations; in order to ensure that its sources of energy and raw materials are secure . This may be in China's interest in ensuring that its source of energy is secure .
 Forum on China-Africa Cooperation was formally established in October 2000 . Forum provides a new platform of multilateral dialogue and cooperation .
 The mechanism is playing important roles in promoting Sino-African economic cooperation, expanding cooperation areas, deepening cooperation levels, and innovating cooperation forms .
 The China-Africa Business Conference and China's Joint Chamber of Commerce are also important organizations boosting bilateral economic and trade cooperation . Meanwhile, the China-African Business Conference is also an important organization .
 The forms of bilateral cooperation between the two are constantly upgraded from commodity trade and economic assistance to direct investment, labor service and project contracting . With the gradual increase of the economic strength of China and Africa, bilateral cooperation has increased .
 In 2007, the China-Africa Development Fund was established in Beijing, starting a new form of Sino-African cooperation . The fund was set up in 2007 in Beijing .
 Currently, bilateral cooperation covers many fields such as trade, production and processing, resource exploration, transportation, communications and other infrastructures .
 China's cooperation with African countries can ensure a marketplace and supply of the raw materials needed for its sustained economic development . In terms of China, its cooperation with Africa can ensure the marketplace and a supply of raw materials .
 China exports mechanical and electrical products, construction materials, textiles, and other light industrial products to Africa, providing business opportunities for related Chinese enterprises . China also exports mechanical, electrical, construction and other industrial products .
 China attaches no conditions, and does not interfere in other countries' internal affairs . During its cooperation process with African nations, China attach no conditions . China does not meddle in African nations internal affairs, says Xinhua .
 The practice is warmly applauded by African countries and has attracted attention from the international community, further increasing China's influence in the world21.
 African countries can share China's development experience and obtain the opportunities brought by China’s rapid economic growth . By cooperating with China, African countries will benefit from China's rapid growth .
 The high-quality but low-price ‘made-in-China’ products greatly benefit Africans . The products are made in China, Africa's biggest exporter of the world .
 China’s investment also helps African countries reduce the costs of project construction, and increases employment opportunities . China's investment also reduces costs of construction and reduces employment opportunities in Africa .
 Cooperation also promotes diversity in Africa’s investment industry, which can also reform its single product-based economic structure and promote sustainable development in Africa . Cooperation will also promote diversity in African investment industry .
 Sino-African economic cooperation not only plays the demonstrative role of South-South cooperation among developing countries, but also drives the world community to attach more importance to the continent . China-Africa economic cooperation is a key part of China's development strategy, says Liu Yungang
 Owing to the rapid development between China and Africa, some world powers such as the U.S. and Japan have also strengthened their cooperation mechanisms with Africa in succession .
 Hu Jintao’s decision to visit non-resource rich countries during his week-long tour in Africa in February 2009 was intended to signal a new phase in Sino-African relations, in the view of press commentators .
 China is paying more attention to Africa not only because of its need for natural resources, but because it counts on the continent for diplomatic support in its drive for reintegrating Taiwan to the mainland .
 Africa must insist that China doesn't just take raw materials but that some value is added, he says . In view of this, “it’s up to Africans to insist that . China doesn’t just take the raw materials... but that . some value must be
 The People’s Liberation Army – Navy, sent a task force of four vessels to the waters off the Horn of Africa to assist in the international anti-piracy efforts .
 The PLA Navy has been sent to “offer security safeguards for Chinese vessels and personnel” sailing near Somali waters . A spokesman for the Ministry of Defense stated that the PLA Navy had been sent .
 PLA Navy vessels will escort Taiwanese ships and foreign vessels carrying Chinese goods . They may also assist vessels transporting humanitarian goods . An official from the Ministry of Communications explained that the PLA Navy will also escort Taiwanese vessels .
 Foreign Ministry spokesman said China's Navy would safeguard world peace and stability . China adheres to ‘peaceful development,” and practices a “non-aggressive defense policy,’ Xinhua said .
 Ta Kung Pao: Sino-Latin American trade relations have ‘important strategic significance” for China’s economic development . Sino and Latin America trade relations are important strategic significance for China, editorial says .
 From Latin America, China can obtain a “steady and large” supply of the resources it needs to alleviate the “bottleneck” obstructing its development . China can get a ‘steady’ and “large’ supply of resources from Latin
 Hu signed 10-year investment and cooperation agreement worth $19 billion with Argentina . $8 billion of that money will be used for railway projects .
 Hong Kong media also reported that an agreement was signed for US$500 million Chinese investment in a new nickel plant in Cuba . Independent Hong Kong reports that the deal was also signed for an agreement to invest in a nickel plant .
 PRC media reports suggest that a major driver of China’s efforts to improve ties with the region is to expand trade with Latin America and secure new export markets for Chinese products .
 Cuba’s efforts to cultivate ties to China may spring in part from a move to lessen reliance on Venezuela, its top trading partner . Cuba is trying to cut reliance on its top trade partner, Venezuela .
 Its relative coolness to Medvedev suggests it is may seek to maintain more limited ties with Russia . Russia may want to avoid a repeat of its earlier reliance on Soviet aid and resentment .
 Cuba also may be keeping some distance from Russia’s recent more confrontational line toward the United States . Havana anticipates a potential change in U.S. policy toward Cuba, under the Obama administration .
 Castro praised the ‘optimal results’ of Hu’s visit, which included the signing of two accords restructuring Cuban debt . The accords also included the establishment of a $70 million credit line and an $8 million grant .
 Castro said Medvedev’s visit had been “wonderful,” but made no comment on its outcome . Castro said the visit was “a wonderful, wonderful experience”
 Chinese news agency Xinhua quoted President Chavez of Venezuela as saying that the package of energy cooperation agreements reached during his 2004 visit included permission for Chinese companies to explore for oil and natural gas .
 Chavez indicated that Venezuela “welcomed” China to “join hands” on the construction of an oil pipeline . Chavez also indicated that China “joined hands’s” construction of a pipeline to Venezuela .
 Plans to sell up to 500,000 b/d of oil to China by 2009, and 1 million by 2012 via a joint tanker fleet venture . Plans to build new refineries in Venezuela and China .
 Chavez said this would “in no way” affect 50 oil sales to other countries . Chavez: This would ‘in no . way’t affect 50 of the country’s oil sales, he said . Chavez said the oil sales would not affect 50 sales to
 Three members of the Politburo Standing Committee, China’s highest ruling body --President Hu Jintao, National People's Congress Chairman Wu Bangguo, and Vice Premier Li Keqiang - met with Chavez during his visit . The same number of members of China�
 In contrast, four members of the Politburo Standing Committee met with Chavez during his December 2004 visit to China . They likely see Chavez's importance to China as increasing .
 Hu said that China was ready to “deepen cooperation with Venezuela in the upstream-downstream integration of the petroleum industry,” and emphasized the importance of continued joint investment .
 PRC media reporting indicates that the Chinese Government seeks to avoid disrupting its more strategically important relationship with the United States, as it expands economic ties with Venezuela .
 2008 was the 'Year of China' referring to China’s first time hosting of the Olympic Games . 2008 was also referred to the substantial elevation of China's economic strength . The Economist said 2008 was China's first year hosting the Olympics .
 China's GDP based on an “initial calculation” soared to RMB 24.6619 trillion in 2007 . In 2007, the country's GDP was estimated at $24.66 trillion . China's first GDP in 2007 was $23 billion .
 Later, China’s State 51 Statistic Bureau revised the GDP data . China's GDP growth rate for 2007 increased from 11. percent to 11.% .
 China’s GDP was up nearly 14 times the figure of 1979, and more or less the same as that of Germany . According to the dollar-RMB exchange rate of 7.3046 to 1 at the end of 2007, China's GDP was 14 times that of 1979
 China’s per capita GDP in 2007 was roughly $2,500, nearly a 20-fold increase from 1979 . Per capita GDP was $2.500 in 2007, nearly 20 years after 1979 .
 China's foreign exchange reserves hit $1.5282 trillion, ranking first in the world . China’s foreign exchange reserve is the world's largest, with $2.6 trillion .
 China jumped to rank first in gross output of an increasing number of indicative products in 2007 . In 2007, China ranked first in the world's largest economy in terms of GDP .
 Recent media reporting suggests that China is seeking to downplay expectations of its role in contributing to international rescue funds or direct investment abroad . At the same time, recent media reports suggest that China may downplay its role .
 He reiterated that China is willing to “enhance cooperation” with world financial organizations “including the IMF,” according to Xinhua .
 China Daily quoted Li Rongrong -head of China’s State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission - warning state-owned firms to “hold onto your cash” and not “rush into” overseas acquisitions . China Daily said China is reluctant to
 If other foreign assets held by the central bank, the commercial banks, and the China Investment Corporation are included, total foreign reserves stood at US$2.1 trillion the largest in the world, double the size of Japan's and four times that of Russia's .
 72 percent of China’s reserves are held in US dollar-denominated assets . China is the United States’ single largest creditor, according to the U.S. Council on Foreign Relations study .
 China had lent roughly US$40 billion a month to the United States in 2008, when the U.S. financial meltdown was taking a heavy toll . China contributed a lot to easing the latter's credit crunch, according to the IMF . It estimated that in the last four quarters of
 Chinese portfolio includes roughly US$900 billion in treasury bonds, US$600 billion in agency bonds and US$150 billion in corporate bonds . US$40 billion in U.S. equities and another US$50 billion in short-term deposits .
 There are risks if China were to use its foreign currency reserves . However, there are also risks if the country were using its reserves to fund its currency .
 The impact of these huge reserves on the domestic Chinese money supply was neutralized by retaining them as foreign currency assets . Until now, the impact of the huge reserves was somewhat neutralized . China has kept the reserves as foreign currencies assets .
 If the funds were to be ploughed back into the domestic economy, the money supply would increase and prices would likely rise . The money supply is likely to rise and prices will likely also rise .
 Unloading sizeable foreign reserves could lead to a rise in the Yuan exchange rate, which could put many of the export manufacturers at risk . Many operate on razor-thin profit margins, since many operate on thin profit margins .
 China’s impressive economic growth has been fueling a surge in spending for military modernization on all levels . The country has been spending heavily on military modernization .
 This includes communications, command, control, computer, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance technology, C4ISR technology, 53 naval assets, and strategic weaponry .
 This spending on military hardware with capabilities beyond the needs for internal security and local defense may indicate that the Chinese leadership acknowledges its need for advanced systems if it were in a dispute with the United States .
 New assets will enable the land power that China currently is to project its power far beyond its own borders . These new assets include air craft carriers .
 The reason why China would risk appearing confrontational to the U.S. would be if the Chinese leadership viewed another threat as being greater . The Chinese leadership may be wary of a greater threat from the United States .
 The greater threat is a national, urban, or rural uprising by the Chinese people themselves from dissatisfaction with their leadership’s management of the state . This is a greater threat than a national or urban uprising, says the Chinese leader .
 The most likely trigger for an uprising would be from a collapse in the national economy, which necessitates the need for its defense of energy and resources . The government would need to defend its resources and energy resources, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 China is very willing to change the balance of military power in the world, China says . In order to maintain the harmony and unity of the nation, China is willing to do so, he says .
 China continues to skip doing certain things in the process of mechanization (i.e. enhancing hardware and acquiring more advanced operational platforms) while it strives to achieve leapfrog development in key areas .
 The PLA is transforming a strategy from winning a local war with the condition of high-tech to winning a war under the conditions of informationization . PLA is also transforming a . strategy from . winning a . local war . with the . condition of . high-technology, the PLA is
 By 2020, the PLA will accomplish the goal of mechanization, and make major progress in informationization . The PLA is aiming to mechanize by mechanization .
 From 2006 to 2008, the PLA's defense expenditure grew even more significantly . The PLA’s defense expenditure has increased significantly since then .
 Defense expenditure was 297.938 billion Yuan in 2006 and 355.491 billion yuan in 2007 . The defense expenditure was up 20.4% and 19.3% respectively over the previous year .
 Chinese defense spending has risen sharply from about 16. billion Yuan in 1978 to about 417 billion Yuan (about $60 billion) in fiscal year 2008, roughly a 25-fold increase . If viewed over a longer time span, China defense spending in 1978 has risen to about 16 billion Yuan
 Pew Research conducted a survey of 24,717 people from 24 countries in the spring 2008 .
 People who believe that China “has already” or “will” replace the United States as the “world superpower” account for 66 percent of interviewees in France, Germany, Australia, Spain, the UK and South Korea .
 It is widely believed that China will surpass the United States “sometime,” and become the number one economic superpower in the world .
 This survey further proved that the elevation of China’s overall national strength has already become an international consensus31.31. This survey was conducted by the World Economic Forum in Beijing .
 From China's perspective, the world "hegemonic power" is the world “head goat,” which is not an admirable role . China's position is that the world's "head goat" is not a admirable role, it's not admirable .
 The current predicament facing the United States includes wide-ranging problems . The U.S. is in a state of state of emergency .
 In the field of security, the United States is facing antiterrorism, the Iraq War, the Afghanistan War and the North Korean nuclear crisis, the Iran nuclear crisis . Political uncertainties in Pakistan and Thailand, and turbulence in Sudan, are also key issues .
 The United States is facing the subprime crisis, the global economic downturn, sharp fluctuations of energy prices, money laundering and the deadlock of the Doha Round . In terms of economy, the U.S. is facing subprime . The U.N. is also facing the
 In terms of strategies, the United States is facing the revitalization of Russia, the rise of large . bourgeoning countries, the challenge from “rogue” countries, and the . rise of anti-Americanism, and adjustment of Atlantic relations .
 The Chinese view the predicament facing the U.S. as a genuine picture of the reverse investment-to-return ratio facing the hegemonic country in the 21st century . They interpret it as proof of China’s wisdom and transcendence characterized by refusing to exercise hegemony .
 Mao Zedong proposed the ‘noose theory,’ prescribing not to exercise hegemony . Mao Zedongo proposed the 'noose . theory, prescribing not . exercise hegemony, Mao Zedongs said .
 This is not only a matter of diplomatic ethic and strategic tradition, but is also -more importantly - a strategic conclusion drawn by China’s community of strategists on the basis of a comprehensive analyses of the national interests . This is also a strategic decision drawn by the Chinese community of
 China's belief is built on a profound strategic cultural foundation and the foundation, for realizing national interests, which permeate China's diplomacy . Therefore, this belief is . built on . a profound cultural foundation, says China's ambassador .
 China has benefited a lot from “blending itself with’s the current international system. China has also benefited from ‘blend itself’ with the current system. The country has benefited from the international system .
 This however, does not mean that China is completely complacent with the current international order . China is not complacent about the international order, however, according to the UN .
 China also proposes to gradually reforming what it views as unreasonable points of the international order . Therefore, while China actively “blends with” the world, China also plans to gradually reform some of the world’s most important issues .
 China refuses to “follow suit” without careful thinking . China is cooperating with the U.S. and the West in general, but not following suit .
 China struggles against hegemony in an appropriate manner and on a justifiable, beneficial and restrictive basis . China also struggles to resist hegemony in a manner that is justifiable and beneficial .
 China desires to realize its rise through strengthening international stability and actively accelerating the gradual and reasonable reform of the international order while ""blending with"" the world . To sum up, in terms of the rise of China, it wants to realize . its rise .
 China desires to realize world peace through maintaining world peace, and by maintaining cooperative relations with the dominating country, i.e. the United States. Second, China desires this through maintaining the world peace .
 China will persist with a reasonable struggle against the U.S. and the West's hegemonic policies in a bid to curb their hegemony . China will also persist with the fight against the United States and Western policies, he said .
 Third, China will rise through persisting in refusing to exercise and plan hegemony . China's rise will be through refusing to engage in hegemony, China says .
 China will adhere to its principles of justice, maintain international equality and justice . China will step up parallel prosperity and development, and regard this as the fundamental approach for realizing fundamental national interests .
 These points are the concept of a ‘harmonious world,” as advocated by China . China is pushing for a "harmoniously world" in the world .
 This “harmonious world” and the steps China wants to take to create it are crafted along Chinese ideals . This is not the same as justice; justice does not mean the same thing as justice . The steps China has taken to create a world of harmony are crafted in
 China has confidence in its ability to menace U.S. aircraft carriers . Chinese carriers would likewise be vulnerable in a fleet engagement, strategists say .
 Beijing likely has other purposes in mind for the flattops, including using them to avoid US counterattacks . The flattops are likely to be used in China's military exercises .
 Beijing asserts jurisdiction over virtually the entire South China Sea . While this sounds harmless enough, it is not the first time Beijing has asserted jurisdiction over the area .
 Putting steel behind maritime territorial claims disputed by fellow Asian states only makes sense from China’s standpoint . China's territorial claims are disputed by other Asian states .
 Aircraft carriers would serve to put an exclamation point on Beijing’s claims vis-a-vis rival claimants like Vietnam and the Philippines . Aircraft carriers from the PLAN's new base on 56 Hainan would serve as a symbol of China's sovereignty .
 Economic logic is refocusing Beijing’s strategic gaze on waters even farther afield than Southeast Asia . Second, economic logic is . refocusing China's strategic gaze . on waters beyond Southeast Asia.
 China's current leadership has staked its legitimacy on improving the nation’s standard of living . That means securing reliable seaborne shipments of oil, gas and other raw materials . China's leadership is staking its legitimacy .
 A carrier fleet would give Beijing some control over the sea lanes that crisscross the Indian Ocean . Beijing wants to control the sea routes that bring vital resources to Chinese users .
 China is the only permanent member of the UN Security Council without carriers in its naval inventory . Reversing China's "century of humiliation" at the hands of Western sea powers is a top priority for Beijing .
 India has one carrier with plans for more, and even the Royal Thai Navy sports one34 .
 China believes it can rebrand itself as a great seafaring nation by procuring carriers . China wants to be seen as having a strong presence in the world's oceans .
 The embryo of the design for China to build aircraft carriers by itself was gradually formed . As time has passed by, the embryo of China's design for the aircraft carriers has been formed .
 Proportionally it will be close to Russia's Ulyanovsk aircraft carrier, but a little smaller than the USS Kitty Hawk . The USS Liberty will be a little bigger than Russia's aircraft carrier .
 Its appearance will be similar to the USS Kitty Hawk, while its internal structure will be based on the ""Ulyanovsk"" aircraft carrier35 .
 China’s borders cover vast distances and cross some of the most inhospitable terrain on earth, such as the Himalayas, to rocky island chains dotting the South China Sea . China's borders cross vast distances, including the Himalayan mountains and the South Sea .
 Due to the history China had with colonial powers carving up swathes of Chinese territory as their own, their leadership has a highly defensive attitude towards defending what they view as Chinese sovereign territory .
 China is willing to negotiate with the nations in these disputes, but they are unlikely to agree to any deal that may be seen as backing down by the populace .
 Taiwan is considered a renegade province by mainland China . The island is considered to be a major source of tension between China and Taiwan .
 If the Chinese leadership were to allow them to declare formal independence then they would be viewed as weak and caving in to foreign pressures . The Chinese leadership would be seen as weak if they allowed them to announce formal independence .
 The need for China to keep face domestically could result in possible entanglements with the U.S. China's need for domestic stability could lead to entanglement with the United States . The need to keep a face domestically may result in a possible entangle between China and the United
 If nations that have a territorial claim against China and are defense partners with the United States, such as the Philippines, Taiwan, and Japan, and attempted to force China to accept their claims, escalation could occur quickly .
 The Philippine government has watered down its claims to the disputed Spratly Islands in the face of diplomatic pressure from China . China also claims the islands .
 Lawmakers from both chambers of the Philippine Congress agreed to adopt legislation which does not describe the islands as lying within the so-called archipelagic baseline of Philippine territory .
 The definition does not represent the abandonment of Philippine claims to the islands, it is a substantial retreat from a controversial description of the Spratlys approved by the Philippine House of Representatives . Beijing had been quick to respond to the description, which prompted a swift response from Beijing .
 The “Kalayaan Island Group” which comprise 53 of the Spratly Islands and the Scarborough Shoal, were both within the Philippines archipelago . The definition was contained in the so-called “baseline bill” defining Philippine territory .
 China refers to Scarborough Shoal as the Huangyan Islands, and the Spratlys as the Nansha Islands . The islands are located in the South Atlantic Ocean .
 The baseline bill has long been a sore point of relations between Manila and Beijing . It has been a thorn in the relationship between the Philippines and China .
 In December 2007, the Philippine House foreign relations committee initially approved inclusion of the Spratlys within the Philippine baseline . The Spratly Islands were initially approved by the House of Representatives .
 Congress shelved the baseline bill for two years . The tone of the response prompted Congress to shelve the bill . Congress also shelved a baseline bill in 2010 .
 Congressman Roilo Golez, who attended Monday's bicameral committee meeting, said lawmakers respected China's stand . Golez: "We respect China's stance. We respect it"
 Senator Enrile insisted that the new text did not undermine the Philippines’ claim to the Spratlys . The new text is now destined for approval by both houses of Congress .
 The text would state explicitly that the islands were considered part of the Philippine province of Palawan .
 It would reiterate the nation’s historical claim to Scarborough Shoal, traditionally known as Bajo de Masinloc . It would also reiterate its historical claim . It is traditionally known to have been known to be the site of the Shoal .
 The baseline bill has been prompted by a May 13 deadline under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, requiring Manila to define the basis for its claim to territory on the extended continental shelf . The new impetus for enacting the baseline bill comes from a U.N. Convention
 Vietnam, China, Taiwan, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Brunei each claim all or part of the low-lying islands . The islands are believed to be rich in oil, gas and fishery resources . They are also rich in fishing and fishing .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement Wednesday reiterating China’s historical claim to islands and reefs in the South China Sea .
 The two chambers of the Philippine legislature -the Senate and House of Representatives -passed bills to annex some isles and reefs of the Spratly Islands (better known as Nansha in Chinese) and Macclesfield Bank Islands (known locally as Jhongsha)
 MOFA stated that Taiwan’s sovereignty claim is beyond doubt and challenge, stressing that all four groups of islands in the South China Sea -Nansha, Jhongsha, Dongsha Islands and Sisha Islands -and their surrounding waters are Taiwan's territories from a historical
 Negotiating teams from Vietnam and China recently announced a final agreement for demarcating the two countries’ long-contested 1,350-kilometer land border . The two countries have long been at odds over the territory of China .
 The deal seems to have resolved one simmering dispute between the nations . It has deepened rifts between the Vietnamese communist leadership and some in its military over how best to deal with their larger neighbor .
 The dilemma for Vietnam's communists is how to preserve the party’s control, but not cede the country's sovereignty . Vietnam's communist government is trying to keep control of the country from losing sovereignty . The country has been ruled by the Communist Party since 1968 .
 Hanoi consistently tries to appease its northern patron, but China seldom makes it easy . To maintain Beijing's ideological support, Hanois tries to maintain its ideological support . China rarely makes an easy choice for Vietnam .
 There are currently four other major territorial disputes between Vietnam and China . The disputes will affect Vietnam's domestic politics in the years ahead .
 The Gulf of Tonkin was formally demarcated in a 2000 treaty, but an official map still has not been published . An official map of the region has yet to be published .
 There have been numerous incidents in recent years of Chinese naval vessels firing on Vietnamese fishing boats in the maritime area . The incidents have led to a serious loss of life .
 Vietnamese fishermen ventured into waters which had sustained them for generations . Vietnamese government must have either conceded the fishing grounds or the Chinese navy invaded Vietnam's exclusive economic zone .
 The sinking of Vietnamese 60 fishing boats by Chinese warships has gone largely unreported in the official Vietnamese media but has been widely discussed on private blogs . Whatever the reason, the sinking of the 60 boats is largely unported .
 Second are the Paracel Islands which China seized from Vietnam on January 19, 1974 . China seized the islands from Vietnam in 1974 . The islands are located in the Philippines, Taiwan and Vietnam .
 The Hanoi government still claims these islands, but intentionally keeps most of the population in the dark as to who really occupies them . The islands are located in Vietnam, but the government still keeps them secret .
 The Paracel Islands had been held by South Vietnam during the war . North Vietnam implicitly supported the invasion of the archipelago by its communist China allies .
 Third are the Spratly Islands, claimed in full by Vietnam, China and Taiwan, and in part by other Southeast Asian countries . The islands are claimed in the South Atlantic Ocean by Vietnam and China .
 China formally annexed the Spratlys and the Paracels in 2007 . In late 2007, China went a step further in formally annexing the region . The Spratly Islands are the largest and most uninhabited islands in the world .
 Hanoi government publicly protested China's move, but cracked down on students and bloggers . Students and bloggers who demonstrated against China were also cracked down .
 Fourth is the Nam Con Son basin, an oil and gas-rich area off the coast of southern Vietnam . The area is well within the country’s legal exclusive economic zone .
 China pressured ExxonMobil to withdraw from an energy concession in the area granted by Vietnam40.40. Last year, China pressured the company to withdraw .
 The Pratas archipelago which lies near Taiwan and China is claimed primarily by the two sides . Beijing has not specifically challenged Taipei's ownership of the island chain . Unlike the strategically located Spratly Islands, which are contested by six claimants, the islands are claimed by six
 The mainland has sought to cooperate with Taiwan in the South China Sea because it does not want Taipei to become ‘one of the multilateral parties” competing for claims to disputed islands, a top Taiwanese research institute says .
 In 2003, government-run oil refineries of both sides even formed a company to jointly conduct oil and natural gas exploration in waters near Pratas .
 A recent cross-strait agreement to resume oil exploration in the Taiwan Strait could possibly include waters near Pratas, say analysts .
 Taiwan began stationing marine fighters on the islet in 1956 because of its strategic importance . Taiwan's claim to Pratas was not vigorously contested, but it began in 1956 .
 Archipelago straddles an important sea route at the north of the South China Sea linking the Pacific and Indian oceans . The archipelago is located in the region of China and Taiwan .
 Others argue that modern military technology has rendered the islet indefensible by Taiwan . Others say modern technology had rendered it indefensible .
 The Chinese military reportedly simulated an invasion of Pratas which is 260km from the Chinese city of Shantou as part of an all-out offensive against Taiwan . The move was reportedly part of a military simulation of an invasion .
 Large reserve of gas and oil was discovered in the East China Sea in 1968 . Sino-Japanese dispute over it intensified after it was discovered .
 Both countries rely heavily on imported energy products . Neither country would easily drop its claim .
 The disagreement is so severe that it could endanger bilateral ties if not dealt with properly . The disagreement was so severe it could end bilateral ties with the US .
 The authorities from China and Japan have realized it is now time to settle the problem with mutual efforts for the disputes . The disputes might escalate and result in a historic retrogression in their ties, and such a possibility would not be welcomed .
 Geneva Convention of Continental Shelf signed in 1958 and 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea signed in 1982 . Geneva Convention is referred to when neighboring countries divide marine area . International laws to be referred to are signed by Geneva Convention .
 The continental shelf of a coastal state comprises the seabed and subsoil of the submarine areas that extend beyond its territorial sea . The second convention, to which China and Japan are signatories, stipulates that the continental shelf .
 China has always held that the Okinawa Oceanic Trough, 2,700 62 meters deep, should be regarded as the point that divides the continental shelf with Japan . It extends from the Chinese continental shelf because it extends from China's continental shelf .
 Japan claims the East China Sea should be demarcated along a “median line” with equal distance to the territories of the two countries . Meanwhile, Japan claims that the East . China claims it is not a matter of sovereignty, but it is an issue of sovereignty .
 There are international precedents for the claims for both countries . Neither of them would compromise their rights over the marine territory .
 Many conflicts have risen from the dispute and become a bitter part in the bilateral ties . The dispute has led to many conflicts between the two countries .
 From 2004 to 2007, China and Japan held 11 rounds of negotiations, trying to settle the territory dispute . From 2004 until 2007, the two countries have held talks on the disputed territory .
 Japanese Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda reached a four-point agreement with Primer Wen Jiabao on the East China Sea issue in 2007 . Fukuda's visit to China in late 2007, he reached an agreement on the issue . The agreement was reached during his visit to Beijing in
 President Hu Jintao visited Japan in May for a ‘warm spring’ trip . Significant progress was made, enough to settle the dispute over the East China Sea .
 The latest consensus on the joint exploration of the gas field is a sign of substantial progress, which has been applauded by both sides . Both sides are pleased with the development of the oil and gas field .
 The core of this consensus is that the two countries should put the territory dispute aside and cooperate for tapping the rich oil and gas reserve in the East China Sea . The two countries have agreed to put the territorial dispute aside .
 The two sides have decided to choose an area of 2,600 square kilometers that is acceptable to both . Joint investment and exploration of the gas reserve will be carried out before a demarcation plan is agreed on by the two governments .
 This is an economic cooperation having nothing to do with sovereignty, and the legal positions of both are not affected . In other words, this is a legal cooperation not affecting sovereignty . This is not the same thing as the sovereignty of the United States .
 It is an initiative proposed by China, that the sovereignty dispute should be put aside to facilitate the cooperation in exploring and sharing the resources .
 Chinese Ambassador Sun Yuxi reiterated his country’s claim to the strategically important state . He said the border dispute with India was complicated and would take time to resolve . Sun said the dispute would take a long time .
 China cites the Tawang Monastery, one of the last vestiges of Mahayana Buddhism, as evidence that it once belonged to Tibet . India says it should hand it back to help settle the row . China says the district of Arunachal Pradesh in Arun
 New Delhi disputes Beijing's rule over 38,000 sq km of barren, icy and uninhabited land on the Tibetan plateau . China seized from India in the 1962 war in Tibet .
 China, for its part, claims 90,000 sq km of territory in Arunachal Pradesh . China also claims the territory in the state .
 The neighbors have held several rounds of talks since 1981 to resolve the dispute . So far, they have failed to make progress .
 They agreed on an 11-point roadmap to settle the border row in light of booming bilateral trade and growing ties . They did agree on a plan to resolve the border dispute .
 The proposal was seen as an attempt to accept the status quo and hammer out a swap whereby China would give up claims in the east in return for India's recognition of Chinese sovereignty in the strategic Aksai Chin area in the west .
 Beijing’s demand for Tawang -and India's refusal to part with any populated territories - has created a stumbling block . Both sides seemed amenable to such a deal, but both sides seem amenable .
 China’s nuclear and strategic decision making during crisis will be determined by a number of internal and external factors . The author concludes that the country's nuclear decision making will be affected by internal or external factors during crisis . The authors conclude that China's decision making in crisis will depend on
 The internal factors will revolve around their president, since he will have the deciding power in the use of nuclear weapons . The president’s closest advisors, and the opinion of the Chinese people, will also be key factors .
 The strength of the relationship between himself and his pro-military action advisors will likely be weighted against the strength of his relationship with his non-military advisors .
 The influence wielded by these groups is determined prior to the conflict and is separate from the group’s stance about the crisis . The influence of these groups can be determined before the conflict, experts say .
 The opinion of the Chinese people is a deciding factor during a crisis that the president must take into account . While the Chinese government is nondemocratic, the opinion is a crucial factor in a crisis . The president must also consider the opinions of the people in the decision .
 The Chinese media is under state control which provides them the ability to make their case to the people more strongly than a democratic nation could . The Chinese government is under control of the media .
 This benefit can become a handicap if the momentum of public opinion continues beyond the desired point, which would hamper the Chinese government’s ability to negotiate for a peaceful resolution while maintaining national stability .
 The external factors that would affect Chinese decision making during a crisis would be generated by China’s interaction with other nations . China's interaction with the world would be key to its decision-making, according to the expert .
 The type of nation, the amount of Chinese interest invested in the nation, if relations are based on an economic or defensive basis or both, if territory is at stake, are all external factors . China's interest in a nation is based on the type of country, amount of interest invested
 Type of nation refers to its military strength, economic strength, political power in the global community and proximity to China . The type of nation is based on military strength and economic strength . It is also considered a nation's proximity to the world's most powerful neighbor .
 China is more likely to use strong-arm tactics against smaller neighbors such as Vietnam than it would more distant stronger nations such as the U.S. China has been accused of using strong-armed tactics against its neighbors .
 The relations between the nations involved in the crisis with China will have an influence, says CNN's John Defterios . China's relationship with the U.S. has been strained in recent years .
 The response China would have to the United States if it were to take action against Venezuela which supplies oil to China would likely be stronger than if the U.S. took action against Cuba which does not provide vital resources . The response would be stronger if Cuba were not provided vital resources,
 China seeks to portray themselves as wanting to act in harmony with the global community . The global community is of definite interest to China as they seek to be seen as wanting it to be in harmony .
 Nations that are not strong in the international community such as Taiwan are more likely to be bullied by China than stronger powers such as India . China would be less likely to bully Taiwan because there would be potentially less outrage if it were stronger powers .
 Nations that neighbor China are much more likely to be in a crisis with China because of a territorial dispute . China is a land and costal power, China can leverage the full force of its military against them . China can use its military to leverage its full force against neighbors .
 Taiwan, the Philippines, and Japan are all ways that the U.S. could become embroiled in a local dispute . The United States could be embroiled in local disputes .
 Understanding how to deescalate a crisis with China is as important as understanding the factors that influence influence . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in China since 2008 .
 The respect the Kennedy administration afforded the Soviets in acknowledging their threats and demands should be afforded to the Chinese . The respect should also be given to the Soviets, the author says .
 The ability for both sides to walk away as the winner will be integral for success . The ability to both sides walk away from each other will be vital for success in the game .
 A situation where the U.S. flaunts it dominance and prevents the Chinese from being allowed an honorable way to back down from the crisis will likely result in escalation . The United States flaunts its dominance and not allowing the Chinese a way of back down .
 Despite the similarities between the Soviet and Chinese governments it is unlikely that the red line will be determined until a situation arises that tests it . The red line is the point in which the threat of nuclear war is realized .
 National leaders should not, and most likely will not, base their decisions solely on past enemy actions also known as planning for the last war . National leaders shouldn't base decisions on past enemies' actions .
 Kennedy based his decisions not on the Berlin crisis or the Bay of Pigs, but on the information available to him . Kennedy made his decisions based on the available information, not the crisis .
 This is an over simplification which distorts the real decision making process . This is the over-simulation of the decision-making process. This is not the only way to get around the world's most important decision makers .
 Strategic decisions are made by National Command Authorities, which are made up of individuals . The decision is made by a National Command Authority, made by individuals, rather than individuals .
 These individuals are working in the interest of their nation, but typically have lesser allegiances to their organizations, departments, and or or bureaus, within their government .
 Since it is widely accepted no two people are exactly alike, no two groups should be predisposed to think alike . The group inherits the dynamics of the individuals, making it fundamentally impossible to predict with great certainty that one group’s decision based on the past decision of a
 The more detailed the comparison of the people and their profiles and roles within the governments, the better the resulting prediction might be. The most detailed comparison of people and profiles will help predict the outcome .
 China is advancing on the world stage with a grand strategy entirely different from the Soviets . China's grand strategy is different from that of the Soviet Union's .
 They operate under the current world system, but with slight variations on the rules, they say . They do not advocate the remaking of the world under communist rule .
 China desires respect and status from other nations, that it believes is inherent with being a great power of the world, but they do not recognize what the U.S. sees as the responsibilities of that status . The United States does not recognize that .
 China gives military and economic aid to those nations it has friendly relations with . However, unlike the United States, they usually attach conditions on the aid .
 The United States uses conditions in order to get countries to conform to American ideals concerning human rights, democratic reform, or policy concerning drugs or terrorism . The U.S. uses conditions such as human rights and democratic reform to get them to conform .
 The Chinese likely view this as interference in a nation’s internal affairs and being a very private nation themselves . They would consider it insulting if they were offered aid with such strings attached .
 The Chinese have had tremendous levels of sustained economic growth until the recent global economic recession . China has had a long history of rapid economic growth, but the economy has been hit hard by recession .
 This economic growth has been used to fuel the modernization of their military forces . The country's economic growth is fueling its military modernization efforts .
 With the announcement of their plans to construct aircraft carriers in the near future, parallels may be drawn to the rise of Germany at the start of the century and their construction of dreadnought battleships .
 Chinese carriers will give them the ability to defend their claims over undersea resources and island chains . The move will allow them to claim undersea territory and island chain .
 Carriers will also give the Chinese the ability to ‘show the flag” or project their presence to other nations in whole new ways . Carriers are also giving the Chinese an opportunity to “project their presence”
 The sending of naval forces off the coast of Somalia is a definitive first step towards this goal . The U.S. is sending naval forces to the Somali coast to help the country .
 Instead of the creation of colonies it will be alliances and trade agreements for access to natural resources and energy . Instead of creating colonies, alliances will be trade agreements over resources .
 Without aircraft carriers, it would be difficult for China to demonstrate its hard power to defend or enforce its agreements . China would not be able to enforce agreements with U.S. without aircraft carriers .
 It’s a widespread belief that China will equal or surpass the United States in the future . The Chinese leadership is looking to ensure their place in the sun .
 The importance of Confucian values in government and the Chinese people as a whole may be in question . China's government may not be able to afford to rely on Confucan values in its government .
 Confucian values were developed in a time where large families worked together under the firm control of a paternal authority figure . Confucan values developed in the time when large families were united under the authority of a father figure .
 With the one child policy, that child has become the focus of the family, or little emperors as they are called . The one-child policy has been in place for more than a decade .
 How this might impact the reverence of elders and the respect of the authority has yet to be determined . How this may affect the reverence and respect of elders is still unknown .
 Using the governmental politics model, or a simplification of it, it may be possible to model the bureaucracy of the higher levels of the Chinese government .
 If adequate background knowledge can be acquired on individuals in positions of authority, it may be possible to create a vital information sheet . It can be used to determine how they will interact .
 The governmental politics model refers to these individuals as Players and their interactions the Game . The government's political system refers to those who interact with them as Players .
 The vital information sheet can be seen as a child’s sports Trading Card . It uses simplified information to tell which Players form which teams and their relative strength . The information sheet is seen as child's sports Trading Cards .
 Operations, Training, Doctrine, Command, Control, and Campaign Planning Planning . Operations and Doctrine, Doctrine and Control, Command and Control . Campaign Planning .
 Prc Scholars Analyze Foreign Relations as World's Second Largest Economy . World's second largest economy is the U.S. and second largest in the world .
 Taipei Sets up Marine Park on Island Chain Also Claimed by Beijing . Atoll May Flower under Better Cross-Strait Ties under better cross-strait ties .