 Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba in order to prevent Russian ships from bringing additional missiles and construction materials to the island . Kennedy also demanded that Russian Premier Nikita S Khrushchev remove all the missile bases and their deadly contents .
 Premier Khrushchev authorized his Soviet field commanders in Cuba to launch their tactical nuclear weapons if invaded by U.S. forces .
 Khrushchev stared down for seven days until he blinked . The two leaders of the world's greatest nuclear superpowers stared each other down for 7 days . The standoff was the first time the two leaders faced each other in seven days .
 On October 28, thinking better of prolonging his challenge to the United States, the Russian Premier conceded to President Kennedy's demands by ordering all Soviet supply ships away from Cuban waters and agreeing to remove missiles from Cuba .
 The Cuban missile crisis was known as the 'Cuban missile crisis' After several days of teetering on the brink of nuclear holocaust, the world breathed a sigh of relief . The events of October 22 and 28 unfolded at a blinding pace .
 In June 1961, Kennedy attended a summit with Premier Khrushchev in Vienna to discuss cold war confrontations between the east and west, in particular the situation in Berlin . Kennedy attended the summit in Vienna, Vienna, while still in the early months of his presidency .
 The failure of the two leaders to resolve any of their differences during the summit led Khrushchev to view Kennedy as a weak president who lacked the power or support to negotiate any meaningful concessions in the arms race .
 The showdown in Cuba may indeed have been the result of such accumulating anxiety among the Soviet political elite . Fidel Castro struggled to survive America's efforts to ""encourage"" his political demise .
 When General Castro came to power, the United States stopped buying Cuban sugar and refused to supply its former trading partner with much needed oil . The U.S. stopped buying sugar and stopped buying oil from Cuba .
 Castro observed as U.S. armed forces staged a mock invasion of a Caribbean island in 1962 . After weathering the failed Bay of Pigs invasion by CIA-backed Cuban exiles in 1961, Castro watched as the United States staged the mock invasion .
 The purpose of the invasion was to overthrow a leader whose name, Ortsac, was Castro spelled backwards . The name of the leader was Castro, spelled backwards, in Cuba .
 Castro soon became convinced that the United States was serious about invading Cuba . Although Ortsac was a fictitious name, Castro ""got the message"" and became convinced .
 Khrushchev eagerly extended an offer of assistance to the desperate Cuban general . Sensing an opportunity to gain a strategic foothold in America's ""back yard,"" Khrushche offered to help .
 The Soviet Premier offered Castro new trade opportunities, to ease the effects of U.S. sanctions, and a promise of protection from United States hostilities . The Soviet premier also promised him protection from the United States .
 We are releasing four tapes in this series now . They include President Kennedy's personal recollections of discussions, conversations with his advisors, meetings with the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 The tapes are unedited and represent digital copies of the materials distributed by the Library . The tapes were unedited . They were unproduced by the library .
 U-2 reconnaissance aircraft reveals several SS-4 nuclear missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy meets with and advises Soviet Foreign Minister Andrie Gromyko that U.S. will not tolerate Soviet missiles .
 President Kennedy spends four minutes recording his personal recollections of discussions that day . October 18, 1962, President Kennedy recorded his recollections .
 opinions tended to move away from air strike to a blockade as the discussion evolved . He states that opinions tend to move toward a blockade rather than air strike .
 Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson and Defense Secretary Robert Lovett supported the air strike . McGeorge Bundy urged the U.S. to take no military action at all while waiting for a Soviet response .
 Kennedy affirms that there will be no declaration of war but rather a limited blockade for a limited purpose . Kennedy says there will not be a declaration war but a 'limited blockade'
 He concludes that he will go ahead with his political speeches to maintain cover until the weekend . He says he will not reveal his political plans until the end of the week .
 JFK meets with the secretary of defense, Robert McNamara, and the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . JFK leaves on a scheduled campaign trip to Ohio and Illinois . JFK was in the Air Force Reserve Force at the time .
 JFK discusses various military options with the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Joint Chiefs chairman General Maxwell Taylor states that the JCS was initially agreed on military action along with the blockade . JFK discusses military options and possible consequences .
 JFK concludes that an air strike would give the USSR ""a clear line"" to take Berlin . The USSR would take Berlin the way they took Hungary after the 1956 Suez invasion . JFK concluded that an attack would give them a clear line to take the capital .
 He states that our allies would think of us as ""trigger-happy Americans"" who lost Berlin because we did not have the guts to endure the situation in Cuba . He states .
 Air Force chief of staff General Curtis LeMay argues that the blockade and political talks without accompanying military action will lead to war . LeMay: The blockade and the political talks will not lead to military action .
 JFK cites the fact that nations automatically expel diplomats if their own diplomats are expelled . JFK concludes that if we take military action the USSR will have to as weIl. WeIl.
 Several members of the JCS argue for military action and express fears that the blockade alone is a weak response which could lead to nuclear blackmail . Some members of JCS believe that a blockade alone would be weak response to the situation .
 President Kennedy addresses the American public and announces his resolve to implement naval blockade only . Despite being urged by Senate leaders to call for air strikes, President Kennedy says he will only implement a naval blockade .
 The Organization of American States unanimously supports the U.S. decision to quarantine Cuba . By the end of the day, all naval vessels are in place .
 Stunning reconnaissance photos reveal that Soviet missiles are poised for launch . Soviet missiles were launched by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Robert Kennedy expresses irritation about failure of U.S. intelligence to discover missiles earlier . Kennedy expresses frustration at failure of United States intelligence to find missiles .
 Discussion of how to handle the press specific reporters to be briefed by specific ExComm members on a strictly off-the-record basis . Discussion also discussed how to deal with the press .
 McNamara indicates that a ship carrying offensive weapons will have to be stopped and perhaps disabled . McNamara: "A ship with offensive weapons must have to stop and maybe disabled"
 Kennedy states that the Soviets will likely turn around such ships on their own to avoid a confrontation . Kennedy says the Soviets are likely to turn around the ships to avoid an encounter .
 JFK argues that the only way the placement of the missiles could have been prevented would have been by invading Cuba six months or one, two or even three years ago . JFK: Only way to prevent missile placement would be to invade Cuba in advance of the missile placement .
 McNamara reviews plans for destroying any SAM site which shoots down a U-2 . JFK adds that when taking out the SAM site, the U.S. should simultaneously announce that if another plane is brought down all SAM sites would be destroyed .
 Bundy suggests that the president should delegate the authority to order an air strike against a SAM to the sec. of defense . Bundy: JFK decides not to issue the order when a U-2 is actually brought down by a missile from a SAM site four days later .
 JFK does not object but insists that there must be absolute verification that the plane was brought down by hostile military action and not as the result of an accident . JFK says there must also be verification of the plane's crash .
 Discussion of the need for hard photographic evidence to help convince the public especially, in Latin America, that the missiles are real . Discussion of a need for photographic evidence .
 Discussion of diplomatic efforts at the UN and the vote by the Organization of American States . Discussion about possible Soviet responses to the quarantine especially in Berlin . Discussion of possible Soviet response to quarantine . Discussion also about the quarantine of the Soviet Union .
 President told that at a minimum the Russians will inspect our truck convoys more closely . Mr. President told . that at least . at a . minimum the Russian will inspect . more closely, he said .
 JFK quickly concludes that ""we ought to accept that"" because ""I don `'t think we're in very good shape there"" to fight over whether they inspect our trucks . JFK: "I don’t think ... we’ll accept that" JFK: ""I
 JFK suggests dropping the words ""Sino-Soviet"" because it could ""hit them harder to name them in a way which may not be desirable" JFK says the purpose of quarantine is to stop the introduction of Sino-Russian offensive weapons into Cuba .
 The term ""Sino-Soviet powers"" does appear in the textJFK predicts a real fight including shooting in order to board and search a Soviet ship . No one questions the Cold War .
 Says we might have to shoot the rudder or even sink a ship- very dangerous and uncertain situation . Says it's very dangerous to shoot rudder, sink or shoot ship-very dangerous .
 Bundy says crews on these ships are small and a big fight unlikely . He suggests the Soviets might have hundreds of marines on board but Bundy says a fight is unlikely . Bundy: "A big fight on this ship is unlikely"
 JFK talks about stopping and disabling a ship, towing it to a U.S. port and finding it carried baby food . Laughter results when JFK says he stopped and disabled a ship and found it had a baby food in it .
 Soviet ships reach the quarantine line, but receive radio orders from Moscow to hold their positions . Soviet ships were ordered to stay in quarantine .
 JFK concludes that if we invade in the next ten days, the missile base crews in Cuba will likely fire at least some of the missiles at U.S. targets . Consideration of civil defense options and planning for possible Soviet responses in Berlin .
 He asks if we could evacuate civilian populations from cities a few days before the invasion . He asks whether we should evacuate civilian population from cities before invasion .
 Response is that cities actually provide the best protection against radiation . Response: Cities actually provide best protection for radiation .
 JFK and RFK talking alone before the next Excomm meeting about the strategic situation in Cuba and its political implications . General Lucius Clay has offered to return to Berlin where he had been the United States commander during the blockade .
 RFK advises that it would be a bad idea to focus attention on Berlin at this time . RFK: "It's a good idea to keep the focus on Berlin this time"
 JFK agrees and they decide to ask General Taylor to tell Clay to stand by over the next few days but not to go now . JFK agrees .
 Discussion of the president's decision to take action in response to the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Discussion of President George W. Bush's response to Soviet missile attacks .
 The brothers talk about the political side of the crisis and Khrushchev's apparent willingness to embarrass the president . RFK concludes that the president could not have done less and that his judgment has now been supported by our allies .
 JFK asks about the views of Soviet Embassy official Georgy Bolshakov, who had been used in the past in communications between JFK and Khrushchev . JFK asks for the view of the Soviet embassy official, who was used in communications with JFK . JFK: "It's a
 Bolshakov believes the ships will attempt to go through the quarantine and that ""this is a defensive base for the Russians" RFK reports that Bolshakakov believes that the ships may attempt to enter the quarantine .
 JFK derides Khrushchev's ""horseshit" about the elections, ""presumably referring to earlier assurances by the USSR that there would be no political complications before November . JFK derided Khrushchchev's earlier assurances that the elections would not be political complications . JFK
 Discussion of the need to disperse planes at Florida bases in the event of attacks by MIGs based in Cuba . Continued review of the impact of latest intelligence on thequarantine, world reaction, negotiations at the UN and possible developments on the high seas and in Berlin .
 JFK questions if a U.S. destroyer tries to board and search a ship and is then sunk by a Soviet submarine . JFK questions what will happen if a United States destroyer tried to search and find a ship .
 JFK recommends placing Russian-speaking personnel on all ships at the quarantine line . Bundy and McNamara say it is already being done . JFK recommends that it already is already done .
 General Maxwell Taylor reviews the latest intelligence which suggests that many Soviet ships are turning around . The latest intelligence suggests that the Soviet ships may be turning around.
 "We don’t want the word to go out from Moscow to turn around and then suddenly we sink their ship. We don `t want to . We don`t want word to . go out of Moscow to . turn around, then suddenly . suddenly, Russia sinks their
 Khrushchev's public request for a summit meeting to resolve the crisis . Senate minority leader Everett Dirksen mentioned the request in a discussion with Congress .
 JFK and Dirksen agree that a summit at this time would be entirely useless . JFK says a summit would be a waste of time . JFK: "It would be very difficult to have a summit with President Obama."
 A participant, probably Senator Bourke Hickenlooper, asserts that congressional leaders should refuse to answer any questions from the press on the meeting . A participant also asserts that Congress leaders should not answer questions .
 JFK replies that security from these meetings has thus far been awfully good . JFK says security has been so good so far so far . JFK adds that security has so far been very good .
 Senate majority leader Mike Mansfield expresses his concern about the "congenital habit of overstating the ease as well as the results of an air strike" Continuation of briefing for congressional leaders:
 "I don't think there is any such thing as one of these quick, easy and sanitary air strikes," says David Frum . He says air strikes are "quick and easy" and "sanitary"
 Urges careful analysis of Soviet intentions over the next few days before taking this critical step . Urges carefully analysis of the Soviet intentions .
 U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson confronts the Soviets at the U.N. but they refuse to answer . The Soviets refused to answer the question .
 The aircraft carrier Essex hails the Soviet tanker Bucharest and allows it to proceed to Cuba after being told that it was not carrying cargo covered by the quarantine . The ship was allowed to sail safely to Cuba .
 Review of the movement of ships toward the quarantine line and potential U.S. responses . Discussion of the arrival of Fidel Castro's list of baby food, plasma and medicines .
 JFK asks if there are any up-to-date intelligence reports on the status of Cuban morale and support for Castro . JFK also asks for any information on Cuban morale .
 McNamara reports that it was hailed, responded that it wasn't carrying prohibited items, and is being shadowed by United States destroyer . McNamara: "It was hailed. It was hailed"
 Recommends establishing a pattern of aerial surveillance which looks like an air attack so that surprise could be maintained as long as possible if an attack is ordered .
 JFK raises the question of the political ramifications of letting the Bucharest pass through the quarantine . JFK raised the question about the political implications of letting Bucharest go through the quarantine .
 Suggests that it might be worth giving the USSR "sufficient grace to get its instructions clear" or for the UN to reach an agreement . Suggests it might also be worth allowing the USSR to get their instructions clear .
 McNamara agrees with JFK's argument and states that the advantage is to avoid a shooting incident over a ship that is not carrying offensive weapons . McNamara says the advantage of avoiding a shooting is avoiding an attack on a ship .
 JFK asserts that the quarantine has already been successful since the USSR has already turned back fourteen ships presumably carrying offensive weapons . JFK says that the USSR is already turning back 14 ships with offensive weapons.
 JFK: "We've got to face up to the fact that we're going to have to grab a Russian ship. But, JFK adds, "we've got . to face . up to . the fact" that we will have to "grab a Russia ship"
 Bundy: "Nothing in your speech requires you to stop any ship, even if it is found to contain offensive cargo we deem unacceptable" Bundy then observes that nothing in his speech requires that any ship be stopped . Bundy then says: "Even if it contains offensive cargo, we deem it
 JFK says that we could lift the quarantine if the UN provides guarantees that no new offensive weapons would be introduced . JFK says the UN must guarantee that no offensive weapons will be introduced in Syria .
 "That would make us seem less negative than if we say we won't lift it under any circumstances," she says . "We would be less negative if we said we would lift it," she adds .
 Bundy and McNamara point out that the real issue is the removal of the existing missiles not the introduction of new ones . Bundy: Real issue is removing existing missiles, not replacing them . McNamara and Bundy say the missile removal issue is not new ones but removal of existing missiles .
 Plan being discussed at UN would put UN guarantees against new missiles into place as a substitute for quarantine for only 2-3 weeks while negotiations continue for a permanent solution involving complete removal . Rusk explains that the plan being discussed is a temporary substitute for the quarantine .
 McNamara wonders what we will do in the next 24 hours if there is no Soviet ship carrying offensive weapons which can be intercepted and construction of missile sites also continues . McNamara wondered what we would do if there were no ships with offensive weapons .
 He recommends spending the rest of the day planning escalation of the quarantine . The quarantine has been quarantined since Monday .
 McNamara recommends stopping the tanker Grozny instead . JFK agrees but notes that we will have to ""pick up some ship tomorrow"" and prove ""sooner or later that the blockade is reaL"" McNamara writes .
 Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon agrees with the ""logic"" of having a confrontation in Cuba rather than on the high seas .
 Policy Planning Council chair recommends adding POL to the embargo list and not having any confrontation for now . Walt Rostow, chair of the State Department Policy planning Council, recommends adding the embargo to the list .
 EX-COMM receives a letter from Khrushchev stating that the Soviets would remove their missiles if President Kennedy publicly guarantees the U.S. will not invade Cuba . CIA reports that the construction of the missile sites is continuing and accelerating .
 JFK asserts only invasion or trade for U.S. missiles will break the impasse . JFK asserts that only an invasion or a trade for United States missiles will end the crisis . JFK says only a trade deal or an invasion of missiles can end the standoff .
 He orders the State Department to make plans for the establishment of a civilian government in Cuba after an invasion . The State Department is supposed to make the plans after the invasion .
 Planning also proceeds for massive air strikes against military targets in Cuba . Planning for major air strikes on Cuban military targets .
 A new public letter from Khrushchev outlines a possible deal to end the crisis . The letter was signed by the then-Krushchev in 1956 .
 RFK meets secretly with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin and agrees removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey is negotiable as part of a comprehensive settlement . Castro urges a nuclear first strike against the United States in the event of a Cuban invasion of Cuba .
 Discussion of the quarantine, potential U.S. reactions on the high seas and the latest intelligence data as well as the possibility of invading Cuba and establishing a new civil government . Further discussion of the possible invasion of Cuba and establish a new government .
 Discussion of a post-invasion Cuban government and the advantages of using Cuban exiles in any invasion . Discussion of using exiles to prepare for invasion of Cuba .
 Bundy refers to 'post-Castro Cuba' and recommends using the Mongoose organization in planning a new civil government for Cuba . Bundy recommends using Mongoose to plan a new Cuban civil government .
 Bundy expresses concern about the need to accelerate civil defense measures without creating panic in the country . Bundy also expresses concern that the country is at risk of creating panic . Bundy: Civil defense measures must be accelerated in order to avoid creating panic among citizens .
 Carrying out invasion will mean consulting many more people in the government . Also notes that carrying out the invasion will be much more complicated and will also require answering many questions from the press .
 Douglas Dillon argues for air strike against missiles rather than a serious confrontation at sea . Douglas Dillon again argues for an air strike on missiles .
 Says the former is directly related to Cuba and the missiles and the latter can take on a life of its own with grave international repercussions . Says the Cuban missile attack on Cuba is a direct link to Cuba .
 Talks would then continue to dismantle and remove the missiles along with a guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba . The missiles would be kept inoperable rather than actually dismantled during these few days .
 The other side may ask the U.S. to dismantle missile sites in Turkey and Italy as part of a settlement, he says .
 RFK, speaking for the president, would propose to the Soviet ambassador late on 10/27 and Khrushchev would accept early on 10-28 . These proposals are essentially identical to the agreement which RFK would propose . RFK's proposal is identical to that of the late Kh
 The understanding concerning the removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey would remain secret for several decades . However, the understanding was not included in the public announcement on 10/28 . The understanding was kept secret for decades .
 CIA director John McCone dissents vigorously saying we should not drop the quarantine until these weapons, ""pointed at our hearts,"" are removed . CIA director McCone says we should drop quarantine until weapons are removed from the U.S.
 Kennedy then clarifies his position, stating that he is not, like Stevenson, advocating lifting the quarantine . Kennedy: "I don't see any other way you're going to get the weapons out"
 JFK asks if anyone has seen the London Times which claims that the U.S. has misidentified ground to air missiles as ICBMs . JFK also discusses the Sino/Indian war between JFK and the Indian ambassador to the US . JFK and McCone discuss the latest pictures of
 McCone expresses concern that missiles could be pointing at us by tomorrow morning . McCone expressed concern that they could have missiles pointing at them by tomorrow . He said they could be in range of missiles .
 JFK states that if we invade, by the time we reach these sites, we may face a very bloody fight . JFK says that if the sites were fired at, they might be fired at us . JFK: If we invade they might fire at us in a 'very bloody fight'
 He expresses doubts that we can get them out by diplomacy . He raises the issue of whether they will be fired at us if we begin air strikes and/or an invasion .
 While one U-2 spy plane accidentally flies into Russia, another is shot down over Cuba . U.2 plane accidentally flew into Russia and was shot down in Cuba .
 Khrushchev expresses willingness to remove missiles from Cuba under UN supervision in return for U.S. commitment to dismantle its missiles in Turkey . U.K. would remove the missiles under the UN supervision . Khrush' message arrives from Khrush .
 A U-2 plane is shot down over Cuba by a Soviet surface-to-air missile and the pilot is killed . The pilot was killed in Cuba .
 JFK and Dean Rusk prepare a contingency plan in the event that the USSR rejects the terms negotiated by RFK and Dobrynin . The plan was made without the knowledge of the Excomm . JFK and Rusk prepared the plan for the Soviet Union .
 Discussion of maintaining aerial surveillance during the day and at night ""keeping the heat on,"" since they are working 24 hours a day on the sites . Discussion of keeping aerial surveillance of the sites during the night .
 JFK says Khrushchev has offered to trade missiles in Cuba for U.S. missiles in Turkey . JFK: "We are going to be in an insupportable position if this becomes his proposal"
 "Last year we tried to get the missiles out of there because they were not militarily useful number 1. In the first place, last year we attempted to get them out of the country," he said . "In the first time, last . year we . tried to remove them
 Discussion of whether the Soviets are moving on two different tracks the public track offer of a straight trade and the private track offer which includes a demand for a U.S. guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba . The public track offers include a United States guarantee of Cuba's territorial integrity .
 JFK repeats that ""you're going to find a lot of people thinking this is a rather reasonable position" JFK says: "you're . going to be surprised by how many people think this is rather reasonable"
 JFK insists we must talk to the Turks to be sure that they don't issue a statement which is totally unacceptable . JFK insists that we must make sure that the Turks don't release a statement that is unacceptable .
 President Obama must make sure they understand the peril they are in after we take action in Cuba . Also must ensure they understand that they are also in danger after they take action .
 Kennedy expresses concern that we will have real problems in England and the continent because Khrushchev's proposal seems so reasonable . If we act in Cuba and the USSR responds in Berlin, many people will justify the Soviet move ""on the grounds that we were wholly unreasonable", Kennedy writes .
 General Taylor reports that the JCS wants an air strike no later than Monday morning unless there is irrefutable evidence that missiles are being dismantled .
 McNamara recommends more surveillance flights Monday morning with proper cover . McNamara: More surveillance flights should take place Monday morning .
 "Every time I tried to put a monkey on somebody's else's back, I got one," he says . "I got one. Every time I try to put it on somebody else's backs," he adds .
 Khrushchev is saying, "I'm going to dismantle the foreign policy of the U.S. for the last 15 years in order to let you get these missiles out of Cuba," he says . "I've got to see what's going to happen," he adds .
 Kennedy reiterates the McNamara proposal tell the Turks that they would be safer if the U.S. missiles were eliminated before an attack on Cuba and replaced by Polaris missiles .
 The meeting resumes later in the evening with further discussion of surveillance flights over Cuba . The meeting is expected to resume later in evening .
 CIA concludes that Soviet technicians have completed the work necessary to make all MRBM sites fully operational . The crisis is over, the CIA says .
 Radio Moscow announces that the Soviet Union has accepted the proposed solution and releases the text of a Khrushchev letter confirming the details . Radio Moscow: The Soviet Union accepts the proposal .
 JFK suspends U-2 air surveillance over Cuba and orders that no military action be taken against ships approaching the quarantine line . No military action is planned against any ships approaching quarantine line, JFK says . JFK also suspends surveillance of U.2 over Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs warn of possible Soviet deception and urge president to reconsider air strikes against missile sites . Several members of the Joint Chiefs urge President Obama to reconsider strikes . President Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House .
 JFK orders U.S. ships to remain on the quarantine line and authorizes continuation of low-level reconnaissance flights . JFK orders United States ships to stay on quarantine line .
 Soviet deputy premier Vasily Kuznetsov meets with U. Thant to work out details for removal of missiles from Cuba . Soviet deputy prime minister meets with Thant for talks on removing missiles .
 U.S. has classified IL-28 nuclear bombers as 'offensive weapons' until Soviets remove them . JFK cites Khrushchev's October 28th letter agreeing to remove the bombers . The quarantine cannot be lifted .
 Rusk argues for continuing surveillance today while waiting for developments in the discussions with Kuznetsov at the UN before making any further decisions . Rusk says he will wait for developments to be made before deciding whether to continue surveillance .
 Discussion of making U.S. planes available to the UN for surveillance . United States planes available for surveillance to be used in surveillance .
 Some discussion of whether U-2 flights are technically capable of revealing any Soviet effort to hide some of the missiles in Cuba . Some of the U.2 flights may have been able to reveal any Soviet efforts to hide missiles .
 Kennedy insists that only aerial photography can prove whether missile sites are being dismantled . U. Thant's upcoming inspection trip to Cuba will be the first to inspect the missile sites .
 Kennedy notes that it is difficult to trust the Soviets since they apparently deceived their own ambassador to the U.S. about the missiles . Kennedy says it is hard to trust since the Soviets apparently lied to the United States about them .
 JFK expresses the hope that we can use this moment to initiate a ""decent deal in Berlin"" since it is our most ""paralyzing"" problem . JFK expresses his hope that this moment can be used to start a deal with Berlin . JFK hopes to use the moment to start
 JFK terminates the quarantine when Khrushchev agrees to withdraw Soviet IL-28 nuclear bombers from Cuba . JFK ends the quarantine after several weeks of tense negotiations at the UN at the end .
 Mobile tactical nuclear weapons and more than 40,000 Soviet troops were in place in Cuba for use in the event of an invasion .