 The energy to see and the energy to do. Call/SMS 03336042057 Latest Edition . Latest edition of the weekly Newsquiz .
 The U.S. requires the next generation of national security professionals to face a host of new issues, Dr. Novemher says .
 Daniel Morgan Graduate School educates and prepares Future leaders to develop actionable solutions to global and domestic security challenges . Steven Meyer Dean of Graduate Studies .
 It does not accept responsibiV^Jbr the views in any ariides. s^ed or unsigned, which appear in its pages .
 H accepts the re^Ptsibdi^ for ^ing them a chance to appear . What h does accept is the re-ptsi^ for . appearing .
 JOHN WATBRBURY HIAHIOQINS Interim Publisher ANIQUE HALLIOAY Senior ftoduct Manager JONATHAN CKUNQ Aasodate Director, Business Operations NORA R EV ENAU OH AssodaCe Director .
 Marketing Director and Sensor Manager. Marketing Director. MICHAEL PASUIT . Marketing Director .
 FareignAifain xeoiA emces TaLIPHONl M0-C29-S$}9 U S /Canada SU-T 1 CHS 60 S . All echo eouAtritt eMAiL. seTi^icet
 Despite having opposed the 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq, EMMA SKY headed to Iraq to work for the Coalition Provisional Authority . Once the invasion happened, she headed to the country to work with the coalition Provisional .
 Over the next decade, she became a key player in Western efforts at reconstruction efforts in Iraq . She was sent as the govemorate coordinator of the province of Kirkuk .
 lisa Monaco has worked on many aspects of the United States’ fight against terrorism . Monaco served as chief of staff to FBI, head of Justice Department’s National Security Division . Monaco also served as President Barack Obama's homeland security adviser .
 Monaco sets out how the U.S. can protect itself from the terrorist threat . Monaco: "Preventing the Next Attack’s"
 After fainting at the sight of blood during a biology class, he switched to the humanities . He fainted at the scene of blood in biology class .
 In 'When Stalin Faced Hitler’, Korkin tells the story of the fateful night leading up to the morning in 1941 . After years of mutual nona^ression, Germany finally attacked the Soviet Union .
 As a young scholar in the early 1980s, OLIVier ROY roamed Afghanistan with the mujahideen . He studied the relations between the Afghan resistance and fundamentalist Islamic movements .
 U.S. forces are waging several conflicts around the world these days . America has been involved in some of the world's most recent conflicts .
 As Washington obsesses over soap operas and scandals, the actual work of maintaining global order continues under the radar . Washington's job is to maintain global order, says Julian Zelizer .
 The U.S. government is trying to redress the balance of American intervention in the Middle East . The White House says the U.N. intervention is under serious scrutiny .
 We asked top experts on six key conflicts to sketch where things are, where they are going, and what the U.S. should do next .
 Kosh Sadat and Stan McChrystaJ explain why pursuing some form of the current U.S. strategy in Afghanistan continues to be the least bad option there .
 Emma Sky and Robert Ford bring their wealth of experience to bear on the post-i5is landscape in Iraq and Syria . Sky advises Washington to focus on local politics and institution building . Ford suggests curtailing most engagement beyond refugee assistance .
 U.S. and NATO allies should focus on preventing miscalculations and unintended escalation, Ivo Daaider says . Ivo says given Russia’s actions in Ukraine, Middle East, and elsewhere, the United States and its NATO allies must avoid miscalculation .
 Lisa Monaco and Susan Hennessey explore the more amorphous realms of terrorism and cyberwarfare . They argue that international cooperation, restored deterrence, and calibrated pushback can help contain these complex threats .
 The Trump administration has generally reacted to global events rather than driven them, engaging the world episodically and idiosyncratically . Inexperienced, understaffed, and lacking a coherent grand strat^y, the Trump administration lacks a coherent global strategy .
 Some issues, like the ones covered here, are simply too important to be pushed to a back burner or delegated to staff wearing uniforms . Some issues like this are too important for staff to push to back burner .
 Stan McChrystal and Ashfaq Parvez Kayani were having the kind of conversation senior military commanders are supposed to have . They were discussing the role of the NATO-led coalition’s efforts in Afghanistan and northwestern Pakistan .
 We’d spent hours alone, each laying out in detail a strategy for the conflict . ‘I’ve spent hours talking to each other about the conflict,’ says one of them .
 The Pakistani army’s headquarters in Rawalpindi was now familiar ground, and Kayani, a colleague with whom I spoke easily . While not quite my second home, the Pakistani army's headquarters is now a familiar ground .
 K08H SADAT is a former Lieutenant Colonel in the Afghan Special Operations Forces . He served as a Lieutenant Colonel for Special Forces in Afghanistan .
 From 2009 to 2011 he served as a Aide-de-camp to the Commander of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan . He was a commander of the Afghan National Army in 2009 .
 He first served In Afghanistan In 2002 as Chief of Staff of Combined Joint Task Force 1B0 . end from 2009 to 2010, he served as Commander of International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan .
 There was nothing revelatory in the general’s assessment, because like many others, 1 had already concluded that it was likely correct . Like many others in the U.S., 1 reluctantly concluded that .
 Back in 2010, nine years after the war had begun and eight since I had first started serving there, we felt pressed for time . It may seem laughable that back in 2010 that back to 2010, 9 years after it began and eight years after I had started serving .
 For most of the years, the coalition's efforts had been underresourced and poorly coordinated . But for most of those years, those efforts were under-resourced . The coalition’s efforts have been poorly coordinated and poorly managed .
 In December 2009, President Barack Obama had announced a commitment to begin reducing the United States’ role in Afghanistan in 18 months .
 U.S. will reinforce efforts to train, equip, and advise 350,000 Af ghan forces . President Obama has also decided to reinforce the United States effort so that it would comprise 150,000 United States forces .
 If ever the U.S. had a realistic shot of success in its post-9/11 involvement in Afghanistan, it was then . Now, the United States has a realistic chance of succeeding in Afghanistan .
 The U.S.-backed government in Kabul remains plagued by political infighting and corruption . The Afghan security forces cannot control significant parts of the country . The government is plagued by corruption and infighting .
 The Taliban have leveraged Kabul’s weaknesses to make gains in recent years . The Taliban are no longer idealistic young fighters that swept north in 1994 and are not particularly popular with the Afghan people .
 U.S. President Donald Trump has outlined a new strategy to deal with the world's economic woes . The new strategy has been outlined by the United States.
 That leaves something resembling the current approach as the only real option . That's not the best way to get around the world's biggest problem .
 Stuck with doing more of the same, Washington must try to do it better . Washington needs to try and do better. Washington must do better .
 The United Slates invaded Afghanistan in 2001 to destroy al Qaeda and overthrow the Taliban regime that was hosting it . The U.S. invaded Afghanistan to destroy the Taliban and overthrow it .
 The overarching goal was always to protect the United States by denying terrorists a safe haven in which to plan and train, but over time, the mission grew . The U.S. government's mission was to deny terrorists a . safe haven .
 Eventually, it came to include the establishment of the Afghan nation that defended its own sovereignty, embraced democracy, educated women, and cracked down on opium production .
 Initial operations appeared to work, but complexities on the ground, plus the distraction of the war in Iraq, sidetracked the effort . The Taliban’s presence expanded, and the Taliban's presence expanded .
 When Obama came into office, in 2009, he announced a surge of U.S. troops and a reinvigorated counterinsurgency strategy .
 By the tniddle of 2015, the troop suige was complete, and a subsequent drawdown left only 9,800 coalition troops in the country . Most of those were focused on training and advising the Afghans .
 The Taliban have de facto control over only limited areas of the country . Their influence is likely at its highest levels since the group lost power in 2001 . The Taliban are likely to be at their highest level since they lost power .
 Remnants of the al Qaeda network and one of its branches, al Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent, are also active . The Pakistani military pushed them out of Pakistan’s tribal areas in late 2014 by the military .
 Islamic State in Khorasan enjoys free rein on both sides of the two countries* border . The branch of is is in Afghanistan and Pakistan, known as the Islamic State .
 All have made common common cause with the Taliban to overthrow the Afghan government . Although each of these groups has its own transnational agenda, all have shared a common cause .
 The fragility of Afghanistan’s security sector is making their job easier . Afghanistan's fragility in security sector makes it easier for security forces to keep tabs on security .
 The 180,000 soldiers of the Afghan National Army are employed primarily at static checkpoints around the country . They are trained and equipped largely by the United States . The soldiers are employed at checkpoints that are vulnerable to Taliban attacks .
 The Afghan National Police, which is riddled with corruption and poor leadership, is used more for the protection of members of parliament and other officials than for its intended purpose of enforcing law and order .
 National Directorate of Security is increasingly involved in military operations against terrorist groups instead of providing essential intelligence . The agency has been involved in operations against terror groups .
 Afghanistan's legal system struggles to deal with corruption and criminality . Compounding the challenges, the Afghan legal system is riddled with criminality . The country's judicial system struggles with corruption, criminality .
 Afghan security forces often make cridcal mistakes, including detaining innocent civilians . Knowing little about the law and the rights of citizenship, Afghan forces often mistake innocent civilians, writes CNN.com .
 By contrast, Taliban fighters often have a thorough understanding of the law . The Haqqani network, an offshoot of the Taliban based in Pakistan, is a key ally in the Taliban .
 When captured, they have proved adept at minimizing their sentences or avoiding conviction altogether . When captured they have proven adept at avoiding conviction .
 Despite its name, the National Unity Government is deeply divided . The deal was brokered by the United States in 2014 that made Ashraf Ghani president and Abdullah Abdullah chief executive .
 Whatever progress the United States has made after 16 years, it is inaiguably incomplete . The United States is in a position in the world as the world's most powerful superpower .
 To some Americans, the effort has succeeded in building a shaky foundation on which more can and should be constructed . To others, the efforts have succeeded in helping to build the foundation on .
 For the ordinary Afghan, however, the U.S. campaign has led to frightening uncertainty about the future . For the Afghan people, the future is uncertain for the country .
 In 1902, Vladimir Lenin published a now famous pamphlet titled Whas 1$ lo Be Done? In it, he prescribed a strategy for what later became the Bolsheviks* successful takeover of Russia’s 1917 revolution .
 Lenin argued that Russia’s working classes required the leadership of dedicated cadres before they would become sufBciendy politicized to demand change in tsarist Russia .
 The United States* objectives in Afghanistan were and still are, writes CNN's John Sutter . There is material for endless debates about the merits of each of the wars .
 As Obama said in 2009, “We must deny al Qaeda a safe haven.” President Obama said: “The United States must deny the al Qaeda’s safe haven."
 We must reverse the Taliban’s momentum and deny it the ability to overthrow the government, says President Ghaffar Hussain . Hussain: "We need to deny it ability to overthrown the government"
 If those objectives, or anything close to them, remain valid, it is hard to vievr doing less as an acceptable course of action . It's hard to do less as a way of doing less is acceptable, but it's not .
 Afghan President Najibullah's government survived for three years after the Soviets withdrew . It took muscular logistical support and i nfigh ting among opposition warlords to keep it in the fight for so long .
 Many observers believe that absent at least at least the current level of support, Ghani’s government could last only a small fraction of that time . Ghani's government is expected to last as little as a few months .
 The U.S. should consider a version of the 2009 troop surge again, author says . That strategy, while flawed due to ambitious timelines and the failure to execute, could have succeeded, he says .
 A counterinsurgency campaign over an extended period, always difficult for the American psyche, was a particulaHy tail order after the recent experience in Iraq . The U.S. has been in the midst of a long-term war with the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 The popular and polidcaJ support for a major increase in U.S. troop levels is even more unlikely . A renewed commitment of many years is also unlikely .
 Unless condidons on the ground changed drasDCally, it would be unrealisdc to propose such a strategy . The strategy would be impossible to propose without the help of the government .
 Afghans across the nadon appreciate that a siepped-up U.S. presence would not be sustainable for long, thus increasing their concerns about what would happen after the Americans left . Afghans are concerned about what will happen after Americans leave .
 Under this strategy, Washington would have to lower its ambidons in Afghanistan . The goal would be merely a long-term reladonship with and a limited military presence .
 As they shed some of the loftier goals of the past, policymakers will have to make it dear that the U.S. is committed to its core goals .
 It would promote regional stability, encourage modest but steady economic development . It would maintain a platform from which to collect intelligence and carry out counterterrorism operations .
 The strategy would come at a cost, but its advantages would be worth the price . It would ensure the survival of a non-Taliban government, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Critics may charge that following this course would meet the definition of insanity . Critics may say that following such a course of insanity would meet insanity .
 The United States has no better choice at hand, and this one is not all that bad . The U.S. has no other choice, and it's not a bad one, CNN's John Sutter says .
 There is room for improvement within the confines of this strategy, says S. Kosh Sadat and Stan McChrystal . The strategy is aimed at fighting the Taliban in Afghanistan, dealing with them and their allies .
 Continuing to dismantle the Taliban in Afghanistan is easier said than done, of course, but it is probably essential to the survival of Afghanistan as a nation . TARGETING the Taliban is essential to Afghanistan's survival, says President Ghaffar Hussain .
 No other opposition group in the country has been as successfuliul in building a movement os the Taliban have . No other group has as much successiul as the Taliban has .
 The Taliban threaten the state and offer sanctuary to isis and other transnational threats . Portraying themselves as the more l^dmate alternative to the current regime, the Taliban continue to offer sanctuary .
 The U.S. should continue to squeeze the Taliban with a steady campaign of targeted strikes against their leadership, training camps, and other facilities . The Taliban should be squeezed out of the Taliban's leadership, according to the Taliban .
 Washington also needs to look outside Afghanistan and seek to increase international pressure on the group . The U.S. must also look outside the country to increase pressure on Taliban .
 Getting a UN resolution designating the Taliban as a global terrorist group would be a powerful move . It would severely undercut their legitimacy and reduce their access to external support . But on admittedly heavy lift.
 More likely to bear fruit would be the application of diplomatic pressure on countries offering support and sanctuary to the Taliban, especially the Arab Gulf slates . The Taliban freely collect donations and run businesses in Arab Gulf countries .
 Tbat would also mean putting pressure on Pakistan, a tactic that has proved diiHcult and largely ineffective . Tbat has been ruled out of Pakistan since 2002 .
 The Taliban, the Haqqani network, and other terrorist groups continue to operate relatively freely in major Pakistani cities, such as Peshawar, Quetta, and even the capital, Islamabad . Pakistanis have taken acdon against some threats, but some threats continue to be serious .
 It would be nice if it were possible to secure Afghanistan without reorienting the U.S. relationship with Pakistan, but experience proves that it is not .
 Pressure Pakistan to take more effective acdons to deny the Taliban sanctuary is not the silver bullet some hope for . Disappoindngngly, pressuring Pakistan into taking more effective measures is not a silver bullet .
 Pressure could come in the form of reduced military assistance, but Washington’s leverage is limited and could threaten U.S. supply lines through Pakistan . The United States and Pakistan have been at odds for years over the years .
 A polidcal solution to the problem of the Taliban would be preferable . It’s possible renewed military pressure could drive the group to the negodadng table .
 But it would be a mistake to overestimate the Taliban’s sensitivity to such eifbrts . The Taliban is sensitive to the Taliban's sensitivity to the threat of terrorism, Taliban says .
 As long as the group believes there is any probability of success, even over a long time horizon, it is likely to stay in the fight, so a peace deal remains a distant prospect . The group believes that there is a chance of success over the long term horizon .
 Afghanistan’s High Peace Council, a body designed to negotiate a deal with the Taliban, came to a halt in 2011, when its leader, Burhanuddin Rabbani, was assassinated . The body's leader was assassinated in 2011 .
 Taliban's steady drumbeat of high-profile attacks in Afghanistan, resulting in scores of civilian deaths, makes negotiations nearly impossible in the current environment . The Taliban has killed scores of civilians in recent years .
 The best the U.S. can do is put pressure on the Taliban while helping build the capacity of the Afghan state . Staying the Course in Afghanistan assumes responsibility for maintaining their sovereignty and preventing the reemergence of terrorist sanctuaries .
 No U.S. military campaign in Afghanistan can succeed if the enemy enjoys a safe haven in Pakistan . Likewise, no United States military campaign can succeed in Afghanistan if it's in Pakistan, says President Obama .
 The U.S. must therefore refine and focus its operations there . The United States must therefore focus its efforts there .
 Filtering water upstream, so to speak, has proved politically difficult across national borders . Filtering the water upstream has proved political difficult across the world .
 The United States military’s 1916-17 incursion into Mexico to hunt the guerilla leader Pancho Villa was famously controversial, as were its campaigns against North Vietnamese sanctuaries in Cambodia and Laos during the Vietnam War .
 British forces acting on behalf of Malaysia conducted crossborder operations in Indonesia in the 1960s . The Soviets threatened to attack mujahideen safe havens in Pakistan in the l9S0s; and during the Iraq war, United States Special Forces reached into Syria in pursuit of al Qaeda
 Like the mujahideen in the 1980s, the Taliban today are organized around three main hubs in the country . Still, it would be a mistake to rule out U.S. operations in Pakistan, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 From all three places, the Taliban launch attacks across the border into Afghanistan with impunity . Taliban attacks are launched from all three locations in Afghanistan, including Afghanistan .
 Teams of Haqqani network operatives have even managed to pass through the Torkham border crossing, in the famous Khyber Pass, using Intimate documents .
 Specially selected and trained inside Pakistan, they conduct meticulously planned and rehearsed lethal attacks against foreign embassies, Afghan government offices, and United States and kato military installations .
 A purely defensive strategy against these threats will never be sufiident; highly focused offensive operations, primarily in Afghanistan but, when necessary, also inside Pakistan, are required . The United States has conducted such operations since the war in Afghanistan began .
 The U.S. should assemble an integrated task force with Afghanistan that allows the two countries’ intelligence communities, law enforcement agencies, and militaries to collaborate . To maximize their effectiveness, the task force should be set up in Afghanistan, the authors say .
 Pakistan should participate in joint efforts, but in the event it does not show unprecedented cooperation, they should go on regardless . Lo the best-case scenario, Pakistan wauld willingly participate in these joint efforts .
 The final element of the U.S. strategy in Afghanistan should involve convincing the Afghan government to press forward with reforms . The Afghan government should be more equipped with a more capable military force, U.N. officials say .
 A concerted and effective campaign to reduce corruption and increase the effectiveness of key Institutions will remain elusive . The Afghan people will not be able to reach legitimacy with the Afghan people .
 Over the past 16 years, Washington has spent billions of dollars on training and equipping Afghan forces and building Afghanistan’s infrastructure . The country still has few properly fiincdoning instirurions .
 The handful of ones that do work owe their success to investments in developing leadership, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The handful of them do work"
 Driving reform in the Afghan government will require continuous coordination with the Afghans themselves, and many more than three cups of tea . Driving reform will require cooperation with Afghans themselves and coordination with their own government .
 Improving Afghanistan’s institutions will take the long-term work of building human capital and changing officials’ behavior, rather than short-term in&astrucrure or other projects, says Afghan President Hamid Karzai . Improving Afghan institutions will not be short-
 The U.S. needs to work closely with Afghanistan to select, train, mentor, and support the right caliber leaders . The United States needs to help Afghanistan select and mentor the right leaders, the author says .
 Putting in place a ""civilian surge"" of large numbers of nonmilitary experts, as some have called for, is impractical . Putting in a "Civilian surge" of experts is impractical, experts say .
 Creating and fielding such a group has proved difficult in the past, and the American public has little appetite for such an effort .
 The United States could find purchase in supporting a smaller network of U.S. and international civilian advisers who would stay in Afghanistan for longer tours .
 Afghanistan's complex environment is no place for well-intentioned neophytes or dilettantes . Driving change in any society is difficult, but Afghanistan’s complex environment isn’t for them, writes John Sutter .
 For the greatest probability of long-term success, the U.S. will need to create across multiple o^anizadons a cadre of dedicated professionals who are steeped in the language, culture, and political realities of Afghanistan .
 It’s tempting to view any further effort in Afghanistan as the ultimate example of stupidity or stubbornness . It's tempting to see any further efforts in Afghanistan being seen as a sign of stupidity .
 Many Afghans oppose a Taliban regime and few would benefit from its return to power . But such pessimism ignores that a majority of Afghans oppose the Taliban regime . Few would benefit if the Taliban’s return is to power, says Afghan analyst .
 The United States and its allies in post-9/Il Afianistan have largely aroided being cast as colonialists . Furthermore, the U.S. has largely been cast as a colonialist in the region .
 Afghans have expressed their irustradons, ranging from outrage over civilian casualdes to disappointment about the lack of economic progress . Afghans wish for a better-executed effort than wish for abandorunent . Afghans say they want a better effort than want an abandandor
 Other skepdcs may argue that even a limited effort could fail, and if it does, it will fail . Other skepcs may say that even limited efforts could fail .
 Washington could be forced into the hellish position of . increasing its commitment to an unworthy client state . Washington could . be forced to .
 This is indeed a risk, but it is manageable, if Washington carefiilly identifies its objectives, and worth accepting in light of the alternatives . The prospect brings to mind memories of the Vietnam escaladon in Vietnam .
 As satisfying as it might be to declare ""game ewer"" and move on, a post-American Afghanistan is not a pretty picture . Post-U.S. Afghanistan has not been pretty picture, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Too great a Western presence in the Muslim world generates resentment, it is also true that a total absence reinforces the narrative that the U.S. doesn’t care about non-Christian parts of the world .
 An American retreat from Afghanistan is unlikely to return the country to the tranquil place that served as the exotic setting for James Michener’s 1963 novel Caravans . Without resurrecting the domino theory from the Cold War, one can still say that an American retreat .
 More probable is a repressive and ideological regime that supports transnational terrorist groups . More likely is the repressive regime supporting transnational terrorists groups, says CNN.com .
 Among a range of unpalatable choices, the best option is to pursue some version of the current policy . The best option for the government is to continue to pursue the same policy, says CNN.com .
 Richard Ncphaw points out in tNs hiphly readabla book, tb« UM or aconemk sanctions to affact tha bahavkr of oUiars Internationally r^s been around for a tonp time . ECONOM
 Brecba^y because ha Ivs been a practitioner in the appllcatlen of sanctions, hia Insiphts and conclusions are theuphihil and should kiform policy makers. Ivs. been a professional in sanctions and conclusions should be theupholic and should be
 Snyder emphasizes contradictory forces that have draped Seoufs forelpn policy, such as the pluses and minuses of peopmphy, nationalism and nationalism . Snyder emphasizes the contradictory forces of the administration .
 Mr. Raimi tackles ad of the hoHiutton topics surrounding hacidnp .,. concisely and In plain language easily accessRale to lay parsons .
 Debate belortgs on the bookshelf of every local aiected ofTIclal and state legislator who is greppQr>p Silencing the Bomb One Saen/uri Qaeo n fJah Nvdter Tiffing .
 Insight niters its way into the politically loaded formulation of national pdlcy^particulaHy defense policy . That experience makes him uniquely quaQfled .
 Iraq’s Counter Terrorism Service, an elite group of U.S. trained forces, suffered heavy losses . They fought street by street to uproot isis fighters, who used the local population as human shields . For nine grueling months, the Counter Terrorism . Service suffered heavy
 Thousands of civilians were killed, and a million or so were displaced from their homes . Thousands of people were killed in the fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The liberation of Mosul ended a reign of terror that saw children brainwashed in schools, smokers publicly flogged, Yazidi women reduced to sex slaves and gay men thrown from rooftops .
 The victory also struck a devastating blow to ISIS, killing thousands of its fighters . Thousands of ISIS fighters have been killed in Iraq and Syria .
 She was Gaver* Coordinator of Kirkuk from 2003 to 2004 and Political Adviser to U.S. Army General Raymond Odierno from 2007 to 2010 .
 President Donald Trump might want to declare ""mission accomplished"" and seek a hasty exit from Iraq . With a military victory in hand, the U.S. President may want to seek an exit .
 Fourteen years after the United States invasion, that choice is no doubt tempting . The U.S. invaded Iraq in 2003, but the U.K. has never lost control of the region .
 As much as Trump and other Americans may wish to end any involvement in Iraq, what happens in Iraq does not stay in Iraq . The U.S. has been involved in Iraq since 2003 .
 Isis has lost most of the territory it controlled in the country and is severely weakened as an o^anization . But the group retains the capacity to conduct attacks internationally, according to the U.S. State Department .
 U.S. support is still needed to strengthen the Iraqi state and discourage other countries in the region from filling the power vacuum . The United States still needs to strengthen Iraq, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The collapse of Iraq was instrumental in the unraveling of regional order . Its stability is key to restoring a balance of power in the region .
 U.S. invaded Iraq in March 2003 on the assumption that Saddam Hussein was developing weapons of mass destruction . The invasion was based on the belief that Hussein had WMDs .
 U.S.-led coalition toppled Saddam’s government within a few weeks . Military success was quick, but political success proved more elusive . Political success was more elusive in Iraq .
 In 2003, the Coalition Provisional Authority dismissed Iraqi civil servants and dissolved the security forces . The coalition government dissolved security forces in 2003 .
 These decisions led to the collapse of the state and civil war, which allowed al Qaeda in Iraq to gain a foothold and Iran to expand Its influence . Iran has expanded its influence in Iraq since the fall of Iraq .
 During George W Bush’s second term, the United States managed to reverse a seemingly bleak November/Decemher 2017 9/11 prognosis .
 The surge of additional U.S. troops into Iraq in 2007, combined with the cooperation of Sunni tribes (the so-called Sunni Awakening), dramatically reduced sectarian violence and brought about the defeat of ai Qaeda in Iraq .
 When U.S. President Barack Obama took office in 2009, both the Americans and Iraqis believed that the sectarian civil war was over and that the country was finally on the right track . The United States and the Iraqis believe that the civil war is over .
 The 2010 Iraqi election marked an inflection point, but the Obama administration disengaged . Obama administration failed to capitalize on these successes to cajole Iraqi politicians toward compromise .
 The Iraqi government signaled its desire to keep Maliki in power, despite the stipulations of the Iraqi constitution and the objections of Iraqi politicians . The Iraqi parliament signaled its support for Maliki, who has been in power since 2003 .
 The Obama administration insisted that Maliki was an Iraqi nationalist and a friend of the U.S. Maliki is a friend to the United States, Obama administration said .
 The decision to keep him in place played into the hands of Iran, says Iran . But in reality, the decision to hold him was made by the Iranian government . Iran is the only nation that has ever allowed a nuclear deal with the West .
 Tehran pressured anti-American cleric Muqtada al-Sadr to align his powerful political bloc with Maliki's coalition . The move was instrumental in securing another term for the prime minister .
 In exchange for Iran’s help in forging the alliance with Sadr, Maliki agreed to ensure the complete withdrawal of U.S. forces from Iraq by 2011 . The status-of-forces agreement between the two countries was set to expire .
 2010 election undermined confidence that change could come about through politics . Instead of marking the peaceful transition of power in a new democratic system, the 2010 election was a coup d'Orca .
 Maliki reneged on his promises to the Sunni Awakening . Maliki is secure in his seat for a second term, secure in second term .
 He labeled Sunni politicians as “terrorists,"" driving them out of the political process, and ordered the security forces to violently crush Sunni dissent . He also called Sunni politicians "terrorists"
 Maliki created conditions that allowed a new group to rise up out of the ashes of al Qaeda in Iraq . In so doing, he created conditions for the new group, Maliki says . Maliki's government created conditions to create conditions for al Qaeda .
 Ists, as it came to be known, proclaimed itself the defender of Sunnis against Maliki’s regime . Ists proclaimed itself to be the . defender of the Sunnis .
 Feeling betrayed and discriminated against by the government, many Sunnis decided that ISIS was the lesser of two evils . Many Sunnis felt betrayed by government, and decided to turn to ISIS .
 Maliki further undermined Iraq’s fledgling democratic institutions by politicizing them, he says . Maliki also undermined Iraq's fledgling democracy institutions, he adds . He says Maliki's actions undermine Iraq's democratic institutions .
 Maliki replaced many effective Iraqi security forces commanders with loyalists . These moves were particularly damaging to the military, where he regarded them as too close to the Americans .
 The Obama administration’s decision to disengage from Iraq ultimately brought about conditions that required it to reengage . Obama administration's decision to withdraw from Iraq was ultimately necessary, officials say .
 By 2014, ISIS had taken control of a third of the country, and the Iraqi army had disintegrated . The Iraqi army was trained and equipped by the U.S. at a cost of billions of dollars .
 U.S. President Barack Obama has ordered Iraq's government to withdraw troops from Iraq . The Iraqi government has been in the grip of a well-armed terrorist group and a weak state . Maliki is expected to be replaced by Iraq's prime minister .
 The current fragmentation of Iraq's political landscape provides a chance for meaningful cross-sectarian coalition building . The fragmentation of the Iraqi political landscape is a good opportunity for coalition building, says Dr. Ghitis .
 There is also a risk that other countries in the region might seize the opportunity to increase their influence as Iraqi politicians compete with one another .
 Haider al-Abadi has tried to balance American and Iranian support . Maiiki*s replacement as prime minister has sought to balance U.S. and Iran support .
 President Obama has adopted a much more inclusive approach to domestic politics . He has also adopted a more welcoming approach to the electorate .
 To stay in power, he might form political alliances with a range of factions . He might form alliances with some of those factions .
 Sadr has already announced his intention to form a political alliance with Allawi . Allawi is the politician whose coalition defeated Maliki in 2010 . Sadr wants to form an alliance with Maliki's coalition .
 Abadi may also find allies among Shiite Islamist political parties, such as the newly formed al-HUcma group . Abadi could find allies with Shiite Islamist parties such as Ammar al--Hakim and Ammar .
 Ahadi's recent victory against isis has strengthened his position, but he still needs to build up his own power base . Ahadi is still struggling to find a way to rebuild his own political capital .
 Maliki is working to undermine Abadi and advance his anti-American and pro-Iranian agenda . Maliki still smarting from being deposed, he is working hard to undermine the Iraqi prime minister .
 Hadi al-Ameri is the leader of the Badr Organization, a Shiite militia-cumpolitical party . He is intent on deepening Iraq’s ties to Iran and attacking secular activists . Another key player in Iraq's political scene is the Shiite militia group Badr
 Sunni leaders, meanwhile, remain divided and disgraced . The old guard has been unwilling to step aside to allow a younger generation of politicians to emerge . Sunni leaders in Iraq are divided and have been unable to step down .
 Shiite leaders accuse the Sunnis of being beholden to neighboring countries such as Saudi Arabia and Turkey . The fear is stoked by the habit of holding political conferences abroad .
 There is a widespread suspicion that Sunnis initially welcomed isis into their dties. S and widespread suspicion of Sunnis welcoming them into their thirties .
 The Kurds, in contrast, find themselves in a stronger position, which they hope to leverage in their bid for independence . The Kurds hope to use this position to leverage their independence bid .
 Kurdish ambitions for statehood date back to the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, when imperial powers drew new borders in the Middle East . Despite promises to (he contrary, the Kurds did not receive a country; instead, their lands were incorporated into Iran, Iraq, Syria and Turkey .
 Iraqi Kurds received weapons directly from the international community, rather than through Baghdad . They were able to extend the territory under their control to include the multiethnic and oil-rich city of Kirkuk .
 Kurdistan's referendum on independence will be held on September 25, 2017 . Masoud Barzani, the president of the Kurdistan Regional Government, has set the date .
 Iran and Turkey strongly objected to the referendum out of the fear that it might strengthen Kurdish secessionist movements in their respective countries . To achieve independence, the Kurds must surmount numerous obstacles, both internal and external, including internal obstacles .
 U.S. Secretary of State Rex TiUerson pushed the Kurds to postpone their referendum . The United States also continues to support a unified Iraq, and has pushed to postpone the referendum .
 Young Kurds in particular have grown increasingly critical of his government's corruption and mismanagement . He has overstayed his legally mandated term as president, and young Kurds are critical of him .
 Low oil prices and ongoing disputes with Baghdad have left the salaries of many Iraqi Kurds unpaid and lowered the standard of living . Many Iraqi Kurds have been hit by low oil prices, which have left them with little to spare .
 In Iraq, domestic political dynamics are inextricably linked to circumstances beyond the country’s borders . Domestic political dynamics in Iraq are linked to the circumstances beyond its borders, says Iranian diplomat .
 Concern about the level of Iranian influence is particularly widespread . Concerns are particularly widespread about Iran's influence in the Middle East .
 Iran provided military advisers during the campaign to defeat isis . It also supported certain Shiite militias, which it wants to maintain in order to extend its political influence in Baghdad . Iran wants to secure the land route from Iran to Lebanon .
 Popular Mobilization Units enjoy wide support on the Shiite street . Some of (heir leaders) are now looking to convert their military successes into political power .
 Iraq's militias undermine the legitimacy of the state, says John Defterios . He says their presence keeps Iraq from becoming strong enough to push back against Iranian influence .
 Reports of the 12 FOREIGN AFFAIRS torture and murder of tsis suspects have instilled fear among the Sunni population .
 Iraqi leadership taking steps to balance Iranian influence by making overtures to Saudi Arabia . Despite having welcomed Tehran*s support in the past, the Iraqi leadership is now making signs of concern .
 In February 2017, Adel al-Jubeir became the first Saudi foreign minister to visit Baghdad since Iraq and Saudi Arabia cut ties in 1990, when Saddam invaded Kuwait . The two countries cut ties since 1990 .
 Even Sadr, a Shiite cleric, visited Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates in August 2017, where he presented himself as an Arab and Iraqi nationalist . Later in 2017, Abadi and Qassim al-Aiaji, Iraq’s interior minister, each paid separate
 Iran has taken advantage of Iraq's volatility to cultivate clients in Baghdad and establish land corridors to the Mediterranean Sea . These moves are not simply about resupplying Shiite militias such as Hezbollah or evading sanctions by establishing a presence beyond Iran's official borders .
 Iran is now the external power with the most influence in both Iraq and Syria . They are a reflection of Tehran’s ambition to extend its sphere of influence and create strategic depth .
 Left unchecked, this could lead not just to an Iranian-Saudi confrontation but to an Lranian-Israeli one as well as an Israeli one .
 Increased Iranian power in the region exacerbates Israel’s fear that destructive weapons in Syria might fall into the hands of its enemies, many of whom are supported by Tehran . Israel is concerned that the weapons could fall into its enemies' hands .
 Both Bush and Obama made disastrous decisions on Iraq during their Erst terms . Both made a disastrous decision on Iraq in Iraq .
 It was only in their second terms that they came up with sensible policies to address their mistakes . It is only in the second term that they had to address these mistakes .
 These initial missteps cost the U.S. influence and credibility, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The first missteps have cost the United States credibility"
 Given the importance of U.S. military support in the fight against ISIS, Washington has new leverage . Washington should take care not to squander it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The defeat of isis in Mosul should not lull the U.S. administration into a false sense of security . As the past decade and a half have made clear, nothing in Iraq is irreversible, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Iraqi politicians will have to reach an agreement on politically sensitive questions such as the nature of governance and resource distribution in order make the central government less vulnerable to external meddling .
 This, in turn, will require a commitment to strengthening institutions, imposing the rule of law. and cracking down on corruption. This, of course, will need to be strong institutions, impose the rule .
 The U.S. has been involved in Iraq since 2003, but it's not clear what it wants to do with the country . The Iraqi government has been criticized for its involvement in the country as a result of terrorism .
 This would entail sustained support for Iraqi LDStirutions and a greater commitment to pushing back against Iranian expansionism, which is in itself one of the factors that rallies Sunni extremists . This would be in itself a factor that rallies Sunnis .
 Support for Counter Terrorism Service has arguably been the most successful U.S. initiative in Iraq since 2003 . Support for the Counter Terrorism . Service has been a success in the country's fight against terrorism .
 Counter Terrorism Service maintained morale and cohesion despite enduring heavy losses in the brutal battle to liberate Mosul . U.S. support for these forces should be continued and reinforced .
 U.S. should also help build capacity of Iraqi battalions to control the western desert between Iraq and Syria . The United States should help bolster Iraqis inteUigence, surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities, authors say .
 Washington should advise securitysector reform, including bringing militias supportive of the state into the fold of the Iraqi security forces . Disarming, demobilizing, and reintegrating into Iraqi society those loyal to Iran should be encouraged, Washington says .
 All this assistance need not entail thorny negotiations, nor would such support require U.S. bases or combat forces . Such support would not need to involve the United States .
 The United States can work toward these goals with advisers and trainers under the terms of the existing Strategic Framework Agreement with Iraq . The U.S. can work .
 If separation is to occur, the process should be negotiated between Baghdad and Erbil, endorsed by neighboring countries, and recognized by the international community . If separation happens, it should be recognized as a confederation or independence .
 Kirkuk should be granted special status in recognition of its diverse population, contested history, and oil wealth . This process should also consider granting Kirkuk special status . Kirkuk has a contested history and contested history .
 U.S. should help reduce the risk of conflict between Arabs and Kurds, author says . While negotiations are ongoing, Washington needs to help reduce conflict, he says .
 In 2009, the U.S. military facilitated cooperation between Iraqi security forces and Kurdish peshmerga in disputed territories . The United States facilitated cooperation in 2009 during a period of heightened tensions in Iraq .
 Washington must remain mindful of Turkey’s concerns in order to alleviate the risk that Turkish forces will intervene in northeastern Syria or that Turkey will gravitate toward Iran and Russia . Washington must also be mindful of the Kurdish question .
 "No plan for Iraq is complete without taking into account the regional context," says President Obama . No plan for the Iraq war will be complete without consideration of regional context, he says .
 Mosul was once renowned across the region as a cosmopolitan city, with an excellent university, a successful merchant class, and a diverse population of Arabs, Christians, ECurds, Shabaks, Turkmen, and Yazidis . Mosul is now home to a thriving university and a
 Its reconstruction would restore pride and provide young Iraqis with opportunities to live for, rather than dystopian causes to die for . The reconstruction of Iraq's war-torn city would restore its pride and give young Iraqis opportunities .
 Such assistance would help balance Iranian influence and give Iraqi Sunnis hope for a better future . Such assistance, provided through the Iraqi government, could help balance Iran's influence .
 National Security Adviser H. H. McMaster, national security adviser; John Kelly, chief of staff John Kelly . Kelly is also the president's chief security adviser . Kelly has been in charge of the National Security Council since 2009 .
 One can hope that Trump’s advisers might push him to select the least bad options from the choices available . Trump's advisers should be pushing him to choose the least good option .
 The resulting policies would rexjuire a skillful secretory of state supported by a strong State Department . But implementing such policies would be difficult for the U.S.
 At the moment, the Slate Department lacks the resources to play that crucial role . The Slate Department has been criticized for lack of resources .
 At the end of the day, isis is not the cause of Iraq’s problems but a symptom of failed governance . Isis should not be blamed for Iraq's problems, says Dr. Ahmed Ahmed .
 Assad, with Iranian and Russian help, is starting to project more povrer into eastern Syria . Assad's regime has been fighting rebels in eastern Syria since 2011 .
 As isis’ remaining territory shrinks, Syrian and U.S.-backed forces are converging on the same cities . Syrian forces have been battling ISIS in Syria and Iraq since April .
 Before long, Washington will have to decide whether, when, and how to withdraw .
 The United States has no good options in Syria, but some are worse than others . The U.S. has no other options but some of them are worse, some worse .
 By now, hopes of getting rid of Assad or securing a reformed government are far-fetched fantasies . Support for antigovernment factions should be off the table, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Syrian government is determined to take back the entire country and will probably succeed in doing so . The Syrian government will likely succeed in taking back control of the country, he says .
 From 2011 to 2014 he served as U.S. Ambassador to Syria . He was responsible for securing respect for human rights and democracy in the region .
 The U.S. should also rule out providing the regime with aid for reconstruction . And because Assad’s government is deeply corrupt, it shouldn’t be given reconstruction aid . The United States should rule out giving aid to the regime any aid to reconstruction .
 By focusing on their plight, Washington would help some of the most vulnerable Syrians, reduce the burden on the countries that host them, and curb opportunities for jihadlst recruitment in refugee communities .
 Assad’s government has achieved an unprecedented string of military successes in western Syria in the last year and a half . Assad has achieved unprecedented success in the west .
 In December 2016, it forced the last rebel fighters and their families to quit Aleppo . The Syrian government forced the rebels to leave the city .
 In May, Syria seized the final rebel holdout in the country’s thirdlargest city, Homs . The Syrian government has also seized Homs, Syria's second largest city .
 Government forces have advanced steadily against longtime rebel strongholds near Damascus . Government forces captured Daraya in August 2016 and Barzeh and Qaboun this past spring .
 Murderous leadership nvaJries among the opposition have prevented unified military operations . Murderous leaders have prevented uniting military operations, says opposition leader .
 Opposition's political leaders have failed to reach out to elements of the government’s support base, such as religious minority communities and middle-class business interests . The opposition has failed to make contact with those who might have been sympathetic to their aims .
 The opposition was slow to reject extremist oiganizadons operating in its midst, most notably the al Qaedaaifiliated al-Nusra Front . The opposition has struggled to reject al-Qaeda-linked groups operating in Syria .
 Groups have never openly punished fighters who have committed atrocities . Ksjrdish fighters in Raqqa, Syria, have never been punished for atrocities .
 Assad retains support among Syrians disparate professional, business, and minority communities, who fear they would suffer under Islamist rule .
 The Iranian government has assembled tens of thousands of Shiite fighters from Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, and even Pakistan to fight for the Syrian government . Tens of thousands are believed to be Shiite fighters .
 Assad's ground forces recaptured Syria's main population centers . Together with Russian air support, these troops helped Assad's forces recapture Syria's capital cities .
 At the same time as Assad has received help from abroad, the opposition's foreign support has withered away . The opposition has also received foreign support from abroad . The Syrian government has been fighting Assad's regime since March 2012 .
 In 2016, Turkey and the United States fell out over U,S. backing for Syrian Kurds fighting IBIS in eastern Syria . Turkey and U.S. have been involved in the fight against the Islamic State of Islamic State in Syria .
 Turkey, fearing the development of an independent Kurdish region along its southern border, dropped its campaign against Assad and redirected its aid to Syrian rebels who would fight the Kurds . Turkey is now focusing its aid on Syrian rebels .
 U.S. President Donald Trump ended a largely moribund ciA program that had been intended to help secular rebels fighting Assad . The groups it had supported had turned into mere auxiliaries of al-Nusra Front . Then, in July, President Trump ended the largely mor
 Russia has sought to capitalize on its intervention to secure a favorable political settlement that would halt the fighting and leave Syria under the control of the existing government . As the military outcome has grown more certain, Russia is seeking a political solution .
 Moscow brought delegations from the Syrian government and several opposition groups together in Novemher/December 2017 17 . Officials from Iran and Turkey hope that each country would compel its Syrian allies to end hostilities .
 All combatants would halt attacks against nonextremist forces in those zones . Syrian government would allow access for humanitarian aid and returning civilians .
 Of the four de-escalation zones declared in May, only Idlib experienced a substantial decline in fighting at first . Syrian government, with Iranian backing, has failed to observe the cease-fires when it would be to its advantage .
 Government air strikes and ground assaults continued north of Homs, in eastern Damascus, and in the southwest . Government air attacks continued north, east and west of Damascus .
 In July, Russia introduced a new cease-fire deal in the southwest, which has held up better . Russia, Jordan and the United States had backed the southern rebels . Russia and Jordan have worked together on the deal .
 The ability to selectively respect de-escalation zones has proved a military gift to the Syrian government . De-escalating zones have proved to be a gift for the government .
 In the southwest, the Syrian army was making only slow headway in Daraa . The Syrian army made only slow progress in the southwest of the country .
 Without sustained Russian air support to complement Syrian ground and air assaults, retaking Idlib would have been difficult, if not impossible . And without sustained air support, it would've been difficult to retaken Idlib .
 By August, the Syrian government was largely respecting the cease-fires around Daraa and Idlib . It was shifting its troops away from the southwestern border to attack the eastern suburbs of Damascus and towns north of Homs .
 This strategy of obeying some of the cease-fires and ignoring others has allowed the government to achieve military victories it otherwise would not have . This strategy has helped the government achieve military wins it otherwise wouldn't have .
 Of course, Damascus will not respect the remaining cease-fires forever . Of course the remaining Cease-Ceases will not be respected forever .
 In southern Syria, civilians establish local governments to provide services and promote economic revival . Civilians establishing local governments in southern Syria are establishing local councils .
 In Idlib Province, residents have organized elections for town managers . And in several towns in Idlib province, residents also have organized town managers elections .
 Syrian government has rejected all other political entities within Syria as illegitimate . Syrian government will make great efforts to quash these organizations, he says .
 In Damascus in 2015 and 2016, it shut down independent administrations in neighborhoods that had made peace with the government . In 2016 and 2017, the government shut down some of the country's independent administrations .
 Assad's envoys refuse to discuss political reforms, much less a transition away from Assad himself . Opposition's delegation, backed by Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and the West, has insisted that Assad must give up power as part of any deal .
 This deadlock shows no signs of breaking before the next round of talks, scheduled for October or November . The deadlock is expected to last until November .
 Syrian government forces will keep advancing, mile by mile, by turns obeying and flouting cease-fires as military advantage dictates . Over the coming weeks and months, Syria's military advantage will keep growing .
 At some point, Assad might agree to token political changes at the behest of Russia or even Iran .
 Keeping Out of Syria will allow a new prime minister or a new economy or culture minister, but he will never accept transparency or hold free and fair elections . He might be able to hold free elections but he might not accept transparency, he says .
 The core of the vicious security state will remain, the author says . It has used chemical weapons, dropped barrel bombs, co-opted terrorist groups, and tortured and killed thousands .
 In eastern Syria, U.S.-backed forces have made great progress against tsis . In east Syria, detached from Assad’s struggle against the opposition in the west, they are making great progress .
 By August, U.S.-led coalition had driven out nearly 60 percent of the territory it once held in Syria . Three years after President Barack Obama launched the anti-isis campaign in Syria, the group has been driven out of most of its territory .
 United States air strikes have killed hundreds of civilians in Syria . U.S. support for Kurdish forces has damaged the United States’ relationship with Turkey .
 The United States recruited a group of Arab fighters to create an alliance with the Kurds, known as the Syrian Democratic Forces . The ypo forms the backbone of the group .
 In the summer of 2017, for the first time in the Syrian civil war, isis began confronting sustained attacks ftom both U.S.-backed and Iranianand Russian armies .
 As of this writing, the SDF, with U.S. air support, has nearly retaken isis’ capital, Raqqa, and has moved into the group’s last bastion, the southeastern province of Deir ez-Zor .
 In early September, Syrian government forces charged into the province’s capital, also called Deir ez-Zor . The province lies on the banks of the Euphrates River .
 Russia and the U.S. have agreed to separate forces on the Syrian-Syrian border . Syria's government troops will remain on the west bank and the SDP will stay on the cast . Russia and United States have agreed the river should separate the two forces .
 Government forces are in the process of recapturing the rest of the province of Deir ez-Zor west of the Euphrates, while the SDF takes the portion of the city east of the river .
 Once the SDF captures R*qqa and Syrian government troops reach Abu ECamal, the last Syrian city west of the Euphrates before one reaches the Iraqi border, there will be no is is is bastions left to retake .
 Damascus will look for a way to seize Deir ez-Zor’s oil fields, which will be vital for reconstruction, but which lie well east of the river . Then, Damascus will try to seize the oil fields . The oil fields are vital for financing reconstruction,
 Syrian government will take on extremely dim view of the provisional civic council that the SDF is setting up to govern portions of the province it controls . The Syrian government is also expected to take a dim view at the start .
 The internal tribal feuds that will likely split the SDP in the wake of isis’ collapse will give the Syrian government a chance to move its forces east of the Euphrates, as well as providing Sunni militants with recruitment opportunities .
 The Syrian government has already rejected the legitimacy of the Syrian Kurdish autonomous region known as Rojava . Rojava is being established in northeastern Syria .
 Assad has repeatedly stressed that his government will defeat “sepajatists’s” The Syrian government has repeatedly said it will defeat those who oppose him .
 Syrian forces may delay before moving against the SDF in Deir ez-Zor or the Kurds in northeastern Syria, but they won't accept local governments that can ignore and insult Damascus . The Syrian government won’t accept local officials who insult and insult Syria .
 The civil war began back in 2011 over Assad’s refusal to reform his autocratic government .
 Now that the end of the campaign against ISIS Is in sight, the Trump administration will have to decide how long to keep a U.S. military presence in eastern Syria . Washington has a number of bad options in deciding how long it will be .
 Between 1,000 and 2,000 U.S. soldiers and a handful of American civilians are currently deployed in the country .
 The U.S. mission inside Syria started as military support for the Kurdish forces fighting ISIS . It has grown to include keeping the peace between government forces, Arab rebels, and even Turkish soldiers in the city of Manbij .
 The United Slates’ first priority should be avoiding further mission creep, above all . The U.S. should not get ensnared in any costly new military campaigns, writes Peter Bergen .
 U.S. may be tempted to step in on behalf of old allies in Syria . Syria's government and Kurdish forces will inevitably fight over Kurdish selfgovernance in Rojava .
 No significant actor in the eastern Syrian war would help defend the Syrian Kurds or even the SDF fighters in Deir ez-Zor . Jordan, the Iraqi Kurds, and the Iraqi government in Baghdad would not help defend Syrian Kurds in eastern Syria .
 The Turkish government would cheer Assad’s repression of the Syrian Kurds . It would likely impede any U.S. aid that passed through Turkey .
 Russia is sensitive to Western intervention against authoritarian governments and has limited leverage . Iran, facing its own restive Kurdish population, would back Assad . Iran has a history of supporting Assad in Syria .
 There Is no political will in the United States for a war on behalf of Syrian Kurdish interests or Syrian Arab tribal fighters in Deir ez-Zor, and eastern Syria has never been important to U.S national security .
 Harakat Hezbollah al-Nujaba is one of the largest Iranian-mobilized Iraqi fighter groups in Syria . The group has vowed that its next fight will be to liberate the Golan Heights .
 Air strikes won’t compel Iranian forces to quit Syria, and ground incursions would simply force the U.S. to defend territories against sustained Iranian and Syrian unconventional warfare tactics . Air strikes will not compel Iran forces to leave Syria .
 History indicates that the Iranian and Syrian governments might even recruit jihadists to fight U.S. forces . Iran and Syria could recruit jihadists, according to reports .
 United States couJd expect little help from Turkey in any conflict with Iran . U.S. expects little help . Turkey is a key ally in the region of Syria .
 U.S. aid to Kurdish groups in Syria has created potential for cooperation between Ankara and Tehran . In August, the chief of staff of the Iranian army visited Ankara for the first time since 1979 .
 Many policymakers hope that Russia will limit Iran’s influence, forestalling the need for a direct military confrontation . As a result, many policymakers in Washington and Jerusalem hope that this will happen, they say .
 Russia will not jeopardize its political and business relationships with Iran, which include shared interests in the Caucasus and Central Asia . Russia has a long-standing relationship with Iran .
 Washington and Jerusalem should recognize that they both made their choice years ago . Washington and Israel should recognize they both chose to live in Jerusalem .
 Having accepted that Assad will stay in power, the U.S. must also accept a newly influential Iran . The United States must accept that Assad is staying in power .
 The U.S. can live with greater Iranian influence in Syria, says Obama . Fortunately, the United States can live in Syria with more Iranian influence, he says .
 Iran’s presence will complicate Israeli security, but will not threaten the country's existence, he says . Israel's security will be complicated by Iran's presence in the region, he adds .
 Jihadists regaining Syrian territory and using it as a base to export terrorism, he says . Worse would be jihadists regaining Syria territory, he adds .
 New jihadist groups have repeatedly appeared from the remnants of old ones . This is a real danger, as new jihadist groups often emerge from remnants of the old ones, he says .
 If a new version of ol Qaeda emerges in Syria, it will have learned from al-Nusra Front and tsis . It will likely be far harder to identify and contain than its forerunners, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The best way to forestall extremist recruitment in the few areas still controlled by the opposition would be to restart the local economy . The economy should be restarted in the areas still under control of the opposition, says the author .
 Economic frustrations among the residents of poor suburbs around Aleppo, Damascus, and Homs helped stir the original 2011 uprising . Economic frustrations were among the reasons for the uprising .
 Poll: 25 percent of young people in the Middle East considered providing better education and jobs the best means of resisting isiS . Only 13 percent thought military action was the best way of resisting the U.S.
 Only when the fighting stops will businesses be able to reopen and restore essential services such as clean water, eleccricicy, hospitals, and schools . Only when fighting stops is when businesses can reopen .
 The Russian diplomatic strategy of creating de-escalation zones mi^t allow for better local governance and economic recovery in those zones if the Syrian government would respect them .
 The U.S. should back Russia's approach on the condition that economic aid will flow only if the cease-fires are respected . The United States, therefore, ought to back the Russian approach, writes Aaron Miller .
 Russia hopes that the West will eventually offer aid to rebuild Assad's portions of Syria . Russia hopes to rebuild parts of Syria with the help of the West .
 Recent UN humanitarian programs have proved that attempting this would be a fool’s errand . But recent UN humanitarian . programs have proven that attempting . this would . be a . fool's errand. But recent . humanitarian programs .
 Large portions of UN aid have ended up in the pockets of government cronies or flowed solely to favored groups that support the government . UN aid has to flow through the Syrian government .
 U.S. sanctions against the Syrian govt. will make such an aid program legally impossible for the foreseeable future .
 Some analysts have argued that the sanctions should be dismantled . They say they primarily punish the Syrian people rather than the government .
 The only question is whether to waste U.S. resources on the Syrian government . The U.N. should not waste resources on Syria, says President Obama .
 "Even minimal respect for human rights, democratic norms, or good governance in Syria is now impossible," says Peter Bergen . He says securing even minimal respect of human rights and democratic norms in Syria now impossible .
 Assad and his spokespeople have consistently said that the government will reassert full control over all Syrian territory . Assad has repeatedly said that he will fight to regain full control of the country .
 The Baathist ideology that infuses the Syrian state rejects decentralization, and Syria lacks skilled provincial and town administrators . Syria has a reputation for corruption, but it has been plagued by corruption .
 Iraq's experience of corruption, mismanagement, and political infighting shows how hard it can be to decentralize a Baathist state, even with a degree of willpower and oil wealth that Syria does not have . Iraq has had a history of corruption and mismanagement that has led to
 Assad would rather live with a weakened but brutal centralized state than try to introduce real reform, he says . Assad made a choice years ago, choosing to live with the weak but brutal state .
 The governments of those countries, already overstretched, would likely allow the U.S. government to operate with greater autonomy than they could in Syriangovemment-controed areas .
 A renewed U.S. drive to raise funds would be extremely useful at a time of growing donor fatigue and dwindling UN resources, which have led to cuts in food rations in some refugee camps .
 Given the economic hardships in Syria and the government's ethnic-cleansing program, many refugees are unlikely to return home . The regime has seized whole neighborhoods in cities such as Damascus and Homs from restive communities .
 Helping refugees maintain a semblance of dignity would diminish the appeal of extremists . Helping those refugees maintain dignity would ease the appeal to extremists .
 Such a meager policy would represent a sad response to an uprising that demanded at its start only basic accountability from the government and a recognition of Syrians’ dignity as human beings .
 Norwich's Master of Arts in Diplomacy online program can help you develop the specialized skills you'll need to build cooperation and solve problems on an international scale . The program is designed to help students develop the skills needed to solve international problems .
 In the nonprofit sector, you'll gain a new perspective on the complexities of communicating and negotiating global affairs . Whether your background is business, milrlary, governmeni or government, learn how to communicate with the world .
 War and the Art of Governance Consolidating Combat Success into Political Victory . Visit graduate.norwich.edu/fapa .
 North Korea and Nuclear Weapons Entering the Naw Era of Detarrence Sur>g Chull Kim and Mkhaal D Ctitan, Editor* paperbad.975-1-42B1641212-3 .
 Kerry R Crawford paperbad. B9,9S. 975*l-62B1S4a-7 hardcover, $89.95,975*1-52B16-4aB*0 Wartime Sexual Violence From SilancB to Cond
 Never again would it let shadowy networks of jihadists, acting in the name of a perverted version of Islam, carry out a catastrophic attack on American soil . The U.S. would never again let shadowy groups of jihadists carry out such an attack .
 Washington sought to disrupt plots wherever they emerged and deny terrorists safe havens wherever they existed . Washington also sought to deny terrorist safe havens .
 Today, the terrorist threat looks much difierent than it did right before 9/11 . But when necessary, the U.S. would act alone to disrupt plots and kill or capture terrorist operatives .
 From 2013 to 2017, she served as Homeland Security and Counterterroristn Adviser to U.S. President Barack Obama . She served as Obama's Homeland Security Adviser .
 The U.S. government created new agencies and insdcuted a new paradigm for intelligence . It set up a slew of “fusion centers” and joint task forces to foster interagency cooperation .
 Borders were hardened, cockpit doors reinforced, and watch lists created . Watch lists were created .
 In Afghanistan, the Taliban regime was hosting al Qaeda . Today, despite recent Taliban gains, al Qaeda still does not enjoy free rein in the coimtry .
 In Iraq and Syria, al Qaeda’s ofTshoot, the Islamic State, is on the run, thanks to the work of a global coalition assembled in 2014 and US.-led air strikes and special operations raids . The Islamic State is now in the hands of the U.
 The group’s Iraqi capital of Mosul fell in July, and its Syrian stronghold in Raqqa is almost certain to follow . The group's Iraqi capital, Mosul, fell last month .
 The threat of a complex and catastrophic attack emanating from abroad has diminished . Owing to the pressure that the U.S. and its allies have placed on terrorists* safe havens, the threat is diminished .
 At the same time, the threat from homegrown and so called lone-wolf terrorism has increased . The threat has increased from homegrown terrorism to lone-wolves .
 Isis has harnessed the power of social media to inspire mostly yoimg men to commit violence . But these threats have taken on new urgency as isis in particular harnesses the power to inspire .
 A threat that began with an attack planned by a small group of veteran terrorists in Afghanistan has transformed into a dil^e movement . The group is planning pop-up attacks across the globe . The threat began with a group of veterans planning an attack in Afghanistan .
 The answer is one that confronts three main challenges: physical safe havens from which terrorists condnue to plot attacks, virtual safe havens through which is is and other groups mobilize individuals to commit violence, and a global environment increasingly hospitable to terrorists .
 Although the likelihood of another 9/11 has diminished, it is from zero to zero . No place to hide in the U.S. State Department .
 Jabhat alNusra—more accurately described as al Qaeda in Syria—are still intent on attacking the U.S. The most dangerous elements of its laigest afEliace are still at risk of attacking the United States .
 Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula or AQAP, al Qaeda’s Yemeni affiliate, has proved persistently focused on attacking airliners . AQAP is al Qaeda's Yemeni affiliate and has proved persistent persistent focus on attacks on planes .
 Isis, for its part, faces almost certain defeat in Iraq and Syria, but it seeks to sustain its brand with no fewer than eight global branches, from Afghanistan to Libya . Isis has eight branches in the Middle East, including one in Afghanistan and one in Libya .
 Its affiliate in Egypt’s Sinai Peninsula brought down a Russian passenger plane in 2015 . The Sinai Peninsula's Sinai Peninsula is home to a Russian plane that crashed last year .
 Australian poUce announced that they had foiled a sophisticated plot by ISIS to blow up a passenger jet . The plot was foiled by Australian authorities .
 An isis commander in Syria had sent followers in Sydney the parts for an explosive device that could be assembled in country . Paul Cruickshank has called the approach “an IKEA model of terror”
 The lesson is that the U.S. cannot take its eye off the threat of a massive, sophisticated attack . The United States is not ready to take its eyes off a massive attack, experts say .
 Finical territory provides terrorists with room to plot but also offers reliable revenue from taxation and. often, oil sales, as well as human resources through forced conscription . Terrorist territory is often a source of revenue for terrorists .
 U.S. must continue to put relentless pressure on safe havens, says Obama administration . "The United States will continue to pressure the safe havens," he says .
 In practice, this has meant adopting a “light footprint” counterterrorism strategy . It is premised on training and enabling local partners to take the fight to terrorists .
 This strategy has been successful at eliminating dangerous operatives, but it has had its downsides . The strategy has also had downsides, including a lack of transparency in the White House .
 At times, U.S. air and ground operations have generated backlash among locals . Unfortunate instances of civilian casualties have further ftieled terrorists* propaganda and recruitment efforts .
 U.S. drone operations have proved particularly controversial . The light-footprint strategy is seen as the hallmark of this light-footed strategy .
 Critics have called for more transparency regarding targeting decisions and civilian casualties . Pbinting to the problems with using force against targets outside of traditional battlefields .
 Obama administration developed a set of standards to guide the U.S. use of drones as technology proliferates . The standards are intended to enhance the legitimacy of these operations and answer questions about who is targeted .
 These policies included a requirement for near certainty that no civilian would be injured or killed in the strikes . These policies include a requirement that near certainty— the highest achievable standard, that no civilians would be killed or injured .
 President Barack Obama also issued an executive order requiring the director of national intelligence to provide an annual report on civilian casualties from U.S. strikes outside traditional battlefields .
 In some places, such as Libya and Yemen, the lack of stable governance and capable partners on the ground has made it impossible to sustain military gains . In some cases, such a lack of stability has made the gains impossible to sustained military gains, says CNN.com's John Sutter
 No amount of drone strikes or raids can counter distantly inspired violence, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Drone strikes and raids are not the answer to the problem .
 Political scientists Peter Feaver and Hal Brands have described in rhi< magazine as the ""counter-isis plus"" approach . Ultimately, the lightfootprint strategy to combat ists and al Qaeda in Iraq and Syria gave way to what the political scientists have described as the "counter
 The Obama administration stepped up operations in Iraq and Syria, increasing the number of troops and advisers there . The administration launched a more aressive air campaign and a series of special operations raids .
 To deal lasting blows to tsts and al Qaeda, the U.S. will need to continue some variant of this stepped-up strategy . The United States needs to keep others from seizing new safe havens .
 So far, President Donald Trump's plan to defeat isis closely resembles that of his predecessor . The president has delegated greater authority to commanders in the deld .
 Military operations will always be half measures if they are not paired with a strategy to make U.S. partners more viable, the U.N. says . But military operations must be paired with strategy to get countries to govern inclusively and reform their economies .
 Trump administration's proposed budget cuts to the State Department are worrisome . Military leaders regularly call for increases in foreign aid . That’s why the proposed cuts are so worrisome .
 Pressure on safe havens will merely keep a lid on a threat from terrorists . Terrorists are growing more creative by the day, says CNN.com .
 From AQA^’s 2010 plan to stow printer cartridges filled with explosives in airplane cargo holds to IS is’ recent plot in Australia, terrorists have shown a determinadon to overcome the post-9/11 security obstacles to bringing down airliners .
 The Trump administration has wisely put an emphasis on aviation security . The president's administration is putting emphasis on security .
 In March, the UK issued a temporary ban on the use of laptops in the passenger cabin on flints originating from certain airports .
 The administration threatened to extend the ban to all U.S.-bound Bights . Some internadonal carriers had to improve their security measures after the threat .
 The government should continue to focus on aviadon security, but it should go further and partner with the private sector to generate innovadve methods of detecting new explosive materials .
 Terrorists are doing their own innovation, and some have even experimented with drones . Terrorists, of course, are experimenting with drones, including drones .
 Iraqi officials say they thwarted a plot to use toy planes to deliver sarin and mustard gas . Al Qaeda operatives intended to use toys to deliver the gas .
 More and more devices are going online as part of “the Internet of things,” creating new vulnerabilities that ISIS and others could exploit . Adding to the danger, more than a million devices are being connected to the Internet .
 The Trump administration should work with the private sector to build security features into new technology at the design stage, rather than play catch up with terrorists’ attempts to commandeer such devices, the report says .
 The United States’ future safety demands that it, not its adversaries, dominate the technological domain . The U.S. needs to dominate the technology domain, not adversaries, it says .
 The innovation that has benefited terrorists the most, however, is social media . Social media has been used by terrorists in the past, according to the terrorist group . Terrorists have been using social media to spread their propaganda .
 Lone wolves are never truly alone; they deliberately search for communities online . Lone wolves search for and find communities online. Lone wolves never truly truly alone, they search for community online .
 isis has created a sophisticated media machine that pumps out professionally produced videos, multilingual tweets, a glossy magazine, and Instagram posts . Other groups, including al Qaeda, are now mimicking ibis’ tactics .
 Al Qaeda’s Syrian branch has steady stream of slick videos and magazines . Gone are the amateur videos of al Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri sitting crosslegged before a drab backdrop .
 The U.S. government has taken steps to beat terrorists at the social media game . Silicon Valley is taking promising steps, but it's not the first step .
 Gel paid to learri Live, study, interact with 20 harvd-pkked internadoral students from zones of confict af>d socral strife . Students will learn public speaking, negotjatlon, mediation, and social entrepreneurship stalls .
 UniveisUy (^^SanDie^* scNKAceuApeiBMe iiinimirimwiifim) To learn more or apply, vbft www;hansefunimarkislHirta.er9 or contact BorvieL
 Rich provides a highly readable and accessible runthrough of all the main challenges with which democracy IS currently beset . Rich provides an extremely eloquent, extraordinarily well written, and impressively informed piece of work .
 Facebook is employing artificial intelligence and image-matching technology to stop known terrorist content from proliferating . Facebook boasts more than two billion active monthly users .
 Twitter, for its part, has suspended more than 375,000 accounts promoting terrorism . Twitter says it has suspended 375,500 accounts promoting terror .
 Social media platforms will need to train algorithms to detect extremist content and banish it immediately . Deleting by hand after the fact will not suffice, and so social media platforms must train their algorithms .
 Companies will need to ramp up support for legitimate voices that rebut terrorists’ narratives . At the same time, companies must ramp up their support of legitimate voices .
 Jigsaw, a think tank created by Google, has developed the Redirect Method, a project that serves online users who have been identified as susceptible to IS is’ messaging and serves them alternative content that subtly debunks terrorist propaganda . The project was developed by Google think tank Jigsaw
 The government can play a role, too, not as the messenger but as a partner to the private sector . The government needs to be a partner in the development of the country's largest economy .
 In 2016, the State Department launched the Global Engagement Center, an office dedicated to supporting voices that rebut terrorists’ messaging . The office is dedicated to helping people rebut terrorist messaging .
 Secretary of State RexTillerson has refused to spend the $30 million already earmarked for the center . The center currently lacks a director and is losing some of the privatesector talent recruited last year .
 What may most influence the future terrorist threat is not the flourishing of physical and virtual safe havens per se, but the breakdown in order that is sure to spawn more of both . The breakdown of order will lead to more terrorist threats, experts say .
 Iran and its proxies are promoting and taking advantage of instability in the Middle East and beyond . Across the Gulf and the Levant, and even in Afghanistan, Iran is promoting instability, experts say . Iran's proxies are also promoting instability in Afghanistan and beyond, they say .
 Russia is working hard to protect its client in Syria and create a new one in Libya . Russia is doing the same in eastern Europe, and it has worked hard in Syria, and Libya .
 The future threat will be defined by these areas of chaos, the author says . The future is defined by the safe havens presented by them, foreign fighters drawn to them, and violence inspired by them .
 There is a dangerous irony in Trump’s invocation of “America first,"" a message that has caused U.S. allies to wonder whether they can still count on Washington to continue as a partner .
 If the U.S. pulls up the drawbridge in the name of protection, it may deny itself counterterrorism tools that are essential to the country’s safety .
 By banning travel of all citizens from certain countries, the U.S. risks alienating the very partners it needs to fight today’s terrorists . The “clash of civilizations” narrative that ISIS uses to recruit new recruits is fueling the ‘clash . of
 Partnership with local allies is the key to successfully taking back territory from terrorists, says MoD . As the campaign against ists has laid bore, partnerships are key to success .
 In the past, the U.S. has taken the lead on working with foreign governments to share watch lists and improve border security .
 Europe will continue to face an immediate threat from skilled returnees of the type that participated in the 2015 Paris attacks and the 2016 Brussels bombings . But given that some fighters have spent years peifecring their violent craft on the battlefield, the greater concern may now be “not so
 The continent has yet to experience the kind of sea change that occurred in the United States . The U.S. radically rethought its practices for sharing information among law enforcement and intelligence agencies .
 In many European capitals, the wall impeding such sharing is far too high . The wall in Brussels is too high to allow such sharing to be shared in Europe .
 What happens in Europe matters for the U.S. security of the United States . The Atlantic Ocean is not a perfect buffer, but it's important for the nation's security .
 The U.S. should expand counterterrorism cooperation with its European partners . The United States should not confuse allies with travel bans and mixed messages about the value of NATO .
 It should press its partners to more rapidly share airline passenger data and intelligence gleaned from investigations, it says .
 It should resume the dialogue begun by James Clapper, the former director of national intelligence, on promoting intelligence sharing with and among European countries . The U.S. should also resume its dialogue with Europe on intelligence sharing .
 It would be a mistake, however, to look only outward, ignoring the growing terrorist threat at home . The U.S. should not ignore the growing terror threat in the Middle East, it says .
 The hit-and-run murder of a peaceftil protester in Charlottesville, Virginia, by an avowed white supremacist is only the most recent reminder that the U.S. has a terrorism problem unrelated to violent jihadism .
 The challenge that bedeviled both Bush and Obama administrations seems harder than ever . Building trust between communities and their government to address extremism in all its forms seems harder now .
 The Trump administration has proposed a budget that zeroes out funding for a Department of Homeland Security program aimed at countering violent extremism . It has already withdrawn a grant for a group dedicated to combating domestic hate groups such as the Ku BClux Klan .
 Sixteen years after 9/11, many Americans are weary of the war on terrorism . The war is still raging in the United States, 16 years on .
 Having built up its defenses, the U.S. should no longer go abroad in search of monsters to destroy, some contend . Some argue that the United States should not go abroad looking for monsters to kill .
 They say it should stick to keeping the bad guys out and adjust to a new normal in which some attacks are inevitable . Instead, they say, it should adjust to the new normal and keep it safe .
 It would be a grave mistake to conftjse a mitigated threat with a weak one . But it would not be a mistake to give up on a weak threat, it says .
 To date, the United States’ strategy has succeeded in preventing another 9/11-rype attack, largely because it built a net designed to do just that .
 The country will need a new net for the next phase in the war on terrorism, the country says . The net will be needed for the country's next phase of the war .
 Moscow’s meddling in U.S. elections is deeply worrying, but it is just one aspect of the threat Russia poses . Moscow's meddling in American elections is one of the most worrying aspects of Russia's threat, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Under Vladimir Putin, Russia has embarked on a systematic challenge to the West . Putin has pledged to take on the West in a systematic way to counter-Western sentiment .
 The goal is to weaken the bonds between Europe and the U.S. and among EU members, undermine NATO’s solidarity, and strengthen Russia‘s strategic position in its immediate neighborhood and beyond . The goal of this is to weak ties between the United States and Europe and
 Putin wants nothing less than to return Russia to the center of global politics . Putin wants to challenge the primacy that the United States has enjoyed since the end of the Cold War . Putin: "I want Russia to be a global leader"
 Russia has undertaken a major military modernization designed to intimidate neighbors and weaken NATO . Russia has resorted to the overt use of miliary force to establish new facts on the ground, not just in its “sphere of privileged interests"
 The U.S. military has long operated with a free hand in the Middle East . Soviet republics, but also further aHeld, including in the Mideast, have long been a focus .
 For some time now, "the Kremlin has been de facto operating in a war mode,"" the Russia scholar Dmitri Trenin has observed . Putin has been behaving like a wartime leader, he says, and Putin is behaving like that .
 NATO divisions weaken NATO’s ability to respond to Russian provocations and provide openings for Moscow to extend its reach and iniluence . First, it is critical to maintain transatlantic unity; divisions across the Atlantic .
 The alliance has responded to the new Russia challenge by enhancing its presence in eastern Europe and the Baldc states . Russia has so far not threatened the territorial integrity of any NATO member state .
 NATO must do more to bolster its deterrence by sending a clear message to the Kremlin that it will not tolerate further Russian aggression or expansionism . But policymakers must remember that the United States is not at war with Russia; there is no need for Washington to put itself on a war footing,
 Dialogue and open channels of communication are essential to avoiding misunderstandings and miscalculations that could escalate into a war no one wants . Dialogue is essential to avoid misunderstandings, miscalculation, says U.S. diplomat .
 The military confronration that had marked relations for more than 40 years rapidly and peacefully disappeared with the collapse of the Warsaw Pact, the withdrawal of Soviet forces from eastern Europe .
 Governments focused their energies on transforming eastern Europe^s command economies into liinctioning market democracies and on the task of unifying the continent .
 In Russia in the early 1990s, economic “shock therapy"" rapidly dismantled the state-controlled economy of the Soviet era . But it failed to produce immediate or widely shared prosperity .
 The Russian financial crisis of 1998 imposed significant costs on the population, including a sharp rise in prices for basic goods . It helped set the stage for the emergence of a new generation of leaders committed to stability .
 Putin took office in late 1999 promising an end to chaos and a return to stability . By the end of the decade, a demoralized Russian public welcomed the arrival of a strong new leader .
 By tightening his control over the state bureaucracy, Putin fulfilled his promise . Putin fulfilled that promise by tightening control over state bureaucracy .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has managed to raise the standard of living of ordinary Russians . Oil and gas prices filled government coffers, but also helped raise the standards of living in Russia .
 The focus during this time was on domestic renewal rather than foreign engagement . Putin did indicate for increased cooperation with the U.S., especially when it came to confronting common threats .
 Putin chafed at what he saw as Washington’s growing power and arrogance, especially in the wake of the 2003 invasion of Iraq . He gradually abandoned any thought of seeking common ground with the West . Putin: "I'm not going to go to Washington"
 Putin spoke at the Munich Security Conference in 2007 . The first signs of this shift came, unexpectedly, in a speech Putin delivered at the 2007 conference . Putin's views on Russia's foreign policy have been consistent in recent years .
 He railed against NATO expansion and accused the U.S. of running roughshod over the sovereignty of other countries in its pursuit of a unipolar world .
 Russia exploited internal disagreements between ethnic Russians and Estonians to launch a cyberattack . Estonia’s government, media outlets, and banking system were targeted . Estonia's government and media outlets were targeted by the Russian government .
 Russia’s war with Georgia, ostensibly designed to secure the independence of two breakaway r^ons, was meant to send a clear message that Russia was prepared to stymie Geoigia's ambitions to join the West . The war was ostensibly meant to secure independence of Georgia
 Moscow achieved its objectives in the war against Georgia but the conflict laid bare real weaknesses in Russia’s armed forces, including failing command and control, a woeful lack of military training, and significant shortcomings in its military hardware .
 Some 60 to 70 percent of Russian tanks and armored vehicles broke down during the five days of fighting . Russia's per capita military spending was 56 percent greater than Georgia's that year . Heavy armor deployed by Tbilisi was far more advanced than Moscow's .
 Kremlin immediately embarked on a massive military reform and modernization program . Moscow has been criticized for its lack of modernization in recent years .
 Military spending in 2016 amounted to 5. percent of Russia’s GDP, the highest proportion since 1990 . Moscow announced a ten-year modernization program in 2011, which included $360 billion in new military procurement .
 At the same dme, the Russian armed forces began a wholesale restructuring and an overhaul of their training programs . The Russian military is undergoing a major overhaul of its training programs in Russia .
 The effect of these improvements became clear in Ukraine six years after the in Georgia . Ukraine is one of the most important countries in the world to improve its economy .
 Putin once told U.S. President George W. Bush that Ukraine was “not even a state"" and claimed that the Soviet Union had given the territory of Crimea to Ukraine in 1954 as “a gift"
 Moscow fomented a separatist reboioo in the eastern Ukrainian provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk, home to a predominant Russian-speaking population . Not satisfied with controlling this strategically vital peninsula, Moscow then followed by fomenting a separatist uprising .
 Russia sent military equipment, advisers, and ultimately thousands of troops to Ukraine &om in order to prevent Ukraine from securing control over its own territory . Russia sent thousands of Russian troops to the region in an attempt to stop Ukraine from taking over its territory .
 The thrusts into eastern Ukraine were straight out of the Putin playbook, but the Crimea operation represented a qualitatively new effort by Moscow to get its way .
 Crimea was not just invaded; it was annexed and incorporated into the Russian Federation after an illegitimate, rigged referendum . Crimea was invaded and annexed into Russia's Federation after a illegitimate referendum, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Putin wanted Russia's “gift"" back, even though Moscow had agreed to respect the territorial integrity of every former Soviet republic when the Soviet Union broke up, in 1991 . Moscow had explicitly reiterated that commitment in a legally binding memorandum negotiated with Ukraine, the United States, and the
 First time in postwar European history, one country had annexed territory from another by force . For the first time, it was a first time in history that one country annexed territory by force.
 The operation in Crimea demonstrated a whole new form of Russian military prowess . The operation also demonstrated a new kind of military prowess, the Russian military says .
 Stealthily deployed special forces took over key facilities and organs of the Ukrainian state . Special forces took control of key Ukrainian state organs and facilities .
 Sophisticated cyber-operations and relentless disinformation diverted attention from what was happening . "Cyber-attacks and relentless disinformation distortion distracted attention from the truth," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The speed of the operation meant it was completed before anyone could mount an effective response . And the speed was so fast that no effective response could be mounted .
 Russian special forces, dressed in green uniforms without identifying patches, suddenly appeared at strategic points throughout Crimea . They effectively took control of the peninsula, effectively taking over Crimea .
 A large-scale propaganda operation sought to hide Moscow's fingerprints by suggesting that these “little green men"" were local opposition forces that reflected the popular will to reject the political change in Kiev and reunite with Russia instead . Simultaneously, a large . scale propaganda campaign sought to
 This, in short, was no traditional military invasion; it was hybrid warfare in which goals were accomplished even before the adversary understood what was going on . This is hybrid warfare, not military invasion, it's hybrid warfare: hybrid warfare . The U.S. military says it's not
 Neither Ukraine nor NATO was prepared to deal with the threat posed by Russia, Ukraine . It represented an entirely new threat for which neither NATO nor Ukraine nor Ukraine was prepared . The Ukraine crisis was the first time NATO had faced a new threat .
 Moscow justified the invasion and annexation of Crimea with arguments based on a new form of Russian nationalism . Moscow justified its annexation and invasion of Crimea by arguing that it was a form of nationalism .
 From the outset of the conflict, Putin had maintained that Crimea was rightly Russia’s and that Moscow was fully within its right in retaking it .
 Russian-speaking people in Ukraine were being attacked by a violent mob of “nationalists, neo-Nazis, Russophobes, and anti-Semites” who had carried out a coup in Kiev, Russia said . Russia claimed that it had to act because it had been
 Putin was adamant that he was not talking about just Russian citizens, or even ethnic Russians, when pronouncing this absolute right to defend them anywhere . And he said it was not just Russians, or Russians, but Russian citizens .
 Daalder's words echoed claims made during the 1930s that Germany had a right to protect Germans in other countries, such as Austria . To many, these words echo claims made by Germany during that time .
 Russians invasion of Ukraine has exacted a huge toll on the country . The fighting in the country has killed hundreds of thousands in recent months .
 More than 10,000 people have died since mid-2014, according to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees . Nearly 25,000 have been injured, and some 1. million Ukrainians have been internally displaced .
 Russia's military footprint stretches from the Arctic in the north to the Mediterranean in the south . Yet the incursion into Ukraine represents only one part of the expansion of Russia’s military footprint, which stretches from Arctic to Mediterranean .
 Russia’s military buildup is both vast in scope and strategically significant . Russia's military buildup has been the focus of the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 In the country’s far north, Russia has reopened former military bases near the Arctic Ocean . Russia has established a position of military dominance in a region where peaceful cooperation among Arctic powers had become the norm .
 Russia has bolstered and modernized its military presence in its western territories . Russia's western territories stretch from the Norwegian border in the north to the Ukrainian border . From there, Russia has modernized and bolstered its presence in the region .
 The Kaliningrad exclave is the most heavily militarized piece of land in Europe . It is just under 6,000 square miles of land sandwiched between Lithuania and Poland .
 More than 300,000 welltrained troops are deployed in Kaliningrad, equipped with modern tanks, armored vehicles, and missile batteries, including a nuclear-capable short-range missile system . Poland and three Baltic states pose a significant military threat to Poland and the three Baltic countries .
 Since the war in Ukraine began, Russia has sent additional brigades to the Ukrainian border and announced the creation of three new divisions that will face in a ""southwest direction”
 Thousands of troops have been deployed to occupied areas in eastern Ukraine, Georgia, Moldova, and Moldova . Troops are in support of Armenia's claim to the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh region .
 Russia has enlarged its air and naval presence in Syria in order to better assist the endangered regime of Bashar al-Assad . Russia is effectively ending NATO’s uncontested control of the eastern Mediterranean, a strategically pivotal area .
 Russia's navy now boasts missiles that can threaten most of Europe . Many analysts worry about the threat to the Baltic states . But the more dramatic shift has been in the Mediterranean, where Russia has missiles that threaten Europe .
 Russia's enhanced military presence has been matched by increased military assertiveness . Russia's increased military presence is matched with increased assertiveness in the region .
 Tha srovving tnfluanea of naw world powers, amargtng statas and nori'Stata actors, soeioaeonomkc transformation, and cross’bordar crisas have rasnapad tha ftald
 Thosa pursuing earaars in this araa must study tha Issuas and ba daaply Invefvad In tham . Thosa pursue ear araarars .
 MS lr.\ Global Affairs is offerad by the NVU School of Profaulonal Studios Cantor for Global Affairs . Offers students a chance to explore the heart of NYC's heart of the city .
 H Daalder long-range missiles £red from naval vessels in the Caspian and Mediterranean Seas . HDaalder missiles were fired from naval ships in the Mediterranean and Caspia .
 It has flown fighter and bomber missions close to or even within the airspace of NATO member states and other European countries . The U.S. has flown its own fighter jets close to NATO airspace .
 It has deployed nuclear submarines armed with ballistic missiles from its northern ports to the Adantic . The Adantic is located in the Adantantic .
 It has engaged in often dangerous air and naval activities, including buzzing NATO naval vessels and aircraft . And it has flown military aircraft with their transponders turned off, and intentionally failed to monitor emergency communications channels .
 Russian military has significantly enhanced the scale and scope of its training exercises, launching many without any notice . Meanwhile, the Russian military is launching many of the exercises without notice . Russia has also increased the scale of its military exercises .
 Moscow conducted its quadrennial Zapad exercise, mobilizing up to 100,000 troops in western Russia, Kaliningrad, and Belarus . In 2014, days before the invasion of Uliraine, snap exercise mobilized 150,000 soldiers near the Russian-Ukrainian b
 Russia is modernizing all three legs of its nuclear triad, building new long-range missiles, submarines, and bombers . Russia's military buildup and posturing have provided Moscow with renewed confidence . Russia once again matters and that the world can no longer ignore it, author says .
 In the Kremlin’s eyes, Russia is again a great global power and therefore can act as global powers do . Russia is now a global power again, says the Kremlin .
 NATO allies must work harder to thwart the challenge Russia poses to security and stability in Europe and beyond . Washington and other NATO allies need to work harder, says CNN's John Avlon .
 NATO allies had been divided in their views of Russia for years . France, Germany, and Italy insisted that the alliance should seek a strategic partnership with Moscow . Others (such as Poland and the Baltic states) warned that Russia still posed a threat .
 NATO responded with actions designed to leave no doubt about its commitment to defend all its members against a possible Russian attack . The Russian invasion of Ukraine ended much of the internal debate, and NATO responded .
 The alliance created a new 5,000-member joint task force that can deploy within to 72 hours . The alliance also established command-and-control headquarters in all its eastern European member states .
 NATO has increased the number of exercises it carries out in central and eastern Europe . NATO has also made infrastructure investments to enable reinforcements to arrive at their destinations more quickly, and ramped up naval and air presence in the Baltic Sea and Black Sea .
 The U.S. has added an additional combat brigade, which deploys to Europe from the United States on a rotating basis . It heads the new combat battalion in Poland and has added another combat brigade .
 Beginning this year, it will also begin forward-deploying tanks and other heavy equipment for a combat division . The move will allow for the rapid reinforcement of NATO’s eastern territories .
 Annual spending on this European reassurance initiative has risen from less than $1 billion two years ago to nearly $S billion for the coming hscai year . The budget request for this year's budget request has been nearly $2 billion .
 NATO's collective-defense efforts are the largest reinforcement of NATO’s efforts since the end of the Cold War . Together, these steps amount to the biggest reinforcement of the NATO collective defense efforts since end of Cold War, NATO says .
 NATO has halted the alliance’s decline in overall capabilities, but the response has been too slow and too limited . The steps taken by NATO countries since 2014 to strengthen deterrence have halted NATO's decline in capabilities, the authors say .
 NATO must invest in land, air, and naval infrastructure to enable rapid reinforcement of the alliance’s eastern European member states . These steps must be backed by real improvements in the overall capability of NATO's military forces, as well as signiffcant investments .
 Most European countries have cut their defense spending and &iled to invest sufficiently in maintaining, let alone increasing, iheii armed forces . Unfortunately, for over a decade, most European nations have cut defense spending .
 The United States has steadily reduced its overall military footprint in Europe . Meanwhile, distracted by conflicts in Afghanistan and the Mideast, the U.S. has been distracted by the Middle East .
 NATO leaders agreed to stop cutting defense spending after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine . NATO members committed to spending at least two percent of GDP on defense by 2024 . NATO leaders finally agreed to spend more on defense in response to Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 European NATO countries ivere spending two percent of their combined GDP on defense . By 2014, that number hod fallen to 1.45 percent .
 NATO should push all members to reach the two percent target by 2020 at the latest . NATO should move more quickly and push all NATO members to meet the target . NATO needs to demonstrate every ally's commitment to the defense of NATO’s .
 Current Cold War is very different from the actual Cold War, which saw ideological clash that extended to every part of the world . But the current confrontation is far from the Cold War's ideological clash .
 Huge armies were deployed on either side of the Iron Curtain, many thousands of nuclear weapons were ready to launch at a moment’s notice . proxy wars were fought as for away as Africa, Asia, and Latin America .
 Today's confrontation lacks the intensity, scale, and ideological divisiveness of that earlier, deadlier conflict . Today’s confrontation lacks intensity and scale of the earlier conflict, but it lacks intensity .
 The biggest threat today is not a deliberate war, as it was then, but the possibility of miscalculation . Moreover, the biggest threat is not deliberate war as it is now, but a miscalculated war, the author says .
 Russia might not believe NATO would actually come to the defense of its most exposed allies . NATO countries, and not least (he United States, are so vital .
 NATO forces are important signals of resolve, but they need to be backed bywords that leave no doubt of the intention to use these forces to defend allies if they are attacked .
 NATO or Russia could miscalculation by failing to understand each other's motives and intentions . NATO and Russia could be miscalculating on each other, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 Doubts are fed by snap military exercises involving large numbers of troops near borders, a lack of transparency in deployments, and dangerous military activities (hat simulate attacks and threaten the safety of opposing forces)
 At a time of rising tensions, actions like these contribute to on uncertain climate and increase the possibility of accidents and escalation . Actions like these add to an already uncertain climate, say experts .
 "The most pressing priority is to encourage direct dialogue, at both the political and, especially, especially the military level," says President Obama . "Most pressing priority" should be to encourage dialogue, he says .
 NATO-Russla Coimcil is a body that brings Russia and all 29 NATO members together under one roof . The body is well suited to this task and can help devise rules and procedures that will reduce the likelihood of confrontation .
 Rising tensions have sidelined the council and turned it into a venue for debating differences rather than finding common ground . Rising poliricaJ tensions have turned the council into a place for debating .
 It provides a forum for discussing ways to increase transparency, build confidence, and ensure communication during crises . It is necessary to avoid mlscalculadon and escalation .
 Russia poses a threat unlike any the United States and its allies have faced since the end of the Cold War . U.S. and allies have been at odds with Russia for more than a decade .
 The United States and its European allies can meet only through unity and strength, writes CNN.com's John Avlon . Europe’s future stability and security may well be imperiled, Avlon says .
 It Is greatly encouraging that the IMF is paying attention to these developments."" —Simon Johnson, Professor of Entrepreneurship.
 An engaging read that is relevant to all who are keen to discover and study the possibilities that digitalization and data brings to governments and people, across the world."" —Nandan Nllekanl, Pounding Chairman of Unique Identifkation Authority of India S25.
 Support for this book and the conference on wKkh it is based was provided by the Sill & Melinda Gates Foundation .
 The Red Star and the Crescent Cuhure and Gavemante <fier the Arab Spring . China and the Middle East . China . and the . Arab Spring China .
 To contribute to the existing body of knowledge on issues related to the Persian Gulf region, the Middle East, and Asia, visit http://www.nasa.gov.org/ .
 Hackers targeted a number of prominent political organizadons of both parties in the two years before the 2016 U.S. presidential election . They managed to steal a trove of documents pertaining to the presidential campaign of Hillary Clinton . The Democratic National Committee was among those targeted .
 The hackers got ahold of private e-mails, including those belonging to Debbie Wasserman Schultz, the dnc chair, and John Padesta, Clinton*s campaign chair . The hackers also got hold of e-mail belonging to Wasserman Schultz .
 Some exchanges discussed hot-button issues such as the Clinton Foundation’s fundraising or suggested that senior dnc figures had sought to aid Clinton in her primary campaign against Senator Bemie Sanders .
 WikiLeaks, began publishing stolen e-mails, fueling right-wing conspiracy theories about Clinton . Donald Trump, the Republican presidendal nominee, seized on the leaks to criticize his opponent .
 Democrats seethed as reports emerged that hackers were Linked to Russian military and intelligence agencies . Meanwhile, Democrats are seething as reports emerge that the hackers were linked to Russia's military .
 The Russian government is accused of being behind the hacking, which aimed to interfere with the election . The hacking was confirmed in early October by the Department of Homeland Security .
 In January, the ODNt released a declassified report stating even more definidvely that the hacking had been part of a Russian attempt to “undermine the U.S.-led liberal democratic order" by sowing chaos and eroding faith in the democratic process .
 Washington has failed to devise a strategy to deter cyberattacks or respond strongly enough when such attacks have occurred, experts say . One reason Moscow succeeded is that Washington has not been able to respond quickly enough to cyberattacks .
 Washington’s retaliatory measures have amounted to little more than largely symbolic sanctions and diplomatic slaps on the wrist, Susan Henntssey says . Washington's retaliatory Novemher/December 2017 retaliatory actions have been largely symbolic .
 This has remained true even in the wake of Russia's unprecedented meddling in the 2016 presidential election . This is despite the fact that Russia's interference in the election was unprecedented .
 U.S. failed to deter Russia; instead, Russia has deterred it from meaningful retaliation . Put simply, the United States failed to . The United States has not been deterred by meaningful retaliation, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In Tht Cybersecuri^ Dilemma, Ben Buchanan, a cybersecurity specialist at Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center, discusses the structural challenges unique to interacdons among states in cyberspace . Ben Buchanan: Oudines are structural challenges that are unique
 In Cyberspace in Peace and War, economist and security expert Martin Libicki details states’ operational and strategic consideradons in the cyber-realm . The economist says states must be strategic and operational in cyber warfare .
 These two books add nuance to debates about digital conflicts while resisting the temptadon to treat them as analogous to nuclear or conventional ones . They add nuance, but resist the temptation to treat digital conflicts as analogies .
 The U.S. has failed to adequately protect itself from cyberthreats, experts say . And together, they help explain why, they say, the United States has failed .
 Authors offer clear-eyed reviews of U.S. responses to earlier state-sponsored hacks . They also provide analytic frameworks that could help policymakers think through the challenge of preventing future digital assaults .
 The U.S. must clearly delineate what consdtutes unacceptable behavior in cyberspace . The United States must embrace a broader range of retaliatory measures to deter cyberattacks .
 Buchanan and Libicki agree that deterrence is primarily about messaging, or the ability to clearly communicate boundaries and consequences .
 Each of these components is exponentially more complex in cyberspace than in a conventional setting . The components are exponentially more difficult to control than in the world's most complex places .
 Hackers can easily intrude into a network without attracting attention . As Buchanan notes, hackers can easily do so without attracting any attention .
 Even when an attack is discovered, it can be notoriously diihcult to confidently attribute it to any one particular actor . Even when it's discovered, the attack is notoriously difficult to pinpoint the culprit .
 If authorities do identify the perpetrator, they must determine whether the cyberattack crossed the retaliation threshold and merits a response . And if they do identify, they sllllll must decide whether the attack crossed the threshold of retaliation .
 In conventional settings, physical troop movements, progress along a path to nucleariaation, or military buildups, have long guided these decisions . In the U.S. military build-ups have long led to troop movements .
 Cyberdefenses can block particular methods of intrusion completely, unlike convendonal military defenses, which cannot necessarily prevent the actions of a more powerful state . Secrecy and surprise are essential for cyberdefenses, says cyberdefenders .
 Washington has faced escalating cyberthreats from a range of adversaries in the past decade . Washington has gained ample experience with these strategic dilemmas in the last decade .
 The U.S. has yet to experience a cyberattack that direcdy threatened lives . The United States may well have deterred the worst, though .
 As often true in deterrence, success is invisible but failure is public . Success is invisible in deterrence but success is visible in the eyes of the public .
 The 2014 hacking of Soi^ Pictures, attributed to North Korea, and the 2015 cyberattack on the U.S. Office of Personnel Management were attributed to China . But two high-profile feilures have revealed important weaknesses in the United States, deterrence policy .
 In 2009, President Barack Obama announced a new U.S. strategy to address the threat posed by increasingly aggressive actors in cyberspace .
 Digital assaults tested the comprehensiveness of these new policies and revealed strategically significant shortcomings . But repeated digital assaults tested digital assaults and revealed strategic shortcomings .
 November 2014, a group sponsored by North Korea and calling itself the Guardians of Peace inBltrated computer networks at Sony Pictures, extracting sensitive personnel information and stealing copies of unreleased films .
 The hackers attempted to blackmail Sony, demanding that the studio abandon its plans to release a comedy critical of North Korea’s supreme leader . The studio had planned to release the film critical of the North Korean leader .
 The disclosure of studio executives’ hacked e-mails proved embarrassing and expensive; one Sony executive estimated that it cost the company $35 million . One Sony exec estimated that the hacking of the company’s e-mailed executives cost Sony $35million .
 Guardians of Peace threatened physical attacks on U.S. movie theaters if the film were released . The United States government did not publicly attribute the attack to North Korea . The film was released in the United States in 2009 .
 Sony initially capitulated, but following widespread public criticism, including from Obama, it reversed course and released the film on a limited basis . The film was released in a limited version of the controversial film .
 Homeland Security insisted there was no genuine threat to theaters . The screenings proceeded without incident . The Department of Homeland Security insists there was a genuine threat .
 U.S. government announced new sanctions against North Korean government agencies and officials in January 2015 . But this haphazard response demonstrated the difficulty Washington has had in defining thresholds for retaliation . The United States has had to define thresholds for retaliatory measures .
 The Sony episode revealed three notable shortcomings in U.S. cyberdeterrence policy . Sony episode reveals three major shortcomings in United States cybercrime policy .
 First, there was persistent ambiguity about the government’s role in responding to attacks on privately owned information in the U.S. in^astructure .
 Government and private industry were unable to coordinate a unified response to the threats . Second, the government and private . industry was unable to . coordinate a . unified response . The U.S. government and the private sector are unable to. work together .
 The press was eager and willing to report on the substance of the hacked e-mails, even if they were brought to light by an aggressive foreign actor . The press focused far more on the often frivolous or salacious content of the emails than on the motives behind the hacking .
 Washington was slow to recognize the broader implications of the attack and the need for a government-led response . Because a movie studio fell outside the definition of critical infrastructure, the attack was not considered critical .
 Drawing the line at intrusion of government networks failed to deter consequential attacks on private networks . Attacks on government networks have also been carried out in the U.S.
 In this case, it seemed that U.S. officials had not anticipated an attack on the country’s core values as a potential trigger for retaliation . Freedom of speech and expression, freedom of speech, expression, is not a trigger for retaliatory action .
 Government action came only after physical threats may have communicated to North Korea and other adversaries . The fact that Washington did not consider cyberattack itself sufficient grounds for retaliation may have signaled that Washington didn't consider it sufficient grounds to retaliate .
 Attacks on government networks have also failed to elicit a strong response, a fiirther blow to U.S. credibility . The attacks on government systems are also failing to elicit strong responses .
 In June 2015, the Obama administration revealed that hackers had stolen a trove of data from servers at the OPM . The OPM houses massive amounts of personal information about government employees .
 James Clapper, the director of national intelligence, said that China was the “leading suspect” in the attack . Clapper: China is the leading suspect’s role in the U.S. attack .
 The Obama administration's updated cyber-deterrence policy was signed into law in December 2015 . But it did little to address weaknesses revealed by the Sony and OPM hacks .
 Obama administration narrowly defines thresholds for retaliation in cyberspace . Obama administration focused on threats to human life, critical infrastructure, economic security and military command and control .
 Russia has long engaged in cyber-enabled information warfare campaigns . The Russians have long targeted its strategically important neighbors, including its neighbors .
 In 2014, a Russianbacked group known as CyberBerkut interfered in Ukraine’s presidential election . The group is known to have meddled in elections in Ukraine .
 Ultimately, those efforts were detected in time and did not alter the election’s outcome . Ultimately, the election did not change the outcome .
 Given that track record, Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. election should have come as no surprise, it's not surprising .
 The Russians targeted nongovernment networks, just as the COUNCIL orL' FOREIGN RELATIONS did . The Internship Program riitf Counrif on Foreign Relaiiom is uekCtilenioJ inJiviJuuls .
 Inieriu are working on a semester iiv work in both the Nev^' York CUv and Washington, D.C.> uflioes .
 An intern's duties generaJIv ctnibbi ofadministratise s^ork, editing and writing, and event ccMtrduiation. An intern is required to be a writer and editor .
 The Counoil ctimideri both undergraduate and graduate students with ma[oc^ in IniernatiunaJ Kebtiont, Political Science. The CounOil ctimidi both undergraduates and graduate student with ma'oc .
 A regional specialiaariim and language skills may alio be retfuired fur some positions .
 Internship Coordinator in the Human ELrstJurce;S Office ai the address listed below . Applicanitt should have evoellent skills in administration, writing, and research .
 North Koreans had done eailier. N^' 1006$ ILL 01.4.9400 9S92 humjntc%tfU(ieS(A'(rur), rur{ bnpu(g 43 Susan Henntssey)
 The Kremlin seems to have noted that the leaked e-mails of Sony executives were deemed an embarrassment rather than a form of information war .
 The DNC and Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee networks that were infiltrated were not government systems or election infrastructure . Their penetration by a foreign power did not set off sufficient alarms within the U.S. government .
 Clapper indicated in May 2016 that the intelligence community was aware that hackers were targeting the presidential campaigns . He implied that the activity was within the ordinary course of passive intelligence collection .
 By the summer of 2016, there was strong evidence of Russia's involvement in the hacking and release of the DNc's e-mails, but the U.S. government did not publicly attribute the attacks to Russia until October .
 Clinton e-mails created impression that Clinton campaign had something to hide . Information that was otherwise unremarkable became headline news . If anything, the e-mail had been surreptitiously obtained created the impression that the Clinton campaign .
 U.S. government attribution from the outset could have shifted focus to Russia's motives . Strong and speci£c United States government attribution could have substantially shifted the focus to Russian motives .
 When the Obama administration finally did respond to the Russian hacking, the tri gg er was not the theft itself or the release of stolen e-mails . The Obama administration responded to the hacking, but not the e-mail theft itself, it was the release .
 The threat of actual vote counts being compromised had been uncovered by state election administrators . Instead, it was the ta*eting of election infrastructure . The threat was uncovered by election administrators, they say .
 Herz posited that actions undertaken by states for defensive reasons are often perceived as threats by ocher states . Herz: Increased defense spending or amassing troop on a border is perceived as a threat by ochers states .
 Those states respond by affirming their own security, which others perceive as threatening . Others perceive their security as threatening, which is perceived as threatening by other nations .
 Activities meant to be defensive unintentionally create and fuel an escalatory cycle . Activities aimed at being defensive unintentionally fuel escalatory cycles .
 In conventional armed conflicts, states have tried to make sure that others don’t mistake their defense for offense . Buchanan explains that states have partly dealt with this dilemma by trying to keep their defense from being mistaken .
 States have developed a sec of standards about what constitutes ""normal” defensive behavior . States have gotten better at making such Judgments .
 A lack of shared norms complicates matters, as does the nature of cyberdefense . But those improvements have yet to reach the 44 FOREIGN AFFIRATIONS .
 Judging intent in cyberspace is often more difficult than judging a conventional military move . As Buchanan highlights, slates sometimes intrude into the networks of other states for genuinely defensive purposes .
 When a state cannot determine intent, it will generally assume aggression . And when a state can't determine intent it will often assume aggression, it assumes aggression .
 Buchanan argues that even defensive intrusions in cyberspace can compromise the security of the targeted state by establishing footholds that might be later exploited for offensive purposes . Buchanan: Cyberattacks can compromise security of a targeted state .
 An acute awareness of the risks of escalation has inhibited Washington’s response to cyberattacks . Washington is aware of the risk of escalation, an expert says .
 The United States is more reliant on information systems than its adversaries are, contributing to the cautiousness that borders on paralysis . So has the fact that the U.S. is more dependent on its own information systems .
 By failing to come up with an effective cyber-deterrence policy, the U.S. has increased its vulnerability to adversaries that are more willing to embrace risk .
 Obama administration's concerns about the risks of retaliation ultimately resulted in a feckless response to Russia’s election interference . The Obama administration’ed response to the election interference was a failure and a failure .
 The White House considered responses including cyberattacks on Russian infrastructure, damaging economic sanctions, and the release of information embarrassing to Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Some officials even floated the idea of sending aircraft carriers to the Baltics . The Baltics have long been a source of tension in the region .
 The administration approved a covert action to infiltrate Russian cyber-infrastructure in order to plant “cyber weapons” that could be used in the future . According to the ftn, the administration also approved the covert action .
 Trump has repeatedly cast doubt on the idea that the Russians interfered in the election . The president appears disinclined to use the tools he has been criticized for using .
 The U.S. government report on Russian interference overpromised and imderdelivered . It outlines the intelligence community’s top-line conclusions without offering much evidence to back them up .
 The document failed to persuade skeptics, and the report’s release backfired . Although the protection of sources and methods is important, the document failed . The document was released in response to the release of the document .
 A subsequent series of highly specific leaks of classified information have revealed far more detail, but they lack the persuasive strength of official confirmation . A series of high-profile leaks have also revealed more detail .
 The Obama administration was loath to be viewed as improperly influencing the election . Obama administration wanted to avoid being seen as improperly influenced by foreign policy .
 Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, Republican from BCenrucky, told Obama administration that he would view any effort to publicly challenge the Russians over their interference in Novemher/December 2017 45 Susan Henntssey (he election as politically motivated)
 The delicacies of electoral politics provide yet another compelling reason for establishing clearer rules of the road when it comes to cyberattacks .
 By setting neutral standards, future administrations can guard against claims of partisanship should they choose to respond forcefully to foreign attempts to interfere in U.S. politics or policymaking .
 Sometimes, an adversary desires a response, and so relying to acknowledge an attack is one way to fight back . Sometimes, a response is needed to be met with a response .
 By that measure, the United States cyberdeterrence strategy, both past and present, has failed . The U.S. has failed to adequately address the problem, the White House says .
 French presidential candidate Emmanuel Macron was targeted with a similar hack and e-mail dump on the eve of a national election .
 The U.S. must chart a new course shaped by a higher tolerance for strategic risk . Russia, which favored Macron’s opponent, Marine Le Pen, is widely believed to be responsible .
 The Obama administration’s cyberstrategy presented ambiguity as a deterrent tactic, claiming that a lack of specificity would discourage states from simply tailoring their malicious activities to avoid crossing lines .
 But experience has demonstrated that aggressive adversaries considered that zone of ambiguity to be a zone of impunity . The U.S. military says it has been a source of tension in the region for years .
 Setting clearer lines does risk encouraging some additional below-the-threshold activity . Containing behavior in that space is a better outcome than allowing more serious violations to go unchecked .
 The U.S. should be more consistent and proactive in attributing attacks, the author says . The United States should also be more proactive about attributing the attacks, he says .
 When ofiiciaJs fail (o point fingers for fear of revealing sources and methods) they offer U.S. adversaries plausible deniability . When they fail, they point fingers, they offer plausible deniable .
 Strong attribution and statements that unambiguously link retaliation to corresponding offenses are important steps toward shaping and enforcing the norms necessary to govern state conduct in cyberspace . The U.S. should use strong attribution and strong attribution .
 U.S. must cease to be inhibited by the fear of sparking escalatory cycles . The United States must not be inhibited from sparking escalator cycles, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Stronger responses to hacking carry significant risks, but Washington can no longer rely on a do-nothing or do-Uttle approach . Counterattacks and aggressive sanctions are risks, say experts . Washington can't rely on "do-nothing" or "Uttle" approach, they say
 One-year master's degree in international affairs . Hybrid program structure of 3 two-week residencies and 33 weeks of internet-mediated learning . Diverse cohort of approximately 50 mid-career and senior-level professionals working around the globe .
 The Security Studies Program is dedicated to preparing a new generation of analysts, policymakers, and scholars . It is the oldest and most respected master’s degree program in hs freld .
 SSP teaches students about the latest security challer>ges arxl cor\nectsthem with the most influential practitioners in Washington . beteve 50 stmngty in SSP. it truly changed my life.
 T hrough the first four decades of his life, Joseph Stalin achieved little . Stephen Kotkin: Joseph Stalin's achievements in the Soviet Union were modest .
 Instead of becoming a priest, he became an underground revolutionary fighting tsarist oppression . He spent the next 20 years hiding, o^anizing, and serving time in prison and internal exile in Siberia .
 Stalin’s life was altered forever by the outbreak of total war in 1914, which helped precipitate the abdication of the Russian tsar in February 1917 . Later that year, a putsch by radical leftists led by Vladimir Lenin led by Lenin led to the putsch .
 Sfetfn; IVe/Cinfi fbrffftfsr. . is the second in a three-volume biography of the Soviet ieeder .
 Foreign embassies, spy networks, scientific and artistic circles, and party organizations. embassies, spies, and political circles. Party organizations.
 He annotated works by Karl Marx and Lenin, as well as translations of Plato and Clausewitz . The only constant in war was an absence of constants, he said .
 Stalin spoke softly, sometimes inaudibly, because of a defect in his vocal cords . He spoke softly because of the defect . Stalin's vocal cords were defective .
 Napoleon stood five feet seven inches, roughly the same as Napoleon and one inch shorter than Adolf Hiller . Napoleon was one inch smaller than Hiller and Napoleon was five feet shorter .
 Beginning in 1929, as the might of the Soviet state and Stalin’s personal dictatorship grew and grew, so, too, did the stakes . The stakes in the battle began in 1929 when the Soviet-Stalin conflict began .
 Communism was an idea, a dream palace whose attraction derived from its seeming fusion of science and utopia, and Stalin was an ideologue . Stalin was a ideologue, and Communism was a vision of science .
 When Stalin Faced Hitler war would give way to solidarity, emancipation, and peace . Exploitation, colonization, and imperialist exploitation would end .
 The purported science of Marxism-Leninism ostensibly explained why the world had so many problems and how it could be made better . Marxist-Leninist: The most terrible crimes became morally imperative acts in the name of creating paradise on earth .
 Accumulated resentments, too, fueled the aspiration to become significant, says the author .
 People under the age of 29 made up nearly half of the Soviet population . The youth proved especially attracted to a vision that put them at the center of a struggle to build tomorrow today .
 Stalin was a ruler of seemingly irreconcilable contradictions . He ruled with seemingly irretrievable contradictions. He was a leader of seemingly impossible contradictions .
 He prided himself on his voracious reading and his ability to quote the wisdom of Marx or Lenin . But he resented fancy-pants intellectuals who he thought put on airs . He resented those who put airs .
 He was cynic about everyone’s supposed base motives; he lived and breathed his own ideals . He was a cynic; he was a cynical about everyone's supposed base motive .
 His authority was rooted in a dedicated party, a formidable governing apparatus, and Marxist-Leninisc ideology . His colossal authority was . rooted in dedicated party and a formidable . governing apparatus .
 His power was magnified many times over by ordinary people, who projected onto him their ambidons for social justice, peace, abundance, and national greatness . But his power was greatly magnified .
 At age 20, Hiller found himself on a bread line in Vienna, his inheritance and savings nearly spent . Hiller: "I'm not going to be able to live on the bread line, but I'm going to live a life of my life"
 He had twice been rejected from Vienna’s Academy of Fine Arts . He was staying in a homeless shelter behind a railway station .
 Hider got himself into a group home for men . Soon, with a small loan from an aunt, Hider was able to get himself in a home .
 When Stalin Faced Hitler managed to find odd jobs, such as painting picture postcards and drafting advertisements . He S2 FOREIGN AFFIRENCE: When Stalin faced Hitler, he found odd jobs .
 He also frequented the dcy’s public libraries, where he read political tracts, newspapers, the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer, and the fiction of Karl May .
 Film footage from 1918 shows Hitler marching in the funeral procession of provincial Bavaria’s murdered leader, a Jewish Social Democrat . He is wearing two armbands, one black and the other red .
 Ten days before Hitler’s 30th birthday, the Bavarian Soviet Republic was quickly crushed by the so-called Freikorps . The Freikarps were made up largely of war veterans and made up of war vets .
 Although he had begun to earn a reputation as a transfixing for-right agitator, he had earned a reputation for his political views .
 Hitler was a master improviser who grasped opportunities that came his way into a triumph . Still, he managed to turn his trial No. 1 into a success .
 Hitler refused to eat, believing he deserved to die, but letters arrived congratulating him as a national hero . Hitler refused food and refused to drink, believing his death was a suicide attempt .
 The richest opportunities perceived by Stalin and Hitler were often supposedly uigent “threats" that they inflated or invented . The richest opportunity perceived by the two dictators were often uigent "threats"" that they invented .
 History is driven by the interaction of geopolitics, institutions, and ideas, but it takes historical agents to sec sec sec it all in motion . History takes place in the hands of historical agents .
 Stalin’s direct experience of Germany consisted of just a few months in 1907 in Berlin, where he stopped on the way back to Russia from a Bolshewk meeting in London . Stalin's direct experience in Germany was in Berlin .
 The Kingdom of Cambodia has shed its image as a strife-ridden country . It has made great strides in building a bright, sustainable future for its people . Stalin was a Germanophile, but like several tsarist predecessors, he was a Nazi .
 Cambodia's demographics presentee perfect condition to speed up economic growth . Half of Cambodia's population is under 25 years old, half of which are under 25 .
 Cambodia already boasts one of the fastest growing economies in the world . Growing at an average of seven percent during the last two decades, Cambodia has been one of Cambodia's fastest-growing economies . Cambodia's economy has grown at average of 7 percent in the last 20 years .
 Justin Wood, head of the World Economic forum Pacific Region, praised Cambodia for boosting economic growth and reducing poverty in the country . There is a different stoiy to be told about Cambodia, says Wood .
 We want the world to uriderstand a bit more about what is happening in Cambodia,* Wood s^d. We want to know more about Cambodia's plight .
 Cambodia needs to attract more investment in various vital sectors, such as infrastructure and education . Cambodia's growth strategy aims to attract investment in infrastructure, education and infrastructure .
 UC can accommodate 10,000 students and stands as a leader in business and entrepreneurship education . Kao KJm Mourn, UC stands as leader in entrepreneurship education. Kao is a member of the Kao Mourn .
 E HA HD COV EH S24.ee PAHEREACK * lb ought ought •pmoldog. decesion and b’ecurity Is oo excelleot odditioii to the sdiolaity literature oo subnadoMl re
 When Stalin Faced Hitler admiring his country's industry and science—in a word, its modernity . C.C. C. COHMELIPRESS. COHNELLEDU: "In a word"
 On Saturday, June 21,1941, Stalin paced and paced in his Kremlin office, gripping a pipe . Stalin paced with his usual short steps in his Moscow office . Stalin's "Pace-OPF" is a weekly feature on CNN .
 The walls in the offices were lined with shoulder-height wood paneling, under the theory that wood vapors enhanced air quality, and the elevators were paneled with mahogany . The walls were covered in shoulder-high wood panels .
 In the rear was a door that led to a room for relaxation, with oversize hanging maps and a giant globe . In the back of the room was a room that was rarely used for relaxation .
 Stalin had eliminated private property and made himself responsible for the Soviet equivalent of Washington, Wail Street, and Hollywood No.emher/Decemher 2017 SS Sttphtn Kotkin .
 Rumors of various health problems had circulated abroad, and the use of foreign doctors had long ^o been discontinued .
 The household staff had stopped bringing his meals from the Kremlin canteen, cooking them in his apartment instead . Staff cooked them in the apartment instead and, in his presence, tasting from the plates .
 Members of the French Grande Arm« defecated in the Kremlin’s Orthodox churches and taken potshots at the holy icons . Many Protestants and Catholics from Germany, Italy, and Poland were among those defecating in the churches .
 Recreating Napoleon had ordered the Kremlin blown to pieces . After cunning Russian resistance starved the occupiers, a recreating Napoleon ordered it to be destroyed .
 Hitler essentially controlled all of Europe from the English Channel to the Soviet border . Only Sw,reden and Switzerland remained neutral, and both were cooperating with Nazi Germany economically .
 Stalin was strictly observing the non-gression pact that Germany and the Soviet Union had signed in August 1939 . The pact was a non-guression pact between the two countries .
 Hitler needed to keep the Soviet Union out of a possible anti-German coalition with France and the United Kingdom . At that time, Hitler had decided to swallow Poland by force . Hitler, who had decided on swallowing Poland, needed to .
 Stalin's apprenticeship in high-slakes diplomacy had shown him to be cunning but also opportunistic, avaricious, obdurate . Stalin’s apprenticeship showed that he was cunning but opportunistic . Stalin was cunning, but also opportunistic , av
 This had worked, until Germany aided by the cornucopia of Soviet raw materials . Germany was freed up to turn its troops toward the Soviet Union . This had been working until the 1940s .
 The two geopolitical and ideological rivals, as a result of their shared aggrandizement, had acquired a common border . The two countries have a shared border .
 Intelligence warnings of an imminent titanic war were coming from everywhere . Now, after half a year of contradictory secret reports about a possible German invasion of the Soviet Union, intelligence warnings of imminent war were being made .
 In Moscow, German embassy personnel were evacuating, taking with them oil paintings, antique rugs, and silver . The embassy was evacuated from the Russian capital .
 Stalin allowed Lavrenti Beria, the feared head of the secret police, to imprison Poskryobyshev’s beloved wife as a “Trotskyite” in 1939 . Stalin had allowed the imprisoned wife to be imprisoned as a "Trots
 On Stalin’s instructions, Stalin phoned General Ivan Tyulenev, head of the Moscow Military District . On Stalin's instructions, at around 2:00 pm, he phoned Gen. Ivan Tyuleev . He phoned the Moscow military district head of General Ivan
 In Berlin, the Soviet ambassador to Germany, after months of equivocation, finally averred that Germany’s actions signaled an imminent invasion . The Soviet ambassador in Berlin, however, averted that the invasion would be imminent .
 Warnings of impending war were even splashed across the front pages of newspapers all over the world . Of course, warnings of impending . war were splashed . over the . world .
 Colonel Georgy Zakharov, a decorated fighter pilot, had been ordered to conduct a full daylight reconnaissance of the border region . He reported that the Wehrmacht was poised to invade .
 Stalin arranged German visits to Soviet aviation and tank factories . He allowed German planes nearly unimpeded reconnaissance of Soviet troop concentrations, airfields, naval bases, and fuel depots .
 The so-called Wnter War between the Soviet Union and Finland, waged in 1939-40, exposed Soviet military weaknesses not just to Hitler but also to Stalin . The war exposed Soviet weaknesses to Hitler and Stalin, says historian .
 The most advanced Soviet warplanes made up just one-quarter of the air force . Similarly, the most advanced aircraft made up one-third of the Soviet air force.
 Out of 659,000 Soviet officers, only around half had completed military school . One in four had the bare minimum military school, and one in eight had no military education whatsoever .
 The discussion apparently revolved around recent developments pointing toward war and Stalin's dread of provocations that might incite it . No. 61 Sttphtn Kotkin apparently discussed No. No. 1/2 .
 Stalin allowed covert strategic redeployments to the western border from the interior . Stalin had allowed covert . strategic . redeployment to western . border from interior from interior .
 Hider would not permit combat positions to play into the hands of hawks in the German military . But he feared that would only play into his hands . Hider’s hand would be used to force Hider to withdraw troops .
 Soviet commanders could be liquidated by their own side if their forces returned any German fire . Soviet commanders were liquidated if they returned any of their forces .
 In the Litde Comer, Kuznetsov, Safonov, Timoshenko, Voroshilov, and Voznesensky were dismissed at 8:15 . Malenkov was dismissed five minutes later, five minutes after .
 NYU's Graduate School has prepared g^erations of global leaders since 1686 . Since 1686 NYU's graduate school has prepared global leaders . NYU has produced more than 100,000 students since then .
 The Program In International Relations offers a rigorous, multidisciplinary study of contemporary International affairs . The Program in International Relations continues this tradition .
 In the M.A. program, students have access to a range of degree options with various technical and regional specializations . Arthur L Carter Journalism Institute, School of Law, Stern School of Business, and Wagner Graduate School of Public Service, are among the schools where students study .
 M.A. students also have the opportunity to study at NYU's Washington, DC center end end other locations .
 Molotov and Beria parroted Stalin’s denials that Hitler was going to attack . The two pea^t-born commanders could see that Germany t j r j was coiled to invade .
 Stalin bebefefthat Germany insisted otherwise, they presumed that could not attack Russia he possessed superior information and defeating the insight . Still, when Stalin befefthat . Germany insisted that . couldn't attack Russia, they assumed that . could not . attack Russia .
 Stalin had himself tried to eng^e Hitler even as he waited for the blackmail demands he expected Hitler to issue . Stalin tried to engage Hitler even though he expected him to issue blackmail demands . Stalin was waiting for Hitler's demands to be made .
 Stalin expected Germany to demand Ukraine, the Caucasian oil fields and unimpeded transit for the Wehrmacht through Soviet territory to engage the British in the Near East and India . A cunning No. 63 despot could have publicly declared his willingness to join the hostilities against the United Kingdom
 Stalin clung to his belief that Gennany could not attack Russia before defeating the United Kingdom . The British did not have an army on the continent and were neither defending territory there nor in a position to invade from there .
 Stalin assumed that even if hostilities broke out, the Germans would need at least two more weeks to fully mobilize their main invasion force, allowing him time to mobilize, too . Failing that, Stalin said, he would need to mobilize his own troops in two weeks . Stalin also assumed that
 Stalin had 64 FOREIGN AFFAIRS him summon the German ambassador, Friedrich Werner von der Schulenbui^ to the Imperial Senate for a meeting at 9:30 pm. Stalin had been summoned by the German Embassy in Berlin .
 In desperation, Schulenbiug had sent his embassy counselor to Berlin to try one last time, but this had failed as well . The embassy counselor had sent one last attempt to contact the embassy counselor, but it failed again .
 Around 10:00 PM, amid the still suffocating heat, the winds gushed, billowing November/December 2017 Suphtn Kotkin the curtains at open windows . Suddenly, around 10:30 PM, the wind gushed .
 The document made clear that the military was to prepare for war while doing everything possible to avoid it . Still, it was clear that it would be prepared for war, not preparing for it .
 Pavlov overheard saying on the phone about reports of German actions . Pavlov was overheard saying: "More self-controllable" Pavlov .
 Hitler’s adjutant Nicolaus von Below noticed that the fiihrer was “increasingly nervous and restless” Hitler was ‘increasingly restless and nervous,’ he said .
 Hitler's war proclamation for the next day would focus on ""the salvation of Europe” and the intolerable danger of waiting any longer . The two walked up and down Hitler’s drawing room for quite a while, finalizing the timing and content of the proclamation .
 Russia considered itself a providential power with a special mission in the world but substantially lagged behind the other great powers . Russian rulers launching forced modernizations to overcome or at least manage the asymmetry of a country .
 The urgent quest for a strong state had culminated, once more, in personal rule . It had culminated once more in the state's quest for strong state .
 Stalin’s regime No^emher/Decemher 2017 67 Sunken Kotkin HitleT turned out to be someone neither Marx nor Lenin had prepared Stalin for .
 Stalin's regime promised not merely statist modernization but also transcendence of private property and markets, of class antagonisms and existential alienation . Stalin’s regime promised a renewal of the social whole rent by the bourgeoisie, a quest for social justice .
 In administration, it constituted a crusade for planning and control that ended up generating a proliferation of improvised ill^alities, a perverse drive for order, and a system in which propaganda and myths about ""the system” were the most systematized part .
 Stalin’s infallibility proved to be the most dangerous flaw of his fallible rule . The fanatical cult of the parry was often self-defeating, but the cult of parry's and especially Stalin's .
 By inclination, Stalin was a Russian nationalist in the imperial sense, and anti-Westemism was the core impulse of this long-standing RussianEurasian political culture . Anti-WestEmism was an impulse of Russia's political culture, and was a key part of its imperial
 Initially, the ambitious Soviet quest to match the West had actually increased the country’s dependency on Western technology and know-how . Initially, it was actually increased by the desire to compete with the West . The ambitious quest to emulate the West increased the dependency of the country on Western
 The Soviet Union mosdy sought, or could manage, only nonaggression pacts . Geopolitically, however, whereas tsarist Russia had concluded foreign alliances for its security, the Soviet Union .
 Stalin insisted on calling fascism “reactionary" a supposed way for the bou^eoisie to preserve the old world . Stalin insisted that fascism ‘reactionaries’ was a way of preserving the old .
 Hider turned out to be 6S FOREIGN AFFAIRS 6S . See the atteched card for your speciaf gift rate .
 Stalin appears to have been mesmerized by the might and daring of Germany’s parallel totalitarian regime . A lifelong Germanophile, Stalin was a lifelong admirer of Germany .
 For a time, he recovered his personal and political equilibrium in his pact with Hitler, which deflected the German war machine, delivered a bounty of German industrial tools, enabled the conquest and Sovietization of tsarist borderlands, and reinserted the Soviet Union into the role of arbit
 Stalin refused to come to grips with the new realities, and not solely out of greed for German technology . This generated unbear^le tension in Stalin’s life and rule, yet he stubbornly refused to accept the new reality .
 He thought in terms of domination of the European continent, which required Lebemraum —living space —in the east . To be sure, in the immediate term, he thought .
 In the lo nger term, he fo resaw dominatio n of the world , which would require a blue-water fleet, bases rimming the Atlantic, and a colonial empire in the tropics for raw materials .
 That was incompatible with the continued existence of the British Empire, at least in the form of the form it took at that time . The British Empire was not incompatible with that form of British Empire . That was not the case .
 Hitler faced a stark choice of either agreeing to deepen the pact with Stalin and taking on the entire British Empire . The choice would mean conceding at least a partial Soviet sphere in the Balkans and on the Black Sea . Alternatively, freeing himself from the infuriating dependency on Moscow would be freeing
 Hiller did not possess the air or naval capabilities or the depth of resources to prevail militarily over the United Kingdom . He did have the land forces to attempt to smash the Soviet Union . Hiller had the air and naval capabilities but did not have the depth or strength to prevail .
 A commitment to a prolonged contest for supremacy with the British made quick annihilation of the Soviet Union an absolutely necessary prelude . Hitler expected to be aided more and more by the vast resources of the United States .
 It envisioned the subdivision and exploitation of Soviet territories, as well as a pincer movement against the Suez Canal and British positions in the Middle East . The conquest of Gibraltar, northwestern Africa, and the Spanish and Portuguese Atlantic islands, to eliminate the British .
 Hitler's social origins cannot be explained in terms of his social origins or his early life and influences . Stalin's influence is no less applicable to Stalin, says historian .
 Stalin's policy resembled British appeasement in that he was driven by a blinding desire to avoid war at all costs . But Stalin's policies resembled that of the British policy in the 1930s .
 Neither his fearsome resolve nor his supreme cunning was in evidence in 1941 . Neither his . resolve nor . supreme cunning were in evidence .
 In the end, however, the question of who most miscalculated is not a simple one . The question is not an easy one .
 Bismarck had built his chancellorship on avoiding conflict with Russia . When a bust of the former Reich Chancellery was transferred to Hider's new office, it had broken off at the neck .
 North Korea can now learn to live with a nuclear North Korea . Doing so will not be risk free, however, however .
 The current standoff with North Korea has been likened to the Cuban missile crisis in slow motion . The international relations scholar Robert Litwak has described the current standoff as "*the Cuban missile . crisis in . slow motion"
 U.S. U-2 spy plane accidentally flew into Soviet airspace during the crisis . That fear was why Khrushchev Novemher was so alarmed by the incident .
 Trump’s poor decision-making process highlights another disturbing contrast with the Cuban missile crisis . Trump's poor decision making process highlights a disturbing contrast to the Cuban crisis .
 Kennedy's approach reflected the best kind of cautious crisis man^ement . Kennedy's refusal to retaliate with an air strike after an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba reflected a cautious approach .
 To some listeners, it just suggests Washington is considering limited military options . To others, it's just suggesting limited military possibilities .
 North Korea and Iran are not in compliance with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, for them, all bets are oif . But then Secretary of Defense Robert Gates quickly added that “because North Korea . and Iran . not in . compliance with . the N.N. Treaty
 Starting a war to prevent another country from taking future action or acquiring a dangerous capability is rarely justified . Preventive war is contrary to the UN Charter, but it's rarely justified, says U.N. Secretary of State Clinton .
 If senior military leaders believe at any time that Trump is impaired, they have a duty to contact Mattis . Mattis should then call for an eme^ency cabinet meeting to determine whether Trump is “unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office" and thus whether to invoke
 Consider the complaint expressed by General Joseph Dunford, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, at the Aspen Security Forum in July that "many people have talked about the military options with words such as 'unimaginable'
 Kim may well have ordered his generals to launch ail available weapons of mass destruction at the enemy if he is killed in a first strike . Saddam Hussein did the same before the 1990-91 Gulf War .
 Economics for the Common Ooo^ ^ I eOKOHAf^AM LHow to Dr Iniemaii' _ Ui.ui.
 Jean Trote is that rare exceptior. a htobel laureate who bdieites he has a soaal responability to talk dearty and responsibly about the tDpis on the minds of noneconorrssts . Standard of Living since the Civil War
 This is an exceptxxul book, tt ^tows the value of oreful economic diinidng on topics from if>efTiTiployTTtertto global warirung.''
 By weaving a complex tapestry of politics zand r^igion he explains the peculiarity and patency of one of the worid^ most lethal . most lethal |ihadist insuigencies .
 i^rfds Together is unashamed to teadi us vital lessons . ‘International law has long struggled to be more than one foregn poficy Justrfkation among others’
 This is a combination of deep tedinolo^^ fvstory. vivid portraits of daily life over the past six generabems and careful economic an.ysis.' Oates . Oates: "This is a book well word"
 Incelligendy presents a sweeping series of new, innovative ideas designed to reform the United Nations’ structure and performance . This . will be an essential reference work for all those who are concerned with the future of a new United Nations .
 A weapon of that size detonated over Seoul would kill 362,000 people . Over San Francisco, the number would be 323,000 . A weapon over San Francisco would kill more than a million .
 North Korea has thousands of conventional artillery pieces along the demilitarized zone that by themselves could inflict 64,000 fatalities in Seoul on the first day of a war . The Nautilus Institute says the North Korean regime could inflict millions of casualties in Seoul .
 One million people could die on the first day of a second Korean war . There are a number of nuclear power plants near Busan that could be damaged in an attack .
 Even if Uruted States forswore preventive conventional or nuclear strikes, the danger of accidental war caused by the mutual fear of a surprise attack would remain .
 The right to nuclear preemptive attack is by no means the United States monopoly"") In such a tense environment, one government’s preemptive-war plan can look a lot like a first-strike plan to its enemies .
 There are few, if any, military targets in North Korea that the U.S. could not destroy with advanced conventional weapons in a long war .
 In 1947, the American diplomat Geoige Kennan outlined a strategy for the “patient but firm and vigilant containment” of the Soviet Union . The strategy was outlined by Kennan in 1947 .
 Singapore has transformed itself many times to adapt to the changing global economic landscape . Singapore's economy has been transformed many times in recent years to cope with the changing world economic landscape.
 Just two generations, the tiny city-state has developed into one of the world's richest and most technologically advanced economies .
 Chan Chun Sing, Mii^ister in the Prime Minister's Office, said global changes and curreht circumstances also offer us new opportunities . Singapore realized early It had to surmount those geographical challenges .
 Chan sad. Singapore is facing technological disruptions and has attained a certain level of economic development . There are new areas that Singapore can leverage, such as the digital revolution, he sad.
 Singapore has |oined a global trend In developing . developing urban solutions In line Its Smart Nation movement . Singapore has . developed urban solutions in line with its Smart Nation . movement .
 This goes beyond the air, land, and sea linla that we have invested and will continue to Invest ln,*the minister said. The minister said .
 Singapore uses education to transfdnn its workforce and Industries . To achieve this, Singapore is using education to transform its workforce . Singapore is investing in education to improve its industries .
 Speed of delivery and relevance to industry are some things to bear In mind . Speed of delivering and relevance of industry are also important to bear .
 Execution has always been Singapore's strength, says T'Chan . 'We have always had a true tripartite system. Other countries may be talking about the same things, so how do we distinguish ourselves?'
 'This new wave of technological changes actually favors Oty-staies like ours. That is what will put us In gcod standing,* the minister said .
 State-run International Enterprise Singapore helped Identify what was noise and what were real opportunities . Singaporean companies get support in terms of due diligence, market intelligence and lead generation .
 If not for them, we would have kept banging on doors that would not open,* recalled MeNln Tan. "We would have been stuck in a hole in the hole"
 Cyclect Group is an Integrated construction, engineering constnjctlon and project management company present in eight countries . Singapore OAG is looking Into regional expansion following jts IPO In 2015 .
 SOG subsequently acquired a well-known aesthetic medical group to add to its obstetrics and gynecology pillar . We did that 10 grow strategically*
 Our members regularly have opportuhities to engage with top government officials and discuss areas either the government or the private sector needs assistance with .
 AmCham Singapore is on the cusp of its 4Sth anniversary . The dialogue allows us to bridge the gap and facilitate swift solutions to challenges .
 "We've cultivated close vvorking relationships with buisness and government leaders, it's built around a mutual commitment to growing the economy and enhancing business relationships in Singapore and the region"
 "As we look ahead, we are going to continue doing exactly that,* she also said .
 As coBypeinen fatM ta keep iv yrltii dunpbyp cemiliaitf bi the 1970s, RtentimliitahertiaAliire, laiKtooesemas and oartMi sappie wide ibe d
 WnuM adjnsQ to baslnessiaadri B SBSOIt its busitess . Mwnmagad by the second ganmiiafl. MwnMagad is the name of the first ganma .
 H has partnered wttli ooH caarscs b«i« and abroad B lyaieiQi) tber ^wiyds aed yvsit INe pobTK health via laasqulto onM piadacts. H
 Hart are penny ompaliCM and gaBrtolont battimishiohiyaiai^ and SByalkrvehne, yvbkh better fits my cenpany an. an. m. Hart . Hart is penny oompaliCM .
 The teams have helped customers uryderstand market entry soalegies, industry dyryamics and to navigate the compleHities of dvryg business in ASEAN . One Visa, a visa consultancy company, is one key player in the industry .
 Established in 2010, One Visa has grown significantly to become a leading immigration service provider in Singapore . One Visa is one of only a few visa consultancy companies that have the capability to advise and offer the hill spectrum of immigration services .
 Cheng added One Visa plarys to establish further globally and is looking at new parmerships with migradon agents in the U.S. and Canada . Cheng added that the company is looking to establish more globally and to establish new parmerhips .
 Sponsored Repoat company Rhodium Resources Pte. Repoat . Rhodium is a member of the Rhodium Resource Group, a company that trades commodities .
 'Few financial centers in the world have an understand* ing of commodhy trade and finance Finance is our specialty' Singapore is one of the world's most important financial centers . Singapore is a major financial hub in Asia .
 In Sir>gapore, where we do not have alternatives or (he luxury of a base resource, we ter>d to be a trading hub' said Director Cheam Hir>g Lee .
 And if there is good fndusthalizalion, ff the country also builds the right in^structure, we will have a successful outcome, he says . And if . there is a good, well-built structure, we'll have a good outcome, says Mr.
 Singapore's Changi Airport is consistently nam^ one of the best airports in the world . It has also remained an important air cargo hub in the region .
 Changi has connections to more than 3BQ cides around the world . Changi plays an tmportant role In global trade and tourism .
 Changi Airport is expected to add 16 mppa to Changi's current capacity of 66 mppa . At the end of this year, the airport's total handling capacity will be 82 mpa . With T4, Changi airport will have a total of 82 mppa capacity .
 LU has growii from a small enterpHse into a billlQr dollar mulQ* national . LU has grownii to a national wealth of $1.5 billion . LU is now a national of $2 billion .
 Oieani attributes Rhodlwii^ success to jMeemptive insiglittbat allows them to anttttttpate and avoid devastating relbads . Rhodwii* success is attributed to their aptitude to initovale that prloritlZB
 Oieam pointed out that lew financial centres in the wsdd fidly understand (ornmocftty Trade) Trade and considered trade fnance a spedalty .
 The company Gdrf aho expressed hb wbh to explore more opportunities In the United States in bifrartructructwe and double Rhodium^ business .
 Rhodium has offices in Hong Kong, Australia, Dubai and London . United Overseas Bank is well positioned to connect businesses to opportunities in Asia .
 UOB was created in 1935 to serve the needs of the overseas Gimese merchant community . UOB is one of the world's strongest banks and has an integrated network across 19 countries .
 The bank's experience and local presence have given it a firsthand understanding of what it takes to build a sustainable business in the region . Over the last eight decades, the bank^ experience and . local presence has given it an understanding of . what it . needs to do to build sustainable business
 In 2011, JOE set up a dedicated unit to help businesses plan and execute their regional expansion strategies .
 Its Foreign Direct Investment Advisory team was initially based in Singapore . It has since been building an ecosystem of partners able to support Its dients, government agencies, trade and investment associations and professional services providers .
 More than 40 percent of business flows were directed through Singapore, reinforcing the nation's strategic importance as an international business center and launchpad to the regioa . Singapore strives to become a smart naSon, the country's business sector proceeds iull steam towards full .
 DBS aims id r\jn like a 22XO[>-Ferson startup . CEO cf DBS named lAtorld's Best Cigrtal BankbyEuromcney in201d. DBS CEO: "DBS aims to be like a bank
 CQC arpand is gec9faphicai leadt and better mderstand customer p refe r en ces and iTer>ds. Di^talization h^ped another banking giant . Di.: "CQC is a great place to
 Singapore's global competitor Sslar aner^ fm Sun Elrark sms laany appertwitlcs for fellow *siiart* (eraaalH amitd the world Mlh to pienetrAg infoittves)
 Smilunreuslyr w*'*e bMO hnevaDve and ralBume^feolsed . Despite dMlIcnpcs to mpleswiting eor iviovatlefi, Stn Beclik helps dues
 Tbh makes for a really posKhe fiture for the eoergy sectw aod healthier OOes,"" PelM added .
 The company wen a government grant three years ago afisr taking part n a fscofcfconcept eaerdse baded by stateowned teal estate compsry JTC Corporadoa 'Now'
 Sm Electric is evporting its patented isdinolG^es arvd sdtviafB tools to a wide range of srrWGtyand grd iniiialMS globally, scaling signrliantly from otf Singapore base It5 .
 Wendell Trading CoTT^ny has helped Singapore maintain its reputaocn as one of Asia’s greenest places . Singapore is one of the most green places in the world, according to Wendell .
 CPIdrvally started as a dsirfoutor of fertilit ers arvd aghojlture dverruols, the company has dveryhed iG adhrittes to indude de^rdopment and rraintenarvs of
 S ingapore Invests heavily In Its schools, aware that human capital ks the country's most valuable resource and that education is the best way to keep Its workforce relevant In a changing world .
 Singapore's polyted^nlc Institutes play an Important role In this mission by offenng Industiy-speciftc programs which give students ar> alternative pathway towards productive and meaningful employment . Singapore’s polyted**SBngdp(ye) is changing .
 Singapore Polytechnic is the first polytechnic insti^on in the country . We are also now concerned with how student interns can help with Innovations that can transform enterprises .
 SP is looking to explore partnerships in the United States for research and research . Founded 63 years ago, SP remains ve^ global-minded and is looking for partnerships in America .
 Singapore Institute of Technology provides practical education for students . Students are taught to apply their knowledge in real-life contexts .
 New Delhi has the world's third-latest military by personnel strength, fifth-latest defense budget, and seventh-largest economy . New Delhi’s New Role Alyssa Ayres Ayres is a role model for New Delhi . The country has the third-largest military by
 The U.S. isn't even a member of the G-7, the exclusive club of major industrialized economies . It's not even a part of the elite club of industrialized nations .
 India is long regarded as an emerging power rather than a major global player . It is India's long-held status as a major player in the world . The country is seen as emerging power, not major global power .
 In fairness, for years, this assessment was not off the mark, and India's reality did not match up to its vaunted potential . But it is not off-the- mark, with India's future not matching its potential .
 India's infrastructure is in need of major investment to the tune of $1.1 trillion over a decade . India’s finance minister says infrastructure needs to be overhauled to $1 trillion .
 Discrimination persists, whether on the basis of gender, caste, religion, or region . Discrimination among India's famously diverse population persists . Discrimination is based on gender, race, caste and region .
 India's impressive economic power and defense capabilities have often gone unnoticed . The country has been kept on the margins of the global institutions central to U.S. diplomacy . But India's defense capabilities often go unnoticed .
 A more confident India has already begun to shape the global agenda on climate change, clean energy, and worker mobility . India is already shaping the world's agenda on issues such as climate change and clean energy .
 India has ramped up its own military capacity in response to China’s increasingly assertive regional posture . India has stepped up its military capacity to cope with the threat posed by China .
 India has long chafed at the feet that despite its size and its democracy, the world does not see it as a major power . Despite its size, it has long complained that it is not seen as an important power .
 Unlike China, unlike China, it does not have to be seen as a stateless nation .
 Alyssa Ayres will have a coveted permanent seat on the UN Security Council . Ayres has been a member of the Security Council since 2007 .
 Indian leaders are pushing for their country’s “due place in global councils,” as former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh put it . Considering India’ growing economy and enhanced military capabilities, India is pushing for its place in the world councils .
 Under the current prime minister, Narendra Modi, India has begun to see itself as a “leading power,” laying overt claim to a new, more central place in the world .
 As India leaves behind some of its old defensiveness on the world stage, it is time for U.S. policy to evolve, as well . It's time for the United States to evolve as it does with India .
 Relations between the U.S. and India have come a long way from the days in which the two were ‘estranged democracies,"’’ The two countries now talk of being ‘strategic partners’ — a relationship of cooperation, but not a formal alliance
 United States President Donald Trump has not yet fully articulated his plans for relations with India . In a departure from the Washington playbook, he has explicitly asked India to do more on economic development in Afghanistan .
 As the president and his team grapple with India’s rise, they should re conceptualize the U.S.-Indian relationship to better manage differences with the power .
 India’s exclusion from major institutions of global governance must be addressed . And they must champion Indian membership by championing Indian membership . New Delhi a long-overdue place at the table .
 The country remains fiercely protective of its policy independence, shuns formal alliances, and remains willing to break global consensus, as it has done most famously on trade negotiations .
 It can be a close defense partner, but not in the familiar template of most U.S. alliances . The United States can be close defense partners, but it's not a familiar template for most alliances .
 India will not be easily persuaded by U.S. entreaties for increased market access . India wants an improved trade and economic relationship with the United States . The U.N. wants to improve the relationship with India, but it is unlikely to do so .
 Democratic and Republican administrations alike have prioritized foiging closer ties with New Delhi . A tighter relationship is a vote for the importance of democracy and a bet on shared prosperity and stability in Asia .
 As with China, the economy has been at the center of India’s global transformation . The economy is at the heart of India's global transformation, with the rise of the economy .
 India will be the world's third-largest economy by 2029, lagging behind only China and the U.S. projections . United States government projections anticipate that India will become world's 3rd largest economy .
 A slowdown in China and contractions in Brazil and Russia have increased India’s share of global GDP as measured by purchasing power . India has begun to see itself as a 'leadingpower,** parity, which the IMF projects will exceed eight place in the world by 2020 .
 India’s sheer size and its youthful demographics offer the prospect of enormous economic growth . The country's young demographics offer an enormous opportunity for growth in the country .
 According to UN estimates, India will overtake China as the world’s most populous country sometime around 2024 . UN estimates: India will do so with a significantly younger population .
 India's laig;e working-age population will continue to grow until 2050, while Japan, China, and western Europe age age .
 Japan's median age is expected to stand at 53 years, China's at nearly 50, and western Europe’s at 47 . By then, the median age will be 53 .
 India surpassed China as the world’s largest market for motorcycles and scooters in 2016 . It has also become a global hub for automobile manufacturing, producing nearly one in three small cars sold worldwide .
 Ford, Hyundai, Maruti Suzuki, and Tata are all making cars in India . India does not yet come to mind as an automotive powerhouse, but it's a growing industry .
 The Indian automotive industry built only slightly fewer cars than South Korea and more than Mexico in 2016 . South Korea is the only major car-producing nation in India . India's automotive industry also built more cars in 2016 than Mexico .
 India's advances in the auto industry represent an about-face from just IS years ago . India needs to do much more to develop its manufacturing base, says ISI .
 Increasingly, India is translating its economic might into military power . India's economic might is translating into military might . The country's growing military might is being translated into power .
 It already counts itself as part of a select club of countries with advanced defense technology, including a nuclear weapons program .
 With its sights set on primacy in the Indian Ocean, New Delhi is strengthening its defense ties with countries across the region and building a blue-water navy . New Delhi aims to strengthen its defense relations with countries in the region .
 India now has a force strength of nearly 1. million troops on active duty and nearly 1 million reservists . According to the International Institute for Strategic Studies, India has nearly 1, million troops .
 The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute estimates that India became the world's fifth-largest military spender in 2016 . India is ahead of France and the United Kingdom, according to the institute .
 India has accelerated its procurements from U.S. companies from essentially zero to more than $15 billion worth over the past decade . India is now the world’s top importer of military equipment for the last five years .
 India is not going to end its long-standing relationship with Russia, and recognizing that is part of working with New Delhi . But even as defense ties with the U.S. grow, India will not end its relationship with Moscow .
 Russia remains a major defense supplier for India, as are France and Israel . India is simply diversifying its strategic bets by doing business with multiple partners .
 India is also increasingly producing its own advanced defense technologies, instead of importing them . India is increasingly producing own advanced technologies, not importing them, instead .
 It recently replaced its aging aircraft carrier in a much-delayed deal with Russia in 2013 . It now has a second carrier under construction, developed and built at home, although it may not be ready for as long as a decade .
 India has a third carrier scheduled for construction, also to be made domestically . It has plans to add at least three nuclear-powered submarines to its fleet . India also has plans for a third aircraft carrier and a third submarine .
 In a major departure from the past, the country has begun to export military equipment to other countries in the region . In fact, in fact, it has begun exporting military equipment .
 A more confident India is eager to shape, rather than simply react to, global events, has already made its presence felt diplomatically .
 India moved, in less than a decade, from playing defense to taking the lead in setting the global climate agenda . India is now leading the way in the multilateral climate negotiations .
 India has refused to acquiesce to proposals to cap carbon emissions . For years, India had refused to . acquiesce . to cap emissions .
 Indians considered it deeply unfair that the developed West was looking for cuts from developing India . India has a historically small contribution to climate change, low per capita emissions, and large future development needs .
 Modi and FranQois HoUande announced a new international solar power alliance to be headquartered in India . The alliance will focus on promoting the rapid deployment of solar energy and cutting the costs of financing and development .
 The Paris agreement showcased a different style of Indian diplomacy . This was not the India that helped scuttle the World Trade Organization's Doha negotiations in 2008 but a new, problem-solving India .
 On defense and security, India has strengthened its capacity over the past decade to such an extent that U.S. secretaries of defense now routinely refer to India as a net provider of regional security . India's defense capacity has been strengthened over the last decade .
 India’s maritime ambitions, especially its goal of primacy in the Indian Ocean, are a response to China's more assertive presence across South Asia . India's maritime ambitions are especially aimed at primacy, especially in Indian Ocean .
 Beijing's intensified infrastructure development assistance to Bangladesh, the Maldives, Sri Lanka, and Pakistan have expanded China’s Indian Ocean reach . Beijing has also expanded a new military base in Djibouti .
 In 2015, New Delhi quietly reached an agreement with the Seychelles to host its first overseas military base . New Delhi reached a deal to host a military base in the Seyschelles in 2015 . The deal was the first of its kind in the South African nation .
 India took the lead in rescuing nearly 1,000 foreign citizens from 41 countries stranded in Yemen, including Americans . That same year, India also rescued nearly a half a million foreign citizens in Yemen .
 Japan joined India and the United States as a permanent participant in the annual Malabar naval exercises . India was able to showcase its warships, planes, and submarines beside the two most powerful democracies in Asia-Pacific region .
 New Delhi has shown a determination to invest in alternative international organizations over the course of the past decade . While deepening its ties with the West, New Delhi is also investing in alternative organizations .
 India does not seek to overturn the global order; rather it merely wants such institutions as the UN Security Council, the World Bank, the IMF, the Nuclear Suppliers Group, and others to expand to accommodate it . India is not seeking to overturn global order, but it wants such
 New Delhi has put some of its eggs in other baskets . But as reform of these oi^anizations drags on, New Delhi is putting some of it in other basket .
 Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa, Brazil, India and South Africa are brics . The brics are the world's biggest economic rivals . They include Brazil and Russia .
 In less than a decade, the group has become an important diplomatic forum . The group has accomplished more chan most observers expected .
 In 2014, they agreed to form the brics Contingent Reserve Arrangement, an alternative to IMF support in times of economic crisis . The brics have also agreed to an alternative arrangement with the IMF to support their economies .
 India also supported the Chinese-led creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank . India is now the bank's secondbiggest contributor of capital .
 India maintains an active presence in other institutions outside the United States' orbit . In 2017, India also joined the Shanghai Cooperation Organization .
 India's top priority remains a seat commensurate with its size and heft within the 88 FOREIGN AFFAIRS . India has shown that it is willing to help build other arenas in order to have a greater voice .
 India will likely continue to maintain this diverse array of relationships even as it strengthens its ties with the United States . New Delhi deserves to be granted the right to participate in major Western forums, rather than hinder, U.S. interests .
 At a time when international coordination has become far more complex, the increase in new organizations creates “forum-shopping” opportunities .
 More forums and more options make it harder to get things done internationally . Washington’s influence is also decreasing, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Successive U.S. administrations have viewed the relationship with India as one of the United States’ great strategic opportunities . The relationship offers a chance to overcome historical differences and strengthen ties with a fast-growing market, a stable pillar in a region of turmoil .
 Bush administration sought to reframe the U.S.-Indian relationship by striking a 2005 deal concerning civilian nuclear cooperation . The deal bridged what had been a 30-year divide on nonproliferation .
 The Obama administration continued the momentum, with various efforts to expand defense, economic, and diplomatic cooperation cooperation .
 Indian officials walked a tightrope, saying little publicly about it beyond an anodyne tweet from a Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson . Indian officials have not condemned Russia’s violation of Ukrainian sovereignty .
 On questions of grand strat^y, India’s desire to be recognized as a major global power includes an indelible commitment to its own ideas of autonomy . India's desire for recognition in the world includes commitment to autonomy .
 New Delhi has shifted over the years from reflexive nonalignment to a recent philosophy of “strategic autonomy” to the present Indian government’s vision of ‘the world is one family’ The connecting thread remains policy independence .
 The U.S. has a strong sense of independence from its partners and allies . But that independence can sometimes clash with the United States' tendency to think that its allies should support it .
 Given the size of India's economy, it is past time for the country to be brought into agenda-setting institutions . Novemher/December 2017 89 Alyssa Ayres .
 The U.S. government’s designation of India last year as a “major defense partner" is unique . The status was created and accorded only to India, as a means to facilitate advanced defense cooperation .
 India does not want to sign themselves up for every U.S.led initiative around the world . Even though New Delhi seeks deeper ties with the United States, Indians want to avoid it .
 There is a difference between being "natural allies" and a formal alliance . Atal Bihari Vajpayee said there was a difference in being 'natural allies'
 New Delhi seeks the rhetorical flourish of the former without the restrictive expectations of the latter . New Delhi is seeking to avoid the restrictions imposed by the Delhi government .
 Given that U.S. and Indian interests are converging across Asia, military ties between the two countries will no doubt deepen .
 U.S. policymakers will have to manage their expectations and not be disappointed when India improves ties with Iran . But as they do, they must manage expectations, and not disappointed .
 In order to ward off frustrations with India’s inevitable departures from U.S. preferences, the United States should frame its relationship with India differently . The relationship should be more of a joint venture in business than a traditional alliance, writes Andrew Hammond .
 That would mean insulating shared initiatives from areas of disagreement, such as policy toward Iran or ties with Russia . That would be insulating them from areas such as Iran or Russia .
 On economics, Washington at times differs sharply with New Delhi, despite a commitment to expanding bilateral trade . Washington and New Delhi at times differ sharply with each other on economics .
 India has never hesitated to break global consensus to protect its perceived economic interests . Indeed, India has always been willing to do so to protect the country's interests . India has also broken global consensus in the past to protect economic interests, says Ravi Agrawal .
 A decade ago, New Delhi and Beijing made common cause to protect their agricultural sectors, leading to the July 2008 stalemate that ended Doha round of international trade negotiations . The Doha talks ended in 2008 .
 In 2014, India backed out of the Trade Facilitation Agreement, which sought to cut red tape, despite having previously agreed to it . Then, in 2014, the Indian government also withdrew from the agreement .
 India's powerful information technology sector has raised trade in services to the very cop of India’s economic negotiating agenda . One way to provide information technology services is to perform work on location .
 New Delhi is pushing other countries to accept greater numbers of Indian temporary workers . New Delhi has remained resistant to opening its own market further to goods and services .
 In 2016, India filed a formal dispute against the United States in the World Trade Organization over increases in visa fees that India claimed would hit its information technology workers especially hard . The outcome will set a precedent for managing worker mobility across the globe .
 Despite disagreements, there is ample room for progress on the economic relationship . Despite these disagreements there is plenty of room to work on the relationship .
 India’s global ambitions rest on sustained economic growth, and for that, India needs to maintain ongoing reforms . The country needs to keep its global ambitions on sustained growth, according to experts .
 The U.S. can and should do a better job of including India in the international networks conducive to economic growth and job creation . Only India’s own political process will determine the trajectory of those efforts .
 Historically, decades of self-sufficiency and a relatively small economy locked India out of productive economic institutions such as apec, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and the International Energy Agency .
 Given the size of India’s economy, it is past time for the country to be brought into such agenda-setting institutions . It is time for India to bring in such institutions such as the IMF .
 An apec missing Asia’s third-largest economy lacks legitimacy and makes little economic sense . Asia's third largest economy is Asia's largest and most populous country .
 Washington should support Indian membership, something it has so far refrained from doing so far . Washington should back Indian membership .
 India has emerged as a major donor of development aid across South Asia and Africa . The same argument holds for the oecd, especially because India is an important donor .
 The oecd has created a category of states called ""key partners”—a group that includes India, along with Brazil, China, and Indonesia—which it consults but does not count as members . In recent years, the oecd created a group called "key partners"
 Locking India out of oecd also keeps it out of the iea, for arcane historical reasons, thus excluding one of the world’s largest energy consumers . India is currently the world's largest energy consumer .
 If the G-7 is to remain a central economic-agendasetting institution for the world’s leading democracies, at some point, it will have a hard time rationalizing its exclusion of India given the rapidly growing size of the Indian economy .
 Concerns that bringing India into the fold will disrupt consensus in these economic institutions are overblown, since these are not binding negotiating forums . Concerns are not that India's presence in the world's economic institutions disrupt consensus .
 Giving India a place at the table will help pull it into a cohort of countries already committed to economic openness and transparency . If anything, it will pull India into a group of countries committed to openness, transparency and openness .
 President Barack Obama pledged to work toward permanent membership of the U.N. Security Council in 2010 . Washington should seek to make good on its promise of working toward a reformed and expanded council, he says .
 Promoting India's membership could present challenges to many U.S. positions . The perspective Indian diplomats bring on some of the world’s most intractable problems deserves to be heard in the same room as the perspectives from China, France, Russia, and the United Kingdom .
 The UN Security Council has not budged on the issue of expansion since Obama first voiced support for Indian inclusion . Unfortunately, Obama has not been able to convince the UN to expand the country's borders .
 Reform has been held hostage to competing demands from other countries, such as Brazil, Germany, and Japan, not to mention a lack of consensus on the size of expansion and whether new permanent members should have veto powers . Reform is being held hostage by competing demands for other countries .
 There are many other forums where India could make a contribution, with the help of Washington . Even if the UN remains plagued by inertia, there are other forums for India to contribute to .
 The United States must do a better job of normalizing the reality of India's rise and emphasizing its importance to U.S. national interests and the world . Washington assumes the importance of so many of its close European partners .
 Houthi rebels had been holding him under house arrest for a month . For a month, the rebels had taken Sanaa in late 2014 and had taken the capital, Sanaa . He was released from house arrest .
 By the time the guards noticed that he was gone, Hadi had reached the relative safety of the southern port of Aden . Hadi has reached a relative safety in Aden .
 A month later, as Houthi forces advanced south, he fled again, this time to Riyadh . He called on Saudi Arabia to intervene in Yemen’s civil war .
 A Saudi-led coalition of Arab states began a campaign of air strikes against Houthi targets . The campaign rapidly became a siege of the entire country . Within days, the siege of Houthi rebels had become a siege .
 Yemen has turned into one of the worst humanitarian crises of modern times . Yemen has been cut off from imports, and under a ceaseless Saudi bombardment, it has become a humanitarian crisis .
 Seven million Yemenis live in areas that are close to famine . Nearly two million children are suffering from acute malnutrition . Over 600,000 people have been infected with cholera in Yemen .
 The conflict in Yemen is often described as an outgrowth of the Shiite-Sunni rivalry between Iran and Saudi Arabia . Iran has supplied weapons and military advisers to the Houthis, as well as weapons .
 Saudi Arabia intervened in the war against Syria . But this misunderstands the origins of the war and the reason why it was Saudi Arabia involved .
 Saudi Arabia intervened not to counter Iranian expansionism, but to secure its southern border against the Houthi threat . And Saudi Arabia's intervention is not meant to counter Iran's expansionistism, it's to secure the border .
 As a result, only an internal Yemeni political settlement can end the war . Saudi Arabia, the U.S. and international humanitarian organizations can do much to improve the situation in the meantime .
 The modern state of Yemen was born in 1962, when revolutionaries deposed Imam Muhammad al-Badr and created the Yemen Arab Republic, or North Yemen . Many of the revolutionaries absorbed ideas of nationalism at foreign universities .
 For the next 40 years, the foreign-educated elite who had sparked the revolution occupied some of the most important positions in the new republic, serving as presidents, prime ministers, cabinet ministers, and chief executives .
 They based their legitimacy on the roles they had played during the revolution and its aftermath, achieving an almost mythic status in the national imagination . They had achieved a mythic role in the country's revolution and aftermath .
 It empowered Yemen’s growing urban population and ended the dominance of those families who could trace their lineage back to the Prophet Muhammad . The move was a victory for Yemen's urban population .
 Yemen's northern tribes, which had supported the deposed Badr, are thrown into the political wilderness . The move sends Yemen's north tribes, including those who supported Badr's overthrow, into political exile .
 Shutoff from government funding, their region stagnated and their problems festered .
 Houthi family is one of the most prominent sayyid dynasties in northern Yemen . After North and South Yemen unified, discrimination against the northern tribes gave rise to a protest movement in the north .
 Hussein Badreddin al-Houthi was one of the leaders of the movement . He was killed in 2004 during clashes between northern tribes and the government .
 His death marked the beginning of the northern tribes’ armed insurgency and gave the rebels their name . The rebels are now known as the Northern tribes .
 For the next seven years, sporadic fighting continued, with neither side gaining a meaningful advantage . Neither side gained any meaningful advantage during that period .
 At the same time as the government was fighting the Houthis in the north, its authority in the rest of the country was fading .
 The greatest challenge for a revolutionary state is maintaining its legitimacy after the founders have died . Half a century after the revolution, few of Yemen's original leaders remained . Yemen is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 The Yemeni state created by the revolution effectively disappeared from Yemen . But from that point on, the Yemeni state effectively disappeared . The Yemeni government was overthrown in 2011 .
 The passing of Yemen’s revolutionary generation created not only a crisis of national identity but also one of governance . Yemen's revolutionary generation has created an identity crisis for the country . Yemen has been in a state of crisis since 2003 .
 Once, Yemeni students who had obtained degrees abroad took pride in returning home as future leaders . Yemeni students now take pride in their achievements abroad .
 Much of the educated elite has left the country, citing worsening government corruption and ineptitude . But over the last ten years, much of the country's educated elite have left .
 Political appointments are now granted on the basis of tribal membership rather than training or experience . technocrats have gradually given way to the beneficiaries of nepotism . Political appointees have gradually been granted the right to power .
 As the central government’s legitimacy declined over the last decade, a political void opened . The central government's legitimacy has been diminished in the past decade .
 Beginning in 2009, extremist groups, including al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, emerged to fill the gap . Al Qaeda in Arabian Peninsula emerged to replace the Taliban .
 Houthi movement, already organized and opposed to the central government, is positioned to take advantage of the derelict republic . But it was the northern Houthi, already well-organized, that was positioned to benefit from the situation .
 The Houthis’ chance came in early 2011, when revolts in places such as Egypt and Tunisia inspired months of mass protests against the corrupt, autocratic government in Sanaa .
 That February, Abdul-Malik al-Houthi declared his support for the antigovernment demonstrations . He sent thousands of his followers to join the rallies in the capital .
 Some of the most powerful images of the uprising were those of tribesmen in traditional robes demonstrating alongside members of the urban youth movement .
 Fifty years earlier, these two groups had fought each other for control of Yemen . In 2011, they marched together against a common enemy, Saleh .
 In early 2013, the government and opposition groups began a national dialogue conference that culminated in 2014 with a plan to write a new constitution and divide Yemen into six provinces . Hadi has backed the plan, backed by Hadi, to write the new constitution .
 Houthi opposition rejected the deal, as it would have further weakened the power of the northern tribes . Houthi rebels have been fighting for the Houthi government in Yemen .
 Throughout 2014, antigovernment protests, many of them led by Houthis, continued to rage . Many of the protests were led by the Houthis . The Houthis are known for their anti-government protests .
 Houthi forces captured Sanaa in September . They dissolved parliament, forced Hadi to resign, and installed a revolutionary committee to replace the government .
 Saudi leaders have worried about the security of the country’s southern border with Yemen . Saudi Arabia was founded in 1932 .
 In 1934, Saudi Arabia fought its first war against the Kingdom of Yemen to secure that border . Saudi Arabia is now the only Arab country to have lost its border to Yemen .
 Under the treaty that ended the war, Saudi Arabia annexed three Yemeni border provinces that it had occupied during the fighting . Saudi Arabia had occupied three border provinces during the war .
 Saudi foreign policy toward Yemen has been driven by the need to maintain a weak central government in Sanaa that does not threaten Saudi security . Since then, Saudi has been pushing for a weak government that doesn't threaten its security .
 Each time a popular movement or a strong central authority has looked as chough it were appearing in Yemen, the Saudi government has responded with military action and financial support for pro-Saudi groups .
 Saudi forces caused the first Saudi casualties along the Saudi-Yemeni border since the 1960s . In 2009 and 2010, cross-border skirmishes between Houthi fighters and Saudi forces took place .
 Houthi leadership openly called for war with Saudi Arabia after taking Sanaa in 2014 . They are demanding the return of the three border provinces as a rallying cry for the movement .
 When Hadi requested Saudi help, Riyadh was only too happy to oblige . As a result of Hadi's request, Saudi Arabia stepped in to help him .
 In March 2015, Saudi Arabia and a coalition of Arab nations launched a military campaign to push back the Houthis and restore the government . The Houthis are still in control of Yemen .
 Saudi Arabia presented the intervention as a response to the threat of Iranian expansionism . Saudi Arabia argued that the Houthis were effectively an Iranian proxy . The Houthis are effectively a proxy for Iran .
 Saudi rhetoric has grossly misrepresented Iran's role in the conflict, says CNN's John Defterios . Yet Saudi rhetoric is grossly misrepresenting the role of Iran in Syria, he says . He says it has been a disaster for Saudi Arabia and the United States .
 Some small arms and money have flowed from Iran to the Houthis, but the amounts are not la^e . There is no real Houihi-lranian alliance, and there is not la ^e, says the author .
 The northern tribes do not share Iran's desire to challenge Israel and the U.S. The tribes began positioning themselves as an alternative to Yemen's central government long before receiving any Iranian help .
 The true target of the Saudi campaign was not Iran but the Houthis themselves . The Houthis are the Yemeni rebels who have been fighting for months in Yemen . Saudi Arabia has launched a campaign in Yemen against Iran .
 The intervention began as a series of air strikes against Houthi military targets, has morphed into an attempt to destroy Yemen's economic infrastructure in order to turn public opinion away from Yemen's Houthi movement .
 Hospitals, factories, water mains, sewage facilities, bridges, and roads have all been demolished in bombing raids . Hospitals and factories were all demolished in the raids .
 The Saudi coalition, with help from the United States, has blockaded Yemen's ports and rendered it dangerous for civilian aircraft to fly over the country . The coalition has rendered it difficult for aid agencies or businesses to bring goods into Sanaa's airport .
 For many Yemenis, buying food or medicine is now difficult or impossible . Yemenis are now struggling to buy food or buy medicine . The country's economy has been hit by an economic crisis .
 UN: Two-thirds of Yemen's 28 million people face food shortages and do not have access to clean water . According to the UN, two-thirds are at risk of food shortages, clean water and food shortages .
 Nearly two million Yemeni children are acutely malnourished . Seven million of them live in areas on the brink of famine, and nearly two million are acutely hungry .
 rubbish and sewage have piled up on the streets and leached into drinking wells . Without working public services, rubbish has piled up in the streets .
 Since April, cholera, Novemher/December 2017 has infected over 600,000 people, killing more than 2,000 . Cholera spreads in contaminated water, spreading in contaminated contaminated water .
 The UN Human Rights Council, Amnesty International, and other humanitarian organizations have condemned Saudi Arabia’s human rights violations in Yemen . Saudi Arabia has been accused of human rights abuses in the country .
 The Houthis' rise was the special adviser , rr j' prevention ot genocide, has called on the Security Council to invesleaders''worst fears'' worst fears'' of Saudi crimes against . » » » .
 By portraying its intervention as a conflict with Iran, Saudi Arabia seems to have convinced much of the world, especially the United States, to ignore the deliberate targeting of Yemeni civilians . Yet, by portraying the conflict as a clash with Iran , Saudi Arabia has convinced the world to ignore its deliberate
 The practical response to the crisis from international aid organizations has been ineffective, says CNN.com . International aid organizations have been ineffective in dealing with the crisis in Syria, he says .
 In July, the World Health Organization announced that it was suspending its cholera vaccine program in Yemen indefinitely . The World Health Organisation announced the suspension in July .
 The who may well have been right, but it and other international organizations have missed opportunities to help resolve the wider conflict . The U.N. and other organizations have also missed opportunities, writes Peter Bergen .
 The international community has officially recognized only the Yemeni government in exile and given the Houthi government scant diplomatic attention . Neutral humanitarian organizations are among the few groups that can mediate the conflict without political restraints .
 In the 1960s, the government of the new Ye men Arab Republic fought a six-year civil war with northern tribes loyal to the deposed leader Badr .
 The northern tribes were not officially recognized by foreign governments, so the Red Cross and UN were the only groups that had access to them . Back then, as today today the northern tribes are not recognized by governments .
 The UN opened a direct line of communication with their leaders, legitimizing their position in the conflict . The UN also encouraged them to participate in a national peace conference . The U.N. has been in contact with both sides of the Syrian conflict .
 The Red Cross facilitated several prisoner exchanges, introducing aspects of the Geneva Convention to an area of the world where belligerents had traditionally beheaded captives rather than swapped them . And the Red Cross helped to bring in a number of prisoner exchanges .
 During the current war, the Red Cross and the UN can repeat chat strategy . The Red Cross says it will continue to work with the Syrian government in Syria .
 The Houthi tribes should be given an international platform to negotiate with the government in exile . They should both address the humanitarian crisis and provide the international platform for negotiations . The Houthis should be able to reach a deal with the Yemeni government .
 The UN could also send peacekeepers to secure Saudi Arabia's southern border, alleviating one of the main drivers of the conflict . UN peacekeepers could also be sent to secure the southern border of Saudi Arabia .
 UN personnel patrolled a demilitarized zone between Saudi Arabia and Yemen and mediated cross-border disputes . That tactic worked from 1963 to 1964, when UN staff patrolled the zone .
 A similar peacekeeping presence today would give Riyadh enough confidence in the security of the border to cease its aerial campaign and lift its naval blockade, ending the immediate humanitarian crisis .
 The United States is not involved in the fighting in Yemen . It has supported the Saudi-led coalition in several ways . Washington has not been involved in Yemen's conflict .
 The United States military trains Saudi forces and offers its bases to Saudi warplanes for refueling purposes . The U.S. military trains and offers to refuel Saudi war planes .
 The United States has sold Saudi Arabia billions of dollars' worth of weapons, many of which have been used in Yemen . The U.S. has sold the weapons to Saudi Arabia in the past .
 The United States is well positioned to improve the situation on the ground . That means that the U.S. is well poised to help the situation in Syria .
 Washington should threaten to withdraw its military support in order to pressure Saudi Arabia to end hostilities and accept an international peacekeeping force along the SaudiYemeni border . The U.S. should withdraw military support from Saudi Arabia .
 With a buffer against immediate territorial incursions, Saudi Arabia might be more willing to allow Yemenis to adopt their own political solution . Yemenis might have a significant role in the ensuing government, even if the Houthi leadership played a major role .
 Any negotiations between the U.S. government and the Houthis would meet serious opposition in the United States . The Houthis have been fighting in Yemen for months .
 United States officials have pointed to this slogan as proof of the movement’s anti-American stance . The expression is based on an Iranian revolutionary catch phrase, as evidence of Houthi-Iranian cooperation . U.S. officials have said this slogan is proof of an anti-
 Houthis are one of the few groups in the Middle East that has little intention or ability to confront the U.S. or Israel . The Houthis have little intention of confronting the United States or Israel, the Houthis say .
 The Houthi movement has clashed with extremists, including the Islamic State and al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula . And far from being aligned to extremists, the Houthi has repeatedly clashed with the extremists .
 Saudi Arabia has long supported Sunni Islamist groups in Yemen . It is Saudi Arabia that has long been supporting Sunni Islamists .
 Yemen's northern tribes are willing to accept foreign assistance no matter who gives it . Orkahy over, Yemen’s northern tribes will accept foreign aid no matter how it comes .
 Israel received secret military aid from Israel in their civil war against the new republic . Diiring the 1960s, they even received military aid .
 Abdul-Malik al-Houthi and the rest of the movement’s leadership, however, need a crash course in modern diplomacy . The U.S. needs to learn more from al-Qaeda in the Middle East, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Members of the Houthi family have dismissed the group’s anti-American slogan as mere words, arguing that it does not reflect actual policy . Houthi members of the family have said the group's anti-U.S. slogan is mere words .
 The Houthi leadership needs to distance the Yemeni conflict from the divisions that characterize the rest of the region, writes CNN's John Defterios . The Houthis must distance themselves from the region's divisions .
 U.S. and international organizations should realize that focusing on tensions between Iran and Saudi Arabia only distracts from finding a local political settlement to end the fighting .
 UN*s special envoy for Yemen has called for Houthi withdrawal and reinstatement of the deposed republican government . Peace talks have so far failed to solve the crisis by addressing both issues .
 The north, home of the Houthi movement, contains the great majority of the Shiite population . The north is dominated by powerful tribal alliances, dominated by tribal alliances .
 The south of the country was a British colony from 1839 to 1967 and thereafter an Arab communist state until Yemeni unification . The south is primarily Sunni, with a weak tribal structure that has been eroded by over a century of imperial dominion .
 Yemen's eastern region, known as Hadramawi, is inhabited by a sparse Hadrami population that has traditionally enjoyed significant independence . Yemen’s eastern region is known for its independence, and has a sparse population .
 None of these regions can or should exercise complete control over the other two, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Yemen would not solve the problem, nor would breaking Yemen up into three separate nations solve it . The country is divided into three countries, including Yemen .
 As well as keeping the peace within Yemen, the absence of a strong central state would allay Saudi concerns over regional stability .
 Yemen's major urban areas could run out of water as soon as 2018, according to projections from the UN . The country's water shortage is a consequence of inefficient irrigation and a growing population . The UN says the country's major cities are at risk of water shortages .
 Saudi Arabia has long promised funds to repair Yemen's damaged infrastructure after the war . Saudi Arabia is expected to spend the next few years repairing Yemen's infrastructure .
 That money should be used to move major urban populations to areas with more water, say experts . Desalination projects should be prioritized, they say .
 Foreign governments must act soon to reduce Yemen’s suffering and accept that the civil war needs a local solution . Yemen can still recover and even add a measure of stability to a volatile region . Foreign governments and the on act soon .
 U.S. government has turned to some form of sanctions as an answer to North Korea's belligerence . North Korea’s belligerence, Iran's nuclear aspirations, Russia's aggression, the Islamic State's brutality, the United States' brutality have all turned to sanctions .
 Obama used sanctions against North Korea, Venezuela and Russia more than any other president in recent history . Despite his misgivings, Trump expanded sanctions against Russia and North Korea in recent months .
 U.S. sanctions aim to stigmatize foreign leaders and human rights abusers . Sanctions include those against North Korea’s Kim Jong Un, Zimbabwe’�s Robert Mugabe, and Russian officials responsible for killing the lawyer Sergei Magnitsky .
 Others are designed to deny terrorists, drug traffickers, nuclear proliferators, and other bad actors the money and tools they need to wreak havoc . Others are meant to deny those groups the money they need .
 The prime example is the sanctions that pressured Iran to sign the 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action . Iran agreed to stringent limitations on its nuclear program in the deal .
 For all the popularity of sanctions, however, the system for applying them remains underdeveloped . The system for sanctions is still underdeveloped, but the system is still developing .
 United States officials almost never design U.S. designs . The U.N. is a FeUowattatthe Atiantic Council .
 From 201S to 2017, he served m an adviser on Europe and Eurasia . He served as the lead sanctions expert on the Rollcy Planning Staff at the U.S. State Department .
 These shortcomings make sanctions less effective in the present, and they will do even more harm in the future . Sanctions will be even more difficult to deal with in the U.S. than they would otherwise have been .
 Washington risks falling behind in an area in which it has long enjoyed primacy . Governments around the world are trying to hone their own economic warfare capabilities .
 It's well past time for the U.S. government to modernize its favorite foreign policy tool . The United States should modernize the use of foreign policy tools, the author says .
 Sanctions have been Washington's foreign policy tool of choice throughout the post-Cold War period . Sanctions are a key part of the U.S. foreign policy of choice since the Cold War .
 As the specter of great-power war receded, policymakers came to see sanctions as an efficient means of advancing U.S. interests without resorting to military force .
 The explosion of sanctions programs during the Clinton administration led to a backlash among experts . Experts say sanctions programs led to an explosion in sanctions programs in the 1990s .
 In the late 1990s and early years of this century, their reputation hit rock bottom . In the early 2000s, it was hard to find a way back to the top of the charts .
 UN Security Council's strict embargo against commerce with Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq was seen as depriving ordinary civilians while doing little to pressure those in power . In particular, the strict embargo on commerce with Iraq in Iraq in the 1990s saw little pressure on the regime .
 U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell proposed a new approach to sanctions . Waning international support for sanctions inspired Colin Powell to propose a new way of dealing with sanctions .
 Dubbed ""smart sanctions," it aimed to move beyond embargoes by tai*eting leaders and influencers directly . Dubbed 'smart sanctions,’ the move was aimed at moving into embargos by leaders . The move was dubbed 'smart Sanctions'
 Washington shifted its focus to sanctions against Iran in 2006 . But it became clear that this approach was not up to the task of curbing the country’s nuclear program .
 It would take pressure on the Iranian economy, chiefly the financial and enei^ sectors, to do that . The Iranian economy is in the throes of an economic crisis in the country .
 State Department and Treasury Department aim to damage Iran’s economy without placing imdue burdens on its civilians or destabilizing global markets . So sanctions experts aimed higher, crafting measures that would damage Iran without destabilizing its civilian population .
 The resulting sanctions severed Iran’s largest banks from the global financial S 3 ^tem, denied its maritime shipping fleet access to insurance and repairs, and gradually reduced its oil revenues . Iran's largest banks were cut off from global financial institutions .
 Iran has been hit hard by sanctions since the start of the year . The country's economy has suffered a sharp decline in recent years . Sanctions have been imposed on Iran, but some exceptions have been granted to ordinary Iranians .
 Banks and companies perform the first line of sanctions implementation . It is impossible to know exactly how they will man^e this task .
 In some cases, they simply decide to cease doing business with entire countries for fear of violating sanctions, making the effect of the measures more draconian than intended . Some of the sanctions have been imposed on Russia and China .
 U.S. officials almost never design sanctions until crises are already under way . That is what is what has happened with Somalia .
 In other cases, sanctions end up being weaker than intended, as the private sector grows accustomed to complying right up to the boundary of legality and illicit actors find workarounds . In some cases, the sanctions are weaker than they intended .
 The United States possesses two principal assets to handle this inevitable uncertainty . The U.S. possesses two main assets to deal with the uncertainty .
 The first is the sheer size and reach of its economy, which gives it a wide margin for error . The second is the size of the country's economy .
 The second is the flexibility of U.S. legal authorities, which permit the Treasury Department to issue licenses, update sanctions lists, and pursue other course corrections with relative ease . The flexibility of the United States legal authorities is the second .
 Russia is the largest economic power the U.S. has ever sanctioned . Sanctions against Russia have been successful in the United States' economic policy .
 U.S. and Europe have been working together for years to crack down on Russia . The sanctions program has been a collaborative effort between the two countries .
 Given the links between the Russian and European economies, getting the Eu’s buy-in was essential . Given the many links between Russia and Europe, it was essential to secure the deal . The deal was signed by Russia and the European Union .
 If Russia could replace all its lost business with the United States by turning to Europe, the sanctions would be toothless . United States companies as the only losers, leaving U.S. companies as losers .
 Unlike ordinary sanctions, these focus on blocking Russia's state-owned enterprises from raising capital in Western financial markets . The sanctions are aimed at hindering Russia's energy companies’ efforts to develop Arctic, deep-water, and shale oil projects .
 The United States and the EU designed the sanctions this way to put pressure on Russia while limiting the risk to markets posed by going after a major player in the global economy . The U.S. and EU are working together to implement the sanctions .
 The sanctions have managed to squeeze Russia's economy while causing little financial blowback in the U.S. or Europe . But owing to the outsize roles played by Western banks and oil companies in global finance and energy, the sanctions have caused little blowback . Western banks, oil companies
 In the six months after the first round of sanctions on key sectors of Russia’s economy were enacted, in July 2014, the ruble lost more than half its value . In the past six months, the Russian ruble has been worth $1.2 billion .
 The International Monetary Fund estimates that sanctions initially reduced Russian gDP by 1. to 1.0 percent . The IMF says sanctions will cost the country up to nine percent of gDP over approximately five years .
 Sanctions have held back Russia's recovery, curbing investment, hampering access to credit, and stalling the development of energy projects . The drop in world oil prices that began in 2014 no doubt remains a crucial factor behind Russia’s fall .
 Ukraine has not taken more drastic measures, such as conquering a wider swath of eastern Ukraine, or using its military forces to secure a land bridge to Crimea, or overthrowing the democratically elected government in Kiev . But they have helped deter it from taking more drastic steps, including taking over a
 It strains credulity that Moscow would have abstained from all these actions had it believed it could get away with them scot-free . It is impossible to prove a counterfactual, but it strains credibilityulity .
 Moscow abandoned the so-called Novorossiya project, which envisioned Russia swallowing half of Ukraine's territory . The project was abandoned after several rounds of sanctions and clear signals from the West that tougher ones were in the offing .
 Despite these recent successes, sanctions are no panacea . Sanctions are not a panacea, and sanctions are still needed .
 In some cases, they are best suited to a supporting role as a means of constraining an adversary's capacity for mischief, for instance, as opposed to solving an intractable problem .
 The U.S. should be wary of using them capriciously, as doing so would allow adversaries to adapt to its tactics, and decrease allies’ appetite for cooperation, and encourage foreign corporations to reduce their exposure to the United States .
 Before turning to sanctions to address a problem, policymakers should ask themselves four questions . Policymakers should ask them four questions: What do you think about sanctions?
 Sanctions will sway a country's political leaders only if their economy relies substantially on foreign trade or access to international financial markets . Sanctions are only if the country's economy relies heavily on international trade, such as access to the markets .
 Sanctions against Cuba have been in place since 1960 to little effect . Such is the case with sanctions against Cuba, which have little effect on the island nation .
 The same dynamic was also at work with the embargo against Iran initially imposed by the Reagan administration in 1987 . The embargo was also imposed by Reagan administration .
 All governments, even autocracies, care to some degree about their people’s livelihoods, as plunging living standards can spark political unrest . All governments care for their people's livelihoods .
 The more politically active a target’s population is, the more likely sanctions are to work . Sanctions are more likely to work when a target's population is politically active, experts say .
 Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, assented to the election of Hassan Rouhani in 2013 . The election of Rouhani in Iran in 2013 led to mass protests in Iran .
 Rouhani had campaigned on the promise of freeing Iran from sanctions, and without his election, the nuclear deal almost certainly would not have happened .
 Sanctions can work in a similar way with Russia, another autocracy that holds stage-managed elections . Sanctions will work in similar way to Russia, which has staged its own elections . The U.S. has been accused of using sanctions to cripple Russia .
 Putin’s popularity spiked after the annexation of Crimea, but as a full economic recovery remains far from sight, discontent is brewing . Putin's popularity spiked in Crimea after annexation, but discontent is likely to grow .
 If not, a country will likely try to wait them out, hoping interest groups and opposition parties in the West will seize on the domestic costs of sanctions and force Washington or Brussels to throw in the towel . A ta^et country will probably try to sit back and wait for sanctions to
 The experience with Russia shows how sanctions can turn into a race against time . U.S. sanctions have been imposed on Russia since 2009 . Sanctions are expected to be imposed by the European Union and the United States .
 Russia has sought to free itself from sanctions not by giving the West what it wants, but by trying to break the West's resolve . For the last several years, Russia has been trying to escape sanctions by breaking the West’s resolve .
 Russia has made itself a frequent target of the EU, with Moscow currying favor with incumbent leaders and boosting aspiring ones . The EU has set up a process in which member states must unanimously agree to extend sanctions every six months .
 EU sanctions would be far more effective if they didn't require a semiannual vote of confidence . But still, EU sanctions still need to be met with a vote of approval .
 Even the harshest sanctions are unlikely to result in total capitulation . It is foolhardy to expect any leader to commit political suicide in order to get sanctions lifted .
 Kim has made his nuclear program a centerpiece of his domestic legitimacy . The political costs of agreeing to denuclearize have outweighed the economic benefits of doing so .
 For sanctions to change a country’s behavior, they must allow leaders on the receiving end to save face . U.S. demands must be met by leaders on receiving end while acceding to the United States demands, experts say .
 In March 2016, Jacob Lew, the U.S. treasury secretary of the treasury, struck a memorable note of caution in a speech on sanctions . Lew: If you want peace, prepare for economic war, prepare to prepare for war .
 Lew argued that other countries will wean themselves off dependency on the U.S. financial system . Lew: The more other countries wean off dependency, it will reduce vulnerability to sanctions . He said the more countries will reduce their vulnerability to United States sanctions .
 China has threatened sanctions against U.S. companies involved in arms sales to Taiwan . Russia has responded to Turkey’s shooting down of a Russian attack aircraft with restrictions on tourism and food imports . Saudi Arabia and other Arab states have imposed a slew of economic penalties on Qatar .
 At a time when states are trying to challenge the liberal world order without triggering great-power war, rising economic combat has become inevitable . Rising economic combat is inevitable.
 Support for sanctions is one of the easiest ways for politicians to burnish their national security credentials . And that’s to say nothing of the political impetus for more and more sanctions in Washington .
 U.S. sanctions have some record of success in persuading adversaries to reverse troublesome steps they’ve already taken . But it remains far easier to prevent future actions than to prevent them .
 The goal should be to establish sanctions as the U.S. most potent deterrent in the gray zone between war and peace . So much of today’s international jostling takes place, so much of it takes place .
 The first step is to build a permanent sanctions contingency-planning process within the U.S. government . "The first step" is to set up a permanent contingency planning process .
 U.S. officials in the State Department, Treasury, and other agencies should create and update off-the-shelf plans to impose sanctions rapidly if needed . Just as the United States military draws up detailed plans for wars it might someday have to fight, officials should create off-
 To practice these plans and signal the government’s readiness to use them, they should routinely perform military-style exercises . The government should simulate crises in which sanctions play a central role in the response .
 The United States government should bolster its defenses against other countries’ sanctions . The U.S. government should also bolster its defense against other sanctions, the author says .
 The U.S. aims to collect intelligence on adversaries’ blueprints for economic warfare in addition to their military plans . That means prioritizing the collection of information on adversaries' blueprints .
 It also means identifying vulnerabilities in the U.S. economy and working with private companies to rectify them . The government is working quietly with private firms to fix them .
 Some vital American-made products, including aircraft and pharmaceuticak, depend on components from countries that may one day sanction the United States . The federal government should team up with their manufacturers to identify potential alternative suppliers in advance .
 Sanctions will require regular consultation between sanctions policymakers and private-sector leaders, says Peter Bergen . He says effective planning will require more regular consultation .
 The U.S. has traditionally shunned the types of close ties between business and government that are so prevalent elsewhere . But it is worth making an exception for national security, it says .
 State Department and Treasury Department should draw on experienced professionals from the financial, energy, and technology sectors to fashion sanctions . The U.S. Treasury and State Department should also draw on experts from the energy, financial, technology sectors, they say .
 Industry expertise is critical for the United States government to construct sanctions programs that are forceful yet don’t backfire on the U.S. or its allies . Industry expertise will be critical to the development of sanctions programs, experts say .
 The risk of financial contagion is higher when deploying sanctions against larger economies, because the risk is higher in such cases . Sanctions are especially important when deploying against larger countries, such as Russia .
 UN Security Council is not the right forum for these discussions, writes Peter Bergen . The differences among its five permanent members tend to result in watered-down sanctions, he says .
 A cardinal weakness of the U.S. campaign to pressure North Korea has been its reliance on the UN Security Council, a legacy of a program that has been geared more toward frustrating the country’s efforts to obtain nuclear missile components than economic coercion . In fact, a cardinal weakness
 The U.S. has left itself with fewer options on North Korea than it has had in the case of Iran or Russia . By giving China and Russia a veto over sanctions decisions, the United States has fewer options than Iran and Russia .
 It has exposed itself to the possibility that Beijing and Moscow will claim the moral high ground for agreeing to Security Council resolutions while surreptitiously aiding Pyongyang .
 In most cases, U.S. interests are best served by negotiating coercive economic sanctions with like-minded allies in the EU and G-7 . Focus efforts in the UN on less divisive sanctions, such as those that stigmatize bad actors and stem weapons proliferation and illicit finance .
 The U.S. government should invite allies to participate in sanctions contingency planning and exercises . It should also work with them to use sanctions for collective defense . The United States should also invite allies, including Russia, to participate .
 A reasonable strategy for deterring future Russian interference in foreign elections would entail a joint eu-nato declaration affirming that such meddling will be treated as an attack against all and result in strong sanctions .
 Economic warfare is a reality of the international environment, and perfecting the art of it will be essential for the U.S. to deter the incremental interventions favored by its adversaries .
 The U.S. will always find it difficult to check aggression and defend its interests in such hot spots as the South China Sea, the Persian Gulf, and Russia's periphery . That doesn’t mean crises will go away; the United States will always struggle to contain aggression .
 The United States has adopted this approach in nearly every region of the world over the last 70 years . Seeking to stabilize fragile states, the U.S. has adopted such a policy in almost every region over the past 70 years.
 Fragile states jeopardize U.S. interests, but large-scale interventions are costly and unpopular . Large-scale intervention is costly, unpopular and unpopular, the U.N. says .
 By outsourcing regional security in places where U.S. interests are not immediately threatened, Washington can promote stability without shouldering most of the burden itself . Washington should not be burdened with the burden of regional security .
 Head off threats before they metastasize means that the U.S. can keep its eye on more sophisticated rivals such as China and Russia . And heading off threats will help keep the United States eye on Russia and China, experts say .
 Among United States policymakers, this approach enjoys widespread popularity . Among U.S. policymakers, it enjoys widespread support .
 Mara Mara Karlin ing weak states cheaply and quickly is more alluring than ever . She says weak states are alluring to the idea of weak states easily and quickly .
 History shows that building militaries in weak states is not the panacea the U.S. national security community imagines it to be . But history shows that it is not a panacea for the United States .
 American efforts to build up local security forces are an oversold halfway measure that is rarely cheap and often falls short of the desired outcome . As examples that span the globe have demonstrated, in practice, U.S. efforts are often oversold .
 For decades, the U.S. has poured countless billions into foreign security forces . Nearly $20 billion per year is spent on foreign forces in the United States alone .
 Sometimes, the problem is one of execution, and the U.S. can improve the way it conceives of and carries out military assistance . The United States can improve its way of conceiving of and carrying out military aid, the author says .
 The United States must recognise that the game is simply not worth the candle . Often, however, the problems run deeper, and the U.S. must recognise it .
 The biggest problem with Washington’s efforts to build foreign militaries is its reluctance to weigh in on higher-order questions of mission, organizational structure, and personnel . Issues that profoundly affect a military's edacity are often considered too sensitive to touch .
 Both parties tend to focus exclusively on training and equipment, thus undercutting the effectiveness of United States assistance . Instead, both parties focus on training, equipment, instead of training and training .
 Such narrow-mindedness hampered U.S. support for South Vietnam, which began in earnest after the French withdrawal from Vietnam in 1954 . The French withdrawal in 1954 led to support for the South Vietnam .
 Ngo Dinh Diem, Vietnam’s president from 1955 to 1963, sought to orient his military toward external threats . Internal defense against communists should have been the primary concern, as many U.S. officials knew .
 Diem reorganized the South Vietnamese military according to his preferences, preparing it for a conventional external conflict with North Vietnam and leaving it ill equipped for the growing communist insurgency at home . Despite receiving nearly half a billion dollars in U.S. military aid between 1956 and 1960, Diem
 The military’s leadership remained weak, its chain of command confusing, and its method of promotion based on loyalty rather than merit . To make matters worse, the military's leadership remains weak, and it's chain-command is confusing .
 Carter and Reagan administrations supported the country's military in its fight against left-wing guerrillas . Something similar happened in El Salvador, where the Reagan and Carter administrations backed the military in the fight against the guerillas .
 The El Salvadorian military spearheaded an extremely violent counterinsurgency campaign characterized by death squads and civilian massacres . Despite U.S. officials' preference for a more humane approach to the rebels, the El Salvadoran military spearheaded a violent campaign against the rebels .
 More than 75,000 civilians died in the protracted conflict, mostly at the hands of government forces . The military did prevent the guerrillas from taking over the state, but more than 75k civilians died .
 El Salvador has one of the world's highest homicide rates . El Salvador today remains a fragile state with one of world's most violent states . The country is fragile and is fragile .
 In Yemen, from 2007 to 2011, the U.S. government disbursed more than $500 million to assist the country’s military in its fight against a mix of domestic insurgents and al Qaeda affiliates .
 Yemen's security challenges were only one of many problems facing the country . The U.S. failed to fully appreciate the security challenges facing Yemen, the Yemeni government says .
 Saleh filled the military with friends and family members who grew rich while nearly everyone else in the country suffered from poverty, hunger, and unemployment . Saleh's president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, had filled the country's military with wealthy friends and relatives .
 Saleh used U.S. funds and equipment intended for counterterrorism to enrich his family and bolster his personal security detail . Saleh also used the United States funds to enrich himself and his family . The funds were intended to bolster his security detail and his personal family .
 Pentagon officials admit that they had lost track of millions of dollars’ worth of military equipment . Pentagon officials said they could not guarantee that U.S. weapons would not fall into the wrong hands .
 U.S. efforts to bmld Mali’s military have fizzled out for similar reasons . United States efforts to get Mali's military out of Mali have also failed .
 Most of the force collapsed in 2012, after a U.S.-trained officer staged a military coup . Leaders of elite units defected, taking valuable United States materiel with them .
 Similar problems have emerged in Afghanistan and Iraq, where the U.S. has put American boots on the ground . Although the situation is different in Iraq and Afghanistan, the situation has been different .
 In both countries, the United States has spent billions of dollars to build militaries . In both nations, the U.S. has spent millions of dollars on defense .
 It has largely sidestepped bi-picture questions about the forces’ mission, structure, and leadership in favor of a focus on training and equipment . The U.S. Army has been criticized for its lack of transparency in the military .
 Both militaries are plagued by problems with recruitment, discipline, leadership, motivation, and corruption . Small wonder, then, that both militaries remain plagued with problems with recruiting, discipline .
 Despite receiving some $60 billion in aid since 2001, Afghanistan’s military has suffered problems with mo rale and desertion, especially in regions of intense conflict such as Helmand Province .
 U.S.-supplied equipment has been used in the battle for Mosul against Islamic State (or IS) that began in 2014 . In Iraq, whole swaths of the Iraqi military deserted en masse, leaving behind equipment .
 U.S. trained Iraqi Counter Terrorism Service played a key role in the liberation of Mosul in July 2017 . The current fight against is is has been more successful .
 Iran-backed Shiite militias have fought alongside Iraqi military in Iraq's fight against ISIS . But credit for success in the broader fight against the terrorist group also goes to the Iranian-backed militias .
 Washington's tendency to avoid raising hotbutton issues with its partners would placate them, but that is rarely the case . Washington might expect that Washington would be able to placate its partners, but not so easily .
 Almost always, partner states are disappointed by the quantity, quality, and timing of assistance they receive from the EU . Partner states often are disappointed with the quantity and quality of the assistance .
 "Because these countries are living with the threat every day, they usually want help as quickly as possible," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The U.S. system is not designed to work so fast, even in high-priority cases . But the United States system does not always work so quickly, even if it's a priority .
 The $1 billion-plus U.S. program to build Lebanon’s military after 2005, when Syrian forces withdrew from the country .
 It took over a year for any military assistance to materialize . Despite a consensus in Washington that Lebanon needed urgent help to exert control over its territory, it took more than a year to get any help .
 December 2026 and upward of 18 months for vital equipment to arrive . U.S. Special Forces training Iraqi filters, December 20, 2026, 20.26 .
 Frustrated by these delays, the Lebanese did not shy away from criticizing U.S. assistance . They even sought additional help from Russia . The Lebanese government has been criticized by the United States .
 Even under the best of circumstances, the United States partners are rarely satisfied . The United States is rarely satisfied with its partners, but it's not always satisfied with the situation .
 In 2007, the Lebanese military faced down Fatah alIslam, an al Qaeda-affiliated group that had taken over a Palestinian refugee camp . The U.S. dispatched planeloads of materiel to the frontlines in just a few weeks .
 This disappointment resulted in uncertainty about U.S. seriousness and staying power . This disappointment has made the Lebanese less amenable to United States guidance, he says .
 U.S. military assistance concerns divisions on the American side . A house divided by American divisions could be a problem for the U.K.
 Washington does not always come to a consensus on the parameters and purpose of its help . Washington often doesn't always agree on what the U.S. government needs to do .
 This confusion undermines a program’s efficacy and can result in unmitigated disaster . The confusion undermines the efficacy of a program's efficacy, experts say . This confusion can also undermine the effectiveness of a government program .
 The Pentagon put in charge of assisting the South Vietnamese military from 1955 to 1960 . Lieutenant General Samuel Wiliams was a commander who received a battlefield demotion during World War II due to incompetence .
 At a time when there are more than enough problems among its Vietnamese allies, Washington was needlessly undermining its own efforts . Washington needslessly undermined its own effort, says U.S. diplomat .
 Reagan administration dispatched U.S. troops to Lebanon in the wake of Israel’s 1982 invasion of the country . In the 1980s, the Reagan administration sent troops to serve in a multinational peacekeeping force and to professionalize the country's military .
 Washington failed to establish a consensus on the purpose of its involvement in Syria . The U.S. government failed to reach a consensus about Syria's involvement in the region .
 The mission began as a 30-day mission to oversee the withdrawal of the Palestine Liberation Organization from Beirut . It turned into an open-ended commitment to support Lebanese stability and security .
 Senior U.S. policymakers disagreed sharply over the scope of the United States role in Lebanon . They disagreed over the extent to which the U.N. should directly support Lebanon's military in combat operations .
 A senior U.S. policymaker encouraged the commander of the armed forces to lead a military coup . The United States government was invested in the stability and security of the Lebanese state . A senior American policymaker broke ranks and encouraged the military coup in Lebanon .
 This disunity laid the groundwork for a convoluted program, ako for the deaths of hundreds of U.S. military and diplomatic personnel . The disunity lays the groundwork not only for the program but also for hundreds of deaths, says Ako .
 Two spectacular attacks in 1983 on the United States embassy and marine barracks in Beirut illustrated that at least some actors saw the U.S. as a combatant in the conflict . Despite efforts to characterize itself as playing a supporting role, the attacks illustrated that some Americans saw themselves as combatants
 By early 1984, portions of the Lebanese military had melted away amid increased violence, and the United States withdrew from Lebanon . The U.S. had failed to make Lebanon more stable or secure .
 A final problem with assistance programs is the impact of antagonistic external actors, says Three's Company . Three's company says it's a good idea to help people in need of assistance .
 When Washington partners with foreign militaries, it often fails to grapple with third parties intent on exploiting a country’s weakness . Washington often doesn’t grapple with foreign forces intent to exploit a country's weakness .
 In Lebanon, U.S. efforts to build up the military in the 1980s were thwarted by all manner of foreign proxies and governments . The United States has a history of building up its own military in Lebanon .
 Iran flooded the country with hundreds of Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps personnel to establish Hezbollah . The group's original purpose was to fight the Israeli occupation . Hezbollah was formed by Iran's Revolutionary Guard .
 Israel intimidated senior Lebanese political figures by parking tanks outside their homes . Israeli tanks were parked outside Lebanese political leaders' homes .
 By refusing to work with Lebanon’s fledgling government and empowering its opponents, Israel, Syria, and Iran undercut U.S. efforts to help Lebanon's military strengthen the state . The U.N. says it will work with the government of Lebanon's fledgling government .
 External meddling also poses a threat to U.S. objectives in Iraq, where Iranian-backed militias and politicians feed sectarian tensions .
 Countering Tehran in Baghdad is admittedly complicated, given Iran’s help in the fight against isis, but if left unchecked, continued Iranian interference will undermine Iraqi sovereignty . Iran is helping fight against ISIS, but it will undermine Iraq's sovereignty, posing further problems as Iraq’
 With isis routed from Mosul, the U.S. should help Iraq meaningfully incorporate the Iranianbacked militias into the Iraqi military, says John Avlon .
 Pakistan’s support for the Afghan Taliban has weakened the government in Kabul and inhibited national reconciliation . In Afghanistan, likewise, Pakistan's support for Taliban has also weakened the Afghan government . Pakistan has been criticized for supporting the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 U.S. efforts to pressure Pakistan should be redoubled to stop the country from serving as a safe haven . The United States should use drone strikes within Pakistan's borders .
 History is not replete only with tales of failure, however, however . History is replete with stories of success, however. History also has tales of success .
 Under certain circumstances, the United States has succeeded in reforming foreign militaries . The U.S. has tried to reform the world's most powerful militaries in the past .
 In 1946, communist insurgents began waging war against the Greek government . The Greek government was overthrown by communist insurgents .
 Truman administration spent $300 million to strengthen Greek economy and military . Truman administration was concerned about growing Soviet influence in the world .
 U.S. deeply involved itself in all aspects of Greek military affairs . Crucially, the United States involved itself .
 State Department officials drafted the Greek government’s initial request for aid . State Dept. officials even drafted the initial request to help Greece .
 U.S. officials worked closely with Greece to reorganize the Hellenic Army’s structure to align with the mission of defending the government against communist guerillas rather than foreign armies . United States and Greece worked closely .
 The British government appointed capable military leaders to the right positions . And they made sure they appointed the right military leaders in the right places .
 The architect of the U.S. effort, General James Van Fleet, was himself a capable and charismatic leader . General Van Fleet was himself committed to keeping Athens and Washington on the same page .
 U.S. advisers trained and equipped the Greek forces, provided tactical and strategic advice, planned operations to rout guerilla fighters . Under Van Fleet’s leadership, United States advisers trained, equipped and provided tactical advice .
 Van Fleet and his team oversaw a complete overhaul of military personnel . All of the Hellenic Army’s lieutenant generals except one to resign from their posts .
 They then facilitated the promotion and placement of eight major generak . They then encouraged the removal of division and corps commanders who were reluctant or incapable of supporting the broader strategy .
 In Washington, senior national security officials regularly assessed the program to ensure its purpose was clear . Officials made necessary adjustments as the situation evolved, officials say .
 The U.S. military has been involved in Greece's civil war for more than a decade . It's unclear when and if the United States should consider becoming a co-combatant in Greece’s civil war .
 Truman responded quickly and decisively to signs of division among those administering the program . Truman responded promptly and decisively . Truman said he would not tolerate divisions in the program's leadership .
 Lincoln MacVeagh was removed from the United States ambassador to Greece . Dwight Griswold was in charge of the U.S. aid program in Greece . The president of Greece removed him from the post in 1973 .
 The most intense disagreements with the Greeks centered on the size of the Hellenic Army . Athens wanted to increase beyond what the U.S. thought was necessary for internal defense .
 United States officials threatened to withdraw United States support . United States finally threatened to pull support for the Syrian refugees .
 The Greek military was able to extend its control over the country thanks to reforms instituted at the behest of Washington . Yugoslavia diminished its support for the communist insurgents as part of an effort to reposition itself away from the Soviet Union .
 The Greek state prevailed in one of the first proxy conflicts of the Cold War . By 1949, the Greek state had defeated the guerillas, thanks to U.S. support .
 Past experience offers two key lessons for U.S. officials as they seek to strengthen the security sectors of weak states . The lessons are important for the United States as it seeks to strengthen weak states' security sectors .
 First, like all statebuilding endeavors, these are political, not technical, exercises . Statebuilding is a political endeavor, not a technical, statebuilding is, it says .
 Instead of focusing narrowly on training and equipment, U.S. policymakers must address the purpose and scope of the United States role and the mission, leadership, and oiganizational structure of the partner's military .
 In Saudi Arabia, the U.S. military is running a handful of programs to train and equip the country’s armed forces . The programs stay for away from sensitive issues, in line with Saudi preferences, in Saudi Arabia .
 The United States should align these disjointed programs, assess the broader purpose of U.S. support, and use the findings to meaningfully engage on crucial but sensitive matters . The findings should be used to help engage on sensitive matters, the authors say .
 Increasing U.S. involvement in the details of a foreign country’s military is rife with colonial undertones . It might be difficult to digest, but it might be necessary to digest .
 U.S. officials should watch how they communicate and avoid creating the perception that they are bullying those they seek to assist . To minimize pushback, United States officials should avoid creating a perception of bullying .
 Recent efforts to condition military aid to Pakistan on the country’s cracking down on the militants within its borders are a good first step .
 The second lesson for policymakers is that they cannot afford to ignore the destabilizing potential of third parties that pose a serious challenge to a newly equipped military . Third parties pose a real challenge to the military, writes Andrew Hammond .
 When possible, the United States should marshal its tools to limit external meddling . The U.S. should use its own tools to prevent external meddling, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A partner state may refuse to discuss those crucial questions, motivated by some combination of distrust, a desire to pursue a different agenda, and uncertainty about the U.S. commitment . The partner states may want to pursue different agendas .
 Egypt is one of the top recipients of U.S. military aid . Officials in Egypt appear to believe that Washington will continue to provide assistance in order to maintain the country’s peace treaty .
 Nigerian officials seem to have calculated that the U.S. will help with their fight against Boko Haram despite the military’s egregious human rights violations . They have refused to discuss changes to the Nigerian military's outdated defense strategy .
 In other cases, improving an assistance program may be unworkable because the U.S. is unwilling to crack down on external actors . The United States needs the support it needs for higher-priority issues .
 U.S. may give up on trying to get Russia to lessen its meddling in Syria . Instead, the United States should focus on making progress on broader European security affairs .
 In such scenarios, policymakers need to make a clear-eyed assessment about the goals and likely outcomes of U.S. military assistance . Policymakers must also consider the goals, likely outcomes, in such scenarios .
 Limited train-and-equip programs can serve useful purposes, such as providing intelligence, professionalizing the military to make the force more respected . They can also en^ling some tactical and operational cooperation on mutually agreed threats .
 Policymakers may conclude that the costs outweigh the benefits . Alternatively, policymakers may decide that the benefits outweigh the costs .
 In those cases, better to submit to reality and deal with the problem some other way than throw good money after bad. "In some cases, it's better than throwing good money at bad. In some cases it's not good money," says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 The British people ignored the advice of the leaders of all their major political parties and of virtually all experts . The decision was made by the British people to take action .
 George Osborne told voters that leaving would wreck the British economy . George Osborne said leaving the UK would wreck Britain's economy . Osborne said the UK will not be able to leave the EU without a deal .
 U.S. President Barack Obama warned that it would reduce the United Kingdom’s influence on the world stage . Obama also warned that the UK would be less influential in the world .
 Financial markets, many pollsters, and political pundits all anticipated that voters would heed the elites* advice . But voters did not heed the advice .
 And yet they decided not to, setting off a process set off by the EU .
 Anand Menon is set to transform the country’s politics, economy, and society . Follow him on Twitter @3anandMenon1 .
 The referendum has generated a rash of books seeking to explain, or at least describe, what happened . No wonder, then, that a book of books has been written to explain what happened to the referendum .
 The pace of academic publishing means that most of those that have already appeared are quick and dirty accounts by journalists or politicians and their advisers .
 Unleashing Demons, by Craig Oliver, who worked as David Cameron’s director of communications, and All Out War, by Tim Shipman. Unleashing Demon, by . Craig Oliver .
 Oliver has drawn heavily on his diaries to produce an accoimt of one part of the Remain side, whereas Shipman offers an exhaustive history of the campaign as a whole . Shipman has produced an exhaustive look at the campaign in his book .
 Both are elite histories, focusing on the words and deeds of political leaders rather than the details of the ground operations or the reasons why over 33 million people voted the way they did .
 Cameron’s team made huge errors when it came to immigration policy, messaging, and the decision to hold the referendum in the first place . Cameron's team also made huge mistakes in the immigration policy and messaging .
 The EU*s principle of free movement, however, made this promise impossible to keep . The European Union*s promise to keep free movement made it impossible to do so, says EU*.
 By suggesting that control over EU migration was attainable, Cameron created expectations he could not meet . Cameron had created expectations that he would not meet, he said .
 By February 2016, his attempt to renegotiate immigration with the EU had turned into a political disaster . By February . 2016, he had failed to negotiate a deal with the European Union .
 The deal fell far short of Euroskepdcs' demands to restrict access to some benefits for EU migrants for the first four years after they arrived in the United Kingdom .
 Shipman explains how, early on, the Leave campaign rect^ized the importance of immigration . Shipman had. in effect, taken no for an answer, Shipman says .
 Net immigration figures show net immigration had risen in the previous year . Campaigners targeted the issue mercilessly after figures were released .
 Cameron's tendency to put the fate of the Conservative Parry over that of the country led him into several blunders, including the decision to hold a referendum in the first place . Shipman also shows how Cameron’s . tendency to . put the . fate of a Conservative Par
 In the end, it proved a shortsighted move to win the 2015 elecdon . Doing so helped him defy the odds and win the election .
 Oliver is less willing to concede that party unity trumped the national interest . As a Cameron loyalist, he is less likely to agree that national interests trumped national interests . Oliver is more likely to be a more sceptical of the Cameron government .
 Cameroffs desire to maintain Conservative unity shaped his tacdcs . During the campaign itself, as Shipman details, Cameroffs wanted to maintain the party unity .
 President Obama was confronted by opponents who relished provoking intra-Conservative fights . He was confronted with opponents who were willing to provoke intra-conservative fights .
 Linking senior Tory defectors to If KIP as ‘crazy, righrwing nutters’ would have proved ‘terminal’ for Leave’s hopes, he suggested .
 In the run-up to the referendum, the Labour leader supported staying in the EU . Shipman provides excruciating detail about how his team was reluctant to cooperate with the official Remain campaign .
 No account of the campaign would be complete without considering the media . The media has been a big part in the campaign for Hillary Clinton .
 Before Joining government, he held several roles at the corporation, including as editor of the flagship 6 PM and 10 PM news programs .
 As he notes, the corporation tied itself in knots as it struggled to appear balanced . The company has been in a state of limbo for years .
 BBC attempted to solve the problem by simply giving both sides equal airtime . Presented with competing claims, the BBC often did not question the validity of one or the other . The BBC tried to solve it by giving both parties equal air time .
 BBC routinely puts one of the few pro-Remain economists alongside a pro-remain voice without mentioning that a clear preponderance of economists backed Remain . Expert opinion overwhelmingly held that leaving the EU would harm the British economy .
 The Remain camp managed to pressure the BBC to reflect expert opinion more accurately on its flagship radio and TV programs . But it had less success at shaping the rest of the corporation’s coverage .
 Much of the British establishment listens to a few major broadcasts on BBC Radio 4 and Nev)sni^i on BBC Two . But majority of the public does not listen to major radio programs .
 Having called an unnecessary referendum, it misunderstood its own people and lost despite a strong majority of voters' wishes . Having called it unnecessary, it misjudged the result of a referendum .
 It was also the result of a growing disoste for politicians, experts, and the United Kingdom's economic system . The UK's economy has been hit hard by austerity measures .
 In the years before the vote, the country witnessed a sustained decline in trust in politicians . In the past decade, the public has been distrustful of politicians .
 Conservative-led coalition led coalition that legalized same-sex marriage in 2014 . It was, for example, a Conservative-backed coalition that led to same sex marriage in Canada .
 Cameron government exacerbated this rising distrust and detachment . Cameron government has exacerbated the rising distrust of the public .
 In the vi^e of the financial crisis, the government pursued policies of austerity that disproportionately hit the vrorst-off in society . The government pursued austerity policies in response to the crisis .
 The word “austerity"" appears nowhere in Oliver*s account . The word "austerity" is particularly galling in his account .
 The government Oliver served in from 2011 onward played a crucial part in alienating the people who turned out to poke the political establishment in the eye . After all, the government Oliver's government has been alienating people who want to challenge it .
 During the referendum campaign, these trends combined to mobilize several disparate groups in support of the UK . The trend was seen as a way to mobilize disparate groups of support for the referendum .
 Almost three million people who did not vote in the 2015 election turned out in 2016 . Almost 3 million people did not turn out to vote in 2015 election .
 Those who held conservative social values were far more likely to vote Leave . Conservative social values most likely to be held by those who voted Leave .
 Despite the centrality of economics to the campaign, its immediate effects were political . The fallout from the campaign was a result of the economic success .
 The civil service has spent much of the last year analyzing how it should approach negotiations with the EU before the country leaves the union on March 29, 2019 . As a result, the civil service is looking at how it might affect the United Kingdom .
 TKis implies caking the country out of the EU*s single market and customs union . Together embody the shared rules and regulatory standards and the absence of internal customs checks make the market across the EU resemble that of a single country .
 But a hard Brexit is not the only way of interpreting the referendum outcome . A hard Britain is not only possible to interpret the outcome of the referendum, it is also possible to predict the outcome .
 The Norway option would see the United Kingdom remain within the single market even after leaving the Eir. Another, for instance, is ""the Norway option "" .
 The United Kingdom seems set for a turbulent few years . Whatever kind of Brexit the government decides to adopt, the UK is likely to be in a turbulent period .
 Inflation is on the rise, partly driven by the devaluation of the pound that immediately followed the referendum . The pound devaluation is seen as a major factor in inflation .
 Economists estimate that a hard Brexit would lead to a 40 percent reduction in trade with the EU . The EU is the United ECingdom's largest trading partner and is the UK's largest trade partner .
 The British economy will have to adapt as some export industries decline . Some firms, especially in the manufacturing and service sectors, may consider relocadnging to the Eu’s single market and customs union .
 It will need to organize new customs arrangements, enact new regulations and policies in such areas as agriculture and Immigradon . It will also set up new regulators to replace Elf bodies .
 For the next several years, it is hard to see how the government will be able to do much apart from operationalizing Brexit . The government will have to rely on its ability to operationalize its decision to leave the UK .
 Senior civil servants leak damaging stories about their political bosses to the press . Senior civil servant leaks damaging stories to the media about their bosses .
 A growing number of people seem to take this instability as a sign that the result of the referendum may be overturned . The instability is thought to be a sign of a possible overturning of the result .
 Those whose hubris and willingness to put party before country brought the UK to this juncture, however, are thriving .
 Cameron has hit the international speaker circuit and, between jaunts, is writing his memoirs in a designer garden shed that cost him 25,000 pounds . The former Prime Minister is writing the memoirs at the expense of a £25,000 house .
 Osborne hired as the editor of the influential London Evening Standard, despite his complete lack of journalistic experience . Osborne is the architect of the austerity that impoverished and alienated so many . Osborne was appointed despite having no experience in journalism .
 Oliver was knighted for his achievements and now works for a high-end consultancy firm . He now makes a living providing advice on the benefits of the EU .
 The term “IsUmism’* and its watered-down equivalent, ‘political Islam,” sprang into widespread use after the Iranian Revolution of 1979 .
 These movements promoted sharia through modern forms of popular mobilization . These movements created branches specifically for young people, women, and workers .
 An advisory council appoints a leader who oversees technical committees devoted to particular policy areas . The Gtobsi Appeal of Istunic State. different steps of inidadon, and a modern polidcaJ party, are different steps .
 The first and most famous Islamist group was the Muslim Brotherhood, founded in Egypt in 192S . It later established branches throughout the Arab world .
 Similar organizations have cropped up elsewhere in the Sunni Muslim world . Over time, similar organizations cropped up across the world .
 Shiite Iranian clergy and miUiants who took part in the overthrow of the shah of Iran in 1979 helped define political Islam in the public imagination .
 Their rise helped popularize the term ‘^Islamist” in the media, academia, and government . The rise of the group has helped popularized the term '#Islamist'
 Hamid and William McCants are two prominent American experts on the subject of political Islam . They say it sharpens the debate over political Islam by identifying what they call “mainstream Islamists”
 Hamid and McCants’ definition leaves out movements such as the South Asiabased Tablighi Jamaat that seek to re-Islamize society through proselytizing .
 It excludes extremist groups such as al Qaeda that advocate and practice violent jihad . It also excludes groups that advocate or practice violent jihad .
 The book’s focus on mainstream Islamists is warranted, but the focus is warranted . Although terrorist groups generate headlines, moderate groups enjoy far deeper and broader support in the Muslim world, they pose a more profound challenge to secular states .
 In the here and now, they seek accommodation with existing institutions and build support by setting up charities . The charities fill the gap left by poor governance in much of the Muslim world . In the current, they aim to fill the void left by the poor governance .
 They do not overtly contest the legitimacy of secular governments but instead try to iniluence them . They enter into the electoral arena when allowed to do so, and are open to joining political coalitions . They try not to overtly contest secular governments .
 They reject the practice of ial^r and do not promote armed insurrections, except against Israel . They reject iala .r and reject the . practice of . ialuar .
 Although they accuse Western powers of neocolonialism and “cultural aggression,’* they always keep the door open to contacts and negotiation . And although they accuse the West of being aggressive, they always open the door to contacts .
 But far from clarifying the nature and trajectory of Lslamism, these shocks have seemed to only muddy the water .
 Hamid and McCants write: "After decades speculating on what Islamists would do when they came to power, analysts, academics ... and Islamists themselves"
 Rethinking Political Islam explores the practices and policies of Islamist parties in recent years . To illuminate the subject, contributors to Rethink Political Islam wisely sec aside theoretical debates about Islamist ideology and examine the policies of Islamists .
 The book devotes chapters to developments in nine countries in the Middle East, North Africa, and Asia .
 After the 2010-11 revolutions, Islamists won elections in Egypt, Morocco, and Tunisia, whereas in Libya, Syria, and Yemen, they were immediately embroiled in messy civil wars . After the revolution in Egypt and Morocco, Egypt, Tunisia and Morocco won elections .
 No uprisings took place in Jordan or Kuwait, but Islamist parties in both places were energized by the upheavals elsewhere . Islamist parties have a long tradition of participadng in elections and working within existing institutions .
 Analysis of political Islam in these places tend to fall into two categories . Despite this variety of analyses, political Islam tends to be viewed as a form of religion .
 The first might be called “the contextualist view,"" which holds that the policies and practices of Islamist movements are driven less by ideology than by events . The second view sees such groups as reactive and adaptive and sees them as reactive .
 The harsh repression faced by the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood in the 1960s produced a more cautious approach &om the movement’s leadership, coupled with radicalization on its fringes . So, for example, the repression faced in the 60s produced more cautious approaches .
 The political opportunities supplied by the 2010-11 revolts led the group to enter into the electoral game, political scientist Steven Brooke says .
 The use of religious rhetoric is often little more than “Muslimspeak"" (in the words of French political scientist Francois Burgat), a way to express a unique identity and articulate grievances, especially against the West .
 An authentic Islamist cannot renounce his ideological agenda in favor of a more pragmatic or democratic approach . Islamic theology recognizes no separadon between religion and politics, says some .
 In recent years, mainstream Islamists have frequently done just that . Mainstream Islamists have often done that, but not so often .
 Tunisia, Egypt, Tunisia and Egypt have both won and lost . They did so in the wake of victory, as in Tunisia, and defeat, as they did .
 Egyptian and Tunisian Islamists realized that their consdtuents cared far less about, say, the role of Islam in the consdturion than jobs, food and housing .
 Morsi's government appeared willing to work within the conftnes of existing institutions . Morsi had previously served as a senior leader of the Muslim Brotherhood . That willingness is part of what got him elected .
 Most Egyptians welcomed the return of military rule after Abdel Fattah el-Sisi took power in a coup in 2013 . Morsi increased his own authority and failed to deliver economic growth and security, public support for his government plummeted .
 Clergy institudons, such as Cairo’s Al-Azhar Unrversity, did not endorse Islamists .
 Even secularist parries, such as Tunisia's Nidaa Tounes, often promoted some Islamic norms to reinforce their cultural norms .
 Almost all polidcal pardes and figures have incorporated re-lslamizarion into their platforms, undermining the Islamist brand . In Southeast Asia, as the research shows in his chapter, almost all . . Joseph Chinyong Liow .
 The aftermath of the Arab revolts of 2010—11 have not supplied a clear verdict in the debate between the contexrualist and essentialist camps . The Arab Spring has not provided an easy verdict for contexualist and essentialists .
 After winning a parliamentary plurality in 2011, the party spent years debating the text of a new constitution . The party has been in power for more than a decade .
 The result was perhaps the most secular foundational document of any Arab state, one that even protects ""freedom of conscience" - that is, the right to hold or not hold any religious belieft and the freedom to change religions . The result of the Arab Spring is perhaps the world's most
 "Freedom of religion" would allow non-Muslims to practice their faith but not allow them to convert Muslims to it and would ignore atheists and other secular-minded people . That is a more expansive right than "freedom of religion," which would not apply to non-Muslim people .
 Ennahda’s volimtary abandonment of governing power showed that old fears of “one man, one vote, one time” are often unfounded . As the international relations scholar Peter MandaviUe notes in his chapter .
 In Egypt in 2013, it was not the Islamists who put an end to democratic rule but a strange alliance of military leaders, secularists, and Salaftsts . Meanwhile, in Egypt, the Islamists were not Islamists but the military .
 Morsi did not have the means to resist Sisi’s coup, as demonstrated by the overwhelmingly peaceful and completely fudJe reaction of Morsi supporters . Morsi supporters were massacred by the army after occupying a public square in Cairo .
 Rethinking f^litical Islam is an attempt to go beyond the long-running, fa miliar debates about the sincerity of Islamists . Ultimately, the contributors to this article are interested in going beyond the debate about sincerity of Islam .
 Scholars seek to understand what It will mean for religious parties to transform from fringe actors conned to the opposition into genuine political players .
 Ennahda "no longer accepts the label of’Islamism’—a concept that has been disfigured in recent years by radical extremists—as a description of its approach,” Ghannouchi wrote in this month’s magazine .
 The goal of the party’s participation in politics is to protect the movement from politics . The answer is that although the movement {harakat) and the party are now formally separate, the party is still formally separate .
 The approach is akin to the Western liberal concept of the separation of church and state . It is closer to the American conception of shielding religion from state interference than to the French idea .
 The redefining of religion to refer more narrowly to a set of beliefs and practices that exist in the framework of a secular society . That represents a profound change, no less than the redefining religion .
 Ennahda has recognized that although Tunisian society may be culturally Muslim, it is not destined to become ideologically Islamic . Ghannouchi glossed this move by declaring that Enahda had become *‘a party of Muslim democrats,"" intentionally inviting comparisons to the Christian
 Christian democratic parties found ways to secularize what had been primarily religious values in order to better reach out to an ever more secular electorate . From the 1940s until the mid-1940s, Christian Democratic parties were able to find a way of reaching out to a more secularized electorate
 In predominantly Protestant and Catholic countries, such parties promoted values drawn from the social doctrine of the church on issues related to the family, cooperation between workers and businesses, and social security .
 There is no Christian democradc social movement equivalent to the ones Ennahda and other Islamist groups see as crucial to their missions . But even though these parties still survive (and even thrive) even thrive in Germany, there are no Christian democratic movements .
 In countries such as Germany, Christian democrats have a hizb but no harakat . In countries like Germany, it's not a Muslim but a democratic society .
 Catholic social movements operate in European countries such as Italy . They do not identify with political parties . And although Catholic social groups operate in Europe, they don't identify with parties .
 It seems unlikely that the secularizadon of Islamic politics will be accompanied by a drift from traditional values in Muslim countries .
 A well-known chant, or nashid, was popularized during the trials of members of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood in the 1960s .
 In their ideological purity and refusal to accommodate secular norms and institutions, jihadists represent the only true Islamists . Jihadists are perhaps, perhaps, only true Muslims, perhaps even true Muslims .
 The danger is that if mainstream Islamists purchase inclusion in the secular state at the price of separating their political goals from their reEgious and social ones , or suffer exclusion from the state owing to their own overreach and a repressive backlash against it .
 Piketty showed that wealth concentration had returned to a peak not seen since the early twentieth century . Wealth concentration has returned to an unprecedented level not seen in the past century .
 Today in the United States, the top one percent of households earn around 20 percent of the nation’s income, a dramatic change from the middle of the twentieth century, when income was spread more evenly . MELISSA 8.1: The top one per cent of households
 The top one percent’s share hovered at around ten percent . The top ten percent of the top earners in the U.S. remain in control of the economy .
 Piketty predicted that without corrective action, the trend toward ever more concentrated income and wealth would continue . He called for a global tax on wealth and called for an end to the trend .
 Pikecty’s book rested on an implicit moral claim that wealth concentration beyond a certain degree violates the inherent sense of fairness on which a just society depends, he says . Like much of the popular commentary about inequality about inequality, it rests on an implicitly moral claim .
 But antipathy toward inequality alone cannot drive a policy agenda that will create a more egalitarian society, says David Rothkopf . He says antipathy for inequality alone can't drive a social justice agenda .
 Critics of inequality need a compelling, evidencebased explanation for how and why the concentration of income and wealth at the top is problematic . Critics need an evidence-based explanation to explain inequality .
 Three left-of-center economists have curated an impressive set of essays responding to Piketty’s work . The essays take a few steps to answering those questions . They include essays from Heather Boushey, J Bradford DeLong and Marshall Steinbaum .
 Piketty’s predictions are based on historical accounts of the role of slavery and gender in capitalist systems . Among them are historical accounts and considerations of the relationship between concentrated wealth and power .
 The essays put Ehketty’s arguments into a broad historical and intellectual context . They highlight some noteworthy omissions that call into question his most dire predictions . They also highlight some notable omissions .
 The result is an intellectual excursion of a kind rarely oifered by modem economics . The result of the book is a kind of intellectual trip rarely made by modem economists . The book is available on Amazon.com.
 The contributors tend to look backward to history or inward to economic models, which is a natural way to respond to a book that is fundamentally historical and theoretical . The contributors of the book look at history and the economic models .
 To more fully answer the questions Piketty’s book raised and to start crafting policies to tackle growing inetfuality economists and policymakers need to know more than they currently do about the causes and consequences of today*s concentradon of wealth at the top .
 To reduce extreme inequality’s threat to economic security and upward mobUity, the U.S. needs policies that enhance the skills and opportunities of the disadvantaged, authors say .
 Washington must pursue tax reform and changes to corporate-governance rules that will create more shared prosperity, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: Washington must push for tax reform .
 In the past four decades, studies of rising inequality in the United States have typically focused on the bottom 90 percent of earners . But policymakers also need to avoid steps that would impede innovation and productivity .
 Economists have produced rigorous evidence demonstrating how trends in technology, trade, unionization, and minimum wages have shaped the fortunes of those Americans .
 Global labor-market forces have pushed up the demand for highly skilled workers . Wages for those with a college education have been steadily increasing in recent years .
 The same forces have led to declining or stagnant wages for those with lower levels of education . Those with less education are less likely to be paid more than those with higher education .
 A decline in unionizadon rates and the fall in the real value of the minimum wage have exacerbated the downward pressures on middleand low-wage workers .
 Less well understood are the causes of the tremendous surge in income among extremely high earners, such as the upper 1.0, 0.1, and 0.01 percent .
 From a policymaking point of view, the most important quesdon is how much of the ultrarich’s income reflects activity such as technological innovadon, that beneiits the broader economy .
 The more of it that does, the greater the economic costs of raising taxes on the highest individuals . The more people who pay higher taxes, the more they pay, the higher the tax rate .
 If the income of the hipest earners is produced by pursuits that are less broadly beneficial, such as high-frequency stock market trading, then higher taxes at the top would pose fewer economic costs . If, in contrast, the income produced by those who do not benefit from such pursuits,
 There are likely compelling reasons to raise the top income tax rates . It could be used to fund public services and invest in infrastructure, for example .
 Policymakers would be able to make better decisions about ‘soaking the rich” if they had a clearer sense of the tradeoffs involved . But policymakers would be better made to think about the risks involved .
 Piketty and others have uncovered that compared with the richest people and families in the early 1900s, large fortunes often came from inherited assets . Today’s superrlch are acquiring a larger share of their income in the form of earnings .
 60 percent of the Income of the top one percent in the U.S. today is labor Income . 60% of the income of the Top one percent is labor income .
 Laura Tyson and Michael Spence highlight the role of technological developments in creating substantial economic rewards for those who possess specific skills . Less skilled workers are less skilled workers, they say .
 Tyson and Spence also note that markets are imperfect and that compensation packages are not determined solely by market value . Tyson, Spence: Markets are imperfect, but compensation packages not determined by market values .
 Income generated by patents and intellectual property protections flows to upper-level management and the owners of capital, authors say .
 Piketty: Social norms, questionable corporategovernance practices, and declining union power are driving the rise in executive pay at the top . In contrast, he says technology or imperfect markets are not technology, but eroded social norms .
 Tyson and Spence favor more research to weigh the relative impact of market forces and institutional factors . They argue that either explanation provides a strong rationale for increasing the marginal income tax rate for top earners to combat income inequality .
 Melissa Novemher asks whether wealth concentration negadvely affects economic prosperity . Melissa 5.2.5.5 is Melissa's Opinion Opinion piece on inequality .
 Mark Zandi, the chief economist at Moody*s Analytics, says the economy might be better . Zandi says it's possible that the economy could be affected by the rise in income tax rates .
 One such potential negative effect is reduced aggregate consumer spending . The U.S. economy is set to be hit by reduced consumer spending.
 Since lower-income households have a higher propensity to spend out of their earnings than do higher-income ones . The more wealth held by high-income families, the less overall spending the economy might see .
 Wealth concentration could lead to harmful reductions in government spending on public goods such as education and infrastructure . Another potential problem is that wealthy Americans tend to vote for lower taxes . Wealth concentration may lead to higher taxes on taxes, which could be harmful to the public .
 Zandi cautions that the link between income inequality and aggregate U.S. economic growth is relatively weak . Zandi: The link is still relatively low .
 Today's extreme inequality does threaten social cohesion, says economist . Top earners' income reflects worthwhile contributions to society, but social cohesion is at risk, he says .
 IVe come to believe that policymakers cannot achieve those goals without addressing inequality . IVe: Policymakers need to address inequality in order to achieve their goals .
 In the winner-take-all economy of the contemporary U.S. economy, the gap between the top and the bottom has grown so large that it undermines any reasonable notion of equal opportunity . The gap between top and bottom undermines notion of equality of opportunity .
 As inequality has increased, the country has witnessed a fraying of communities and institutions, deepening divisions along socioeconomic lines . The country has seen a frayed of communities, institutions and deepening divisions .
 Children from high-income homes are pulling further and further ahead of their less advantaged peers in terms of education . This means it is far less likely that children born into middleor low-income families will experience upward economic mobility .
 Americans celebrate “rags to riches" stories, but data indicate that the U.S. has less social mobility . Social mobility chan most European countries, according to data .
 Social mobility in the U.S. is not yet on the decline, but if current trends continue, it will be soon . Social mobility is still on the rise in the United States, but it will soon be on decline .
 Inequality harms American society by encouraging negative perceptions of the economy and one’s prospects for upward mobility . Inequality also harms U.S. society, according to the author .
 If Americans view the system as rigged against them and see economic success as out of reach, they might give up on the celebrated American ideals of hard work and meritocracy . If Americans see the economic system as out-of-reach, they may give up .
 Research shows that young men are more likely to drop out of high school if they live in places with higher levels of income inequality . Young men are also likely to live in areas with higher income inequality, all else being equal .
 This is consistent with evidence produced by psychologists showing that beliefs about inequality negatively affect people’s expectations of social mobility . The study was published in the New York Review of Economic Policy .
 The alarmingly low rates of labor-force participation among young Americans and those of prime working age might also be driven by a sense of malaise shaped by high levels of income inequality .
 In 1964, percent of prime-age men with a college degree or more participated in the work force . 97 percent of those with a high school degree or less participated in work force, 97 percent with less .
 By 2015, the rate for college-educated workers had fallen only slightly, to 94 percent . But the rate among less educated men had plummeted to just 83 percent . The rate for less educated workers had also plummeted to 83 percent in 2015 .
 This drop reflects market forces and technological change, but it also su*ests social norms and attitudes . The drop reflects technology and social norms, but also reflects changing attitudes .
 A growing body of evidence now indicates that inequality in the U.S. threatens to create inter-national poverty traps .
 Piketty proposed that greater wealth inequality will increase the demand for egalitarian policy responses . Piketry said that greater inequality will lead to an increase in egalitarian policies . He said that the need for egalitarian policies should be met with greater inequality .
 The wealt)^, with their deeperthan-ever pockets, will be even better able to block such changes . But it also means that the wealt(^)u, with . their deeper than ever pockets, is even better than ever . It also means it will be
 Piketty doesn't have much to say about the politics of ioecjuality in the U.S. or elsewhere . He says he doesn't know how much of the world's politics is about it .
 Assistant Editor is looking for Assistant Editors to join our editorial team . We are happy to provide an overview of the world's most important issues .
 The Assistant Editor position is a full-time paid job offering exceptional training in serious Journalism . Previous Assistant Editors have included recent graduates from undergraduate and mascer*s programs .
 Candidates should have a serious interest in international relations, a flair for writing, and a facility with the English language . Candidates must also have an interest in the international community .
 Many of the volume’s contributors assume that no matter what policy remedies for extreme inetjualiry emerge, wealthy elites will marshal influence to maintain their position and privileges .
 They do not explore potential policies that would shape pushback from elites, they say . But they do not consider the precise mechanisms of pushing back from the elites .
 Afier Piketty would also have beneBted from more discussion about whether recent political events challenge the notion that elites can overcome a wave of support for redistribution of wealth .
 In 2016, voters gleefully rejected the elite classes in both the UK and the U.S. In both the United Kingdom and the United States, populist and nationalist sentiments were expressed .
 Political economy models tend to associate rising wealth concentration with growing political power of the elite, not the rise of populism . Even in the wake of such surprising outcomes, the political economy models don't see populism as a problem .
 The watershed political events of 2016 call those models into question . In both the United Kingdom and the United States, elites saw their preferred choices lose out .
 When it comes to income and wealth inequality in the U.S. there are no silver bullets, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: There's no silver bullet to solve the problem .
 The best evidence suggests that the U.S. could have a more progressive federal income tax code without incurring substantiaia) economic costs .
 Tax reform should focus on expanding the tax base by closing loopholes and eliminating regressive features such as the mortgage-interest tax deduction, which benefits only highincome homeowners .
 The federal government should take the additional revenue such steps would generate and invest it in programs that would increase the country’s economic potential . The U.S. should take it and use it to increase its economic potential, the author says .
 That would include improvements to public infrastructure, expanded access to high-quality childcare and preschool programs . More spending on programs that assist economically disadvantaged youth would be needed .
 Government commitments to public universities and community colleges must be strengthened . Government commitments should be strengthened, says the minister .
 At the same time, institutions of higher education must focus on helping students build the skills they will need to succeed in a competitive, rapidly changing labor market .
 Edward Snowden released thousands of top-secret documents by Edward Snowden in 2012 . The U.S. government scronibled to justify its far-reaching surveillance programs .
 Obama administration established a special review group, revived a dormant privacy oversight board, and issued an executive order pledging to respect privacy rights of noncidzens abroad .
 U.S. technology and telecommunicadons companies moved into a defensive crouch after Snowden*s documents were exposed . The companies' complicity with the documents was exposed .
 In order to maintain their internadonal customer base, they sought to explain away their past cooperadon and distanced themselves from the government . The government has distanced itself from the company .
 From 2009 to 20tl. she served as Counsel to the Assistant Attorney General for National Sec urity at the United States Department of iustke. telephony metadata program, the nsa’s bulk collection of the phone numbers of incoming and outgoing calls .
 The British have their own set of sophisdcated intelligence capabilides . The British are grappling with many of the same concerns .
 In the fall of 2016, Parliament passed the Investigatory Pdwcts Act . Opponents call the act “the snoopers charter,"" but defenders portray it as an overdue piece of legislation .
 As with most controversies, there is an element of truth to both sides of the debate . There is also truth to the debate, says CNN's John Sutter .
 For the first rime in the United Kingdom*s history, warrants to intercept communications are subject to judicial review . Previously, the executive branch could execute these on its own say-so .
 Rhodri Jeffreys-Jones’ new book, We Know All About You, puts contemporary debates over surveillance in historical context . He defines surveillance as ‘spying on a mass scale" as “spying"
 Jeffreys-Jones ably tells the story of surveillance in the U.S. and the UK from its beginnings in the eighteenth century to today . The book is published in the UK and the United States .
 As Jeffreys-Jones details, surveillance is the prerogative not just of governments . Surveillance is not just governments, but it's the private prerogate of all .
 "It is something that was developed, relied on, and institutionalized by private actors as well," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It's something that has been developed and relied on by private actor as well"
 In the American South before the Civil War, plantation owners hired white men to monitor the movements of slaves and collect intelligence about possible uprisings . White men were used to monitor slave movements in the South to collect intelligence .
 With the rise of manufacturing, private companies turned to surveillance as a marketing tool . Private companies have been using surveillance as an economic tool to bust the economy .
 Jeffreys-Jones tells chilling stories of U.S. and British companies hiring private detecdves to spy on workers and keep tabs on labor organizers . Jeffrey-Jones: Companies hire private detectives to spy and spy on unions .
 Hollywood studios feciliuted McCarthyism by informing government investigators of alleged Communist subversives . Hollywood studios ruined careers of screenwriters, directors, and actors .
 Jeffreys-Jones documents a great deal of damage inflicted by private actors . But it’s a stretch to claim that private surveillance causes more harm than government snooping .
 Only the state can use information gained through surveillance to incarcerate people or even kill them . After all, only the state has the power to use surveillance to lawfully kill people or incarcerate them .
 What really matters is the fact of public and private surveillance, the risk of abuse by both the government and the private sector, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The decisions of the private sector have an enormous impact on the scope of government surveillance . The private sector has an enormous influence on government surveillance, says Julian Zelizer .
 Every day, companies make choices about what to collect, where to store data, and how, whether, and when to accede to or resist the government’s demands for information .
 These decisions, in turn, shape what information is available for the government to collect . These decisions shape what data is available to the government .
 Jeffreys-Jones shows that the revolving door between the public and private sectors allows the two sides to trade techniques . The revolving door allows the public to learn from each other .
 In the late nineteenth century, Ralph Van Deman developed an indexing and classification system that United States commanders could use to identify insurgents in the field .
 After leaving government, he used his skills to keep tabs on union workers on behalf of California industrialists . He sometimes sent confederates into union meetings to spy on workers and report back .
 William Reginald Hall ran a code-breaking unit in World War I . After being booted from government, he created a group that became known as the Economic League .
 The Economic League tracked and blacklisted union activists on behalf of the private sector . A powerftil and murky association of industrialists, the Economic League, blacklisted activists .
 Jeffreys-Jones also reminds readers of the ebb and flow of public-private partnerships . Jeffrey-Jones reminds readers that the public sector is still in its prime form .
 In 1919, Western Union inidalJy refused to grant permission to the Black Chamber to access sought-after telegraph messages as they crossed the Adantic Ocean . By the end of the year, the government had laid out its case, and Western Union and other telegraph services ass
 Project SHAMROCK lasted for decades; the NSA shut it down only after the Church Committee exposed it in the 1970s . The NSA shut the project down after it was exposed in 1970s by the Church committee .
 Jeffreys-Jones does a good job cataloging government and private-sector surveillance . Jeffrey-Jones is also a good writer of the book .
 What’s missing from his account is an assessment of what kind of surveillance is justified and what kind is not . How to make that determination in an increasingly digitized and interconnected world, he says .
 To be fair, these kind of normative judgments are not the goal of his book, he says . "These kind of . judgments are . not the . goal of the book," he writes .
 It was intended to ensure that the government’s searching and seizing is ’Reasonable" The government's need for information to fight crime and provide security and the risks of overreach .
 Sometimes government surveillance is reasonable, and sometimes it's not . Put simply, sometimes it is reasonable . Sometimes it is not. Sometimes it's reasonable, sometimes not .
 Drawing the iine between what is and what is not reasonable is the hard part . The hard part is drawing between what's reasonable and what's not .
 The NSA can collect data only for the purposes of gathering ‘foreign intelligence information . The general targeting procedures must be approved by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court . The court is a special panel of federal judges .
 Specific decisions of who and what to target are left to the executive branch . It requires little more than a finding that the target is a foreign national who possesses sought-after intelligence .
 The government has argued that the program has helped protect the U.S. from various terrorist threats . Two independent review groups set up by the Obama administration say the program is necessary .
 The government can intercept communications of U.S. citizens and residents only when authorities have a warrant based on probable cause . Ordinarily, after all, the government can . intercept the communications of United States citizens and . residents only . Authorities have a right to intercept communications only when they have
 The upcoming reauthorization debate provides a chance to reform this program . There are a number of options on the table, and there are many options .
 Some argue that all searches of U.S. citizens* and residents* information must be supported by a warrant based on probable cause . Others argue that the search should have been supported by probable cause.
 Others claim that only searches of actual content require that protecdon . Others claim searches of metadata (such as metadata) can be accessed without judicial approval .
 The PBt’s wairandess querying of databases is dne so long as the invesdgadons concern national security or espionage rather than other crimes . Still others contend that the PBt.’ddzadons querying . databases is
 The FBI should get a warrant based on probable cause when searching the data of U.S. citizens and residents in the course of a criminal invesdgation, regardless of the type of crime .
 Invesdgators would have to do that if they were seeking information directly from the suspect or irom the private entity that manages the suspect’s data . After all, that is what would be required to be done .
 The default rule should be that investigators need a warrant when seeking the content of a U.S. person’s communications . The law should put in place some emergency exceptionsons, but the default rule is that investigators must get a warrant .
 If the government wants metadata, it should have to document a reasonable suspicion . The government should document reasonable suspicion, the ACLU says .
 "Wherever one comes down on these issues, the interests on both sides need to be taken into account," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Intelligence and law enforcement agencies need to access information to keep people safe, CNN.com reports . Intelligence and police need to be able to share information with the public, report says .
 The U.S.* founders wisely recognized that security will trump all other concerns . But at the same time, there is a real risk that security is trumping other concerns, he says .
 Government surveillance is necessary to ensure that government surveillance remains reasonable . That*s why procedural and substantive safeguards are needed to ensure it is reasonable .
 Companies do not have the authority to incarcerate people, but they can use information to wreak havoc on individuals' lives .
 As everything from televisions to thermostats stores digital data, the amount of personal information private companies have access to will only grow . The amount of data private companies get access to is expected to grow .
 Their decisions about what to retain, access, and share will increasingly influence how much both the private sector and the government know about all of us . Their decisions will influence what they want to retain and share .
 The question is how to respect privacy, provide security, and protect against abuse in the modem, digitally-connected world .
 Jeffreys-Jones’ book highlights one set of critical concerns to take into account . In focusing on the threat to privacy and the history of abuse, Jeffrey-Jones highlights one of the concerns .
 They are intended to form part of a broader strategy to confront a variety of international threats . They are not only intended to confront international threats, but to confront them .
 Neumann argues that they have decreased not so much as a result of financial measures but largely thanks to military action against the group’s oil infrastructure and cash depots . Neumann: The loss of its territory in Iraq and Syria is largely due to the loss of territory .
 Private-sector financial data gleaned by finance ministries and shared with the United States military and U.S. bw enforcement agencies have helped idendfy financial targets for those military strikes .
 Today, banks run financial intelligence units, which in several cases have provided “chat missing piece of the puzzle to identify someone here or abroad who is planning or supporting plans to attack our interests,” a former FBI official said in 2015 .
 Neumann wrongly assumes that sanctions make up the bulk of measures to counter terrorist financing . Neumann says best way to measure impact of sanctions is to tally up the number of entities designated or the amount of funds frozen .
 Not every terrorist fonder that comes across the U.S. government’s radar is sanctioned . It is more useful to share that information with partner governments and allow them to act .
 Although governments aim to freeze terrorists’ funds, they know that they will never bankrupt terrorism . Terrorists have too many ways to raise, move, launder, and access funds, says Neumann .
 At the least, denying terrorists easy access to financial tools forces them to use more costly and less reliable means of fundraising, making their lives far more difficulr .
 In 2006, the jihadist militant group Abu Sayyaf was reportedly unable to carry out plans to bomb targets in Manila due to a lack of funds . The jihadist militant militant group was reportedly able to carry on with its plans in 2006 .
 In 2007, al Qaeda’s finance chief lamented the group's money problems in a propaganda video . “There are hundreds wishing to carry out martyrdom-seeking operations, but they can't find the funds to equip themselves," he said .
 Following the money allows governments to map out the links between known terrorist operatives and supporters and to identify new ones . The money can be tracked down to terrorist operatives or supporters .
 Financial intelligence has provided valuable information in several high-profile investigations . Financial intelligence provides valuable information to investigators, say experts .
 In 2006, authorities helped thwart a plot to blow up several aircraft with liquid explosives . Authorities tracked large transfers of money disguised as earthquake relief from a British-based Islamic charity to the three suspected bombers .
 Financial intelligence contributed to the arrest of three al Qaeda affiliates who were plotting attacks in Germany . Neumann insists financial measures are ineffective at preventing the kinds of cheap, self-funded attacks that have recendy become common in Europe .
 Even the cheapest attack b not free, when terrorists are frozen out of their bank accounts, they have to resort to rbkier tactics . But such attacks often cost more than meets the eye, and because of the cost, even the cheapest is not free .
 ISIS operadve arrested while traveling from Germany to Syria in 2012 . Ismail Issa was arrested while trying to travel to Syria from Germany .
 The group had sent him with cash to shop for supplies rather than wiring money to an operative already in the country . It had become too difficult for isis members to transfer money without it being picked up by the authorities .
 In many cases, jihadists had grown so worried that their transacdons were being monitored that they were too scared to collect the funds .
 Neumann argues that in the age of tsis, the ways terrorists finance their operations simply don’t lend themselves to the traditional tools used to fight terrorist financing . Neumann: In the past, terrorists have been able to make large sums of money through their terrorist organizations .
 Governments rely too heavily on UN Security Council resolutions, he says . He suggests that governments rely on the UN to make decisions .
 Resolutions demonstrate international resolve and provide cover for local officials to act when it would otherwise be too politically risky . But those resolutions can provide cover to local officials when it is otherwise too risky .
 In the Persian Gulf, some of al Qaeda’s funders have family or tribal ties to governments and ruling families, so international backing has been necessary for officials to move against them .
 The group’s ability to take territory was a function not of any particular financial prowess but of the breakdown of the rule of law in parts of Syria and northwestern Iraq . The rule of the law is a problem in Syria and Iraq, the U.N. says .
 Terrorist organizations are better resourced than they were before 9/11, says Neumann . Terrorist groups are now more funded than before 9-11, he says .
 The proliferation of ungoverned places is a result of the failure of efforts to crack down on terrorist financing . But that is not the result of efforts, but of the proliferation, he says . It's a result not of the . failure of . cracking down on terror financing but of
 Neumann is right to highlight the heavy burden on financial institutions designed to combat money laundering and terrorist financing . Neumann says governments must work harder to understand terrorists' financial structures .
 Governments need to do a better job of balancing priorities, such as delivering humanitarian aid while preventing terrorists from abusing charities to raise, launder, and move money .
 Matthew Levitt: But the solution is not to throw the baby out with the bath water . Levitt is Director of the Stoin Program or) Countorterrorism and Intelligence st the Washington .
 In 2008 to 2007, he served as Deputy Assistant Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis at the U.S. Treasury Department .
 KATHERINE BAUER is Blumensteinstein-Katz Family Fellow at the Washington Institute . She is also a family member of the family at Washington Institute of Washington .
 Danielle Camner Lindholm served as Assistant Director In the Office of Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes at the United States Treasury . From 2011 to 2013 she served as assistant director in the Treasury's Office of Financial Crimes .
 Financial intelligence has vital role in detecting, analyzing, and dismantling dangerous networks . Financial intelligence is vital in the fight against financial crime in the world .
 He overlooks important progress in cooperation among countries, U.S. government agencies, and the private sector . And he overlooks the important progress among countries .
 Measures to coimter terrorist financing will not by themselves eradicate terrorism, they play a significant role . The measures will not eradicate terrorism by themselves, they say . They will not be by themselves eradicated by themselves .
 Terrorist organizations have to recruit and train fighters, buy weapons and equipment, bribe corrupt officials, wage propaganda campaigns, and plan and carry out operations . Terrorists must also buy weapons, pay corrupt officials and bribe them to carry out their operations, the author says .
 Understanding how groups raise, store, move, and spend that money has helped bring terrorists to justice and deter others from harboring them or funding or joining their organizations . These activities cost money, so understanding how groups raised, store and move that money is important .
 The Bush administration's response to the 9/11 attacks remains relevant . The ways in which terrorists finance their operations have certainly changed since the attacks have changed .
 Neumann also discounts the notable deterrent effect that sanctions have had on potential terrorist financers . Neumann: Sanctions have had a deterrent effect on potential financers.
 A1 Qaeda operatives from Afghanistan to Iraq have complained about increased difficulty in raising funds, financing terrorist operations . Al Qaeda in Iraq’s late leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, has complained .
 In recent years, the boundary between terrorist groups and organized criminal networks has blurred . Hezbollah, the al Qaeda-aligned Haqqani network in Afghanistan and isis have grown more reliant on crime to generate revenue .
 Officials combating terrorism have turned to financial tools originally designed to fight internadonal crime . As a result, officials combating terrorism are turning towards financial tools .
 S coalition, for example, has worked with the private sector to use its anti-smuggling experience to prevent ists from selling antiquides it loots .
 Franklin Williams Internship TJir Coumii tjn F iU'iiiuotu £> ulenied uidrvUiualsfor Ihchnmidin Willmms hiWruMfi The FrankJin Williams Incerivhip.
 He waa alw a Direcctir of the Cuoncil on Foreign Relaoun^, where he made special efforia tu eccmirage the iJonuDaiiuD uf black Americans n) membership, Tbe C^ounci I will w
 Tbe intern will work with a Program Director or Fellow in either i1\e Siudjes or the Meetings Program . He will invtdved with program courdination. subvcaniive and buaineM writing, research and budget management .
 The selected intern will be required to nioke a commitment of at least 12 hours per week, and will be paid 5 1U on boor. 10 apply for this iruernthip, please send a resume and cover letter to the Internship Cuiyrdina
 Banks and other private-sector organizations have adopted crime-fighting analytic tools and techniques to better identify bad actors and trends in terrorist financing . Banks and others have adopted analytic tools to identify and prevent terrorist financing trends .
 Government agencies report suspicious activity to law enforcement and intelligence agencies . They fuse that information with law enforcement, intelligence data .
 Neumann also points to the high costs that efforts to counter terrorist financing have imposed on the private sector . Neumann says a great deal has already been made on that front .
 Governments have begun to work more closely with financial institutions to mitigate the costs of regulations on the financial sector, while gathering as much data as possible . Governments are working more closely .
 Groups such as the Association of Certified Financial Crime Specialists and the Financial Intelligence and Information Sharing Working Group regularly bring together banking executives .
 The annual Public-Private Analytic Exchange Program is convened by the U.S. Office of the Director of National Intelligence and the Department of Homeland Security . It encourages cooperation on such issues as virtual currencies and methods of money laundering .
 The public and private sectors are working together to better understand how innovations in financial technology, such as Bitcoin, will affect future legal and illegal financial transactions .
 As these examples demonstrate, Neumann is wrong to suggest that efforts to counter terrorist financing have failed . Neumann argues that efforts have failed to combat terrorism have failed in the past .
 It would be a grave mistake for industry, law enforcement, intelligence agencies, and the international community to give up this crucial tool, says CNN.com.com .
 DANIELLE CAMNER LINDHOLM b Managing Director of Roaring Fork Strategies and Co'Chair of the American Bar Association's National Security Committee . DANIelle CAMner Lindholm is a managing director of Roared Fork Strategies .
 From 2002ta 2006, she served as Director of Counterterrorism Programs at the U.S. State Department . She served from 2002 to 2006 .
 Jodi Vittori eter Neumann is right to point out that efforts to counter terrorist financing focus too much on the international banking sector . Neumann calls for a more comprehensive approach to combating terrorism .
 He is wrong to imply that controls on the international financial system have failed to curb terrorism . But he is wrong, he says, that financial controls on international financial systems have not helped curb terror .
 The ability to track terrorists and their networks through the financial system forms an important pan of investigations after the fact . It is true that these measures do little to prevent imminent attacks .
 These measures act as a usefiil deterrent to potential funders of tenorism and throw sand in the wheels of large terrorist organizations . And these measures are a use fiil deterrent .
 The same financial requirements also help mitigate other international threats, such as corruption and organized crime, say officials .
 The Trump administration has gone in the wrong direction on this issue . Unfortunately, it has gone the wrong way, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Since January, the U.S. government has rolled back important transparency and accountability mechanisms, many of which were designed to tackle other global problems but also affect terrorist financing . Many of these mechanisms have been rolled back .
 In February, President Donald Trump signed a bill that sent the Securities and Exchange Commission rule on oil, gas, and mining transparency back to the drawing .
 This will limit the transparency of the flows of money from oil, gas and mining firms to governments . It will make it easier for corrupt politicians and their cronies to use the cash to illicidy fund anything from extravagant lifestyles to terrorism .
 The SEC has watered down an important regulation requiring U.S. companies to assess whether minerals bought through certain supply chains are funding conflict or human rights abuses . The SEC also watered down a regulation requiring companies to check if minerals bought in certain supply chain are funding conflicts or abuses . SEC has
 The United States Department of the Interior has refused to take the steps needed for the United States to become a full member of the Ebctractive Industries Transparency Ini dative .
 Although none of these steps alone would end terrorist financing, enhancing transparency is crucial to hampering all manner of illicit financial activides . The U.S. government is taking steps to improve transparency in the fight against terrorism .
 If the U.S. is serious about preventing terrorist financing, it should work to replace the current international focus on specific areas or threats with a broader approach . This approach would cover banking, trade in some natural resources, and wildlife trafficking, the authors say .
 The goal should be to minimize the ability of terrorists and criminals to easily acquire or move money or goods, regardless of the sectors in which they operate, the authors say .
 Neumann is right that the war on terrorist financing has not lived up to its promises, but it has done some good . Governments, the private sector, law enforcement, and civil society must balance risk assessment, due diligence, and transparency against the need for privacy and practicality .
 If the international community stops focusing on just a few issues, such as banks and cash, it will be far more successful . Instead, it should focus on stitching the various transparency and accountability mechanisms together and filling the gaps .
 Neumann Replies A s critics write, efforts to counter terrorist financing have certainly had some successes . Neumann: A s my critics write. A s . critics write that efforts to . counter terrorist Financing have certainly been some successes. Neumann replies .
 Respondents fail to address the more fundamental questions that my article raised, I said . But these respondents fail to answer the more questions that I raised .
 "No systematic data to show that the current strategy works," he says . "None of my critics worked on these issues as government officials," he adds .
 This epitomizes the entire approach, which has relied on the instinctive appeal of following the money, while remaining sufficiently obscure to escape the scrutiny to which other parts of the war on terrorism have, eventually, been subjected to . The entire approach has relied heavily on the instincts of following
 There has been virtually no public debate over combating terrorist financing . There is no academic literature on the subject beyond case studies of individual groups and terrorists .
 Discussions, where they exist, revolve around anecdotes, making it difficult to test wider assumptions and judge the effectiveness of the overall approach . Discussions around anecdotes make it hard to judge how effective the approach is .
 After my article was published, several current and former intelligence officials contacted me to echo my conclusions . After I wrote an article, several former officials told me their conclusions .
 Financial intelligence could be ‘Valuable’ and ‘evidentially helpful,"" especially after an attack, he said . Financial intelligence can be used to track suspects or establish connections between known and unknown terrorists, he added .
 Financial intelligence, as he understood it, had little to do with the massive efforts to find needles in haystacks that constitute much of the fight against terrorist financing . But along with others who contacted me, he made it clear that .
 The current strategy offers no answer to the rise of cheap attacks, says David Cameron . Finally, he says, the current strategy is not the answer to cheap attacks .
 Banks cannot monitor every $100 transaction or notice every time someone with a potentially suspicious background rents a truck . Banks and other financial Institutions cannot monitor all $100 transactions or notice .
 Counterterrorism financing remains the job of treasuries and finance ministries . Governments will keep looking in the wrong places for terrorist financing . Counterterrorism is still a job of governments, but it's the job they have to combat it .
 People in the U.S. and around the world started talking about freedom and justice in strikingly new ways in the second half of the twentieth century .
 The UN’s 1948 adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was the starting point for what VA^uld become a revolution in global political culture .
 Ideas about human rights v^ve themselves into narratives about the U.S.’s ideotiry and role in the world . Sensibilities in Africa, Asia, and Europe also changed dramatically .
 Bradley’s account of the rise of a global human rights imagination makes its most profound statements on the subject of the United States’ changing—and, unfortunately, declining—position within the U.S.
 In recent decades, historians and pundits have not been kind to Woodrow Wilson . Wilson was a president of the United States from 1913 to 1918 . Wilson died of a heart attack in 1918 .
 He is remembered at home for his paternalistic liberalism and complicity in racial injustice . At home and abroad for his naive idealism, he is remembered for being paternalistic .
 This groundbreaking book by Throntveit, a young historian, tells a different and more sympathetic story . It is an extraordinary effort to recover and illuminate the thinking behind Wilson’s internationalist vision .
 Throntveit argues that Wilson was not actually a “Wilsonian,"" if that term implies imposing American-style democracy on other countries . He says the term "Wilsonian" implies imposing U.S. style democracy .
 Wilson sought a system of global governance geared toward the promotion of justice and peaceful change . What Wilson actually sought was the gradual and collective development of a global governance system .
 Throntveit maintains that his vision was deeply influenced by the American wing of the philosophical school of pragmatism, particularly the ideas of William James . It was a vision that he maintains was influenced by American philosophy .
 Wilson’s views were also shaped by the Anglo-American progressive tradition and its many public intellectuals, including Jane Addams, including Addams . Wilson's views have been shaped by his views on the progressive side of the American progressive tradition .
 Wilson’s thinking was certainly eclectic, with ideas drawn from British constitutional theorists, the American founders, and Christian ethicists . Wilson's thinking was also eclectic, drawing ideas from American founders and thinkers such as Du Bois .
 Lipscy provides the most elegant and systematic explanation yet for these diverse and shifting choices . Lipsky provides an elegant, systematic explanation of these diverse choices .
 Policy areas differ in their propensity to create competition between institutions . Policy areas are different from policy areas to policy areas that create competition, says David Cameron .
 In some areas, such as the management of financial crises, all states want global surveillance of the situation, so it makes sense to concentrate capabilities in a single institution . The costs for dissatisfied rising states of creating new institutions would be prohibitively high, anyway .
 Foreign aid and infrastructure lending reward competition over cooperation . But other policy areas reward cooperation over cooperation, creating opportunities for rising states to strike out .
 The prevailing wisdom among policymakers and pundits is that credibility counts in the world . It's a good thing to say: "Credibility counts" in a world of politicians .
 Political scientists say Washington's credibility in the eyes of an adversary will be shaped by the adversary’s reading of current U.S. interests and capabilities . No such consensus exists among political scientists, however, among them .
 Harvey and Mitton join the debate with a detailed study of the Obama administration's response to Syria’s use of chemical weapons in 2013 . Harvey: The Obama administration responded to Syria's use of such weapons in Syria .
 Syria crossed U.S. President Barack Obama’s publicly stated redline by using such weapons against civilians and rebels . After Syria crossed the redline, the U.N. says it will continue to investigate .
 Russia brokered an agreement in which Syria gave up its chemical stockpiles but avoided U.S. military action . The deal avoided United States military action in Syria but avoided a military response .
 Harvey and Mitton argue that Washington’s ‘’’reputation for resolve”—earned by the use of U.S. military force in similar circumstances in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Iraq—influenced Russian and Syrian calculations .
 The authors do not settle the debate about whether Obama harmed his reputation by declining to use military force to punish Syria . Obama's reputation has been tarnished by his decision not to strike Syria .
 Credibility ultimately depends on imperfect perceptions of leaders and their real-time calculations of risks and probabilities . But they drive home the fact that credibility ultimately depends upon the imperfect perceptions .
 L. L in, a former chief economist of the World Bank, and Monga, the chief economist at the African Development Bank, discuss economic development in poor countries . They bring to bear their considerable scholariy credentials and practical know-how .
 The authors quarrel with the conventional wisdom about what is necessary for successful development . The authors say they disagree with conventional wisdom on what is needed to succeed .
 Instead of hawking a one-siae-fits-all formula, they urge countries to find a niche in the worid economy by taking a pragmatic approach tailored to their financial resources and labor markets .
 Lin and Monga tend to &vor the creation of industrial or export zones, outfitted with infrastructure and unburdened by red tape . The zones offer no protection from market forces, but also offered no protection against market forces .
 They have no ideological objection to an active role for government, which is often necessary . But they are wary of restrictions and regulations that allow only some players to profit, they say .
 Robert McNamara best known as the ‘whiz kid’ secretary of defense under U.S. Presidents John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson . McNamara was one of the main architects of United States (and by extension, by extension) the United States .
 But as the death toll from the mounted and public opposition increased, the public opposition to the government increased .
 McNamara left (or was perhaps pushed out of) the Pentagon and took the helm at the World Bank . McNamara served until 1981, when he left the Pentagon to take over at the Bank .
 This useful book describes McNamara's tenure during a turbulent period that saw the partial breakdown of the postwar international monetary system, two major increases in world oil prices, and China's entry into the international Monetary Fund and World Bank .
 Sharma analyzes the positive and negative aspects of McNamara's enduring legacy at the bank . He analyzes his focus on reducing poverty and his insistence on rigorous quantitative analysis of both client countries and the bank’s own performance . Sharma: McNamara was a strong advocate of quantitative analysis
 The size of the grants could be affected by various factors, such as the recipient's age and level of need . Grantees could be conditioned on meeting certain behavioral requirements such as preventing truancy in children .
 Van Parijs and Vanderborght, however, prefer a universal, unconditional cash grant . Standing Standing is the latest in a long-running series of music videos that has been released .
 Van Parijs and Vanderborght's book is more scholarly than Standing's . It explores the history of basic-income schemes going all the way back to sateenth-century Antwerp . Standing, for his part, usefully examines present-day pilot projects in Finland
 Both books sum up existing empirical research on basic incomes and the various ideological and pracdcal objections that economists have put forth .
 Both books address the question of how rich and poor countries could finance basic-income schemes . And both books also address the issue of how wealthy and poor could finance such schemes .
 In India, a basic income that would lift millions out of extreme poverty could be comfortably financed by eliminating subsidies, such as those for electricity and gasoline, that mainly benefit higher-income families . Basic income could be easily financed in India by eliminating numerous subsidies .
 Both books emphasize how a basic income would bring about economic benefits and greater freedom of choice . Evidence suggests that most recipients would make good decisions about how to spend the money .
 Neither book discusses the potential impact that a basic income might have on birthrates . It's possible positive for countries with declining populations but negadve in the many more countries where populadons continue to rise .
 In 2010, CEO of Japanese e-commerce firm Rakuten mandated that all of the company’s 10,000 employees, most of whom were Japanese, start using English to communicate within the firm, both in speech and in writing .
 Neeley followed the implementadon of this radical change over the course of five years . He followed the implementation of the radical change .
 She weaves her observations of Rakuten into a larger story about language education in Japan, which is a crucial pan of the 'Abenomics” agenda of the country's prime minister, Shinzo Abe . The result is an interesting and informative book full of practical lessons for any internationally
 Neeley points out that although language reflects culture and influences behavior, it does not determine them . Neely: "Language reflects culture, influences behavior and influences people's behavior"
 The universal use of English at Rakuten was one consequence of the universal use . It was reinforced by the reinforcement of traditional Japanese customs throughout the £rm .
 As aesthetically pleasing and occasionally useful as such theoretical constructs may be, human life does not conform to them, tn particular, they fail to accoimt for the crises chat all too frequently plague modem economies .
 The authors reveal the complex set of relations among bin Laden’s many wives and children, the disagreements within al Qaeda . They also reveal the challenge posed to the organization by the brutal sectarianism of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the leader of its affiliate .
 The books sheds considerable light on the question of whether senior Pakistani officials knew that bin Laden was hiding in their country . The books shed light on whether senior Pakistan officials knew about bin Laden's whereabouts .
 A large group of senior al Qaeda figures and bin Laden family members found unlikely refuge in Iran after the 9/11 attacks . Perhaps the book’s most fascinating sections explain how a large number of senior members of al Qaeda figure found refuge .
 They were both guests and hostages, providing Iran with some immunity from al Qaeda attacks . Iran never cashed in on them during negotiations with the United States .
 Sageman sets out to explain why people with radical political agendas are prone to violence . Sageman: Radical political agendas can lead to violence in the U.S. Sageman explains why radical agendas are often violent .
 He covers the French Revolution, the development of terrorism in tsarist Russia, the radical nationalist movement in the Balkans that helped trigger World War I, and anarchist violence in the United States .
 Sageman mosdy examines eiforts to assassinate significant political figures . Although the book touches on mob violence and indiscriminate killing, Sageman mysdy examines the book's use of mob violence .
 Sageman's sharp focus on the perpetrators of such acts illuminates their motives and circumstances but does not contribute much to Sageman’s main goal of developing a general theory of why some people become killers . Sageman: "His sharp focus is on perpetrators"
 The role of political repression in radicalizing those who might otherwise have eschewed violence is clearly evident . One thing that comes throu^ quite clearly, however, is the role of the role .
 The rapid development of the Internet has created a new form of conflict, one that is often touted as transformational . It is often said to be transformational, but it is often not .
 Almost every online transaction has the potential to become part of an unseen maneuver to cause mischief, steal mon^, bring down vital infrastructure, or subvert a government .
 Cyberconflict is now part of every other form of conflict; it affects everything while deciding very little on its own . But it is difficult to measure the measure of cyberconflict because it is now a part of all other forms of conflict . It affects everything, but decides very little
 One merit of Klimburg’s book is his description of the many layers of the Internet, their vulnerabilities, and the governance problems they pose . The book's profusion of acronyms can be overwhelming, but it's worth reading .
 The essential portrait of cyberspace that emeiges is of a stateless global good being exploited by states, especially for the purpose of reshaping the way people think . Some of the strongest sections focus on Russia, an innovator in such activity .
 Perkovich and Levite’s volume explores the issue of cyberconflict through analogies to conventional forms of violence . The editors successfully adopt a potentially misleading approach, but one they nonetheless succeed .
 CO investigate the cyberspace dimension of areas such as nonlethal weapons, drones, preemption, surprise attacks, and economic warfare . They have assembled a firsc-rate cast of contributors to their findings .
 In overt warfare, the effects of digital tools have become much clearer in recent years . The effects of the digital tools are becoming more clear in overt warfare .
 The real difficulty now lies in sorting out what is taking place in covert forms of conflict, where cyberartacks are easy to mount but hard to attribute to any particular actor . Cyberartacks can be easily mounted, but are often not attributed to specific individuals .
 Washington’s tentative reaction to alleged Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election has been cautious . Moscow is accused of trying to influence the 2016 presidential election .
 Given the steady flood of books about strategy, it is remarkable how few there are about tactics . It is remarkable that there are few books about tactics about strategy .
 Friedman highlights the physical, mental, and moral dimensions of conflict . He explores concepts such as “the culminating point of victory,"" the term Oausewitz used to describe the point when the attacker had achieved the maximum possible .
 Friedman enlivens a potentially dull subject, using plenty of historical examples to illustrate his points . Friedman uses plenty of examples of his points, including examples from the past .
 Some core lessons are timeless: the advantage of combined arms, the importance of having the right mix of mass and firepower . Even though their application must incorporate the latest technologies, they must include the latest technology .
 War fighters can win tactical victories with tactical victories, but not strategic ones . This may not be sufiicient to win a war, says author . He says in the broader strategic context, these tactical victories are not enough .
 Employment and Internship Opportunities Opportunities are open at 212.434,9526 . Internships are required in order to meet the needs of candidates for employment .
 Green saw Bannon as an important figure early on and began tracking his career long before other journalists . Green saw him as important figure in his career early on .
 Green had the material and access to produce a deeply researched and sharply observed account of a political figure and a movement that took most of the country by surprise . As a result, Green produced a sharply researched account of the movement .
 Many seasoned observers thought that Trump had rendered himself unelectable by embracing and peddling conspiracy theories regarding President Barack Obama's nadonal origins . Trump's "birtherther" conspiracy theories were thought to have turned him off by peddling the theories of birtherism .
 Bannon understood that Trump had forged a bond with a significant Republican constituency that could win him the COP nomination and put him on the road to the White House . Bannon said that Trump's bond with the Republican constituency could help him win the nomination .
 Bannon's tenure as Trump’s chief strategist in the White House was brief and mostly unsuccessfiil . It is unlikely that his influence in U.S. politics will fade quietly away .
 Readers will find no better guide to Bannon’s vision than this gripping and sometimes appalling account .
 'Lowed Thomas and the Invention ofTkoentieth-Century Journalism' by St. St. Louis journalist .
 Thomas remained a dominant presence in the U.S. media vrell into the 1970s . He helped transform the British archaeologist and military officer into ""Lawrence of Arabia"" in the public imagination during Worid War I . Thomas was a dominant figure in the United States .
 He nimbly adapted to the shifting conditions in the media industry, moving from radio to newsreels and finally to television . He moved on to radio, newsreel and finally television .
 Stephens suggests that today’s media environment is less hospitable to the kind of journalism Thomas practiced . Thomas practiced journalism in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Thomas' trademark travelogues would have less appeal in the age of jet travel . The mass audiences of the networks have broken up, and Thomas’ trademark travelogueues would be less appeal .
 DeLauro has served as the U.S. Representative for Connecticut’s Third District since 1991 . She grew up in the rough and rumble of New Haven politics . She has served since 1991 as a Democrat .
 Out of that experience DeLauro developed a concern for the underdog and a commitment to retail politics . DeLauros: "I have a passion for retail politics. I have a commitment of retail politics"
 The Least Among Us combines backward-looking memoir with forward-facing prescriptions . DeLauro argues with inequality growing and newly-arrived immigrants in U.S. cities .
 DeLauro’s mix of sharp intelligence, skilled partisan instincts, and long-term legislative experience will make her a key player in the House of Representatives in 2018, says Rep. John Boehner .
 DeLauro explains how Washington's political winds might shift in Washington . He says he wants to know how the winds shift in D.C. might shift . DeLauros says he understands politics .
 Edwin Stanton served as President Abraham Lincoln’s secretary of war . Stahr's biography of Stanton brings an important reminder of just how wrenching and transformational the Civil War was .
 Stanton was responsible for the recruitment, supply, and coordination of the unprecedented military machine that the Union assembled during the war . Stanton also played a critical role in the suppression of Confederate sympathizers and antidraft activists in the North .
 Stanton would go on to forge close links with the Radical Republican faction . Stanton was the virtual ruler of the United States in the days following Lincoln’s assassination .
 In 1868, President Andrew Johnson demanded Stanton’s resignation after Stanton sided with Republicans who wanted to take a harder line on Reconstruction in the South . That dispute led to Johnson's impeachment and trial . Stanton's resignation led to the impeachment of Johnson .
 Few Americans have been at the center of so many consequential political storms . This long and thorough account sheds new light on some of the most important events in the history of the U.S.
 Many commentators on both the leit and the right insist that powerfiiJ ofiicials in international organisations such as the International Monetary Fund and EU dominate global finance .
 Such institutions rarely act independently, instead, just like domestic political institutions, they are arenas of political conflict . Yet such institutions often act independently . They are arenas for political conflict, like domestic politics .
 Henning Henning analyzes the European financial crisis of the last decade . He focuses on seven debt-restructuring programs that pitted creditors against debtor nations . Henning: "Europe's financial crisis was the worst of the decade"
 European Central Bank, European Commission, IMF, and IMF oversight of such programs lies with the so-called troika . The troika is a cumbersome arrangement that increases complexity, reduces efficiency, and undermines European integration .
 Henning argues that parliaments in powerful creditor countries, notably Germany, will only approve institutional arrangements designed to do their bidding to the greatest extent possible . The reason is that they will only agree institutional arrangements to do the bidding of the government .
 Creditors rejected a proposed European Monetary Fund because it would have diluted their power and restricted the imposed austerity that benefits them . Ironically, creditors rejected on a proposed EU-based solution .
 The estimated 14 million Roma people -- ""gypsies," are Europe's hidden minority . Roma people are considered a hidden minority in Europe . Roma is a Roma population of about 14 million .
 This book introduces readers to their plight, focusing especially on legal remedies for human rights violations . This book focuses on the plight of those who have been forced to live under the law .
 Roma suffer from a legacy of slavery, discrimination, and economic marginalization . Like African Americans, the Roma have a history of discrimination, discrimination and marginalization.
 Roma have not benefited from the type of broad legal revolution that has improved the lot of minorities in the U.S. Yet over the past century, the Roma haven't benefited from legal changes . The Roma have been in the United States for decades .
 Governments, especially in eastern Europe, continue to slight the Roma, often informally, in the provision of housing, education and employment . Governments often fail to protect them from violence and violations of family rights, including the unjustified removal of children .
 Insofar as policies toward the Roma have improved, it is largely because western European countries use the Eir to impose policy changes on eastern European governments . This book seeks to bring the Roma’s plight to the attendon of Americans .
 The authors blame the Roma’s continued second-class status in Europe on a weak social and governmental commitment to the cause of equality . But they also note that the Roma have failed to organize effectively .
 Some Europessimists sincerely believe that Europe's travails reflect an epochal transformation in Western societies . But some say Europe's troubles reflect a change in Western society .
 Krastev is an uncommonly literate, reflective, and engaging observer of European affairs . He is also a trained philosopher with a penchant for grand historical visions . He argues that the world's most recent history is in the hands of Russia .
 He argues that in the wake of Franco-Cerman reconciliation, the collapse of the Soviet Union and the stagnadon of the European economic model, the movement for further European integradon lacks big ideas to push it forward .
 Krastev believes that the refugee crisis poses a genuine threat to European idendty by spawning populism . The refugee crisis threatens Europe's esoblished political compromises, cultural cosmopolitanism, commitment to human rights and social solidarity .
 Realisdc analysis of these crises might suggest a more sanguine conclusion . Still, a realisdc study of the crisis might suggest that it's not all bad .
 European governments have worked together to cut third-country immigration by more than 80 percent . European governments cut third country immigration by over 80 percent in recent years .
 The eurozone seems to be stable and recovering for the moment . And although economic malaise maybe the most serious of all the crises, the eurozone is stable . The eurozone appears to be recovering from the crisis .
 Portugal has ten million citizens, a strategic locadon, and a crisis-prone economy . Portugal receives little international academic or media attention .
 Lochery has written a useful introduction to an underappreciated corner of Europe . He traces the country's history from the fall of authoritarian rule in the so-called Carnation Revolution of 1974 to present .
 Henry Kissinger intervened in Portuguese politics to bolster moderates against Communists . Henry Kissinger's intervention in Portuguese domesdc politics is a tale of how democracy was established in Portugal .
 Lochery narrates Portugal's joining the EU in 1986 and the 2004 elevation of a Portuguese politician, Jose Manuel Barroso, to head the European Commission, in his new book .
 Short chapters on recent years focus on the political fallout of the financial crisis . The financial crisis posed as dire a threat to Portuguese democracy as communism had a quarter century earlier .
 The collection of admirable studies presented by Dominguez and his esteemed Cuban collaborators manages to convey a compelling, if depressing, portrait of Cuban society .
 Universal health and education have produced worthy outcomes, but their quality is visibly deteriorating . Health and education reform efforts have fallen short, and efforts at reform have failed to meet expectations .
 Although good data are scarce, it is clear that socioeconomic inequalities are widening along gender, ethnic, and geographic lines . The study shows that socioeconomic inequality is widening along racial and ethnic lines .
 Cuba's highly centralized bureaucracy and tightly planned economy have repeatedly frustrated attempts to decentralize decision-making and increase democratic participation . Cuba's tightly-planned economy and highly-centralized bureaucracy are resistant to reform .
 Even these erudite authors struggle to recognize that renewed economic growth and higher labor productivity will require sacrificing some egalitarian social ideals .
 Voces de cambio en el sector no estatal cubano supports a similar conclusion . Voces of cambionio en cubanía support a similar result .
 Smallsample studies generally confirm what other smallsample studies have uncovered . Nevertheless, their findings are valuable and generally confirm that other small sample studies have been conducted .
 Cuban entrepreneurs report a high level of satisfaction and are earning handsome returns and reinvesting for future growth . Despite the many obstacles conironting Cuban entrepreneurs, most report high levels of satisfaction . Cuban entrepreneurs are investing in the country's future .
 The Cuban private sector has added jobs, generated tax revenues, and improved the quality of services, says Cuban president . Private sector has created jobs and generated tax revenue, says President Obama .
 Cuban authorities have criticized small businesses for earning ’'excessive” profits . Small businesses are accused of engaging in illicit practices that, they charge, undermine socialist ideals .
 Officials would do better to digest the many well-founded recommendations in Voces de cambio and further encourage the productive capacities of the Cuban people . Officials should digest the recommendations and encourage the people to work harder .
 The thrill master DeMille visited Cuba with Yale Educational Travel in 2015 . The Cuban Affair is a fast-paced, entertaining novel written by the famous author .
 John Sutter is a wry, jaded U.S. Army veteran of the war in Afghanistan who owns a fishing charter boat in Key West . His handsome protagonist is wry and jaded, but also jaded .
 Die-hard anti-Castro Cuban Americans hire his ship, The Maine, to sneak into Cuba to recover property records . Property records were squirreled away by a fastidious banker fleeing the revolution .
 DeMille sympathetically conveys the profound sense of loss of dispossessed elites . Cuban Affiir features an amusing take on the Yale tour group, unsavory spies, and a climactic firefight .
 Burbach was a self-styled “utopian intellectual vagabond"" who had fled his Midwestern origins to struggle alongside left-wing comrades striving to remake their worlds . Burbach fought in Chile during the AUende years, in the early 1970s, and in Sand
 Burbach was an erudite student of progressive political theory . He enjoyed deep connections to major figures on the Latin American left . His memoir takes an unusually profound dive into the revolutionary movements of the late twentieth century .
 Burbach endured political and romantic setbacks, and was confined to a wheelchair for the rest of his life . Burbach persisted in his uncompromising commitment to radical research and activist engagement .
 Home—So Dlffrent, So Appealing Los Angeles County Museum of Art , 2017. Home—so DlFFrent, so Appealing . Los Angeles .
 Forty-two Latino and Latin American artists present a mostly grim view of low-income urban life and reduced opportunity . The images show the shantytowns of Bogota and Buenos Aires .
 The overwhelming, strident political commentary is disturbingly pessimistic. But it's not surprising, it's disturbingly optimistic. It's a good thing to say, but it's depressing.
 Ugly slums brutalize vulnerable children, brutalize them in slums . Loudly flapping buzzards loom over heaps of trash . jarring inequalities separate the prosperous from the impoverished .
 Latino immigrants to the U.S. confront class divisions, bogus patriotism, and long, wrenching jail sentences . Latinos face class divisions and bogus patriotism .
 New singlefamily housing developments in Mexico and the U.S. alike appear as bleak, dehumanized wastelands of consumerism . The new singlefamily developments look as bleak and empty .
 In these artists’ eyes, the American dream is an illusion, and there is no exit from the Western Hemisphere’s social nightmares . The American Dream is not an exit from social nightmares, they say .
 Nongovernmental organizations rushed into Bosnia and Kosovo in the wake of conflicts during the 1990s . Despite their good intentions and hard work, their actual contribution to peace building was largely insignifrcant .
 Rather than generate local initiative, create community, strengthen civil society, or foster democracy, they left locals despairing of change, cynical, and disdainful of NGO model .
 International groups and governments supported them had the money, but their aims did not match the reality on the ground . International groups' aims were not matched by the reality in the ground, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 They relied on self-serving measures of success and disregarded the insights and preferences of their local counterparts . Making matters worse, they relied on themselves, they said .
 International priorities are designed according to international priorities, rather than genuine local needs, says CNN.com.com .
 Bust followed boom as failure and exhaustion set in . International NGOs moved on, and local NGOs withered. Bust followed .
 McMahon fears that too many incentives exist to leave things as they are . Many within the NGO community now understand these problems, but McMahon fears they will not change .
 Fop-Eleches and Tucker examine the legacy of communism in eastern Europe . They tackle the difficult problem of distinguishing its impact from that of other factors . The study is an ambitious and data-rich study of the communist legacy of eastern Europe.
 Pop-EIeches and Tucker apply a highly refined theoretical model to their large data sets . They succeed in that task by applying to their data sets by applying a theoretical model .
 Those trying to pin down with greater precision the legacy of communism have a model to emulate .
 Kyrgyzstan was once seen as one of the post-Soviet states best positioned to build democracy and foster a market economy . The country is now one of Russia's most prosperous states .
 It is now mired in corruption, political dysfunction, and economic stagnation . The U.S. has been in a state of economic and political turmoil for decades .
 Pelkmans paints an earthy portrait of how people in one Kyrgyz city, a former mining town of 20,000 inhabitants, have coped with the loss of their mining industry . The former mining city is now known for its mining industry, but has been hit hard by
 Those who stayed have adopted a variety of credos to help them understand their new world . Half of them have fled, but half have adopted the same credos as those who fled .
 Initially, many hewed to oeoliberalism, which promised a future of democracy and prospering markets . Now, many of the world's most powerful nations have rejected that idea .
 Conservative Islam, Pentecostal Christianity, and shamanistic spiritual healing all enjoying a surge in popularity . People drifted to alternatives including nationalism and religion .
 Pelkmans focuses on the swift cycle in which these belief systems gained purchase over people and generated enthusiasm and energy, which then deflated when prophets failed and outcomes disappointed . Pelkman focuses on a swift cycle of belief systems that gained purchase and people's enthusiasm .
 He is interested in not merely the force of ideas but also what determines their influence, durability, and decline . He is also interested in what determines what determines the influence of ideas and decline, he says .
 A lack of reliably enforceable property rights discourages investment and burdens the Russian economy . Property rights are a problem in Russia's economy .
 This problem attracts intense scrutiny from those studying and promoting economic reform . The problem has attracted intense scrutiny .
 Normally, scholars draw a sharp correlation between secure property rights and the strength and integrity of political and legal institutions . But this is not the case in the United States, it is the case for the first time .
 Most analysts assume that if institutions are weak or corrupt, people and groups struggling to protect their property will resort to criminal or corrupt means . Most analysts say that if those institutions are . weak, people . struggle with their property, they may resort to crime or corrupt .
 Gans-Morse, employing survey data and extensive interviews, turns that assumption upside down . The study is based on survey data .
 Many disputes over ownership and contracts are settled by legal means in Russia . Despite lagging efforts to improve Russian courts and state bureaucracies, many disputes are settled through legal means .
 The level of engagement with the legal system often depends on the size of the firms involved, the nature of their products, and the character of the markets in which they operate . This trend, however, has advanced unevenly, and it is often the result of the legal process .
 The immediacy of the threat from contemporary terrorism might make it difficult to view the phenomenon through the lens of nineteenth-century Russian literature, but Paryk makes a stimulating case that the essence of today*s violence originates there .
 The seditious emodons that would later inspire political terror, she suggests, first appeared in Aleksandr Radis hchev's 1790 Journey From St. Peterburg .
 Turgenev and Dostoyevsky gestated in the work of their less famous but more radical counterparts . It then gestured in the works of Turgenv and his less famous counterparts. It gestated .
 Sergei Nechaev and Nikolai Chernyshevsky depicted revolutionary zeal and its terrorist strain . The two main characters in the film were portrayed by two Russian revolutionaries .
 Dostoyevsky's three great novels Crime and Punishment, Demons, and The Brothers Karamazov, gave terrorism literary form well before it became a fixture of modem polidcs . Patyk draws on the works of many authors to subtly tease out the symbiosis between words
 The main characters are the residents of the House of Government, an immense edifice in Moscow, completed in 1931, that housed the Soviet elite . The main character in the novel is played by Robert Defterios .
 He traces their lives, often in their own words, from youthful idealism and ardent revoludonary fervor to disillusionment and prosaic surrender to pragmadsm . For a vast portion of the protagonists, exile or death during Stalin's terror .
 The book's depth invites the reader to luxuriate in it, chapter by chapter, rather than simply plowing through . The book’s depth (not the mention its length) invites readers to luxeiate in its length .
 T his important collection follows an earlier edited volume that Elbadawi and Makdisi put together prior to the Arab uprisings of 2010—11 .
 For decades, the region’s autocracies defied predictions that growing wealth, rising levels of education, and the development of middle classes would lead to democratic transitions . The region has been plagued by autocratic regimes for decades .
 Elbadawi and Makdisi argued that the deficit derived from a combination of war and the wealth afforded autocrats by natural resources .
 Uprisings briefly raised the possibility that the deficit would be overcome . The uprisings were briefly thought to have overcome .
 Elbadawi and Makdisi conclude that the process of democratic transition that began in 2011 will resume at some point . They say Islamist fundamentalism will not emerge as the dominant political paradigm in the medium or long term .
 The other contributors, all Arab academics, generally make similar arguments in useful sketches of particular countries, including Egypt, Lebanon, and Syria . Syria, Egypt, Syria, Lebanon and Syria are examples .
 The trouble is that, outside Tunisia, there is not much empirical evidence to support such optimism . Outside Tunisia, Tunisia is not likely to see an improvement in the country's economy .
 Iran pledged to eliminate stockpiles of uranium, drastically limit its enrichment activities . Iran also pledged to allow inspections of its nuclear facilities . Iran said it would allow inspections, and allow inspections .
 Farsi did not participate in the negotiations but has interviewed just about everyone who did . He has interviewed many of his interviewees, including the Iranian president .
 His book captures the ebb and flow of the process—indeed, its psychology . The book is available now on Amazon .
 The U.S. saw sanctions as a way to force Iran to negotiate . Iran saw enrichment as a means to force the United States to negotiate, the U.N. says . The United States and Iran have been at odds for years .
 There is no doubt in Farsi’s mind that the only alternative to the deal was war . The only alternative was war, which was United States President Barack Obama's position, as well . The U.S. president has been in the lead in Iran for more than
 Further sanctions would not have produced regime change, Farsi says . Further sanctions not have led to regime change in Iran, FARSi contends . Iran's government has been accused of violating international law .
 He also does not believe that Iran, a big, diverse, proud nation, could be isolated indefinitely . Iran is not isolated indefinitely, he says .
 Parsi presents a convincing argument that normalization with Iran, although not inevitable, is possible . The Trump administration may think otherwise, but Parsi argues otherwise .
 RaEq Hariri was twice Lebanon's prime minister, first from 1992 to 1998 and again from 2000 to 2004 . He was the prime minister of Lebanon between 1992 and 2004 . Hariri served as prime minister from 1992 until 2004 .
 Hariri was assassinated in a massive blast in Beirut in 2005 that killed dozens of people . A UN special tribunal has blamed on members of the Shiite militia Hezbollah . Hariri's assassination was blamed on Hezbollah .
 Baumann focuses on Hariri’s economic reforms, his program of acquiring undervalued property in Beirut and redeveloping it . Baumann also focuses on his pegging of the Lebanese pound to the United States dollar .
 He argues that such policies exploited the state’s power to engineer a huge transfer of wealth from ordinary Lebanese to oligarchs such as Hariri himself . Many of them are based in Gulf Arab states .
 The Gulf-based oligarchs did not need Lebanon to make their fortunes, which were more directly affected by oil prices than by the Beirut property market . The Gulf based oligarchs, for example, did .
 Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey's leader since 2003, has had an impact on the republic arguably equal to that of Kemal Ataturk . Erdogan's impact on Turkey has been arguably equal that of the country's transformational founder . Erdogan has been Turkey's president since 2003 .
 Turkey’s economy has boomed imder Erdogan; its middle class has tripled in size during his rule . The middle class now includes around 40 percent of the population .
 Cagaptay sees Erdogan as a deeply flawed figure who threatens Turkey’s democracy . But he says Erdogan is a flawed leader who threatens the country's democracy . Erdogan has been accused of corruption in Turkey .
 Erdogan's center-right coalition of pro-market and Islamist supporters has never quite exceeded 50 percent of the electorate . Erdogan's politics are shaped by an uneasy mix of Islamism and constitutional secularism .
 At first, Erdogan was aided by Fethullah Gulen, an influential cleric with many followers in the security establishment . Gulen's followers in Turkey have been key to Erdogan's rise .
 In 2016, a failed coup allegedly organized by Gulenists gave Erdogan a pretext to purge the government, academia, and the media of not only Gulenistists but also liberals and Kurds . Erdogan has a pretext for purging government, academics, and media of those who oppose him
 She declines to give a definitive judgment but hints that commitment to democracy may be more opportunistic than doctrinal . She hints that the commitment to democratic principles may be opportunistic .
 Tunisia’s political culture is rooted in a history of reform, Wolf says . Ennahda likes to cast itself as the inheritor of the reformist mantle . Wolf stresses Tunisia's political culture has a long tradition of reform .
 After decades of repression, Ennahda began to operate legally only in 2011 . President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali was ousted from power in 2011 after a broad-based revolt . The Tunisian government has been in power since 2011 .
 Since then, the party has grappled with issues such as the tension between civil and religious law and the question of whether Muslims and non-Muslims are equal under the law .
 Ennahda’s main weakness, Wolf contends, is its failure to put forward an explicit economic philosophy . Wolf: The Tunisian government lacks consensus on such questions . He says the country's main weakness is a lack of an explicit philosophy .
 As China’s power increases, the country does not always get what it wants from its regional neighbors . E ven as China's power increases China does not get what its neighbors want from it .
 Goh and her contributors explore the complex interplay of pressure and resistance in China’s relations with Myanmar, North Korea, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam . They also explore the role of China in regional issues such as dam building, monetary policy, and human rights .
 These interesting essays go beyond the standard chronology of diplomatic interactions to probe factors that ampliiy or impede Chinese influence .
 China’s neighbors may cooperate for economic gain, or to manage troublesome borders, or simply because they share China's preferences . China's neighbors may cooperate for an economic gain or manage troublesome border issues .
 India, Japan, and especially the U.S. tend to side with them whenever those powers are available . But they also fear Chinese dominance and often side with India and Japan .
 Corruption may make it easier for China to gain access to local decisionmakers, but it can also generate scandal . Corruption makes it easier to get access to decisionmakers in China, but also generates scandal .
 Beijing’s gains can be reversed because of shifu in public opinion or leadership . Proand anti-China factions often form in these countries, and anti-Beijing factions form .
 The anthropological perspective on Chinese family life adopted by the contributors to rhi^ volume reveals a great deal of interesting variation across the urban-rural divide; according to region, class, and sexual orieniadon; and even just personality and circumstance .
 The Chinese family is changing under the impact of many forces, including marketiaation, urbanization, reduced family size, consumerism, and loosening sexual mores .
 Elderly elders today rely less on their children to take care of them than in the past . There is more personal choice in marriage, families are smaller, and smaller families . Elders today rely on children to care for them more than in past .
 Daughters are more valued than they used to be, because of the housing and gifts that must be purchased to marry off a son are more expensive . Daughters more likely than sons to help their parents in old age, because they are more likely to help them .
 The power of elders has weakened more than the dominance of males, editors say . The editors of this volume call ""the two axes of patriarclty"
 Ransmeier shows that Chinese families often bought and sold family members . He made innovative use of police and court archives dating from the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries .
 Still others indentured children to work as servants or purchased children, women, and disabled people to serve as beggars, laborers, or prostitutes or to be sold on the international market .
 For every buyer, there was a seller, usually driven by need . Modernizing officials outlawed some but not all practices . Many forms of buying and selling were covered by a veneer of kinship .
 China today still suffers from widespread human trafficking . Ransmeier’s richly detailed stories of individual cases show how societies can come to accept the trade in people as a normal kind of business .
 12-chapter documentary series surveys the history of the U.S. media’s reporting on China . This 12-part documentary series is reported by the former css Asia correspondent Mike Chinoy .
 Time reporter Theodore White’s struggle with publisher Henry Luce over how to portray the Chinese leader Chiang Kai-shek during World War II . Bloomberg News’ 2013 decision to fire the reporter Michael Forsythe because, he says, his research into the wealth of Chinese
 As China followed a twisting path from war to Maoist revolution to its present state of prosperity and assertiveness, American correspondents faced ever-changing challenges .
 Reporters understood the importance of the story and covered it with remarkable insight . Still, wave after wave of reporters understood the significance of this story .
 More than two centuries of peace, stretching from the early 160Os to the mid-180Os, left Japanese samurai more skilled in martial arcs than in martial action .
 Jaundrilfs study traces the origin of the modern Japanese military to the 1840s . Martial arts teacher introduced a more westernized style of musketry and artillery training based on the Dutch example .
 The West’s relentless encroachment, together with battles between reformers and conservative feudal lords, kepi up the pressure to create more effective fighting units .
 Reformists took power in the 1868 Meiji Restoration adopted a universal conscription law . Conscription broke the link between service in the military and social status and consolidating the Idea of amass citizens .
 By 1894, Japan was poised to defeat Qing China and win control of Korea and Taiwan . Japan's defeat of Qing China was seen as a major factor in its success .
 Allied occupation of Japan after World War II considered a strategic success because it pbced a formerly militaristic, aggressive enemy firmly on the road to democracy, prosperity, and an alliance with the United States . The U.S.-led Allied occupation was considered a success .
 Barnes shows chat the planning for the occupation started as early as 1939 . Barnes tells chat the Nazi-occupied Germans were planning for occupation in 1939 .
 It was far from obvious in advance whether or how Japan would be defeated or what to do if it was . It was not clear how or how the Japanese government would respond .
 One faction, led by some of the U.S. State Department’s leading Asia experts, held that the Japanese were culturally impervious to Western worldviews and inherently aggressive . Another faction said Japan had to be reduced to impotence to make the world safe to make it
 The other view was that Japan’s aggression had been stimulated by resource insecurity . Integrating the country into open global markets would be the key to peace, he said .
 Barnes’ engaging intellectual and social history of the planners provides a fresh window into the origins of today’s liberal international order . Barnes' engaging intellectual history of planners provides an engaging social history .
 The author places much of the blame for Pakistan’s everworsening intolerance on a series of military men turned politicians who fostered sectarian oppression in pursuit of political gain .
 Her prime villain is Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, who took power in a coup in 1977 and ruled until 1988 . He instituted a vague law against ’‘blasphemy"" that is still widely used to persecute innocent people .
 The American authors of this valuable study benefited from their collaboration with a number of scholars at Chinese universities and think tanks . The study was published in the New York Review of Science .
 Researchers set out to demonstrate that even within China’s dosed regime, it is possible to advance transparency and public participation, often through small experiments that are subsequently scaled up .
 Why would an authoritarian party permit such changes? That Is the puzzle of the book’s title .
 The central state does so to reduce corruption and improve compliance with its policies at the local level, authors say . According to the authors, the central state reduces corruption and improves compliance with local policies .
 The authors skillfully blend the latest statistics with illuminating case studies . They argue enlisting the Chinese public to monitor the bureaucracy would yield better results than continuing the current heavy-handed crackdown .
 This short, accessible biography provides an excellent introduction to his life and to the country he ruled .
 In 1922, he was identified as a promising pupil in a Catholic mission school . He later became one of the first Tanzanians to earn a college degree . Bom in 1922 was the first person to graduate from a mission school in Tanzania .
 He has a keen grasp of political tactics and a talent for rhetoric . That distinction has thrust him into a leadership position in the buoning nationalist movement .
 Nicknamed Mwalimu , Nyerere earned a reputation for being a thoughtful and visionary socialist . His high degree of personal integrity was not matched by many other African heads of state at the time .
 Bjerk's balanced biography lauds Nyerere’s accomplishments, but also makes clear that the regime committed human rights violations, tolerated corruption, and implemented disastrous economic policies that left the country bankrupt by the 1980s .
 He walks the reader through a complex story of uneven state building and civil war that begins in the nineteenth century and extends to the present . The book is published by Simon Cowell, a Pulitzer Prize-winning author .
 Clapham turns to geography to explain the variation in political outcomes in the region .
 He contrasts the region’s highlands, where relatively high population density and fertile soil have produced agricultural surpluses that can finance a viable state such as Ethiopia, with the lowlands, in which pastoralism dominates and undermines state authority .
 Ethiopia is Africa’s first ‘developmental state,"" fostering growth with major infrastructure projects . The book deftly describes how Ethiopia has emerged from recent crises with a stable government (albeit one led by military rulers)
 Extremist extremists continue to exploit the continent’s dire poverty and underperforming, illegitimate regimes . Decade after decade, extremists have exploited poverty and illegitimate regimes in Africa .
 The names and the rhetoric change, but the essential qualities stay the same . The names of some of the most prominent politicians in the world are changing .
 The African continent's generally woeful infrastructure has long acted as a brake on economic growth and poverty alleviation in the region . The continent's woefully poor infrastructure has played a major role in the continent's growth .
 Cheaper and more reliable electric power would allow manufacturing sectors to expand . Cheaper, more reliable electricity would allow the manufacturing sector to expand, experts say .
 Economic essays by economists associated with the African Development Bank suggest ways to achieve those outcomes . This collection of essays suggests ways of achieving those outcomes.
 The authors estimate that the region's governments spend less than half of the $93 billion a year they need to spend on infrastructure investment and maintenance . The authors say the region needs to spend more than half that much on infrastructure .
 The difticulty in bridging this funding gap stems not just from a lack of money but also from a paucity of proposals for well-deftned, bankable projects .
 Robinson argues that African countries’ responses to the hiv/aids crisis have been largely determined by their previous experiences in implementing familyplanning programs . Robinson says African countries' responses have been determined by previous experiences . Robinson: Africa’s response to the crisis has been largely
 Based on careful case studies of Malawi, Nigeria, and Senegal, she documents how nongovernmental organizations and technocrats that had gained experience and developed working reladonships with international family-planning organizations were typically the same actors .
 Preventing pregnancies and preventing the spread of Hiv require the same ability to intervene in intimate relations and influence sexual practices . Robinson convincingly demonstrates that the effectiveness of a given familyplanning program depended on whether the political conditions allowed for the development of relatively strong nonstate actors .
 The study conveys an abiding optimism about the ability of large international aid organizations to help local groups build skills in one area and then apply them to other challenges .
 Senator Tim Kaine describes a bold new foreign policy strategy that balances greatness and goodness . I am delighted to see Senator Kaine (’A New Truman Doctrine,"" Ju]y/ August 2017) .
 BCaine highlights the rising influence of nonstate actors but seems to consider only their destructive power . BCaine: "BCaine seems to think only of the destructive power of the state"
 The U.S. must find, defend against, and hold accountable those who seek to harm the country and its allies . Of course, the United States must find and defend against those who want to harm its allies, the author says .
 A new strategy should also seek to identify and empower those nonstate actors working to improve lives and reduce suffering . But a new strategy must also seek and empower nonstate agents working to help improve lives .
 More rime and money should go to Malala Yousafzais, Nelson Mondelas, and Vaclav Havels of the world than to heads of state and CEOs .
 Kaine righdy highlights the role of the U.S. in addressing natural and man-made crises . Kaine: The U.N. role is vital to the nation's ability to respond to natural crises .
 He mentions the failures in Rwanda and Syria as proof that failure can come from crimes of omission, not just those of commission . He says failure comes from a crime of omission rather than commission .
 Kaine’s new strategy should adopt or adapt R2P to address genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against humanity, he says . Kaine's strategy should address genocide and war crimes as well as genocide .
 Taiwan has one of the world’s best universal health-care systems . It offers reasonably priced, high-quality care . Coverage rate of 99 percent of the population and short waiting times .
 Taiwan could do a lot to help the WHO speed up the expansion of health coverage . Many countries could benefit from Taiwan’s know-how and medical expertise .
 Taiwan joined forces with the U.S. to hold training courses for medical personnel in Asia . During Ebola and mers outbreaks in 2015, the two countries held training courses together .
 It donated funding and medical equipment to the U.S. Centers of Disease Control and Prevention to fight Ebola . It also donated funding, medical equipment and funding for Ebola victims .
 The WHO should adhere to its principles, convey its professional concerns honestly to its members, and reiuse to succumb to political pressure to exclude anyone . WHO should not succumb to pressure to include anyone, it says .
 Canadian pLUkaDon Mail-Mail ft 157212L Perindlcals posoge paid in New YV>rk.
 From dae CO date, we persut cenain caraTuUy acnesaed companies to send our aiibscsiben cofoRoadon about produco orservkes that we belieresi. (£ yew prefer lux to receive such 
 ForeignAffairs.cora is your instiiucion's gateway m the best analysis of today's events and isstiea, k also includes access to the full 90*year online archive tn give users a comprehensive history of modern global affairs .
 Foreign Affairs Brain Trust asked experts whether they agreed or disagreed that the U.S. should reduce its military invotvemeal in Afghanistan . Experts say U.K. should cut back on Afghanistan .
 Mara Karlin is Associate Professor of the Practice of Strategic Studies . She is the author of a book called "Mara Karlin’s Strategic Studies"
 Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies . “The opporolty costs of a longer, wider, open-ended commitment to A*hanistan have grown too profound to ignore,” says Johns Hopkins .
 Michael Kugelman Senior Associate for South Asia, Wilson Center says reducing the U.S. military’s iovolvement could imperil ao Ai^an security fbrcea aaining misaion that has made major progress in recent years .
 The School of Global Policy and Strategy at UC San Diego attracts recent college graduates and accomplished professionals . The school is world-renowned expertise In the Pacific region and innovative science and technology policy research .
 Meneqing Direeler and Head of Wealth and Estate Planning Jeff oversees ell weelOt and estate planning for Wilmington Trust Company . He has peitleuler expertise In adueaUng clients on use of Delaware trusts .
 Wilmington Trust is part of a seasoned team of professionals who exemplify Wilmington Trust's H4*year heritage of successfully advising clients .
 Delaware provides special advaalages to busleess owaers who create a personal trust tor estate plaaaiog, asset proteclioQ, or eooddefitlallty purposes . Delaware also offers many other beoefits this irust'frl
 Directed trusts offer control of business's main asset . A directed trustee feature allows a business owner to designate one or more advisors to make investment decisions .
 Delaware was among the first states to allow an asset protection trust . The trust a&seIs protected from creditor claims . Quiet trust provisions offer confidentiality .
 In Delaware, trusts can contain ‘quiet* provisions tailored to business owner’s requirements . Trusts can contain 'quiet' provisions tailored for business owners .
 A business owner in 1997 WILNINOrON TBUII helped establish EUr DELAWARE’s ^UaST ASSET ASSET EEOTECTJOH IHimt law into practice . Instructs the trustee to keep the trust confidential until a milestone
 Delaware Erast could M3tk to meet )oar specific goals, visit wilmLttgtgtoolrust.coaL/ debware advantage .
 T RibarU)rBfDofUi nrMeenfrdiflBnolinMMitineflevjDildUDonlDtBteialeofaiv finandal|iMudor »YiQL Itibaftlc