 Library Director Carolynn Volz discusses the new library renovations that will take place in 2012 . Library Director Volz says the renovations will be completed at the end of 2012 .
 An artist’s rendition of the Fort Myers library is on the cover of this issue . The library is located in Fort Myers .
 There is a lot of buzz in our society concerning the place of books, or perhaps more accurately, the preferred format of books . There is also a buzz in society about the use of books as a form of entertainment .
 An incident in recent history concerning the potential power of the published word to influence world events has been debated in the past .
 Naples campus library enjoyed participating in Florida Libraries Snapshot Day last November . The Naples library participated in the event . The library is a member of the Florida Libraries Association .
 This way all the materials remain available, and can be brought to the Ft.S. Ft. A.C. facility . This way, the materials will remain available .
 For Phase II we will be moving into temporary quarters in the new classroom building in midFebruary . For Phase I, we'll be moving in to temporary quarters .
 We will have the equivalent of four classrooms on the third floor to use for library space and a group office . The school will also have four classrooms and a library space .
 This will be our library location until about August 15th, when the renovation of our old location is completed . The renovation of the library's old location will be completed . This is the first time the library has moved to this location .
 Our space will increase to include the entire first floor of the West Wing in the main building . The space will be expanded into the entire West Wing .
 Computer workstations around the floor will increase from 18 to at least 35 . Workstations will be placed on the floor of the convention hall of operations .
 There will be furniture and white boards on wheels that can be reconfigured according to the needs of the students . There will also be white boards that will be on wheels .
 More improvements are better lighting, more color, a variety of seating choices and study areas . A multi-purpose conference room, a reception desk, and a workroom are among the improvements .
 We will have two computer classrooms for computer stations, and one classroom area set up with tables and chairs for a study area . We will be able to use computers, computers and study areas for students .
 Riva and our student worker Yara will be located in the middle of this area and available to everyone . The students will be able to use the area as a place to sit and relax .
 "We expect to have business as usual, and look forward to all our old regulars plus many new ones joining us every day," says BBC presenter .
 The four librarians will all be sharing one classroom space for six months . They will all share a space in one classroom for the duration .
 A study on the confining of diverse librarians into one small space would be a good research project for a psychology student . Perhaps a study on diversity confining a library librarian into a small space is a good idea .
 I’m not too sure how it’s going to work, but there should be some good stories along the way . I'm not sure how much of this is going to be, but it should be good stories .
 The Naples library will be upgraded in Naples, Florida . The project is part of the Myers Myers library project . The upgrades will take place in Naples .
 There will be new paint and carpeting, less shelving, and a more open feeling . New paint, carpet and carpet will be added to the building .
 "All of this will go a long way in creating a place of study that better fits the needs of our students," says the school president .
 This work will be completed by the end of 2012, and will take place while keeping the library open, we hope . The library will remain open, but the library will be closed .
 "We had three focus groups of wonderful students who really spoke up about their dreams for our library," says library librarian .
 We worked with three marketing classes that drew design plans for us . Then we worked with 3 marketing classes to come up with our own design plans .
 Administration listened to our problems regarding lack of space to serve our growing student population . Administration listened and gave us the support we needed . Some of the librarians attended workshops and joined in online forums to find best practices for library design .
 The architects listened to our dreams and plans and drew up a perfect design . The architect listened to us and we wanted to live in a dream home .
 Hodges family caring and collaborating . Library needs, dreams and plans are all coming together . Hodges hopes and dreams come together .
 Most importantly, we will never have to turn students away just because we can’t seat them in the library . We will never turn students down just because of the size of the library. We will also have to sit students in a library.
 "It is great to be part of this exciting venture, and we appreciate your leadership," says CNN.com . "We appreciate you for your leadership"
 She was a hero for the U.S. and her country, but she was also a hero in her time in the world . She was assassinated in 1945 . She died at the age of 92, a year after her husband died .
 As a librarian, the idea that a book helped steer a nation from disaster has great appeal . The idea of a book helping steer a country from disaster is great appeal to librarian .
 Wertheim pursued a dangerous assignment covering the Spanish Civil War in 1937 . The war was already raging since mid-1936, already raging .
 She passionately embraced and wrote for the cause of the Spanish Loyalists, who were struggling against the Nationalists under General Francisco Franco .
 The later victory by the Nationalists spelled the end of her idealistic illusions, she would recount .
 This heartbreaking event appears to have opened for her a new view of the world and its history, where the irrational sometimes triumphs, and sweeping mistakes are committed by governments .
 Kennedy had been a history and government major at Harvard, and had previously studied the Great War . Kennedy had studied history and history at Harvard .
 Tuchman was not just a dramatic retelling of the outbreak . However, the writing was more than just a retelling, it was a story of the disease .
 Tuchman wove throughout the narrative convincing threads of political miscalculation and misunderstanding and misunderstanding .
 Tuchman portrayed the outbreak of the Great War as the result of human decisions, many of which could have been more tempered and adept . The Great War was not an inevitable slide of events, but the result was human decisions made by human decisions .
 Therein lay the tragedy – that such a terrible and violent cataclysm that swept over 20 million soldiers and civilians from the earth could have been prevented, but for the actions of a handful of politicians – actions that were severely tainted .
 As a Harvard student, this thesis would have probably been interesting, but now as an American president during the Cold War, Kennedy was profoundly moved . Kennedy: As a student, it would have been interesting. As a . Harvard student he would have likely been interested in this thesis .
 He made it his avowed aim not to be the president who led the U.S. into World War III, if at all possible . He said he wanted not to lead the United States into WW III .
 He recommended to top military leaders that The Guns of August be required reading for all Armed Forces officers over the rank of major .
 The U2 spy plane flyovers were spotting these missile sites in progress . The range of these missiles covered most of the United States .
 President Obama enshrouded himself with the Tuchman thesis during the whole conflict, says CNN's John Defterios .
 There would not be a path of miscalculation and misunderstanding descending to war on his watch . Nor would there be a . path of . miscalculculation and misunderstandings descending to . war .
 His skillful negotiations with the enigmatic Nikita Khrushchev revealed a passionate man on a mission to get those missiles out of Cuba, and to prevent a nuclear war .
 Kennedy would have pursued those two aims without Tuchman’s influence, he says . Kennedy would not have pursued his aims without the influence of the late Harvard professor .
 During the Crisis, Kennedy hearked back to The Guns of August in conversations with his advisory team . However, during the crisis, Kennedy said hearkened back to the book .
 The Kennedy Administration’s military quarantine around Cuba succeeded, and the Soviets withdrew the missiles . The Kennedy administration's military quarantine .
 By all accounts, the prospects were grave, and military action seemed imminent . The prospects of military action were grim, but military action was imminent .
 Today we rightfully look back with generous praise for the President, Robert Kennedy, and the other advisers . Today we look back on the President and his advisers .
 Barbara Tuchman’s presence was keenly felt in that somber conference room as well . Barbara's presence was also felt in the somber room as also .
 In 1962, Tuchman published a book in 1962 that deftly put her hands on the steering wheel of American history . Though the Spanish Civil War ended wrongly, in her thinking, the book was right this time .
 Florida Libraries Snapshot Day in Naples November 2, 2011 at the Naples Campus . Riva Wharton, Library Associate in the Fort Myers Library .
 Project ALFA is a federal grant that promotes Universal Access primarily in libraries . The grant will carry over to all facilities and programs in libraries across the country .
 When she graduates, she will have a Master’s in Library Science with an emphasis on Universal Access for the blind, deaf and physically challenged . She will also have a master's in library science .
 The ability to become proactive instead of reactive is taught in the classroom . Web page design and web page design is also taught in schools .
 The library is really excited about this as they are expecting returning veterans to become a larger part of the student body . The library hopes returning veterans will be a bigger part of campus .
 Riva's training in the program will be beneficial for the Hodges’s Veteran's Department . She is planning on working closely with them .
 She worked with migrant workers, ESL, homeless and those who slipped through the educational cracks . She also worked with the homeless, those who slip through the cracks .
 She likes to sew, but has disciplinary problems with her dog that keeps grabbing fabric as she is running it through the feeder of the machine . The dog keeps grabbing the fabric .
 She and Dale have become expert screen repairers, again, with this loving animal charging through screens and doors after cats, armadillos, raccoons or any other creature that dares to venture onto the property . The loving animal has become an expert screen-repairer
 She is looking forward to the new challenges the new building will bring, and remains optimistic the changes will be positive .
 New study rooms, user friendly facility and updated technology will keep Hodges current with other 21st century universities . Hodges' new study rooms will be user friendly and user friendly facilities .
 The books on the shelves in Fort Myers were sent to the Naples Library, where the librarians integrated both collections together . The Fort Myers Library is located in Naples .
 Barb Hawkes and Jeanine Brady participated in the WorldCat Navigator Webinar . The WorldCat navigator Webinar was hosted by WorldCat's Navigator Navigator .
 Carolynn Volz attended a regional meeting for the ICUF Libraries at Indian River Community College in November . She attended the meeting at IUF Libraries in Florida .
 Gayle Haring attended the Charleston Conference for academic librarians in November . Haring is a librarian at the Charleston Library in Charleston .
 Gerald Franz taught several Center for Lifelong Learning classes in Naples, Naples . Franz taught on the Berlin Wall and on the Lusitania .
 Jay Dela Cruz put together a new look for the library portal page . The other librarians contributed their input to the new look .