 After formulating his plan, he went to Fidel Castro, to seek approval to put intermediate range nuclear missiles in Cuba . The plan was rejected by the Castro government .
 He was able to convince Castro that if he had intermediate range nuclear missiles on his own country, he would be better suited to prepare for a second strike against his country . He convinced Castro that he would better prepare for second strike .
 USSR deployed several intermediate range nuclear range missiles to Cuba, one of many actions, which brought the world closer to nuclear war . The USSR deployed a number of missiles to the Cuban Islands in the hope of avoiding war with Russia .
 On October 14th 1962, during a regular reconnaissance mission by a U 2 reconnaissance aircraft through Cuba, pictures were taken of several intermediate range nuclear missiles, known as SS-4's . The missiles were taken by the U 2 during a mission to Cuba .
 Pictures then sent to Washington, where President Kennedy started 'some of the most stressful days' of his life . Pictures then, after a 1 day period in which they were interpreted, were sent directly to Washington .
 The stress was overwhelming in the tones of the voices of Kennedy's advisors, as the possible scenarios began to unfold . The stress of the situation was evident in the tone of the .
 The idea of such a large strike radius must have been shocking to all of the advisors who had not heard the exact distances, as you can hear in the tone of their voices . This idea of the size of the strike radius was shocking to them, as well as their advisors .
 President Kennedy was stressed after only four hours of knowing that there were nuclear missiles in Cuba . The stress for Kennedy only escalated from there to a high level of stress .
 Throughout the day of the 16th President Kennedy and his advisors look for various possible plans of action, working out the various possible consequences and effects each will have .
 Some of Kennedy's advisors were pushing for war, and a more decisive plan of attack, such as McNamara . McNamara was pushing for more decisive plans, including war .
 President Kennedy urged President Kennedy to try as many peaceful political maneuvers as possible before any strike against Cuba . Others, like Robert F Kennedy, and Charles Bohlen, another of President Kennedy's advisors, urged .
 These two sides pulled at Kennedy, and attempted to convince him of their own beliefs throughout the day .
 President Kennedy and his advisors decide to move some of the military to bases in the South Eastern United States . By the end of the night, the military had been moved to South Eastern U.S.
 The President juggles his campaign schedule and this crisis, as to not alert the public, or Cuba, of his knowledge of the impending threat . Throughout the following days, he juggles the campaign schedule, as well as the crisis .
 On October 18th, the President confronted the Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko . President Vladimir Putin confronted the Foreign Minister on October 18 .
 According to him, Khrushchev was against offensive training of any nation, and he believed that this policy should also be true with the United States . According to CNN.com, the U.S. should not be allowed to train with any nation .
 President Kennedy already knew that the USSR had placed nuclear weapons in Cuba . This twisting of the truth was quite transparent for President Kennedy, as he already knew .
 Gromyko may have thought he had convinced the U.S. of the Soviet policy of not training or aiding other nations in performing offensive actions . He did not. The United States did not .
 After the meeting, the President and his advisors met again, for 5 hours to decide on a plan of action . The meeting was the first of two days to discuss the situation in Washington .
 Prior to this, two possibilities were written down, with many various opinions on these possibilities, and different ways to implement these strategies . This is the first time we have written down two possibilities .
 Two main sides pulling at President Kennedy, one telling him to have a ""surgical air strike"", and the other telling him . One told him to first prompt Khrushchev with a letter, and the use of a blockade . The other was told he should have a 's
 There was some heated argument between McNamara and Bolin, who had very different opinions . Although there are no transcripts of these conversations, there was no transcript of the conversations .
 McNamara was for a stronger, surgical air strike, the more aggressive plan . McNamara wanted a stronger surgical strike . He called for a more aggressive air strike .
 Bolin was interested in the more obvious plan to send a letter to Khrushchev, and then use a blockade . Bolin wanted to use the blockade as a way to get the message out to the Soviets .
 The quarantine around Cuba was agreed upon by the advisors and President Kennedy, and naval planning begun . Finally, after the 5 hours, the quarantine was agreed on .
 The next day, Sunday, October 21st, President Kennedy spoke on the phone to Prime Minister Harold Macmillan . President Kennedy was speaking to the Prime Minister of the British Empire .
 In this conversation, we can see how serious and scary this situation was for both parties . In this article, we asked about the seriousness of the situation in the U.S.
 Only the President's transcript is available, we can see that he is worried about the possibility of this escalating to a third world war . This shows the escalating stress that the president was under .
 He speaks of attempting to stop a third world war from occurring; however the United States ""cannot accept his actions"" no matter what the effects will be . The United States will not accept the effects of his actions, regardless of the effects .
 ExComm was to meet on a daily basis to discuss the crisis and advise President Kennedy of a plan of action . ExComm met daily with President Kennedy and advised him to prepare for the crisis .
 President Kennedy 'always felt calmer after discussing the problems at hand' according to McNamara . This was used to keep the President up to date, and possibly lower his incredible stress levels .
 During the day, he decides to address the nation in a television address, which he writes his speech for . He writes the speech for the television address .
 President Kennedy told the U.S. of the nuclear missiles they found evidence of in Cuba . President Kennedy also told the United States of the missile evidence they found in Cuba.
 President Kennedy told President Kennedy that the Soviet government would not aid in any offensive actions by another country, an obvious lie, and proof of the USSR's attempt at deception of the U.S. He told the country that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics had, through Gromyko
 A 'strict quarantine' on all military ships would be put in place to stop the addition of new nuclear missiles, warheads, or any other product, which may be construed as offensive . He also explained that a 'quarantine' would be placed on military ships .
 During this explanation, President Kennedy's 'stress started to show itself,' because of the anxiety created while waiting for a response from Khrushchev . President Kennedy said he was waiting for the response from the Soviet leader .
 The naval fleet had a confrontation with some Soviet submarines, luckily however, the Soviet submarines halted before reaching the quarantine . The Soviet submarines stopped before reaching quarantine .
 President Kennedy urged Khrushchev not to have his ships break the quarantine . Kennedy responded that the blame for this crisis was the movement of offensive weapons into Cuba .
 Khrushchev, yet again says that he will not abide by the demands of a quarantine, however the movements of his ships says otherwise . None of the ships had broken the quarantine, as none had broken .
 President had hoped Khrushchev would accept the terms of the quarantine . This was yet another negative event for the President .
 President Kennedy urged Khrushchev that he was not trying to do anything other than restore peace to the region . President Kennedy said he was trying to restore peace in the area .
 Two letters arrived from Nikita Khrushchev on October 26th, 1962 and the morning of the 27th . The letters were signed by the then-Krushchev in Moscow, Russia .
 Within a few hours of the first letters arrival, in the early morning of the next day, via ""back channel,"" or secret, communications a letter, which fully contradicted the first, arrived . The next day the first letter, from the same day, arrived.
 President Kennedy followed the Second letter, which called for a more peaceful resolution, asking the U.S. only to close their base in Turkey . President Kennedy decided to follow the Second Letter, which asked for a peaceful resolution .
 Through October 15 to October 28, Kennedy got hit with one problem after another . Through those 13 days in October, Kennedy was hit with a series of problems .
 He was able to settle the crisis without the creation of a 3rd world war . These burdens he had to carry caused a great deal of stress for him .
 President Kennedy exemplified heroism . Due to this ability to overcome stress and bring his country to peace overcoming all the odds, he exemplified heroics .
 To find more information on the Bay of Pigs, the first strike by the United States on Cuba, see Bay Of Pigs .