 Reconnaissance photos taken on October 15th showed missile bases being built by the Soviets in Cuba . The bases are 90 miles away from the coast of the United States .
 President Kennedy ordered a quarantine around Cuba and in the ensuing days both sides ramped up for a possible military engagement . The Cuban government and Cuban citizens were quarantined around Cuba .
 United States military forces stood at the ready, while Soviet forces in Cuba had orders to use nuclear weapons if the U.S. invaded Cuba . The Cuban government was ordered to prepare for the invasion .
 Negotiations between Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Kruschev continued in hopes of a nonviolent resolution . Kennedy's negotiations with the Soviet Union continued in the 1960s .
 The Soviet Union agreed to remove all missiles in Cuba in exchange for the United States removing missiles in Turkey . After much deliberation, on October 28th, the Soviet Union removed all missiles from Cuba .
 The outcome of the crisis forever altered the course of the Cold War . Both sides saw just how close they had come to a nuclear conflict .
 Foreign policy between the two changed from confrontation to coexistence . The foreign policy of the two countries has been changed since the 1980s .
 Students will examine several primary documents from the thirteen-day crisis . They will analyze the differences in policy objectives between the Cuban, Soviet and U.S. leaders . Students will also examine the differences of policy objectives .
 Marshal evidence of antecedent circumstances and contemporary factors contributing to problems and alternative courses of action . Marshal evidence that the government has not been able to deal with the problems of the country's leaders in the past .
 Thirteen days in October 1962 was one of the most intense periods in American and Soviet history . The two countries spent 13 days in a period of intense conflict .
 The United States and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear war . The U.S. and Soviet Union were at risk of war .
 The Cold War policy of containment was tested 90 miles from the Florida coast on the island of Cuba where the Soviets were installing nuclear missiles . The policy was carried out 90 miles away from the Cuban island .
 The United States had weapons that threatened major Soviet cities from Italy and Turkey . The U.S. had been in possession of the weapons for decades . The weapons were used to attack Soviet cities .
 Soviet nuclear weapons had long suffered from inadequate delivery systems and long distances . Soviet weapons had suffered from long-delayed delivery systems .
 President Kennedy challenged the Soviet military with a naval blockade and threatening to invade Cuba . Under­estimating Soviet nuclear power in Cuba, President John F Kennedy and his Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara engaged in brinksmanship .
 After the crisis, both Soviet and American leaders realized, full horror, how close they had come to nuclear apocalypse . Both Soviet and U.S. leaders realized how close the nuclear crisis had come .
 The confrontation began during Eisenhower’s administration . The confrontation between the U.S. and Cuba began in 1953 .
 During Eisenhower’s administration, the dictator of Cuba was Batista who was friendly with the U.S. During that time, the Cuban dictator had a friendly relationship with the United States .
 As Castro gained power, the relationship between the U.S. and Cuba worsened . The relationship between Cuba and the United States has been strained .
 Kennedy won the 1960 election and became president of the United States in 1961 . Kennedy was elected to the White House in 1964 .
 Kennedy defeated Republican candidate Richard Nixon in part because Kennedy played up a so­called ‘missile gap’ Claimed that Republicans under Eisenhower had let the Soviet Union get a missile advantage over the United States .
 The United States had far more missiles and nuclear bombs than the Soviet Union . It established Kennedy’s credentials as a candidate who would not back down to a communist threat .
 This was done in secret against the wishes of Castro and a few of Khrushchev’s advisers . The decision was made against the will of Castro . This was made in secret .
 Khrushchev offered no public explanation to the world for installing missiles in Cuba, and this caused suspicion . The secrecy was a miscalculation that ultimately hurt Khruschev because he offered no explanation .
 Kennedy formed the Executive Committee that met every day to decide how to handle the situation . From October 16, 1962 to October 22, 1962, Kennedy formed an Executive Committee . The committee met daily to discuss the situation in the wake of the assassination .
 The Executive Committee had to make a decision before the missiles became fully operational . The decision was made by the Executive Committee of the Executive Council .
 The political and strategic implications needed to be considered in the decision­making process, the author says . The decision was made in the wake of a terrorist attack in France .
 The U.S. considered that Soviet missiles alongside a communist Cuba would violate the American Monroe Doctrine . The Monroe Doctrine was an assertion of American predominance in Latin and South America .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev, Castro and the 1962 Crisis . They considered the Cuban missiles 5 Mark J White, Missiles in Cuba . The missiles were seen in the Cuban missile tests .
 The hawks wanted an air strike on the missile installations and followed with an invasion if necessary . They wanted to follow with a strike on missile installations in Syria .
 The doves wanted a naval blockade which would embargo military shipments to Cuba . Doves wanted an embargo which would restrict military shipments .
 Kennedy decided on the naval quarantine because it would give the Soviets a way to back down and save face . Kennedy decided to quarantine the Soviet Union in order to give it a way of backing down .
 On October 22, 1962, Kennedy delivered a speech about the naval quarantine and the crisis in Cuba . Kennedy delivered the speech to the nation and the world about the quarantine .
 From October 23, 1962 to October 28, 1962, letters of correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev were sent day by day as the crisis unfolded . Letters of correspondence were sent from October 23-October-November 1962 . The letters were sent by Kennedy to the Soviet Union in response to
 The U.S. Navy stopped a number of Soviet ships dead in the water on October 24, 1962 .
 Other ships were allowed to pass that did not contain military supplies . The U.S. government allowed the ships to pass .
 Adlai Stevenson showed photographs to the United Nations Security Council after an argument about the existence of the missile sites with Soviet UN Ambassador Zorin . The photos were taken in 1962 .
 Khrushchev’s letter to Kennedy offered a possible settlement in 1962 . On October 26, 1962, a letter to the Soviet Union offered a settlement . The letter was sent to Kennedy in October .
 Castro sent a letter to Khrushchev convinced that the U.S. would invade Cuba and that he should respond with a nuclear strike against the United States . On October 26, 1962, Castro wrote that he would respond to the invasion with a nuke strike .
 Khrushchev sent a message to Kennedy about the “double standard in American 11 Ball, The Past Has Another Pattern Memoirs, 289. 11 Ball . Memoir: The past has Another Pattern has another pattern .
 Kennedy’s response ignored the request and accepted the no­invasion pledge . In return for the removal of the missiles from Cuba under United Nations’ inspection .
 The Jupiters were removed from Turkey, but at a later date and secretly, secretly . They were removed by the Turkish government .
 Even though the crisis subsided in November 1962, its effects were evident in the change in foreign policy . The crisis ended in November 1963, but the effects were still evident in policy .
 According to Richard Lebow, “Cuba unquestionably had an effect on Soviet policy toward the U.S.” The Cuban government had “unquestionable’s effect” on the United States, he says .
 A hot line between the Soviet premier and American president was established for crisis communication . The line was established between Soviet and U.S. presidents during the Cold War .
 The Limited Test Ban Treaty limited testing to the underground only . In order to control arms, testing was limited to underground .
 Although the treaty limited where countries could test nuclear weapons, this did not limit the number of nuclear weapons . The treaty was signed in 1950, but did not stop the spread of nuclear arms worldwide .
 According to Garthoff, there were two lessons – 18 White, Missiles in Cuba Kennedy, Khrushchev, Castro and the 1962 Crisis, 134­135 .
 Diplomatic History 14 : 490. The Traditional and Revisionist Interpretations Reevaluated . Diplomatic history 14: 490. “
 The first lesson learned was that nuclear war was too risky to seriously risk . The first lessons learned were that nuclear weapons were too dangerous to risk .
 The second lesson not learned was it would not take many nuclear bombs to annihilate the enemy . It would not be necessary to destroy the enemy with many nukes .
 The two superpowers continued to stock pile a massive number of weapons, weapons that were costly, menacing and unnecessary . So, despite arms­control agreements and a new spirit of diplomacy that emerged from the Cuban missile crisis, they continued .
 Never again would Soviet or American leaders go again to the brink of nuclear war . Never again, however, would Soviet and American leaders .
 The crisis evoked miscalculations and misperceptions, which frightened Soviet and American leaders into a change in policy was the only way to avert a nuclear war .
 "Change in policy, but also a change in the relationship of the three countries to a certain extent occurred," he said . "Not only a change of policy, ... it also changed the relationship," he added .
 The evolution of the relationship between Kennedy and Khrushchev went from a reaction­response to one of coexistence with open communication . Kennedy's relationship with the Soviet Union went from reaction­reaction to a coexistence, one of open communication.
 Raymond Garthoff, Raymond L A Journey Through The Cold War A Memoir of Containment and 24, was published by the U.S. State Department of State of the Cold War .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev, Castro and the 1962 Crisis . White, Mark J Missiles in Cuba . White .
 ICBMs­ any supersonic missile that has a range of at least 3500 nautical mi. and follows a ballistic trajectory after a powered, guided launching . ICBm. is any supersic missile with a range that has been launched at 3500 miles .
 Try to structure the discussion to pay special attention to the Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961 . The invasion of the U.S. invaded Cuba in 1961 .
 After allowing students sufficient time to examine the missile range, pose the following lead questions . The missile range is located in Alaska, Alaska .
 RS #10 is an instructional sheet and RS #11 is a blank sheet for student completion . RS #9 is an instruction sheet for students . RS 10 is an educational sheet .
 Review the directions to the “Mapping an Event” sheets, answering any student posed questions . Use the map to map an event in the classroom .
 If audio is unavailable students can take turns reading the speech aloud . Students can read it aloud if audio is not available at the time .
 U.S. policy choices confronting Soviet leaders are discussed in class discussion . Lead a class discussion on the policy choices facing the United States and Soviet leaders . Use this discussion to help students understand the choices faced by the world's leaders .
 Ask students to evaluate Kennedy’s decision to establish a naval blockade . Ask student to evaluate decision to set up naval blockade of Cuba .
 Letter to Nikita Khrushchev from Fidel Castro regarding defending Cuban air space . Fidel Castro was responding to the threat of Soviet invasion of Cuba . Letter was written by Fidel Castro on behalf of Fidel Castro .
 Fidel Castro’s confrontational proposal includes concern about either an air attack or an invasion by the U.S. Fidel Castro is concerned about either air attacks or a possible invasion . Fidel Castro's proposal includes air attacks and an invasion of the United States .
 Students will place the letter in the organizer under during the crisis to establish confrontation . Students will use the letter to place it in an organizer under . Students plan to use it as a way to create confrontation .
 Letter from President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev, October 22, 1962 . Letter from president Kennedy to chairman Khrushchchev . Letter: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 His explanation references past diplomacy and a reminder of the responsibilities and commitment of the U.S. to the United States .
 The United States will stand firm intending to remove the threat with minimal action . The U.S. is standing firm and intends to remove it from the threat .
 Students may use references to Berlin and Vienna to place in the organizer under before the crisis . Students may also place references to Vienna and Berlin in context .
 Students use President Kennedy’s action to place in the organizer under during the crisis . Students use the president's action to help them understand the impact of the crisis.
 Students should be looking for examples of reaction­response in the confrontation between President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev . Students should also look at the reaction to the Kennedy-Krushchev confrontation .
 President Kennedy wrote to Nikita Khrushchev about observing the terms of the quarantine and discussion within the Security Council . This is a letter from the President Kennedy to the Soviet Union .
 Students will place the letter under during the crisis to establish confrontation . Students will use the letter to place under the letter during the confrontation .
 Letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 24, 1962 . Letter from President Kennedy to President Khrushchchev . Letter: "We will never forget what happened in this country's history."
 Nikita Khrushchev accuses President Kennedy of providing an ultimatum and violating freedom of the seas . President Kennedy was accused of violating freedom to the seas in the 1960s . The incident was the first time the U.S. Navy had been involved in a war with the Soviet
 Nikita Khrushchev instructs his ships to follow international protocol . The Russian leader was in charge of the Soviet Union's first ship .
 Students will place this letter under during the crisis establishing confrontation . Students will be placed under the letter of support for students .
 The idea of the quarantine as an ultimatum and violating international law. The quarantine is a violation of international law, according to the U.S.
 President Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba, so it removed the threat to Cuba and Soviet assistance was no longer needed . President Kennedy also promised not invading Cuba, which was removed from Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev mentioned the violation of Cuban and Soviet air space . Khrushchchev said the violation was a violation of Soviet and Cuban air space. Khrushchevitch said it was an act of violation .
 Students will place the letter under after the crisis and note the concerns of Nikita Khrushchev in obtaining a peaceful coexistence and a settlement on the crisis .
 President Kennedy addressed the violation of Soviet air space, but not the Cuban air space or U­2 missions . President Kennedy said the violation was a violation of air space but not Cuba or Cuba .
 The telegram mentions the beginning of talks for a nuclear test ban as well as future communication . It also mentions the start of talks to ban nuclear test tests .
 Students should place the telegram under after the crisis with the idea of a peaceful coexistence . Students should also place the message under the idea that a peaceful peace is possible .
 President Kennedy is seeking a détente with open communication and arms control . President Kennedy was seeking an end to the Cold War with the Soviet Union .
 Students will place the commencement address under after the crisis focusing on open communication and a comprehensive test ban treaty as well as the Peace Corps . Students will also place the graduation address under the new policy .
 After the crisis, the United States and the Soviet Union move toward peaceful coexistence . U.S. and Soviet Union had been at odds for decades .
 The photos are the first images shown to President Kennedy on the morning of October 16, 1962 . The photos were shown to the president on October 16 .
 There are three circles which show the range of nuclear missiles in relation to Latin America as well as most of the U.S. The circles are shown to show how far the missile range has spread over Latin America .
 Students will use the map to infer the political and strategic implications of Soviet missiles ninety miles from the coast of the United States . The map will be used to help students understand the political implications of the Soviet missiles .