 In 1959 after a three year guerrilla campaign, Castro overthrew Batista . Genera Batista was a dictator, corrupt and unpopular . The Americans provided military and economic support because he was opposed to Communism .
 USSR lied about Cuban missiles, would be a sign of weakness . Surgical Air Attack would destroy the missiles before they could be used . Would destroy them before using them .
 Destruction of all sites could not be guaranteed, Attack would kill Soviets and USSR would respond, An attack without without without warning was immoral . Would get rid of missiles and Castro, Castro, American forces were trained .
 Would guarantee a response, either to protect Cuba or in Soviet sphere of influence . 21 of 34 Diplomatic Pressure to get UN to intervene and negotiate . Would guarantee response to Cuba or to Soviet-held territory .
 Would show the USA was serious without being a direct act of war, would put the burden on Khrushchev . If the USA had to back down it would seem weak . Would show that the U.S. was serious . Would also show the burden of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev sends Kennedy a letter saying the missiles are defensive and that if the USA promises it will not attack then they could withdraw the missiles . At 10.32 am they stop or turn around 27 of 34 missiles were fired from Turkey .
 Kennedy delays an attack and accepts the first terms . Khrushchev agrees to remove the weapons 30 of 34 Outcomes for USA .
 Khrushchev forced from power 32 of 34 Outcomes for Cuba Stay Communist and heavily armed, heavily armed Communist, Kept control of American companies and other economic resources . Made no difference to the missile gap, made no difference in missile gap . Khrushchell forced to back down,
 Both leaders saw how close they'd got to a nuclear war and a phone link was set up . Was upset by the agreement but needed USSR support . Helped thaw relations, both leaders saw close-up .
 Card 2 Front USA Allies Back USSR was powerful and so the USA needed allies, NATO in 1949, South-East Asia Treaty Organisation in 1954 and the Central Treaty Organization in 1955 .