 In 1983, veterans of the Kennedy Administration were brought together to look back and reflect on the affair . In their minds, these questions had very clear answers .
 The author wishes to acknowledge an extraordinary debt of gratitude to John Mearsheimer for all the help he gave with this article . On the other hand, there have always been those who maintained that America’s “overwhelming strategic superiority,” or simply the American willingness to
 Arthur Singer for allowing me to view the videotapes of these discussions . Arthur Singer: "I'm glad to have these discussions with the world's leading thinkers"
 International Security, Summer 1985 by Harvard College and of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 1985 .
 Bernard Brodie, for example, took it for granted that America’s ‘nuclear superiority’ had been crucial in 1962 . Brodie: “I’m not sure what happened in 1962. I’ve got a lot of respect for the U.
 These debates, however, have always had a rather abstract and speculative character . These debates have always been rather abstract, speculative .
 The problem will be approached by examining three schools of thought-about the crisis, and about the political utility of nuclear forces in general . The problem is approached here by examining the crisis and about nuclear forces .
 There is a thesis that nuclear weapons played no political role at all in 1962-that is, that their sole function was to deter their use by others . This is the thesis that the role of nuclear weapons in 1962 is to deter the use of others .
 Neither side threatens the other with total war . The reasons are several, but it's mostly that neither side threatens to kill each other . The U.S. and Russia are unlikely to engage in war .
 Transcript of two secretly taped meetings held at the White House on October 16 and 27 . Minutes of two ExCom meetings held on October 27 are reproduced .
 Recently declassified material represents only a small portion of the Kennedy Library’s holdings on the crisis .
 There are important, but still unavailable, sources in other archives, and in private hands as well . And there are also sources in private archives, including notes from Paul Nitze .
 A second major school of thought argues that nuclear weapons did matter, because the risk of nuclear war was bound to affect political behavior . A third school of thinking says nuclear weapons do matter because risk of war is bound to influence political behavior, the study says .
 There is the notion that risk is not simply an inescapable fact of life . On the other hand, there is the idea that risk of life is not just an inevitability, it says .
 The level of risk is instead seen as something that can be deliberately and consciously manipulated . The risk is not seen as a risk, it is seen as an opportunity to deliberately manipulate risk .
 A third school of thought claims that it was the balance of nuclear capabilities that proved decisive . The balance of resolve or conventional capabilities proved decisive, they say . O .
 A government’s ability to manipulate risk might depend largely on the military power at its disposal . This interpretation is not logically inconsistent with the approach that emphasizes risk, he says .
 Taylor denied that America’s ”strategic superiority” played a meaningful role in the crisis . Taylor here denied that U.S. strategic superiority played a significant role in crisis .
 Gregg Herken, Counsels of War, discusses the role of nuclear forces in the missile crisis in his book . Note also his comments on the nuclear role in the crisis .
 This claim is generally based on the notion that nuclear weapons are ”unusable” weapons-that they are good only for deterring their use by others . This claim has been made by the U.S. State Department .
 The effect of this line of argument, therefore, is to emphasize the importance of conventional forces- that is, of America’s conventional predominance in the Caribbean .
 If war could come without such a deliberate and conscious decision on the part of either the President or his Soviet counterpart, then the risk of war would be real and would inevitably affect political behavior . The risk of a war would therefore inevitably affect the behavior of political leaders .
 McNamara demonstrated a clear grasp of the logic of escalation, writes Julian Zelizer . McNamara's actions could set off a chain of events over which one could exercise only limited control . Zelizer: McNamara showed a grasp of how one’s actions set off an escalation chain
 Even those who base claims about the irrelevance of the nuclear balance on the argument that no rational government would ever deliberately start a nuclear war have frequently argued along these lines .
 The case of Secretary McNamara is again particularly interesting in this connection . McNamara was Secretary of State at the time of his death .
 CIA had reported that some of the missiles on 12.6 missiles had been fired by the U.S. on October 27 . But by October 27-that is, after October 27, the missiles had already been fired, the CIA said .
 U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Department of Defense Appropriations, “Department of Defense . Appropriations for 1964,” February 6, 1963, 31 .
 Even he was willing by this point to accept what by his own reckoning was a serious risk of nuclear war . l4 Finally, there is the point that the specter of . nuclear war was deliberately manipulated to support American objectives in the crisis .
 The U.S. should recognize that possibility “by trying to deter it,” he said . “We probably should alert SAC, probably put on an airborne alert, perhaps take other s-, alert measures.” He said .
 McNamara’s assumption was that nuclear preparations would serve to deter Soviet responses in general . The implied threat was not directed simply at the possibility that the U.S.R. might consider using its nuclear forces .
 October 16 transcripts, 11, 10; see also Dillon’s remarks, ibid., I, 27. October 16 Transcripts . October 16 transcript .
 The same kind of point might be made about the effect of American military preparations during the Berlin crisis in the previous year .
 These deterrent threats would reduce the probability of any direct Soviet retaliation . They would thus increase America’s freedom of action in Cuba, author says .
 This was a deadly game, played reluctantly and without any trace of enthusiasm . But this was played reluctantly, played without enthusiasm, it was said .
 The logic of the confrontational situation-prevailed over the government’s horror of nuclear war and led it to adopt tactics of this sort . Political necessity. Political necessity, the logic .
 The specter of nuclear war influenced both Soviet and American policy . The Balance of Resolve is based on the book "Nuclear War of the Cold War"
 The fear of a Soviet countermove against Berlin weighed heavily on American policy during the crisis . U.S. policy was based on the fear of Soviet counter-movement .
 The Soviets would be deterred from moving against the city (even though their forces in the Caribbean might already have been attacked); but the Americans presumably would not be deterring from following through with their policy of defending the city .
 It was taken for granted that the same risk would have unequal effects . The risk of the same thing would have equal effects, the government says .
 The situation in the Caribbean was the mirror image of the situation around Berlin . The situation is mirror-image of that around Berlin, according to CNN.com .
 The Americans had conventional predominance, but (given that the missiles had already been put in) the United States was the power that was threatening to alter an existing situation . The U.S. threatened to alter the situation, but it was already in place .
 If the nuclear threat had perfectly symmetrical effects, U.S. power should have been stalemated around Cuba as Soviet power was around Berlin, author says . "If the threat had symmetrical effect, it would have led to a stalemate in Cuba," he says .
 This put pressure on the Soviets to head off that invasion and accept terms . The Soviets were forced to accept terms and head off the invasion . This pressure was put on the Soviet Union .
 The Americans, for similar reasons, were also under pressure to settle the crisis before matters came to a head .
 An arrangement involving the withdrawal of the American Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for a withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba would be tested . One way to test this issue is to examine the case of the Jupiter-that is, the question of an arrangement involving an American Jupiter missile withdrawal .
 Kennedy was “quite amazed” when Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon told him during the crisis that “everyone knows that those Jupiter missiles aren’t much good anyway.” Kennedy, according to his close adviser Theodore Sorensen, said .
 In fact, there were from the outset very precise assurances to the contrary, the government said . "There were assurances to us that the government would support us. In fact," he said. "This is not the case."
 U.S. Congress, ”Department of Defense Appropriations for 1964,” 57; see also 74. United States Congress. ” Department of Defense. appropriations for 1964 .
 Within the space of a few months, the Jupiters were in fact dismantled . And within the time of the time, they were dismantled .
 There are two ways in which the documents throw some light on this issue . The documents show that the documents may shed light on the issue . There are other ways to look at the documents .
 President Kennedy was in fact the strongest advocate of a trade in that high policymaking group, the minutes show . The minutes show that at the peak of the crisis, on October 27, with an invasion of Cuba imminent, Kennedy was the strongest supporter of the trade .
 Some kind of trade involving the Jupiters would eventually be necessary, he said . Repeatedly, he returned to the theme that some kind of deal would eventually happen . The president of the United States' largest trading group, the U.S. Navy, won't trade
 President Obama wants Russia to stop working on missile sites in Cuba and make the missiles there inoperable . This would then be followed by a negotiation involving missiles in Turkey .
 To Move a Nation , 203; repeated in Schlesinger, Robert Kennedy, 519, and Allison, Essence of Decision, 226. To Move A Nation, 203 .
 In view of the President’s attitude about a trade and the more hostile attitude of his advisers, what all this implies is that the settlement that emerged after the assurances were given to Dobrynin should probably be understood as the conflation of a negotiation .
 If the issue came down to whether America was willing to withdraw the ”worthless” Jupiter missiles from Turkey, then, no matter what the strategic balance was, the President was not going to dig in his heels and risk a nuclear holocaust .
 Kennedy’s eagerness for something like a political settlement was rooted not in a conviction that nuclear forces were politically impotent, but rather in the notion that the main obstacle to a solution was too trivial to warrant any serious risk of nuclear war . Kennedy's eagerness to something like
 The same logic, however, implies that his attitude about the kind of risk worth running might have been very different if the political issues at stake had been viewed as basic-as in fact they had been during the Berlin crisis the previous year .
 New evidence about the final settlement supports the idea that the basic situation was not one of simple parity . In fact, the new evidence shows that the settlement was not simple parity. In fact it was not the case of parity .
 Political concerns played an important role in determining the kind of risk the U.S. government was willing to take on . Political concerns also played a key role in deciding the risk the American government would take on, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In theory, the strategic balance could have played a role by influencing either American policy or Soviet policy or both . The U.S. and Soviet relations could have influenced the outcome of the war .
 This section will be concerned mainly with how the Americans might have been affected . The Soviet side will be examined in the next section of this section .
 There is no evidence that Kennedy and his advisers counted missiles, bombers, and warheads, and decided on that basis to take a tough line . No evidence that they counted missiles and bombers and warheads .
 Few assumed at the time that the strategic balance in itself meant that the U.S. would almost automatically back down . The veterans of the crisis have often denied that any calculation of that sort had been made, and there is no reason to dispute that .
 No one even touched on the issue of what exactly would happen if the 25th anniversary of the first lady's 25th birthday .
 Even rough calculations of this sort were not terribly important, according to the transcript . But one does come away from the transcript with the sense that even rough calculations aren't terribly important .
 No one discussed what American counterforce capabilities were-that is how well the U.S. might be able to “limit damage” in the event of an all-out war .
 It was as though all the key concepts associated with the administration’s formal nuclear strategy, as set out for example just a few months earlier, were meaningless . In fact, the whole idea of controlled and discriminate general war-in the final analysis counted for very little .
 People were in fact concerned with the problem of whether the deployment of missiles in Cuba would make an important difference in military terms . People were concerned with whether the . deployment of . missiles in . Cuba would be an important . difference in . military terms. People were worried about the .
 The positions taken on this question reflect, in a rather crude and imperfect way, to be sure, the authors say . It reflects attitudes about the significance of shifts in the strategic balance, they say .
 They can function as something of a surrogate for more direct notions about the role of the nuclear balance . They can be used to help explain the role nuclear balance in the world's nuclear arsenal .
 It is sometimes claimed that the general belief among high administration officials was that the deployment would not count for much from a strictly military point of view .
 There is nothing in the Sorensen document that even remotely deals with this question . But there is nothing at all in the document that .
 The larger the force, the more the Soviets would be able, in the words of the CIA assessment, “to blunt a retaliatory attack’” Sorensen in this document takes megatonnage as the basic index of strategic power . This a couple of
 The Kennedy Administration wanted other things besides sheer destructive power from its strategic forces . The Kennedy administration wanted more than sheer power from the strategic forces, it says .
 The issue of the military significance of missiles in Cuba had been around ever since the administration had begun to worry about a possible deployment during the summer .
 Neither President Kennedy nor anyone else at the meeting, however, seemed much concerned with how such a deployment would affect the vulnerability of America's strategic forces .
 Kennedy did seem concerned that the initial deployment might be followed by a more massive one . Kennedy did say he was concerned that it might lead to a larger deployment . Kennedy: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be deployed in the next few months"
 McNamara linked this point to McNamara's argument that the U.S. could not contemplate military action against the island once the missiles there were operational .
 The U.S. decided to resist the deployment of the missiles, sparing the President from any need to resolve the perplexing issues of nuclear strategy . It provided a straightforward rationale for the decision .
 It is unclear whether such a study was ever written; an attempt to locate it via the Freedom of Information Act proved unsuccessful .
 Kennedy was concerned with how the missiles might affect Soviet first strike capabilities . The quote suggests that by this point Kennedy was worried about how the missile might affect first strike capability .
 I most important people in the Kennedy Administration found it hard to take such notions seriously . The Kennedy Administration would have been hard-to take seriously .
 As a result, the nuclear strategy of ”controlled response” never really cut very deep under Kennedy37;and a certain ambivalence about these basic issues was very characteristic of that administation’s approach to military policy . As a . result, a . certain amb
 What is striking here is the sense that peace was hanging on a thread, that it did not take much to touch off a nuclear holocaust-attitudes that would have been inconceivable if the sense was that the Soviets were simply outgunned and would have to back down, or
 An American U-2 spy plane had gotten lost and turned up over Soviet territory . General David Burchinal, the Director of Plans on the Air Staff in 1962, later recalled how during the crisis an American spy plane got lost .
 McNamara, he said, “turned absolutely white and yelled hysterically, ’This means war with the Soviet Union.” McNamara . McNamara was “absolutely white and turned absolutely white," he said .
 It is now well known that the influence of declaratory strategy on actual planning for general war is much slighter than many people used to assume .
 Air Force General Bruce K Holloway was a member of the U.S. Air Force . He was killed by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Taylor and McNamara argued on October 16 that it was crucial to take out every target that might have any nuclear capability .
 Our recommendation would be to get complete intelligence, get all the photography we need, the next two or three days, no hurry in our book . No hurry in the book. Get complete intelligence. Get all the photos we need .
 One point was that if military action was to be undertaken, it had to be done quickly, before the missile sites became operational . One point: If military action is to be carried out, it must be done before the sites become operational .
 Military power is viewed primarily as a way of affecting an enemy’s capabilities rather than as a means of influencing his will . Military power can be seen as an attempt to affect the will of an enemy rather than influence his capabilities .
 The enemy cannot be counted on to behave rationally and control his own behavior . And this is based on the notion that once the ball starts rolling, things may very well become uncontrollable .
 Rusk and Bundy attacked a set of assumptions that were attacked by Bundy and Rusk . Bundy was attacked by Rusk, Bundy, and Bundy, but it was not the case .
 There were great political advantages to limiting the attack to missile sites . There were no reason to assume that the Soviets would retaliate with whatever they had left, since such behavior would be suicidal for them . The Soviets would not have retaliated with whatever it had left .
 The deterrent effect in 1962 seems real enough, even if in the final analysis the presence of operational missiles would not in itself have been sufficient to prevent an American attack on Cuba .
 A sense for the danger of attacking Cuba after nuclear weapons were deployed there had a broader base than uncertainty about Soviet command and control . The evidence on this point is not very strong .
 This was not “a perfect solution by any means,” and he said he did not want to argue for it . “Wait until you work on the others.” he said .
 It's important to remember that its fear of escalation did not drive the threshold of acceptable risk down to zero . But it's also important to . remember that it did not . drive the . threshold of . acceptable risk . down to . zero .
 On both the air strike and the blockade, McNamara’s initial views were not accepted . McNamara was not accepted on both the strike and blockade .
 The blockade did in fact function as a political instrument-that is, as a ”first step,” raising the prospect of further, more extreme steps if a settlement was not reached .
 There were two possible ways in which the strategic balance could have influenced the course of the crisis: through its effect on U.S. policy or through its . effect on Soviet behavior .
 They would be challenged on the high seas regardless of flag, and they’d be searched, and searched . If they had anything that falls under war materiel they will be turned around or sunk . They would then turn around or be sunk .
 There was a phone from the Secretary of Defense’s office right to the deck of the damn destroyer on patrol in this blockade . And, there was control in detail, so there was a . phone call from the secretary of defense's office .
 "Right through the damn blockade and right on into Havana. Full steam ahead," he said . "I'm going full steam ahead and right through the ... blockade"
 'They just looked at each other, these people who were now learning to ‘manage crises’ and run wars, they said . So, they just looked like these people, these . people who are now learning . to manage crises, run wars and manage crises . So
 The next ship comes along and he's Lebanese-he’s flying a Lebanese flag . So the next ship will be Lebanese, he’ll be flying Lebanese-flowing a Lebanese-flag, he says .
 A strong, although somewhat speculative, case can be made that Soviet policy was very much influenced by the strategic balance . But a very speculative, though somewhat speculative-case, can also be made .
 This case rests on a study of what was going on in the area of military preparations during the crisis . This is based on a case based on what was happening in military preparations .
 One of the most striking features of the Cuban missile crisis is an extraordinary asymmetry in the area of general war preparations, writes David Frum . Frum says .
 On October 22, President Kennedy announced the presence of the missiles and the measures the U.S. was taking to force their removal . Every day, from that point on, the Central Intelligence Agency prepared a memorandum outlining the military measures the Soviet Union was taking .
 CIA Director, John McCone, briefs ExCom on the latest intelligence memorandum . ExCom meeting is the first order of business at each morning meeting . CIA Director McCone is the CIA Director .
 The CIA said it simply had not been able to detect any ”significant redeployment” of Soviet forces . The same point was made in the October 25 memorandum; still on October 27, at the climax of the crisis .
 Burchinal stressed that ‘all these moves were signals the Soviets could see and we knew they could see them.” ‘All these moves ... were signals,” he said .
 They are an indication of resolve, a hint of what one might actually do, a means perhaps of preventing the enemy from making certain countermoves and thus of preemptively increasing one's own freedom of action .
 It is clear that these bargaining advantages of preparing for war were understood at the time . But if taking these measures can have such effects, it is even clearer that a refusal to make serious preparations can have important political effects .
 It is not just the Soviets’ reluctance to declare an official alert of their own. It is a question here not just of the reluctance of the Soviets . It is also a question of whether the U.S. should declare an alert of its own .
 This might be explained by the specific character of what an alert might have meant in the Soviet system . An alert alert may have meant 'alert' in Soviet times .
 The Soviets evidently did nothing, even in the way of major ad hoc measures, to reduce the vulnerability of their strategic forces . The Soviets might have been unable for technical reasons to hold their strategic force on alert for more than a short period of time .
 Khrushchev tried over the past few years to extract political advantages by brandishing the specter of nuclear war . The war was the first nuclear war between the Soviet Union and Russia .
 If anything, he had tended to overestimate the bluff value of nuclear weapons, he said . The tactic of exploiting the nuclear threat could backfire, he added .
 The Soviet missile guidance system used gyroscopes with metal ball bearings that would fail if they were subject to continuing stress-that is, if the missile were held ready for launch over a prolonged period . The system was developed in the 1960s .
 It's reasonable to suppose that their view of the U.S. had a good deal to do with the choices they made . It is reasonable to think that their views of the United States had a lot to do .
 U.S. nuclear policy focused on how much advantage there might be to getting in the first blow, it says .
 The important volume on Soviet Military Strategy , edited by Marshal Sokolovskii, shows just how sensitive the Soviets were at this time to the American emphasis on the logic of preemption .
 It is clear that the Soviet authors understood some of the basic arguments American strategists were making during the period . ‘It is considered to be the final and only means of avoiding disaster’
 The most disturbing thing would be the notion of “damage limitation” and the U.S. counterforce capabilities that supported it, he says . He says the most disturbing part of the story is that the American counterforce was supported by it .
 Kennedy's remarks were originally made in an interview with Stewart Alsop, ”Kennedy’sGrand Strategy,” Saturday Evening Post, March 31, 1962, 14. 14 . Kennedy: ‘Grand Strategy’
 The famous remark of Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov to John McCloy shortly after the crisis-”You Americans will never be able to do this to us again”-suggests that the Soviets drew back because of a relative, but remediable, weakness . The
 The asymmetry in military preparations is to be explained, but the important thing to note is that people in Washington were aware of it during the crisis . Washington was aware of the situation during the time of the crisis, says Julian Zelizer .
 There is also the related question, about which there has been so much conjecture, of the connection between the Cuban missile crisis and the development of Soviet strategic capabilities after 1962 .
 It is hard to believe there is no connection at all, but it is still too early for firm conclusions on this subject . It is too early to conclude whether there is a link between the two .
 It's already clear that some people close to the crisis did in fact draw these sorts of inferences . It's not the first time people have drawn such conclusions .
 Khrushchev "never alerted a bomber or changed his own military posture one bit," says General Burchinal . General Barchinal later stressed that Khrushvic never changed his military posture .
 Burchinal implied that this issue was discussed with his civilian superiors . One would like to see how the arguments were played out and what effect they had on policy .
 In any event, the mere fact of asymmetry does not seem consistent with the picture Bundy painted in 1969 . Bundy painted the picture in 1969, but it's not consistent with what he painted .
 It suggests in itself that the nuclear situation was not one of simple “stalemate” in 1962 . The nuclear situation in 1962 was not a simple ‘stalemate in 1962,’ it suggests .
 America’s ”superiority” apparently did not have much of a direct effect on U.S. policy during the crisis . The limited evidence now available seems to indicate that this is what the limited evidence suggests .
 There is first argument that nuclear forces simply neutralized each other-that nuclear forces were ”unusable” and that because they were militarily useless, they could not be harnessed to any political purpose, beyond simply deterring their use by others .
 Of all the arguments considered here, this is the most difficult to sustain, says CNN.com . Of all of the arguments discussed here, it is the hardest to sustain .
 It is obvious that the fear of nuclear war affected both Soviet and American behavior in the crisis . These fears were consciously manipulated by the American 66, most notably by the Americans .
 Brodie: Government was able to “threaten the next in a series of moves” that seemed to tend in the direction of general war . It was sufficient, as Brodie pointed out in a 1963 talk on the crisis, that the government was able .
 Nuclear anxieties did not have an equal effect on both sides . But the threshold of acceptable risk could vary, and nuclear anxieties do not have equal effect .
 The balance was not so completely lopsided that the crisis was ended by a total Soviet capitulation . The balance of the Soviet Union did not end in a complete capitulation, the historian says .
 The final arrangement was not a bargain negotiated between equals . Nor, on the other hand, was the final arrangement a bargain negotiate between equals.
 The balance was unequal, but not so unequal that it makes sense to view the crisis as a simple ”contest” with a clear victor . The balance of the crisis was unequal but it wasn’t so unequal, says CNN.com’s John S
 It would be too extreme to view the crisis as a ”competition in risk-taking” a la Thomas Schelling, a la Schelling . It would therefore be a bit too extreme for the crisis to be viewed as a competition .
 The administration knew that it could not sit this one out . Both for foreign policy reasons and for domestic politics, the administration knew it couldn't sit out .
 No one wanted to keep upping the ante, to keep outbidding the Soviets in ”resolve” as the way of triumphing in the confrontation . But no one wanted . to keep . upping . the ante .
 The evidence suggests that it did not have an important direct influence on U.S. policy . As for the argument about the strategic balance, the evidence is clear, says CNN.com .
 The American ability to “limit damage” by destroying an enemy’s strategic forces did not seem, in American eyes, to carry much political weight . The U.S. could not afford to destroy strategic forces .
 Political, Military, and Economic Strategies in the Decade Ahead , 646.6.46. Political, military, and economic strategies in the U.S. in the next 10 years .
 The ironic thing is that they probably took American ideas about ""damage limitation"" and ""discriminate and controlled general war,"" far more seriously than the Americans did . The irony is that the U.S. didn't take American ideas seriously seriously .
 Just months earlier, after the Ann Arbor speech, they had contemptuously dismissed the McNamara strategy as absurd . And this was in spite of the fact that just a few months earlier they'd dismissed it as absurd, they said .
 It really does seem that ""we had a gun to their head and they didn't move a muscle''-that their failure to make any preparations for general war was linked to a fear of provoking American preemptive action .
 This meant that it was more essential than it otherwise might have been to head off an invasion of Cuba through a political settlement . And this meant that the Cuban government was more likely to be able to avoid a military invasion .
 The danger of provoking an American preemptive strike tended to rule out countermeasures . Countermeasures would significantly increase the risk of war, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The effect was to tie their hands, to limit their freedom of maneuver, and thus to increase their incentive to settle the crisis quickly . The effect therefore was to . tie the hands of the British government, and therefore to increase .
 The historical analysis of the Cuban missile crisis is still in its infancy . It's still not clear what happened in Cuba in the 1960s .
 The new documents on the crisis represent just the tip of the iceberg, CNN's John Sutter says .
 It is only as more material is released that the full meaning of the crisis can begin to unfold . The full meaning will only be revealed once more material has been released, it says .
 It is one of the best ways to bring the political utility of nuclear forces into focus, says David Cameron .