 The major confrontation began when the United States discovered Nikata Khrushchev, the Soviet premier had secretly installed Soviet missiles that were carrying nuclear weapons from Cuba . The U.S. discovered the missiles were installed in Cuba .
 When President John F Kennedy discovered the plot, there was a standoff of several days as the United States imposed a naval blockade of Cuba . The United States demanded the USSR to remove the missiles immediately .
 The United States were fearful that Fidel Castro, Cuba's revolutionary leader, would establish a Communist regime so they also applied economic pressure . The U.S. cut off all trade between the United States and Cuba in Cuba .
 Castro responded by becoming closer to USSR and Russia helped Cuba by offering trade opportunities . Castro became closer to Russia and helped Cuba become closer to them .
 America's trade block with Cuba began two years earlier . This was to ease the effects of America's block with the island nation .
 The Cold War was a diplomatic, military and economic struggle between capitalist and Communist countries . It was a struggle between capitalism and communism .
 In September of 1962, President John F Kennedy warned the Soviets that ""the gravest of issues would arise" are weapons were found . President Kennedy warned that the 'gravest issue would arise'
 In October, U.S. spy planes showed photographs of Soviet missile installations under construction in Cuba . In October the United States also showed photos of Soviet missiles under construction .
 The United States said to Cuba if the weapons were not dismantled and removed, that they would invade . The U.S. threatened to invade Cuba if they did not remove the weapons . Cuba has been hit hard by the U.N. for years .
 The Soviet diplomat denied that there were any offense missiles being built in Cuba . The diplomat said that the missiles were being built on Cuba .
 The Soviet Union saw this Communisation as a vital part of it's defensive system . It was seen as a key part of the Soviet Union's defence system .
 U.S. removed some of its own missiles from Turkey to appease the Soviets . United States also removed some its own own missiles to appease Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy's decision of blockading Cuba influenced his decision to do so . President Kennedy made the decision to block the Cuban blockade of Cuba .
 The Great Exhibition of 1851 ... of Prince Albert, built by Joseph Paxton and regularly visited by Queen Victoria, the Crystal Palace . The book I chose was the Exploring Lewis and Clark by Thomas P Slaughter .