 Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience . Due to electronic rights, some of the content has been removed from the content .
 Due to electronic rights restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed . Third party content is suppressed .
 Editorial review deemed any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience . Editorial review has deemed that any suppression of content is not materially affecting the overall experience .
 The publisher reserves the right to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it . This article includes the content that has been published without permission .
 For valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for materials in your areas of interest .
 For product information and technology assistance, contact us at Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706 For permission to use material from this text or product, submit all requests online atwww.cengage.com/permissions .
 Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd. The company is represented in the country by Nelson education, Ltd .
 Understanding world politics requires up-to-date information and analysis . CNN.com will feature iReporters from around the world in this weekly Newsquiz .
 In a constantly changing world, it is imperative for students to develop the intellectual skills to be better global citizens and to effectively analyze key issues in international affairs .
 Trend and Transformation provides the tools necessary for understanding world affairs, for anticipating probable developments, and for thinking critically about the potential long-term impact of those developments on institutions, countries, and individuals across the globe .
 World Politics aims to put both change and continuity in perspective . World Politics is a weekly look at the world's political landscape .
 Key theories for understanding international relations frame the investigation . Realism, liberalism, constructivism and constructivism, as well as feminist and Marxist interpretations, frame the study .
 At the same time, this book presents all the complexities of world politics, as well as the necessary analytic tools to make sense of a wide range of substantive issues, from war to global finance to human rights . The book is published by Simon Tisdall .
 World Politics' key terms and concepts in real-world applications . An enhanced video resource program, provided in partnership with the Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs .
 Trend and Transformation continues to change in response to unfolding events around the world . Trend and transformation continues to evolve as a result of events in the world around the globe .
 Since publication of the 2014-2015 edition, numerous changes have taken place in international relations . This year's edition was the first edition of the World Series of International Relations magazine .
 The entire text of this 2016-2017 edition has been revised to incorporate the latest global events and scholarly research . To provide students with the most current information, the entire text is revised to provide the latest information .
 Updated discussions of conflict and cooperation around the world, including the prospect of a resurgent Russia and an increasingly powerful China, thawing relations between Cuba and the United States .
 MindTap is here to simplify your workload, organize and immediately grade your students' assignments . MindTap enables you to customize your course as you see fit . As an instructor, MindTap helps you organize and grade students .
 Through deep-seated integration with your Learning Management System, grades are easily exported and analytics are pulled with just the click of a button .
 MindTapprovides you with a platform to easily add in current events videos and RSS feeds from national or local news sources . Mindtapprovide you can add in videos and feeds to your list of current events .
 Students can access the KnowNow International Relations Blog for weekly updated news coverage and pedagogy . Students can also access the blog for weekly updates on international relations .
 Use this book to help introduce your students to world politics . We thank you for using this book .
 Aims to help students understand global affairs and assess the possibilities for the future and its potential impact on their own lives .
 In a constantly changing world, it is important to be able to effectively analyze key events and issues in international affairs . In this case, we need to critically assess different viewpoints concerning these issues .
 By providing you with the leading ideas and the latest information available. Use this information to help you understand today's featured news stories .
 Trend and Transformation offers the tools necessary for understanding world affairs, for anticipating probable developments, and for thinking critically about the potential long-term impact of those developments on institutions, countries, and individuals across the globe . It is essential to understand world affairs .
 World Politics strives to help you become an informed global citizen . World Politics aims to establish a foundation for life-long learning about international affairs. World Politics is a weekly weekly feature on CNN iReport .
 World Politics alms to put both change and continuity in perspective . World Politics is a weekly feature on CNN.com's World Politics .
 Learn about key theories and worldviews for understanding international relations . Examine some of the most prominent issues in global politics, including war, terrorism, world trade, global finance, demographic trends, environmental degradation, and human rights .
 As a student, the benefits of using MindTap with this book are endless . Use MindTap to help students learn more about how to use MindTap .
 The accessibility of current events coupled with interactive media makes the content fun and engaging . The accessibility to current events and interactive media make the content more engaging .
 MindTap is there when you need it, giving you easy access to flashcards, quizzes, readings, and assignments . On your computer, phone, or tablet, MindTap can be used to help students with reading comprehension skills .
 Trend and Transformation to be an invaluable resource as you seek to learn more about global affairs . We are happy to provide an overview of the world's most important issues .
 World politics is one of many interests that you are exploring as you earn your degree . This book is designed to provide you with a comprehensive coverage of the trends and transformations that characterize international relations .
 It is our hope that as you conclude reading World Politics you will be as fascinated as we are with the complex dynamics of global interactions . We hope to continue to observe, critically analyze, and address the challenges and opportunities that we share as members of a global community .
 Access your World Politics, 2016-2017 Edition resources by visiting www.cengagebrain.com/shop/isbn/ 9781301305504875. Access the World Politics 2016-17 Edition resources . Access the world's political resources for the next two years .
 You can purchase the book's resources here separately through the “Study Tools” tab .
 Access your World Politics, 2016-2017 Edition resources via www.cengage.com/login . Access these resources via the CEngage website . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of events in the U.S.
 Log in using your Cengage Learning single sign-on user name password . Create a new instructor account by clicking on “New Faculty User” and following the instructions .
 MindTap guides students through the course curriculum via an innovative Learning Path Navigator . Students will complete reading assignments, challenge themselves with focus activities, and engage with interactive quizzes . MindTap provides students with a unique way to navigate through the curriculum .
 MindTap provides students with opportunities to check themselves for where they need extra help, as well as allowing faculty to measure and assess student progress . Through a variety of gradable activities, MindTap can be used to assess students' progress .
 Integration with programs like YouTube and Google Drive enables instructors to add and remove content of their choosing with ease, keeping their course current while tracking global events through RSS feeds .
 The Test Bank contains Learning Objective-specific multiple-choice and essay questions for each chapter . The test bank is offered in Blackboard, Moodle, Desire2Learn, Canvas, and Angel formats .
 Import the Test Bank into your LMS to edit and manage questions and create tests . Import the test bank into your . LMS . Import your questions into your test bank .
 Instructor's Manual contains chapter-specific Learning Objectives, an outline, key terms with definitions, and a chapter summary . Instructor’s Manual contains chapters-specific learning objectives and key terms .
 Instructor's Manual features a critical thinking question, lecture-launching suggestion, and in-class activity for each Learning Objective . Instructor's manual also includes a lecture-starting suggestion, lecture activity, and a critical think question .
 Microsoft® PowerPoint® presentations are ready-to-use, visual outlines of each chapter . The Microsoft PowerPoint presentations are . ready to use, visual outlining of each chapters .
 These presentations are easily customized for your lectures and offered along with chapter-specific Microsoft® PowerPoint® Image Slides and JPEG Image Libraries . They are available in Microsoft's PowerPoint® PowerPoint Slides .
 The Test Bank for World Politics, 2016-2017 Edition, contains Learning Objective-specific multiple-choice and essay questions for each chapter . This edition includes Learning Objective questions for students to understand world politics .
 We are thankful for the constructive comments, advice, and data provided by an array of scholars and colleagues .
 The always helpful and accommodating project manager AnupriyaTyagi with Cenveoand photo Researcher Swarnadivya Chokkalingam with Lumina Datamatics made valuable contributions to this book .
 Product Team Manager Carolyn Merrill and Senior Content Developer Rebecca Green guided the process that brought this edition into print . Project management of Cathy Brooks, the project management of Carolyn Merrill, and Managing Content Developer Megan Garvey, also helped see the book through the production process .
 Gratitude expressed to the always instructive advice of Valerie Hartman, Cengage's skilled Political Science Marketing Manager . Gratitudes expressed to Valerie Hartmann .
 She is a past vice provost for undergraduate programs, department chair, and department chair . She has served nationally as a facilitator for leadership development in higher education .
 International Studies Quarterly, Foreign Policy Analysis, International Interactions, and International Studies Perspectives, is published on international studies. International Studies quarterly, Foreign Studies Quarterly and International Relations Perspectives. International Students Quarterly. International Interaction Analysis .
 She has published articles on United States foreign policy decision making . She has a particular focus on the determinants and consequences of U.S. arms transfers and foreign aid .
 Her work has also examined the significance of human rights concerns in global political and economic interactions . Her work includes examining the significance in global politics and economic relations .
 Charles William KEGLEY is a past president of the International Studies Association . He has been serving the past two decades on the Board of Trustees of the Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs .
 He is also a recipient of the Distinguished Scholar Award of the Foreign Policy Analysis Section of the International Studies Association .
 A founding partner of Kegley International, Inc. , he has authored more than fifty scholarly books and over one hundred articles in journals . He has authored over fifty books .
 Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience . Due to the content content is not materially affected the overall experience .
 May Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not n t be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part .
 Inlet Hudson Juneau Arviat, Kuujjuaq ,Fort Nelson Happy Valley-' Goose Bay Churchill Fort McMurray Prince George ,Chisasibi Edmonton Sydney Charlottetown . Fredericton • Moncton . Monccton is the name of
 D 1 'Seattle 60“W Portland Toronto, Salt Lake' •Sacramento City 'San Jose' •Fresno Las Vegas* Los Angeles • San Diego, ,PI Tijuana 'Mexicali San Francisco' St. Virgin Beach 'Virginia Beach'
 VINCENT BARBADOS ^Managua ^_ ,,, GRENADA COSTA RICA Panama City f i^TRINIDAD & TOBAGO ^ . Peru . Lima® ^kej'iticaca ^ La Paz BOLIVIA .
 It opens a window on the many unfolding trends, some of them moving in contrary directions . Some of the trends are moving in opposite directions, some say .
 Chapter 1 looks at our perceptions of global events and realities, explains how they can lead to distorted understandings, and suggests ways to move beyond the limited scope of those views . Chapter 1 explains how distorted perceptions of events and reality can be used to understand the world .
 Chapter 2 looks at the realist, liberal, and constructivist theoretical traditions that scholars and policy makers use most often to interpret world politics . Also considers the feminist and Marxist critiques of these mainstream traditions .
 Chapter 3 further strengthens your understanding of world politics by introducing three ways of looking at international decision-making processes by transnational actors . Chapter 3 also introduces three ways to look at the international decision making process .
 Sultan bin Salman Ai-Saud remarked that “the first day or so we all pointed to our countries.” The first day of space shuttle travel, he said, “all of us pointed to each other”
 As viewed from outer space, planet Earth looks as If It has continents without borders . Planet Earth looks like If It Has continents Without borders .
 As viewed from newspaper headlines, however, world politics looks much different . World politics is much different, as seen from the headlines .
 Ukrainians commemorate the death of protesters who took part in an uprising that toppled the country's pro-Russian leader in 2014 . Ukrainians participate in a ""Dignity March"" in Kiev on Sunday .
 Hostilities between pro-Western government and pro-Russian rebels reflect global issues of sovereignty, territorial integrity, and geopolitical power . Hostilities reflect conflict over enduring global issues, such as sovereignty .
 Learning Objectives 1-1 Describe the core difficulty of investigating human phenomena such as international relations . Describe how difficult to investigate human phenomena like international relations such as human relations .
 Due Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience .
 It is the human being's capacity for struggling against being overwhelmed which is remarkable and exhilarating . I magine myself returning home from a two-week vacation on a tropical island .
 The trip gave you a well-deserved break before starting a new school term . But now you are curious about what has happened while you were away .
 Fighting and heavy casualties persist, with record numbers of people forcibly displaced and seeking refuge in neighboring countries . The fighting has killed more than 100,000 people and displaced millions .
 The civil war in Syria continues, with A1 Qaeda, the militant group Islamic State and other insurgent groups committing grave atrocities . A1 Al Qaeda, Islamic State, and other insurgents have committed atrocities in Syria .
 A historic deal was reached between Iran and other major world powers after nearly ten years of diplomacy . The deal commits Iran to curbing its nuclear program in return for sanctions relief .
 The situation in Greece is dire with the economic crisis having reached the scale of the United States Great Depression of the 1930s . Greece's economic crisis has reached the size of the U.S. Great Depression .
 Greece faces austerity measures to address rampant debt and poor public finance . Questions abound as to ramifications for Greece and the European Union should the country not recover and its economy collapse .
 Puerto Rico's $72 billion debt crisis has also come to light, to the tune of $72billion owed to creditors . Puerto Rico has been hit by a debt crisis that has left the island island of Puerto Rico in debt crisis .
 Ghina’s economic growth is slowing, and there are concerns about the slide in total trade and the Ghinese stock market . The Ghinese economy is slowing and the country's stock market is down .
 The IMF expects global economic growth to accelerate in the coming year . However many of the effects of the Great Recession are fading, IMF says .
 You hope that conditions improve before you graduate before you enter the job market . You hope to be able to find a job after graduation .
 Social media companies are debating how to maintain global platforms that embrace free expression yet prevent militant groups from using them to advance gruesome terrorist propaganda and recruit new members .
 There is also coverage of violence by drug cartels in Mexico and the escape of a drug lord from a prison .
 The United Nations announced that rich and poor countries have agreed upon new international development goals . The goals will end poverty and hunger, ensure universal access to quality education, secure gender equality and advance environmental sustainability .
 With all of the conflict and hardship in the world, it is encouraging that people can work together to improve the human condition . It is encouraging to see how people can improve the world's condition .
 A popular cruise company is looking at providing trips to the island nation of Guba . You also hear that in light of the warming of relations between the U.S. and Guba, a popular cruise line is looking to provide trips there .
 A Discovering World Politics The CSS Point world politics . The study of how global actors' activities entail the exercise of infoe to achieve and defend their goals and ideals .
 The events identified record what actually occurred during the month of July 2015 . This month's events were selected to show what actually happened in July 2015.
 Many individuals experienced fear and confusion during this period . Undoubtedly, many people experienced fear, confusion .
 International affairs matter, and events around the world powerfully affect your circumstances and future . Putting this information about unfolding events together, you cannot help but be reminded that international affairs matter .
 The ‘news’ you received is not really new, because it echoes many old stories from the past about the growing sea of turmoil sweeping the contemporary world . The “news” you received . is not . really new . It echoes many . old stories . from the
 The temptation to wish that this depressing, chaotic world would just go away is overwhelming . Nevertheless, the temptation is overwhelming, and I wish that it just goes away . I'm not sure how long it will be until the end of the day .
 If only the unstable world would stand still long enough for a sense of predictability and order to prevail_Alas, that does not appear likely . The unstable world does not seem to appear likely.
 "You cannot escape the world or control its turbulence, and you cannot single-handedly alter its character," he says . You cannot escape or control the world, he adds .
 If we are to live adaptively amid the fierce winds of global change, then we must face the challenge of discovering the dynamic properties of world politics, says David Cameron .
 All can benefit from investigating how the global system works and how changes are remaking our political and economic lives . The world events increasingly influence every person .
 To best understand the political convulsions that confront the globe’s more than 7 billion people, it is critical that we perceive our times accurately . The whole purpose of edueation is to turn mirrors into windows .
 The world in which we now live and anticipating what lies ahead for the globe’s future—and yours—presents formidable challenges . Yet interpreting the world in . which we . now live, interpreting what lies . ahead of the globe's future presents formidable challenges, authors say .
 The study of international relations requires taking into account every factor that influences human behavior . In part, it is because of the importance of understanding human behavior, the author says .
 Albert Einstein believed the task was extremely challenging . Albert Einstein said Einstein believed it was extremely difficult to solve .
 A purpose of this book is to help you question your preexisting beliefs about world affairs and about the world stage’s many actors . The book is written in response to a series of questions about the role of world affairs .
 We ask you to evaluate rival perspectives on global issues, even if they differ from your current images . To that end, please share your own images of the world .
 We expose you to prevailing schools of thought that you may find unconvincing, and possibly offensive . Indeed, we expose us to prevailing school of thought . We expose ourselves to prevailing views that may be 'unconvinincing'
 Many other people make these views the bedrock of their interpretations of the world around them, and these viewpoints accordingly enjoy a popular following . Many others make these beliefs the bedrock .
 The text describes some visions of world politics with which even your authors may not agree . For this reason, the text includes some of the wisdom or foolishness of contending perspectives . You may weigh the wisdom of some of these visions with which you may disagree .
 The interpretive challenge, then, is to observe unfolding global realities objectively, in order to describe and explain them accurately . The challenge is to be able to observe and explain the world's unfolding realities .
 We begin with a brief introduction to the role that subjective images play in understanding world politics . To appreciate how our images of reality shape our expectations, we begin here .
 This is followed by a set of analytic tools that this book uses to help you overcome perceptual obstacles to understanding world politics and to empower you to more capably interpret the forces of change and continuity .
 We all hold mental images of world politics in our subconscious . Although you may not have attempted to explicitly define your perceptions about the world in your subconscious, we all hold images .
 Many people simply assume seeing is believing . Without questioning whether they have organized their perceptions are accurate, many people assume they are seeing is seeing .
 People can vary greatly on how they view international events, actors, and issues . This principle has great importance for the investigation of international relations . This is especially true for the study of international affairs .
 To appreciate the controversies that can result when different people (with different perspectives) see different realities, even though they are looking at the same thing, consider something as basic as objectively viewing the location and size of the world’s continents . Consider something as simple as objectively .
 The accuracy of rival maps matters politically because they shape how people view what is important . In turn, the accuracy of their rival maps matter politically because of their accuracy .
 Each depicts the distribution of the Earth’s land surfaces and territory but portrays a different image . The images were taken from the Earth's land surface and territory .
 Each is a model of reality, an abstraction that highlights some features of the globe while ignoring others . Each is an abstraction of reality that highlights features of globe .
 Consider the role that politics, history, culture, and racism, among others, might play . Consider that politics and history might play a role in politics . Consider how history, history and culture might play. Consider that .
 More than three-quarters of the world's population lives in the Global South . In contrast to most geographic representations, it draws attention to the less developed countries of the global South .
 The orthographic projection, centering on the mid-Atlantic, conveys some sense of the curvature of the Earth by using rounded edges . The projection is based on the rounded edges of the globe .
 Most of us look for information that reinforces our preexisting beliefs about the world, assimilate new data into familiar images, mistakenly equate what we believe with what we know, and ignore information that contradicts our expectations . Most people, including political leaders, look for info that reinforces preex
 We rely on learned habits for viewing new information and making judgments . These “schema’s” guide our perceptions and help us organize information .
 The absentminded professor, the shady lawyer, and the kindly grandmother are examples of “stock” images that many of us have created about certain types of people . The absenceminded professor and shady lawyer is examples of "stock" images that we have created .
 When we know little about someone, our expectations will be shaped by presumed similarities to these characters . Professor, lawyers, and grandmothers that we meet may bear only a superficial resemblance to these stereotypical images .
 Many factors shape our images, including how we were socialized as children, traumatic events we experience that shape our personality and psychological needs . We are shaped by these factors, including exposure to the ideas of people whose expertise we respect, and exposure to people whose opinions we respect .
 We try to keep that image consistent with other beliefs . We reject information that contradicts that image of the world . The process is known as cognitive dissonance .
 We must be careful not to assume that what applies to individuals applies to entire countries . We should not equate the beliefs of leaders, such as heads of state, with those of people under their authority .
 Leaders have extraordinary influence, and their images of historical circumstances often predispose them to behave in particular ways toward others, regardless of ‘objective” facts . Still, leaders have extraordinary power, and they can influence their behavior, experts say .
 The loss of 26 million Soviet lives in the ‘Great Patriotic War’ reinforced a long-standing fear of foreign invasion . Soviet policy makers perceived the U.S. defensive moves with suspicion and often alarm .
 The founders of the United States viewed eighteenth-century European power politics and its repetitive wars as corrupt, contributing to two seemingly contradictory tendencies later evident in U.S. foreign policy .
 America’s impulse to isolate itself (its disposition to withdraw from world affairs) and the other is its determination to reform the world in its own image whenever global circumstances become highly threatening . The first and second reasons for the U.S. to reform itself is its desire to reform
 Each side saw its own actions as constructive but its adversary’s responses as hostile . Both sides erroneously assumed that their counterpart would clearly interpret the intentions of their own policy initiatives .
 Both sides demonize the image of their adversaries while perceiving themselves as virtuous . For example, in rivalries such as Christianity’s with Islam during the Crusades in the Middle Ages and the United States’ with AI Qaeda today, the U.S. has demonized
 The mirror images held by rivals tend to be self-confirming . Further complicating matters is the mirror image held by rival rivals .
 The tendency of states and people in competitive interaction to perceive each other similariy—to see others the same hostiie way others see them .
 France and Belgium have banned full-facial veils in public places . Spain, Italy, and Muslim-majority Turkey have some limitations on where they may be worn .
 In July 2014 the European Court of Human Rights upheld the French law banning such clothing . The court said such laws do not prevent the free exercise of religion in a place of worship, but that the face plays an imporfant role .
 Pakistani woman challenged Canadian prohibition against wearing clothing that obscures the face during citizenship ceremonies . In February 2015, a federal court ruled in favor of a nafive Pakistani woman .
 The finding supports her argument that wearing a full-facial veil is an expression of her Muslim faifh and cultural values . Touching off a firestorm of debate within that country, the finding supported her argument .
 Perceptions vary on whether such coverings are repressive or liberating . Whether legislation banning clothing is a victory for democracy or a blow for individual freedom .
 Some women say they choose to wear the concealing garments to protect their femininity and express their devotion to God . Others say they wear the garments to express their love for God .
 Some argue that such coverings enable them to move about in public anonymously, shielded from sexual pressure, and so actually allow considerable personal freedom . Others say they allow people to move around anonymously and move about anonymously .
 Others decry the practice and point to cases where women are forced to wear such garments or face violent repercussions such as disfigurement, beatings, or death . Others say the practice is barbaric and dangerous .
 In this context, the practice induces fearful obedience, denies individual choice, and silences the voices of women . In the context of this practice, it is said to be a form of oppression .
 Al Khansa, an all-female policing unif of the Islamic State, poured acid on the faces of 15 Iraqi women because they were not properly covered . The Islamic State is known for its brutality in Iraq .
 There are no sure-fire solutions to ensure accurate observations of international relations . No ways to guarantee that we have constructed an impartial view of the world .
 A number of tools can improve our ability to interpret world politics . However, there are a number of ways to improve our understanding of world politics, such as the Internet .
 As you undertake an intellectual journey of discovery, a set of intellectual roadmaps provides guidance for your interpretation and understanding of past, present, and future world politics . The roadmaps provide guidance for you to interpret and understand the world politics.
 A primary goal of this text is to introduce you to the vocabulary used by scholars, policy makers, and the “attentive public” who routinely observe international affairs . The belief that one’s own view of reality is the only reality is a dangerous delusion .
 You need to be literate and informed about the shared meaning of common words used worldwide to discuss and debate world politics and foreign policy . Use these words to help people understand and understand the meaning of world politics .
 These words are the kind of vocabulary you are likely to encounter long after your formal collegiate education has ended . These words will be used long after you graduate from college .
 You need to know their meaning to engage in effective analysis and well-informed debate with other scholars, practitioners, and attentive observers of global politics .
 State sovereignty is supreme authority to manage internal affairs and foreign relations . A state’s supreme authority is its supreme authority in managing internal affairs . State sovereignty means state has supreme authority over internal affairs, foreign relations.
 An independent legal entity with a government exercising exclusive control over the territory and population it governs . A collectivity whose people see themselves as members of the same group because they share the same ethnicity, culture, or language . State is independent legal .
 Certain words are printed in boldface italics in the text . A broad definition is provided in the margin of the margin .
 When a word is used again in a different chapter, it will be highlighted at least once in italics, although the marginal definition will not be repeated .
 The primary definition will appear in the Glossary at the end of book with a notation of the chapter in which it was first introduced . In all cases, the primary definition appears in all cases .
 The world is a stage, and in the drama there are many players . Distinguishing the Primary Transnational Actors is a key distinction .
 It is important to identify and classify the major categories of actors who take part in international engagements . It is also important to classify and categorise the major groups of actors .
 The actions of each transnational actor —individually, collectively, and with various degrees of influence —shape the trends that are transforming world politics, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The essential building-block units, of course, are individual people—over 7 billion of us, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Every day, whether each of us chooses to litter, light a cigarette, or parent a child, we affect some small measure of how trends in the world will unfold, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 All these groups combine people and their choices in various collectivities and thereby aggregate power of each group . All of these groups are groups that combine people, their choices and their collectivities .
 Such groups often compete with one another because they often have divergent interests and goals . Groups often compete because of diverging interests, goals . Such groups compete with each other .
 For most periods of world history, the prime actors were groupings of religions, tribes whose members shared ethnic origins, and empires . empires or expansionist centers of power .
 When they came into contact, they sometimes collaborated with each other for mutual benefit; more often they competed for and fought over valued resources . When they were together, they often collaborated but also fought over resources .
 The more than 8000 years of recorded international relations history between and among these groups provided the precedent for the formation of todays system of interactions .
 A state is a legal entity that enjoys a permanent population, a well-defined territory, and a government capable of exercising sovereignty . State is legal entity with permanent population and well-defined territory .
 The history of world politics since 1648 has largely been a chronicle of interactions among states, which remain the dominant political organizations in the world . The world's dominant political organization remains dominant states .
 The supremacy of the state has been severely challenged in recent years by nonstate actors . However, the supremacy is severely challenged by non-state actors in recent times .
 Global affairs is influenced by intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations . Increasingly, global affairs are influenced by international organizations, says CNN.com .
 Intergovernmental organizations, which transcend national boundaries and whose members are states, carry out independent foreign policies . They are considered global actors in their own right and therefore can be considered global organizations . Intergovernmental Organizations .
 IGOs include global organizations such as the United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . They derive their authority from the will of their membership . They were created by states to solve shared problems .
 IGOs are characterized by permanence and institutional organization, and they vary widely from size and purpose . IGO's size, purpose and size vary widely in size .
 Nongovernmental organizations, whose members are private individuals and groups, are another principal type of nonstate actor . Private individuals, groups and private individuals are also important nonstate actors .
 NGOs are diverse in scope and purpose and seek to push their own agendas . NGOs seek to exert global influence on an array of issues, such as environmental protection, disarmament, and human rights . NGOs push agendas and exert influence on a range of issues such as disarmament .
 Amnesty International, the World Wildlife Federation, and Doctors Without Borders are all NGOs that work to bring about change in the world and influence international decision making . Amnesty International is one of the world's most influential NGOs .
 Many NGOs are seen in a positive light, others, such as terrorist groups and international drug cartels, are seen as ominous nonstate actors . Terrorist groups and drug cartels are also seen as menacing nonstate groups .
 In thinking about world politics and its future, we will probe all of these ‘units’ or categories of actors . We will probe the "units” or “categories of actors” in our new book .
 All actors (individuals, states, and nonstate organizations) are simultaneously active today, and their importance and power depend on the trend or issue under consideration . But you should keep in mind that all actors are active today .
 Doing this will help you think like an international relations scholar . Do you know how to think like a foreign policy scholar? Share your thoughts with CNN iReport.com .
 FOREIGN POLICY OECISIONS and INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS are among the factors we are trying to explain . The factors we try to explain are the factors that shape the phenomenon we are seeing .
 Most events and developments in world politics are influenced simultaneously by many determinants, each connected to the rest in a complex web of causal linkages . Most of the world's world politics is influenced by many factors, such as climate change and environmental factors .
 World Politics provides an analytic set of categories to help make interpretive sense of the multiple causes that explain why international events and circumstances occur . World Politics is written in the form of World Politics, a set of analytic categories .
 International events or developments can best be analyzed and understood by separating the multiple pieces of the puzzle into different categories or levels . This analytic distinction conforms to a widespread scholarly consensus that international events or . developments can . best be understood by first separating the . multiple pieces, or levels, into
 To predict which forces will dominate the future, we also must recognize that many influences are operating at the same time . We must also be aware that many factors are operating in the same way at all times .
 If interacting forces converge. that affect states' foreign policies and the decisions of all other global actors can be categorized at three basic levels. The interaction of interacting forces can be described as 'interactential forces'
 At the global level are structural features of the international system such as the prevalence of civil wars and the extent of trade interdependence . At the . global level, these structural features include the prevalence . of civil war and the . extent of the global . system are structural factors such as
 At individual level are the characteristics of leaders— their personal beliefs, values, and personality . At the individual level, leaders' personal beliefs and values are their personal characteristics .
 All three levels affect decisions, but their relative weight depends on the issues and circumstances at the time of decision . Their combined effects can accelerate the pace of change in world politics, moving it in directions otherwise not possible .
 The individual level of analysis refers to the personal characteristics of human beings, including those responsible for making important decisions on behalf of state and nonstate actors, as well as ordinary citizens .
 At this level, for example, we may properly locate the impact of individuals’ perceptions on their political attitudes, beliefs, and behavior . We may also find the impact on people’s perceptions on political attitudes and beliefs .
 Protectionist trade policies by an importing country increase the costs to consumers of clothing and cars . They reduce the standard of living of citizens in the manufacturing states .
 Distinguishing Change, Continuities, and Cycles is useful to place them in a chronological sequence .
 To explain why something happened in world politics, we must determine how various factors at the individual, state, and global system levels fit together in a configuration that unfolds over time . Similarly, to explain why an event took place in the world, we need to determine how it happened .
 To understand the dramatic changes in world politics today and to predict how they will shape the future, it is important to view them in the context of a long-term perspective . Transnational patterns of interaction have changed and how some of their fundamental characteristics have resisted change .
 The countries of the world are drawing closer levels of analysis . The different aspects of and agents in international affairs that may be stressed in interpreting and explaining giobai phenomena are different .
 To predict which forces will dominate the future, we must recognize that no trend stands alone . Different trends may produce stability by limiting the impact of any one disruptive force, experts say .
 It appears that world politics is now going through a transition period . World politics appears to be in the midst of a difficult period of transition period.
 World Wars I and II and the Cold War caused fundamental breaks with the past and set in motion major transformations, providing countries with incentives to rethink their interests, purposes, and priorities .
 It is equally important to look for the possibility of continuity amidst apparent transformation . Yet it is also important to think for continuity amid apparent transformation.
 Decades-old flash points also persist, including the conflicts between India and Pakistan, North Korea and the United States . Israel and militants in southern Lebanon and the Palestinian territories .
 Headlines are not trend lines, and a trend does not necessarily signal transformation . Headlines do not necessarily mean transformation, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 It is dangerous to assume that a major transformation in world politics is under way, writes Andrew Hammond . Given the enduring continuities that persist even alongside rapid changes, it is not to assume a major change is underway .
 Stanley Hoffmann argues that we can identify a new global system when we have a new answer to one of the following three questions . Hoffmann: We need to identify a global system in order to find out what is the answer to each of the three key questions .
 States remain a fixture of the international system . Supranational institutions and nongovernmental actors are prominent in the system .
 The World Trade Organization has been adjudicating trade disputes since 1995 . It wields substantial influence over the policies of many individual states .
 The United Nations has peacekeepers engaged in sixteen ongoing operations as of July 2015 . Peacekeepers are engaged in 16 ongoing operations in the United Nations .
 Transnational terrorist movements commit widespread human rights atrocities, such as the Islamic extremist group Boko Haram . Boko Haram is a terrorist group committed by the Islamic extremists in northern Nigeria .
 The International Criminal Court has successfully prosecuted political leaders for human rights violations . It is the first permanent treaty-based global court . At the same time, in its role as the . first . treaty based global court, the International Criminal . Court has prosecuted political . leaders for . human rights
 territorial conquest is no longer states’ predominant foreign policy goal . territorial conquests no longer state’s primary foreign policy goals . territorial conquest no longer a primary goal for states in the world .
 Many key issues on the global agenda, including environmental, health, and financial crises, are transnational threats that require a collective response from countries and other global actors . Rather than a global crisis, many key issues need to be transnational issues, such as environmental and health crises .
 The G-20 is a grouping of the world’s twenty largest economies . It is called for international dialogue and common efforts to promote financial stability .
 Epidemics such as Ebola underscore need for timely and well-coordinated international responses to major threats to global health on the part of international organizations, nongovernmental organizations, and states . Epidemics like Ebola underscore the need to be well coordinated international responses, such as response to major
 The proliferation of weapons technology has profoundly altered the damage enemies can inflict on one another . Weapons technology has changed the damage it can inflict, experts say .
 Some view the world through a macro political lens, meaning they look at international affairs from a “bird’s eye view” and explain the behavior of world actors based on their relative position within the global system . Others see the world's behavior based on the relative position of
 World Politics will inspect the values, interests, and capabilities of the individual actors affected by these global trends . This includes the ways these actors interact in their individual and collective efforts to modify existing global circumstances and how these interactions shape the ultimate trajectories of global trends; and the major macro trends
 This analytic approach looks at the dynamic interplay of actors and their environment as well as how the actors respond and seek to influence each other’s behavior .
 This approach has the advantage of taking into account the interplay of proximate and remote explanatory factors at the individual, state, and global levels of analysis . It avoids dwelling on particular countries, individuals, or transitory events whose long-term significance is likely to decrease .
 The terrorist attack on the World Trade Center's Twin Towers on 9/11 is widely regarded as a revolutionary date in world history, producing a sea of change in world politics . The attack on September 11, 2001, is regarded as the most significant date in history .
 Time will tell whether this event will rank alongside the birth of the nuclear age on August 6, 1945, when the United States bombed Hiroshima, or the November 1989 dismantling of the Berlin Wall, which signaled the end of the Cold War .
 A rising China may pose a new challenge that will displace 9/11 as a transformative phenomenon in world politics . Alternatively, a rising China could pose a challenge to displace World War II as a major global event .
 Take full advantage of all of your opportunities to study and learn about the global community . Visit the University of Cambridge, Massachusetts, to learn more about the world .
 MindTap is a fully online, highly personalized learning experience built upon Cengage Learning content . MindTap was created by MindTap, a fully-customer-friendly learning tool .
 MindTap combines student learning tools into a singular Learning Path that guides students through the course . MindTap is a tool that combines reading, multimedia, activities, assessments and assessments .
 Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos . Kupchan, Charles. Charles. "Kupchan" is a member of the Carnegie Council . The Carnegie Council videos are part of a series of videos from the Carnegie Institute for Human Rights .
 As you begin your study of trend and transformation in world politics, your challenge is to interpret theoretically the meaning of a changing world . Your challenge is: interpret theoretically, theoretically, to understand the meaning in a new world .
 Learning Objectives 2-1 Identify how theories are defined, and articulate why they are important in world politics . Identify what theories are important to world politics, and why they're important to the world .
 You face the task of both defining the aspects of international affairs most worthy of attention and explaining the reasons for their priority . You also have to explain the reasons behind their priority, and why .
 You must be careful because your interpretations will necessarily depend on your assumptions about international realities that your citizens might find questionable . You must also be careful .
 The effort to explain the world, predict new global problems is bound to result in controversy . Even reasonable people often see reality differently, writes David Frum .
 When leaders face these kinds of intellectual challenges, they can benefit from drawing on various theories of world politics . Leaders should draw on theories of the world politics, says Julian Zelizer .
 A theory is a set of conclusions derived from assumptions and evidence about some phenomenon, including its character, causes, consequences, and ethical implications . Theory is derived from conclusions based on assumptions, evidence and assumptions .
 Theories of international relations specify the conditions under which relationships between two or more factors exist, and explain the reasons for such linkages . International relations are the result of a theory that explains why such links exist .
 Each theory rests on different assumptions about the nature of international politics, advances different claims about causes, and offers a different set of foreign policy recommendations . Choosing which theory to use is an important task .
 No single theory has proven capable of making international events understandable for every global circumstance . The reason is primarily that the world is constantly changing, and no single theory is proven to make it easier to understand .
 In any given era, a paradigm, or dominant way of looking at a particular subject such as international relations, influences judgments regarding which characteristics of www.thecsspoint.com or ngage Learning.net ngage learning.net .
 Over time, paradigms are modified or abandoned as their assertions fail to mirror the prevailing patterns of international behavior . Over time they are modified, they are often abandoned as they fail to reflect the prevailing pattern of international behaviour .
 These paradigms, or “a set of assumptions, concepts, values, and practices that comprise a view of reality” (Harrison, 2006, 17), tend to be revised in order to explain new developments .
 Theories are not merely passive agents for explaining historical events, they are theories . Yet theories can be used to explain historical events such as the Holocaust .
 theoretical perspectives can play a key role in influencing policy choices . As they inform the worldviews of policy leaders, they can influence policy decisions . Theoretical perspectives can be key to influencing policy decisions, experts say .
 Helps policy makers assess issues they face by facilitating their ability to discern patterns and focus on important causal factors . Helps them assess issues by helping them discern patterns of problems .
 Provides framework for conceptualizing strategies and policy responses . Provides a framework to conceptualize strategies and responses to crises .
 Facilitates critical assessment so that policy makers reach accurate conclusions about the successes and failures of a policy . Facilitation of critical assessment is critical to policy makers' success and success .
 Realist theory drove U.S. President Nixon’s decision to establish diplomatic relations with China in 1971 . The insights of realist theory, particularly the importance of balance of power, drove Nixon's decision to start diplomatic relations .
 Nixon overlooked his profound ideological differences with China’s government . Nixon sought to establish relations based on common strategic interests, particularly, countering the power of the Soviet Union .
 The neoconservative approach to foreign policy was pivotal in the U.S. decision to go to war against Iraq in 2003 . More recently, liberal ideas about the spread of democracy, combined with a realist emphasis on military power and disdain for international institutions, shaped the neoconservatives approach to
 As British economist John Maynard Keynes famously argued, “The ideas of economists and political philosophers are more powerful than is commonly understood,” he said . “Both when they are right and when they're wrong, they are wrong,’ he wrote .
 The relationship between theory and historical events is interactive . Theories both influence, and are influenced by, events and behaviors in world politics .
 The chapter broadens coverage of the range of contemporary international theorizing . The chapter also introduces you to feminist and Marxist critiques of world politics .
 Critical reflection on practice is a requirement of the relationship between theory and practice . Critical reflection is required for a relationship between the relationship and practice. Critical reflection must also be critical of practice .
 neoconservative is a political movement in the United States calling for the use of military and economic power in foreign policy to bring freedom and democracy to other countries . Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent content is required .
 Realism is the oldest of the prevailing schools of thought and has a long and distinguished history dating back to Thucydides’s writings about the Peloponnesian War in ancient Greece . Realism was the oldest school of thought in the world .
 Other influential figures who contributed to realist thought include Niccolo Machiavelli and Thomas Hobbes . The realist thinker was born in Italy in 17th century .
 Realism deserves careful examination because its worldview continues to guide much understanding of international politics . Realism requires careful examination of the view of the U.S. in the world .
 Realism views the state as the most important actor on the world stage because it answers to no higher political authority . Realism, as applied to contemporary international politics, views state as an important actor in the world .
 States are sovereign; they have supreme power over their territory and populace . No other actor stands above them to wield legitimacy and coercive capability and govern the global system . States must wield legitimacy, coercive capability, and govern their sovereignty, says the author .
 Realists depict world politics as a ceaseless, repetitive struggle for power where the strong dominate the weak . Emphasizes the absence of a higher authority to which states can turn for protection and resolve disputes .
 realism claims that prudent political leaders build strong armies and allies to enhance national security . Each state is ultimately responsible for its own survival and feels uncertain about its neighbors’ intentions .
 International anarchy leads even well-intentioned leaders to practice self-help, increase their own military strength, and opportunistically align with others to deter potential enemies .
 Realist theory does not preclude the possibility that rival powers will cooperate on arms control or on other security issues of common interest . Theoretic theory, however, does not exclude the possibility of arms control cooperation .
 It simply asserts cooperation will be rare because states worry about the unequal distribution of relative gains and the possibility that the other side will cheat on agreements . Instead, it says cooperation is rare because it's not shared in equal gains or benefits .
 Embedded in this ‘philosophy of necessity’ is a distinction between private morality and raison d’etat . Private morality guides the behavior of ordinary people in their daily lives . Raison d'etat governs the conduct of leaders responsible for the security and
 Actions that are dictated by national interest must be carried out no matter how repugnant in the light of private morality . Actions must be taken regardless of the morality of the nation, says the author .
 The Evolution of Realism: The intellectual roots of realism reach back to ancient Greece . The evolution of realism has been traced back to Ancient Greece . We have seen how realism has evolved in the past .
 Discussions of ‘power politics’ abound in the Arthashastra, an Indian treatise on statecraft written during the fourth century BCE by Kautilya .
 This formed the foundation of what became a growing body of modern realist thinking . The drive for power over others as necessary and wise statecraft is necessary, says the realist .
 The onset of rivalry between the U.S. and the Soviet Union and the expansion of the Cold War into a wider struggle between East and West . The realists’ emphasis on the inevitability of conflict, the poor prospects for cooperation, and the divergence of national interests among .
 Neorealism (often called “structural realism’s) understands human identity, motivation, and behavior as being driven by the environment in which actors are situated . Neorealists understand human identity and motivation as driving by environment .
 Different variants of realism emphasize certain features in realist thought . Realism is a form of realism that emphasizes certain features of realism .
 The two perspectives differ with regard to the underlying motivation for state behavior and conflict . Although both are structural realist theories, the two theories differ on how state behavior develops .
 The Limitations of Realist Thought is published in The New York Review of International Affairs . Realists' policy recommendations suffered from a lack of precision in the way they used key terms such as power and national interest .
 A variant of realist theory stresses that, in an anarchical international system, states should always look for opportunities to gain more power . defensive realism is a variant that emphasizes the preservation of power as opposed to expansion of power .
 Even the policy recommendations that purportedly flowed from its logic were often conflicting . Even the policies that supposedly flowed from the logic were conflicting .
 The cooperative pursuit of mutual advantage led Europeans away from unbridled power politics that had brought them incessant warfare since the birth of the nation-state some three centuries earlier .
 Others worry realism’s tendency to disregard ethical principles and the material and social costs some of its policy prescriptions imposed . Others worry about hindered economic growth resulting from unrestrained military expenditures .
 The statement comes amid speculation about the possibility of a unilateral Israeli military strike in response to Iran’s pursuit of a nuclear program .
 Liberalism warrants our attention because it speaks to issues realism disregards, including the impact of domestic politics on state behavior, and the implications of economic interdependence . The role of global norms and institutions in promoting international cooperation should be considered .
 There are several distinct schools of thought within the liberal tradition . Drawing broad conclusions from such a diverse body of theory runs the risk of misrepresenting the position of any single author, says John Sutter .
 Politics at the global level becomes more of a struggle for consensus and mutual gain than a struggle to power and prestige . Politics at global level, then, becomes more a struggle of consensus than for power .
 liberals argue that the conditions of peace should be reformed . Reforming those conditions, liberals argue, will enhance the prospects for peace .
 Liberalism is an emphasis on undertaking political reforms to establish stable democracies . Another element common to various strands of liberal thought is the need for political reforms . The liberal view is that political reforms must be followed by democratic reforms .
 A second command strand in liberal theorizing is an emphasis on free trade . A free trade is a key part of liberal theory . The U.S. should be open to free trade, the author says .
 The idea that commerce can reduce conflict has roots in the work of Immanuel Kant, Charles de Secondat Montesquieu, Adam Smith, and various Enlightenment thinkers .
 The third commonality in liberalism is the advocacy of global institutions . The idea is that global institutions should be protected from dictatorships and dictatorships .
 Fiberals recommend replacing cutthroat, balance-of-power politics with organizations based on the principle that a threat to peace anywhere is a common threat to everyone . Fiberals propose replacing balance of power politics with organization based on principle that peace is peace .
 They see foreign policy as unfolding in a nascent global society populated by actors who recognize the cost of conflict, share significant interests . They say institutions are used to mediate disputes whenever misconceptions, wounded sensibilities, or aroused national passions threaten peaceful relations .
 Realists counter that “neither globalization nor international institutions impose genuine constraints on great powers” Realists say states have sufficient power to interpret sovereignty and participate in global institutions only to the extent that it suits their own national interest .
 In the wake of World War I, contemporary liberal theory rose to prominence . The Evolution of Liberalism is a look at the evolution of modern liberal theory .
 World War II involved more participants over a wider geographic area than any previous war . Modern science and technology made it a war of machinery .
 Old weapons were improved and produced in greater quantities . New and far more deadly weapons were rapidly developed and deployed . New weapons were produced and deployed rapidly .
 liberals set out to reform the global system . They believe that another horrific war would erupt if states resumed practicing power politics .
 International regime Embodies the norms, principles, rules, and institutions around which global expectations unite regarding a specific international problem . neoliberalism The “new"" liberal theoretical perspective accounts for the way international institutions promote global change, cooperation, peace, and prosperity through collective programs for reforms .
 A third group of liberal thinkers followed the biblical ideal that states should beat their swords into plowshares and sought disarmament as a means of avoiding war . The biblical ideal was that state should beat its swords into swords to avoid war .
 Washington Naval Conference tried to curtail maritime competition among the U.S., Great Britain, Japan, France, Italy, and Italy by placing limits on battleships .
 States were becoming increasingly interdependent; that is, they were mutually dependent on, sensitive about, and vulnerable to one another in ways that were not captured by realist theory . States were being mutually dependent and sensitive about each other in ways not captured as realist .
 When a body of norms fosters shared expectations that guide a regularized pattern of cooperation on a specific issue, we call it an international regime . We call it 'an international regime' when it's shared expectations .
 Various regimes have been devised to govern behavior in trade and monetary affairs, as well as to manage access to common resources such as fisheries and river water . Various types of regimes were devised to manage behavior of trade and financial affairs .
 neoliberalism focuses on the ways in which influences such as democratic governance, liberal commercial enterprise, international law and organization, collective security, and ethically inspired statecraft can improve life on our planet .
 neoliberal theorists maintain that the ideas and ideals of the liberal legacy could describe, explain, predict, and prescribe international conduct in ways that they could not during the conflict-ridden Cold War . Neoliberal theorists perceive change in global conditions as progressing over time .
 The expansion of trade, communication, information, technology, and migrant labor led Europeans to sacrifice portions of their sovereign independence to create a new political and economic union out of previously separate units . Europeans sacrificed their sovereignty to create an economic and political union .
 These developments were outside of realism’s worldview, creating conditions that made the call for a theory grounded in the liberal tradition more convincing . These developments created conditions for the theory to be grounded in liberal tradition .
 The Eeague of Nations and the PCIJ say institutions today exert minimal influence on state behavior . They charge that just like the Eeagues and the . PCIJ, they say, institutions . today exert little influence .
 International organizations cannot stop states from behaving according to balance-of-power logic . States are calculating how each strategic move affects their relative position in a world of relentless competition . International organizations are powerless to stop states behaving in balance of power logic .
 Most studies supportive of international institutions appear in commercial, financial, and environmental affairs, not in the arena of national defense . Critics of liberalism contend that most studies support international institutions in commercial and financial affairs not in defense .
 National survival hinges on the effective management of security issues, realists insist . Realists insist that the country's survival depends on effective security management .
 Power-lusting states are unlikely to always see their vital interests in this light . Global institutions cannot provide timely, muscular responses to aggression, he says .
 A final complaint lodged against liberalism is an alleged tendency to turn foreign policy into a moral crusade . The complaint is that foreign policy should not be turned into a 'moral crusade'
 Nonintervention into the internal affairs of other states has long been a cardinal principle of international law . Human rights are an international entitlement and governments that violate them forfeit the protection of law, says the UN .
 The international community has a responsibility to protect vulnerable populations and to use armed force to stop flagrant violations of human rights, says Amnesty International .
 President Obama declared that the U.S. had a moral obligation to respond to the violence perpetuated by Muammar al-Qaddafi’s troops in Libya in March 2011 .
 On one hand, they deny the universal applicability of any single moral standard in a culturally pluralist world . On the other hand, the moral standards are not universal in the modern world, they are not .
 Constructivism merits careful consideration because awareness of how our understandings of the world are individually and socially constructed, enables us to see international relations in a new light . Constructivism has roots in the Frankfurt School of critical social theory .
 A complete understanding of international relations requires knowledge of the social context underlying these relations . The identities of the actors, their norms of behavior, behavior, and their social interactions within the international system are important .
 As discussed in the previous chapter, our images and understandings of the world define and shape reality . Our images, understandings, shape reality, are important to our understanding of reality .
 Constructivists view ideas, norms, and individual speech acts as shaping the global structure . They stress the intersubjective quality of images—how prevailing attitudes shape perception . constructivists do not limit their analysis to the individual level .
 For constructivists, this underscores the potential for agency as actors can reflect on their environment and seek change . Constructivists say they can reflect their environment in order to seek change in the future .
 Ideas define identities, which impart meaning to material capabilities and behavior . Ideas define identity, which is defined by how they are perceived by others .
 In the years following the Cold War, new norms about sovereignty emerged, particularly with regard to the acceptability of intervention in cases of gross human rights violations . New norms have emerged, especially in the case of human rights abuses in Russia .
 Constructivism recognizes the evolution of shared ideas as underpinning the growing legitimacy of the responsibility to protect concept, even though in practice it entails a violation of Westphalian sovereignty . Constructivism, like liberalism, recognizes the legitimacy of a shared idea underpinning its legitimacy, but it also entails
 The meaning of a concept such as ‘anarchy’ depends on underlying shared knowledge . Similarly, the meaning of anarchy depends on a shared knowledge, such as knowledge of the concept .
 Anarchy among allies, for instance, holds a different meaning than anarchy among bitter rivals . Anarchy is anarchy among allies not anarchy among rivals, but anarchy among enemies .
 The nature of an anarchic international system, therefore, is not a given, says the author of the book . "The nature of the anarchy system is not given," the author says .
 Social structure underlying relationships is malleable, says author . Ideas and interests of actors may change as the nature of their interactions, and the way they understand the other actors, changes .
 Constructivism 4 paradigm is based on the premise that world politics is a function of the ways that states construct and then accept images of reality and later respond to the meanings given to power politics . As consensual definitions change, it is possible for either conflictual or cooperative practices to evolve .
 A prominent example of this is the European Union, which is made up of many states that fought against each other in both World War I and World War II . Many states have been able to develop a common identity, or “we-feeling,” in the latter half
 Key concepts of international relations, such as war and slavery, may likewise change over time as the normative consensus surrounding them evolves . The institutions of war, slavery, and slavery are examples of how international relations evolve .
 Constructivism sees the fundamental structures of world politics as social rather than material . Constructivism is a form of constructivism that sees the world's fundamental structures as social . It is opposed to realism and liberalism, which emphasize how objective factors such as military power and wealth affect international relations .
 Constructivism rejects rationalism and asserts that social structures shape behavior, as well as an actor’s identity and interests . Rejects realism and liberalism, with realism focusing on power, and liberalism on peace and prosperity .
 realism and liberalism “portray a world occupied by undifferentiated rational actors (i.e., selfinterested states), whose relations are structured by the balance of material power . In other words, realism and liberal realism ‘portray’s world as a world of und
 Realism and liberalism take interests and identities as given, whereas constructivism does not . Constructivism is the central concern for constructivism . Realism, liberalism and constructivism are realist and liberal .
 The Evolution of Constructivist Thought . The unraveling of the Warsaw Pact, the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the rise of religious fundamentalism, and the growth of micro-nationalism through the 1990s stimulated scholarly interest in constructivism .
 Constructivists attributed this to the material and individualist orientation of realism and liberalism . Constructivistists argued that an explanation addressing the role of changing ideas and identities provided superior explanations for this systemic change . Constructivism argued that this explanation was superior to that of an explanation for this change .
 Constructivist constructivism is a constructivist theory . Constructivist is a theory of constructivism . Constructivism is an idea of realism, liberalism, realism and liberalism .
 There is concern that social constructivism overemphasizes the role of social structures at the expense of purposeful agents, such as state’s or organizations’ political leaders .
 A second strand of constructivism, agent-oriented constructivist, addresses this weakness with its emphasis on individual influences on identities . Agent-orientated constructivism is a form of constructivist that focuses on individuals .
 According to agent-oriented constructivism, independent actors in world politics may differ in their internal ideas or identities . Independent actors may differ from their internal identities, according to constructivism .
 An actor can hold both domestic and international identities, which are shaped by respective dialogue at home and within the international community . An actor's identity can be shaped by dialogue between home and international communities, says CNN.com .
 Social constructivists attribute the development of these identities to repeated social practices . Agent-oriented constructivist suggests identities need not be universally shared and allow for individual or autonomous identity within the collectivity .
 Individual actors with the capacity for independent and critical thinking, making it easier for new ideas to construct and change the international system, experts say . They credit the development of ideas in part to individual actors .
 Mikhail Gorbachev’s ‘new thinking’ posed to traditional Russian ideas about national security . Agent-oriented constructivists point to the challenge that Gorbachachev's new thinking posed to Russia's security .
 Gorbachev shifted from belief in irreconcilable conflict between capitalism and communism to possibility of a foreign policy rooted in moral and ethical principles . New thinking reflected in greater emphasis on political influence, diplomatic relations, and economic cooperation rather than intimidation and posturing through military power .
 Social constructivism is a variant of constructivism that emphasizes the role of social discourse in the development of Ideas and identities . agent-oriented constructivism sees ideas and identities as influenced In part by independent actors .
 Structural realism anticipates that some countries are better able than others to ward off zombies . Due to an uneven distribution of capabilities, some countries will be better able to protect themselves from zombies .
 Balanceof-power politics could ensue, with human states aligning with other human states to counter the global spread of zombieism . Balance of power politics would ensue with other nations aligning to counter zombieism.
 Liberal institutionalism sees a zombie outbreak as a problem that transcends national borders and threatens the global community writ large . As a strand ot liberalism, liberal institutionalism is a strand of liberalism . The zombie outbreak is a problem of global community, not national borders .
 Daring states seek to cooperate with one another and coordinate efforts to contain and squash the zombie threat . Therefore, prudent states should cooperate with each other and coordinate .
 Both global and regional regimes and institutions could serve as important means for facilitating communication and directing the human response . Both governments and international bodies could be important means of facilitating communication, directing the response .
 Social constructivism envisions a number of different scenarios . With its emphasis on the development of norms and ideas, social constructivism is social constructivist . Social constructivist envisions future scenarios .
 Relations between humans and zombies might best be reflected by the Hobbesian “kill or be killed” norm . On one hand, relations between humans, zombies might be best reflected by Hobbes’s ‘kill or kill’ norm .
 A third strand of constructivism has more recently emerged that emphasizes sentimental or affective sources of intersubjective instability . Some see what some see as insufficient attention by earlier constructivist efforts to the role of psychology and emotion in shaping ideas and practices used by individual actors to promote change .
 Constructivism supplements rather than supplants realism and liberalism, says Julian Zelizer . Constructivism is a form of constructivism, says Zelizer, but it is not a substitute for realism .
 Realists criticize constructivism for its emphasis on norms and values . They suggest that norms are simply manifestations of state or individual interests . Realists suggest norms are merely manifestations of interests and can be superficially adopted for strategic reasons .
 Constructivism seeks to explain change . Critics say constructivists remain unclear about what factors cause particular ideas to become dominant while others fall by the wayside .
 Gonstructivists, he says, have excessive faith in the ability of ideas that seem self-evident today to replicate and sustain themselves . Future generations who live under different circumstances and who may think differently could easily reject these ideas, he adds .
 Critical theorists saw all phenomena as being embedded within a specific sociohistorical context ascribing normative meaning to information . Realist and liberal paradigms could lead to greater understanding of change in the international system .
 Constructivist approach is increasingly viewed as a vital perspective for understanding world politics . It is still criticized for its limited attention to methodological issues . Constructivist approaches are increasingly seen as vital perspectives for understanding politics .
 Such a pluralistic methodology would help us consider both the material and ideational factors that shape world politics . In other words, such a pluralist methodology would be helpful to consider both material and ideological factors .
 Of the many different challengers, two of the most significant are feminism and Marxism . Marxism and feminism are the two most significant challengers to feminism .
 Feminist theory sought to demonstrate how gendered perspectives pervade world politics . In particular, feminist theory was concerned with the gender bias inherent in both mainstream theory and the practice of international affairs .
 The feminist critique emphasizes the role of identity in the construction of knowledge, but focuses specifically on gender identity . It contends that the study of international relations draws heavily on male experiences to explain international affairs .
 Feminism challenges the heavy reliance on such assumptions and posits that characteristics dismissed due to their ‘feminine’ quality play an important role in international affairs as well as international affairs .
 Feminism notes that the basic assumptions of the mainstream theoretical literature, as well as the practice of foreign policy, are heavily colored by a masculine tradition of thought .
 Soldiering is a role into which boys are socialized in school and on the playing fields . Soldiering has been a role in which boys socialize with each other . Soldiersing is an important part of the socialization of boys in the community .
 A soldier must be a protector; he must show courage, strength, and responsibility . Repress feelings of fear, vulnerability, and compassion, he must repress feelings, he says .
 Ffistorically, the role of women has been marginalized in most societies . The role of female leaders has been a major problem for women in the past .
 To understand how unequal gender relations have excluded women from foreign policy, it is critical to purposively examine the female experience . To understand the impact of gender relations on foreign policy and politics, it's critical to look at women's experiences .
 Traditional international relations theory—particularly neorealism—has influenced the study of world politics . Neorealism attempts to explain behavior of states in the international system by universal, objective laws .
 Spike Petersen, a prominent feminist theorist, notes that there was an explicit masculine bias in the scientific revolution of the seventeenth century . Science/reasoning attributed as a “male” trait and emotion/intuition as a "female” one, Petersen says .
 Some critics of feminism are skeptical of the historical and interpretative approach to investigating research questions . Some critics are skeptical about the historical, interpretive approach of investigating research .
 There is a greater need for feminist scholars to develop scientifically testable hypotheses . This would make it easier to assess competing claims and increase the validity of feminist research . They argue that there is a need for more research into feminist theories .
 Women held hands and created a 14-mile chain around the airbase with their bodies . They saw peace as a feminist issue and asserted their power .
 Not only did they see nuclear weapons as a direct threat to themselves and their children, they protested that trillions were being spent on weapons of mass destruction while so many around the world suffered from a lack of food and water, inadequate health care and underfunded schools .
 Not all women are the same or share similar life experiences, and important differences may exist that are conditioned by factors such as social class, race, and culture .
 All feminists stress the importance of gender in studying international relations and are interested in gender emancipation . There are numerous theoretical perspectives within feminism .
 Liberal feminism is a prominent category of feminist theory and draws on liberalism’s emphasis on liberty and equality . Liberal feminism draws on the emphasis of liberty, equality .
 Liberal feminists object to the marginalization and exclusion of women in international affairs . Women are marginalized and excluded from international affairs, they say .
 Women argue that women are just as skilled and competent as men . They argue that they should have an equal opportunity to participate in world politics .
 Exclusion of women in leadership positions squanders talent and squanders potential, says author . Exclusion means state and organizational capabilities fall short of their full potential, she says .
 Liberal feminists call for the removal of legal and societal barriers that prevent women from full participation . Liberal feminists see the state and the international community as a possible ally for overcoming the oppression of women .
 Liberal feminism is a category of feminist theory that sees men and women as equai in skiiis and capabiiities, and promotes the equai participation of women under existing political, legal, and social institutions and practices . Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content
 Standpoint feminism argues that real differences exist between men and women . Standpoint feminists argue that real difference exists between men, women .
 The lives and roles of women in most societies across the world are very different from those of men, and therefore women have a unique perspective . Whether biological or cultural in origin, women's roles in society are different from men .
 Women are thought to have a greater aptitude in nurturing and social interactions . They may also have greater skill in community building and conflict resolution . For instance, women may also be better at community building .
 This strand of feminism urges us to examine events from the personal perspectives of the countless women who have been involved in international affairs as caregivers, grassroots activists, or participants in the informal labor force . The women's perspective on events in the world should be examined from personal perspectives .
 Women's experiences paint a very different picture of global relations than that portrayed from a masculine point of view . Women’s experiences in countries where they have no political rights or voice, or as victims of human trafficking .
 The phallic nature of military weapons invokes imagery of male virility and female submissiveness . Consider the “potency” of weapons, “penetration” and the masculine “warrior”
 dichotomist constructions such as rational/ emotional, strong/weak, protector/protected convey a preference for the masculine . Similarly, dichotomism constructions like rational/emotional, strong and emotional constructions convey preference for masculine .
 Poststructural feminists are critical of these linguistic constructions and believe they have real consequences in world politics . They say they have a real impact on world politics and the world's future .
 Poststructuralist feminists contend that women have typically been marginalized as both generators of knowledge and subjects of knowledge . But that the spoken meaning of gender can be changed, they say, and that it can be reversed .
 Postcolonial feminism argues that not only are there differences between men and women, but there are differences between women from different parts of the world . Postcolonial feminists argue that women from around the world have different experiences .
 There is not a universal approach to understanding and overcoming the subordination of women . Thus, there is not an approach to women's subordination, she says .
 It's important to keep in mind that the various types of feminist theory are not mutually exclusive . It is important to remember that the different types of feminism are not all mutually exclusive.
 Feminist scholars are critical of traditional theoretical perspectives that ignore the ways in which gender shapes international relations, they say . Yet regardless of the position taken on the issue of gender differences, feminist scholars say they are critical .
 Socialism was the primary radical alternative to mainstream international relations theorizing . The Marxist Critique is published by The New York Review of International Relations, published by Simon Simon and Simon Simon .
 Realists emphasize state security, liberals accentuate individual freedom, and constructivists highlight ideas and identities . Constructivists focus on class conflict and the material interests of each class . Socialist realists emphasize the state security and individual freedom .
 Socialism envisions society as optimally characterized by public ownership and control of property and resources, to the benefit of individuals living in concert with one another, on the private ownership of the means of production . A free market allows individual choice through a free market to determine the distribution of goods and
 There are many strands of socialist thought, and they diverge over the extent to which society should own or control property . Whether society should exercise its control through a central authority or at a local level of the people, they say .
 Karl Marx, however, is widely viewed as the most prominent theorist of socialism . Karl Marx is widely considered to be one of the leading figures in socialism . Marx is considered to have been the most influential theorist of capitalism .
 Engels argued that socialism emerges through the clash of social classes as opposed to the establishment of harmonious communities . Engels and his co-author Friedrich Engels wrote that socialism emerged from the clash between social classes .
 The target of his crifique was the compulsion of the wealthy great powers to subjugate foreign people by military force and create colonies for purposes of financial exploitation, he said .
 The working class is estranged from, and lacks authority, over, the products of their labor . Working class lacks authority over products of its labor .
 Marxism holds that the ruling class controls and benefits disproportionately from the surplus value generated by the subordinate working class’s labor . Marxists believe that the working class's labor is worth more than its subordinate workers’ labor .
 Through the labor of workers, raw materials are transformed into products of greater value . Raw materials are turned into products that can be made into more valuable .
 Workers lack bargaining power and tend to receive a fixed wage for their labor, irrespective of the value added . Owners of companies unfairly reap a greater portion of surplus value as realized through increased profits .
 Marxism anticipates that class struggle will result, sometimes through violent rebellion, wherein the oppressed working class seeks power and a greater share of wealth . Marxists predict that the oppression of the working class will result in violent rebellion .
 Marxism has had considerable influence in countries in the Global South where there is pronounced inequality and workers endure harsh labor conditions and low wages . Marxism has also had influence in some countries where there are pronounced inequality .
 Marx’s theory of economic exploitation focused on domestic class struggle . The antagonistic relationship between classes plays a key role in determining the characteristics of international relations . Marx's theory of exploitation focuses on domestic struggle .
 This interaction creates a predatory international system with the core states benefiting from the subjugation of peripheral states . The core states benefit from subjugating the subjugated states, writes John Defterios .
 Lenin in the Soviet Union extended Marx’s analysis to the study of imperialism . Lenin interpreted imperialism as a stage in the development of capitalism when monopolies overtake free-market competition .
 The world is divided into spheres of influence, dividing the world's sphere of influence . The world's leaders respond by waging wars to divide the world into spheres . They respond to these new foreign markets to consume the surplus goods and capital .
 European colonization of the Global South was seen as a means for the capitalist ruling class to placate their own domestic working class by sharing some of the profits accrued through exploitation of laborers in the colonies . European colonization of the global south was a means of placating the working class .
 Lenin’s assertions have been heavily criticized on conceptual and empirical grounds . The socialist attention to social classes and uneven development stimulated several new waves of theorizing about capitalism as a global phenomenon .
 Dependent theorists claimed that much of the poverty in Asia, Africa, and Latin America stemmed from the exploitative capitalist world economy .
 The advantages held by core states are perpetuated through the continual accumulation of capital within the core from the periphery and semi-periphery . Core states have advantages in the world economy as a whole, according to experts .
 With the end of the Cold War and the failure of the Soviet regime, there are fewer advocates today for organizing society along Marxist principles . Fewer advocates today are still advocates of organizing society in Marxist fashion .
 These radical challenges to mainstream theorizing continue to enhance our understanding of world politics by highlighting the roles played by corporations, transnational religious movements, and other nonstate actors . Yet these various radical challenges . continue to . enhance our . understanding of . world politics .
 Economists overemphasize economic interpretations of international events . Yet they omit other potentially important explanatory factors, such as economic factors .
 Some critics of Marxism have also accused it of partaking in the theoretical simplification that it had sought to overcome and leaving key political ideas, such as revolutionary social change, ambiguous .
 International relations scholar Andrew Davenport goes so far as to suggest that this is one of the major deficiencies of Marxist theorizing today . In fact, he suggests that Marxist theory is a problem .
 This photo of Makati in the Philippines captures the dramatic inequalities that exist in many, if not all, cities across the globe .
 Each paradigmatic effort to do so in the past has ultimately lost advocates as developments in world affairs eroded its continuing relevance .
 As you seek to understand changing global conditions, it is important to be humble in recognizing the limitations of our understandings of world politics .
 The task of interpretation is complicated because the world is complex, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The task of interpreting is complicated," he says .
 Conceptually speaking, world affairs today can be likened to a disassembled jigsaw puzzle scattered on a table before us, says David Cameron . World affairs today is like a puzzle, he says, scattered by disassembled puzzle scattered before us .
 Much of the international community views the land as occupied territory and sees settlement construction as a breach of international law, a violation of Palestinian human rights, and an obstacle to peace .
 Palestinians argue that such activity is an effort to preempt or undermine any agreement that provides for Palestinian sovereignty . They say the presence of Jewish settlements hinders the possibility of having a viable and contiguous state .
 As Israel's staunchest ally, the U.S. often finds itself in a position where there is tension between its pursuit of strategic interest and its normative values and preferences .
 U.S.-lsraeli relations are at their lowest point in thirty-five years, Israel says . This led to an outcry by Israel, lamenting that relations had suffered a “tectonic rift” in the relationship .
 In 2011, the United States actively opposed a campaign to bring the issue to the United Nations Security Council . Yet, despite its disapproval of continued Israeli settlement, in January 2011 the U.S. actively opposed the campaign .
 Critics suggested that the U.S. position was largely motivated by a desire to preserve its ability to strategically influence key Mideast peace issues .
 In theoretical exploration of world politics, we must critically assess the accuracy of our impressions, avoiding the temptation to embrace one worldview and abandon another without any assurance that their relative worth is fixed . So in our theoretical exploration, we need to critically assess our impressions .
 Constructivism is charged with being a social scientific framework rather than a “real” theory . Realism is frequently criticized for relying on ambiguous concepts, liberalism is often derided for making naive policy recommendations based on idealistic assumptions . Constructivism has been charged with not being a �
 These three mainstream theories overlook seemingly important aspects of world politics, which limits their explanatory power . Moreover, as the challenges mounted by feminism and the Marxist critique suggest, these three theories overlook aspects of the world politics . The challenges mount by feminists and Marxist critiques suggest, as well as feminism .
 We lack a single overarching theory able to account for all facets of world politics, we draw on realist, liberal, and constructivist thought in subsequent chapters . Because we lack an overarching theory, we use realist and liberal theories to explain world politics .
 We supplement them with insights from feminism and the Marxist critique when these theoretical traditions can best help to interpret the topic covered . We also offer insights from feminist and Marxist critique .
 "If you tell people the world is eomplieated, you're not doing your job as a soeial seientist," he says . "You're not going to do your job," he adds .
 Blog is a blog that applies political theory to daily life in the form of narratives . It is the work of political theory that applies to everyday life .
 An interactive forum for discussion of debates in world politics with an emphasis of theoretical issues . The World Politics Forum is a forum for discussions of world politics .
 Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos Realism * Zero-sum • Neoliberalism Liberalism * Collective Security • Social Constructivism Diplomacy Diplomacy • International Regime • Norms Additional Videos Additional Videos: Betts, Richard.
 He has defended his policies, depicting protestors as seeking to destabilize his government in a tough economic year . He has said protestors are seeking destabilizing government in tough economic years .
 Your employment allows you to apply your acquired knowledge to help make the world a better place . Your employment offers you the chance to help people around the world make a difference .
 As an international decision maker, your approach will partly depend on your preferences and priorities . There is no sure path as to how to make foreign policy decisions that are workable, moral, and successful, says Obama .
 Any choice you might make is certain to carry costs that compromise some values you hold dear and undermine some of the other goals you would like to pursue . What is more important to you is to make sure you don't compromise some of your values .
 Foreign policy "befuddled every decision maker who has had the power to make foreign policy decisions on behalf of the transnational actor he or she led," says Obama .
 This chapter looks at patterns of international decision making by all transnational actors . Yi Yi I FOREIGN POLICY MAKING IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS .
 In addition, it is important to reflect on how each and every one of us—all individual people— are part of the equation . In addition to the importance of individual people, each individual person is also important to remember .
 We are all, in a sense, transnational actors capable of making free choices that contribute to the direction of trends in world politics . We all make free choices to contribute to direction of world politics, says David Cameron .
 This chapter opens a window to rival ways of describing and analyzing international decision making by transnational actors . Transnational Actors and Decision Processes are discussed in this chapter .
 You will be introduced to some of the lessons that theory and history provide about the relative strengths and weaknesses of these approaches, and develop the tools to critically assess decision-making outcomes and processes .
 The major theoretical schools of thought provide some insights into international decision-making .
 Neorealism eschews the explanatory importance of the individual level of analysis in favor of systemic explanations, whereas neoclassical realism allows for the dominance of the international system and relative material capabilities to be filtered through the state . Neorealistic realism eschews .
 Some constructivists focus on shared norms at the systemic level . Others focus on such forces inside the decision-making unit . Some constructivistists say that such forces can be found in the decision making process .
 Theories of international relations offer important insights, but have been critiqued as not going far enough in developing conceptions of agency and incorporating internal factors .
 There are explanations drawn from these theories that emphasize the pivotal role of the decision-making units . These theories provide a rich foundation for understanding policy making .
 These approaches enable us to move beyond the generalities of international relations theories to better understand foreign policy decisions in specific cases . These approaches can be used to help explain foreign policy in specific situations .
 The factors or causes that influence the ways in which all transnational actors make foreign policy decisions are important to think about international decision making, such as the factors and causes .
 President's personal inclinations may influence policy decisions, but all leaders are constrained by circumstances that restrict free choice . All leaders have to be constrained by various circumstances, such as circumstances, to make a decision .
 To get to the essence of how international decision making takes place, we must go beyond a single-factor explanation and think in terms of multiple causes . Thus, to get to an end of the single factor explanation, we need to think beyond that .
 It's useful to identify the various clusters of variables that affect the choices all types of transnational actors make when they formulate a foreign policy . For that, it is useful to . identify the different clusters of . variables . that affect all kinds of . transnational . actors .
 Personal characteristics of the leaders heading international actors assume great importance in making international decisions . Individual values, personalities, beliefs, intelligence, intelligence and prior experiences predispose them to take certain kinds of positions on global issues .
 A geographical set of conditions, for instance, can affect the behavior of a nation only as specific persons perceive and interpret these conditions . A geographical setting can affect a nation's behavior only as individuals interpret and interpret it .
 Changes in global conditions and actors’ collective internal characteristics may influence the costs and benefits of particular foreign policy options . These are mediated by leaders’ perceptions, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Leaders’ ideas and images influence the choices taken. Therefore, in any explanation of why any international decision is made, it is imperative to take into account how leaders' ideas influence the decisions taken.
 Every actor on the global stage is defined by its own attributes, which also act to determine the actor’s foreign policy choices . Every actor in the world has his own attributes and foreign policy decisions .
 As important as the individual decision maker is, it would be a mistake to think foreign policy leaders alone are the sole source driving international decision making . The U.S. should not rely solely on individual decision makers .
 Internal characteristics of the transnational actor shape the range of choices open to the individual decision maker . Internal characteristics such as wealth, military might, and public opinion heavily shape the decisions made by the individual .
 International actors organized to take action abroad are composed of a collection of individuals . All international actors are made up of individuals, not individuals, say the organizers .
 How these group actors are governed, and the processes and procedures they follow to reach foreign policy decisions, are forces of their own that structure and determine the decisions that are reached .
 Global conditions provide constraints and opportunities for international decision making . Global conditions color the degree of which an actors internal attributes and individual leader preferences can account for the choices made .
 The changing state of the world—everything that occurs beyond the actor,affects the decisions of international actors, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Everything that occurs outside the actor affects the decision of the actor"
 All shifts in global circumstances have an important impact upon decisions by international actors, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Richard Nixon said changes of global circumstances serve as a catalyst for international decision making . Richard Nixon declared, “The world has changed.” in Nixon's first speech .
 This three-part framework encourages you to think in causal terms about categories of phenomena that explain why particular decisions are made . The framework is designed to help you understand the causes of particular decisions .
 Each category encompasses a large number of factors, which, together with the influences grouped in the other two, tell you what to observe when you construct an explanation for why a particular decision by a particular international actor was made .
 Factors in three categories serve as “inputs” that shape the policy-making process . Factors in the three categories are “insights’ that shape policy making process, the authors say .
 Foreign policy outcomes have consequences for the input factors themselves at a later time [t + 3] because they exert “feedback” on these causal factors as the foreign policy decisions alter the conditions that influence subsequent decisions .
 This decision, furthermore, exerted a painfully negative “feedback” influence on public opinion within the U.S. and abroad . The invasion increased the level of international terrorism it was originally designed to end . This decision was made in the wake of the invasion of Iraq .
 This reaction, in turn, later [t + 3] transformed global conditions as well as attitudes within American society, which began to galvanize revisions of the original policy decision . This reaction was galvanizing revisions {t + 4) of the initial policy decision.
 This way of tracing the determinants and consequences of international decisions provides you, the analyst, with a lens through which to view and explain the foreign policy of transnational actors in historical perspective . The model is not tied analytically to any one time period or actor .
 With the “funnel of causality” framework in mind, you are armed intellectually to probe international decision making in greater depth . Continuities will be obscured, causalfactors unidentified . —George W Ball, former United States undersecretary of state .
 Two schools of thought have emerged that emphasize individual decision makers and the factors that shape foreign policy . Drawing on the insights and responding to the shortcomings of the major theories of international relations, these schools have emerged .
 Realists believe that every leader’s goals and approach to making foreign policy choices are the same . The decision-making processes of each actor can be studied as though each were a unitary actor, they say .
 International actors can and do make decisions by rational calculations of the costs and benefits of different choices . From this assumption can be derived the expectation that international actors can make rational calculations .
 Ideally, the search for information will be exhaustive, and all the facts relevant to the problem will be gathered . The search is exhaustive and thorough .
 It requires the identification and ranking of all values (such as security and economic prosperity) in a hierarchy from most to least preferred . It is a hierarchy of values, such as security, prosperity, security and prosperity .
 Policy makers must conduct a rigorous costbenefit analysis guided by an accurate prediction of the probable success of each option, they say . For this purpose, policy makers must also consider the impact of each decision .
 Those who advocated for a withdrawal of U.S. troops argued that bin Laden’s death should force a reevaluation of the war . The terrorist leader was found by a small special operations force in Pakistan .
 Critics say with bin Laden’s death the Afghans themselves should be able to take more responsibility for their own security .
 The message reflected the language of deliberate rational choice to convince skeptics that the costs and benefits of all options had been carefully weighed . The message reflects a deliberate rational decision to make a decision .
 Like beauty, rationality often lies in the eye of the beholder, and reasonable, clear-thinking people can disagree about the facts and wisdom of foreign policy goals . Ffowowever, like beauty, rational arguments often lie in the eyes of the viewer, and rationality lies in
 This debate demonstrated that although rationality is a decision-making goal to which all transnational actors aspire, it is difficult to determine when the criteria for rational choice have been met or what those rational choices look like in practice in practice . And it’s This Debate demonstrated that .
 Each step cannot be taken in order because each step must be taken separately . But he explained how difficult it is to follow these steps to follow .
 Some of the barriers that make errors in foreign policy decisions so common are human . They are human, deriving from deficiencies in the intelligence, capability, and psychological needs of foreign policy decision makers .
 Reaching agreement is not easy, because reasonable people with different values often disagree about goals, preferences, and the results of alternative options . Reaches agreement with reasonable people are not easy .
 Political leaders often rely on bureaucratic organizations for advice, often screen, sort, and rearrange it . The available information is often inaccurate because it is often screen and sort . Political leaders depend on the advice of bureaucrats for advice .
 Decision makers are psychologically prone to block out dissonant or inconsistent information and perceptions about their preferred choice . Compounding the problem is decision makers’ susceptibility to cognitive dissonance .
 Those who see themselves as ‘political experts’ are habitually mistaken in their judgments and forecasts . Leaders are prone to place faith in their leaders, says Thecsspoint.com .
 Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro held the first in-person meeting between leaders of their two countries in a half-century . Obama and Castro met in Panama in April 2015 .
 Research shows leaders are limited in their capacity to process information and avoid biases . Preoccupied with preventing losses, leaders are prone to “wishful thinking” and “shooting from the hip,” which frequently results in irrational decisions .
 Foreign activities heavily influence an actor’s internal condition . Foreign activities often heavily influence the actor's internal condition. Foreign activities commonly heavily influence actor's health .
 Many leaders are likely to fuse the two sectors when contemplating policy decisions . This is why many leaders will likely fuse them together when making policy decisions.
 Critics suggest that the two-level game model does not go far enough and could be improved by incorporating insights from constructivism . Constructivism is a form of constructivism that can be applied to constructivism in the future .
 Many decisions tend to produce unintended consequences, what economists call externalities . Many decisions often result in unintended consequences: externalities, such as unintended consequences .
 In the choice phase, then, decision makers rarely make value-maximizing decisions . In the decision phase, decisions are made by people who want to make a better decision .
 Leaders use cognitive heuristics, or mental short-cuts, to simplify the decision and eliminate some options . In the first stage, leaders use cognitive short-cutters to simplify some options and eliminate options .
 In the second-stage, they assess the remaining alternatives through analytic calculation as depicted by the rational choice school of decision making . In the third-stage they then assess remaining alternatives using analytic calculation .
 Decision makers then evaluate the policy choices that remain through rational calculations and select the alternative that has the strongest net gain . Decision makers evaluate the options that remain and then select the best policy choices .
 Blair government ruled out rapid entry to the single currency and set up a series of economic tests . It essentially provided cover to indefinitely put off a decision to join the Euro .
 poliheuristic theory sees individuals as having the capacity to make decisions via a rational choice process within certain parameters . This theoretical perspective allows for mediating influences that compromise rationality . Poliheurgeuristic theory nonetheless sees individuals having the ability to make rational decisions .
 Constructivism challenges this fundamental premise, positing that human subjectivity and intentionality are conditioned by constantly changing contexts of meaning and thus there is necessarily ambiguity in decision making . Constructivism is a form of constructivism where subjectivity is conditioned by context context context .
 poliheuristic theory challenges the idea that decision makers behave rationally . It advances the notion that rather than making optimal policy choices, leaders tend to opt for “satisficing” alternatives .
 Prospect theory challenges the idea of rational choice in decision making . Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman won the 2002 Nobel Prize in economics for their work . Prospect theory is similar to prospect theory .
 U.S. leaders are often more concerned with the loss of sovereignty and power that would result from greater authority of international organizations such as the United Nations or the International Criminal Court than they are with the gains .
 Prospect theory suggests that when leaders take risks to initiate bold new foreign policy directions, they will have great difficulty admitting and correcting those choices if they later prove mistaken . Another implication of prospect theory is that leaders will not be able to admit and correct their mistakes .
 Leaders are prone to cling to failed policies long after their deficiencies have become apparent . George W Bush’s refusal to acknowledge decision-making failures regarding the Iraq War is an example .
 Rigf prospect theory is a socialpsychological theory explaining decision making under conditions of uncertainty and risk . It looks at the relationship between individual risk propensity and the perceived prospects for avoiding losses and realizing big gains .
 experimental literature indicates that people tend to incorporate a sense of fairness into their decision making even if it is contrary to their own rational self-interest . People tend to include fairness in their decision-making even if they are not in the right mind .
 We can still assume that policy makers aspire to rational decision-making behavior, which they may occasionally approximate . Yet rational foreign policy making is more of an ideal than a reality, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Leaders and the style of leadership they employ shape the way in which foreign policies are made and the resulting behavior of the actors in world politics . Leaders are responsible for foreign policy and foreign policy decisions .
 Leaders as Movers of World History model oi'policy decision making perceives world leaders as people who create global changes . This history-making individtmls model o'policy .
 Equating U.S. foreign policy with Bush Doctrine in the 2000s is a recent example . Equating the Bush Doctrine with foreign policy in the '00s is not a new thing, it's a mistake, he says .
 The assumptions they make about the personalities of their counterparts, consciously or unconsciously, influence their own behavior . In turn, these assumptions may influence their behavior, experts say .
 The categories in what is known as the Big Five Model are consistent across gender, culture, ethnicity, ethnicity and time . While subsuming thousands of individual personality attributes, the categories are consistent .
 Extraversion ^ • Assertiveness ■ Gregariousness ■ Excitement-Seeking ■ Warmth • Optimism •Energetic_^ Agreeableness ^ • Altruism •Altruism — trust • Modesty . Conscientiousness ^ • Self-Discipline
 The Big Five personality factors represent broad dimensions that encompass a number of facets . The Big FIVE personality factors are considered broad dimensions of personality .
 People who are highly extraverted are outgoing and enjoy the company of others . Extraverted people are outgoing people who enjoy social interaction .
 Those who are very conscientious have a preference for planned behavior . High levels of openness reflect creativity and intellectual curiosity, say experts .
 Emotional stability is linked to one's tolerance for stress and ability to regulate emotions . Emotions are linked to tolerance of stress and tolerance for emotions .
 In world politics, “all leaders face decision making under uncertainty,” says President Obama . “All leaders face making decisions under uncertainty," says Obama .
 Leaders who are risk-acceptant are more likely to engage in brinksmanship and the use of force . This has implications for understanding the sources of conflict as leaders who are willing to engage risk-taking .
 One of the challenges illuminated by leader-driven explanations of international decision making is that history’s movers and shakers often pursue decidedly irrational policies . The challenges illuminated are that leaders often pursue irrational policies, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Personality likely plays a role as it affects a rational actor’s optimization process by influencing the options seen as acceptable in a particular situation . Personality also plays a key role in the optimization process, according to the study .
 Adolf Hitler's ruthless determination to seek military conquest proved disastrous for Germany . A classic example is Adolf Hitler, whose ruthless determination proved disastrous . Adolf Hitler was ruthless and ruthless, but his determination to pursue military conquest was ultimately disastrous .
 Realism says that survival is the paramount goal of all states and that all leaders engage in rational calculations to advance their countries’ self-advantage . Realist says survival is a paramount goal for all states .
 Realistic cannot account for the times when leaders’ choices ultimately prove counterproductive, writes CNN.com’s John Sutter . “Realistic” can’t account for when leaders choose counterproductive, he says .
 Even defects in states’ foreign policy-making processes cannot easily explain wide divergences between the decisions leaders sometimes make and what cold cost-benefit calculations would predict . The U.S. should be careful not to rely heavily on foreign policy experts, experts say .
 We must be cautious and remember that leaders are not all-powerful determinants of states’ foreign policy behavior . Having said that the history-making individuals model may be compelling, we must be careful .
 The “great person” versus Zeitgeist debate is pertinent here, as constructivist theorists like to observe . The ‘great person vs. Zeitgeist’ debate is a key point in this debate .
 At the core of this enduring controversy is the question of whether certain times are conducive to the emergence of leaders or whether famous leaders would have an impact wherever they lived . At the heart of this debate is whether certain time is conducive to leaders .
 The history-making individuals model alone appears too simple an explanation of how transnational actors react to external challenges . The history of transnational individuals is too simple a simple explanation for transnational challenges .
 Leaders are not in complete control, and their influence is severely constrained . They clearly do both, but leaders do not have complete control of the world .
 The impact of leaders’ personal characteristics on foreign policy decisions generally increases when their authority and legitimacy are widely accepted or when leaders are protected from broad public criticism . Leaders' personal characteristics are important to foreign policy .
 New situations are new situations that free leaders from conventional approaches to defining the situation, such as complex situations involving many different factors, and situations without social sanctions . Such situations are free of social sanctions because norms defining the range of permissible options are unclear .
 A leader’s political efficacy, or self-image, will also influence the degree to which personal values and psychological needs govern decision making . Self-image of a leader will influence the level of his or her ability to control political events .
 Political psychology and constructivism tell us that the same option is likely to have different value to different leaders . Different leaders may have different values for different leaders, such as a leader .
 In 1971, Americans took to the streets outside the White House to protest the immorality of Nixon's massive bombing of Vietnam . Americans protested Nixon's decision to bomb Vietnam in 1971 .
 His reaction to this perceived threat was to shield himself from the voice of the people, without success, as it happened . His reaction was to try to shield him from the voices of the public, but he failed .
 Nixon complained that “nobody can know what it means for a president to be sitting in that White House working late at night and to have hundreds of thousands of demonstrators charging through the streets’s streets . “Nobody can know’t what it is to be a
 Earlier, on a rainy afternoon in 1962, John F Kennedy faced a similar citizen protest . Earlier, in a similar rain-filled day, he faced similar citizen protests .
 Americans gathered in front of the White House for a ‘Ban the Bomb’ demonstration . Americans gathered for the demonstration .
 His response was to send out urns of coffee and doughnuts and invite leaders of the protest to come inside to state their case . He believes that a democracy should encourage dissent and debate .
 Many would protest that Kennedy alone could not be expected to eliminate nuclear weapons . The Zeitgeist was dominated by fear of the Soviet Union and intense concern for national security .
 Nixon ordered the gradual withdrawal of U.S. troops from Vietnam in order to end the war . The Vietnam War ended in 1973, ending American participation in the war in Vietnam .
 Other factors undoubtedly influence how much leaders can shape their states' choices . Other factors also influence how well leaders can influence their state choices .
 New President Barack Obama's "honeymoon" period is a relatively free period of criticism and pressure . That's especially true during the ‘boneymoon’ period, when leaders are relatively free of criticism .
 Crisis decision making is typically centralized and handled exclusively by the top leadership . Crisis decision-making is typically handled by top leadership, such as the president and vice president .
 "Any given decision you make you’ll wind up with a 30 to 40pereent chance that it isn’t going to work. Any given decision . You’ve got to think about how to make a decision,’s the author says .
 Leaders must seek information and advice, and must see that the actions their decisions generate are carried out properly . You have to own that and feel comfortable with the way you made the decision, Obama said .
 Standard operating procedures for reaching decisions about particular types of situations . Rules for reaching conclusions in particular situations include reaching decisions for particular situations .
 Rules define rules and standard operating procedures that specify how tasks are to be performed . They also divide authority among different organizations to avoid duplication of effort . They often lead to meritocracies by hiring and promoting the most capable individuals .
 The method U.S. policy makers used in orchestrating a response is often viewed as having nearly approximated the ideal of rational choice . The method United States used in responding to the crisis is often seen as having been rational .
 He advanced what is widely known as the bureaucratic politics model . Essence of Decision (1971) advanced the model of bureaucracy .
 This model of decision making highlights constraints that organizations in policy networks place on decision makers’ choices and the “pulling and hauling” that occurs among the key participants and caucuses of aligned bureaucracies in the decision process .
 Policy making is itself an intensely competitive game of why “it is necessary to identify the games and players, to display the coalitions, bargains, and compromises, and to convey some feel for the confusion” .
 Kissinger fought often with James Schlesinger and Donald Rumsfeld, who headed the Department of Defense, over strategy regarding the Vietnam War . Jimmy Carter’s national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, repeatedly engaged in conflicts with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance over the
 Such conflicts are not necessarily bad because they force each side to better explain its viewpoint . This gives heads of state the opportunity to weigh their competing advice before making decisions .
 Battles among advisers can lead to paralysis or to rash decisions that produce poor results . However, battles among advisers often lead to a rash decision that produces poor results.
 George W Bush's administration divided over 'how and why' to go to war against Saddam Hussein in Iraq in fall of 2002 . The president's administration was divided over the idea of war against Iraq in Iraq .
 In addition to their influence on policy choices, bureaucratic organizations possess several other characteristics that affect decision making, they also have influence on political leaders .
 One view proposes that bureaucratic agencies are parochial and that every administrative unit within an international actor’s foreign policy-making bureaucracy seeks to promote its own purposes and power . Another view suggests that every unit in a foreign policy making bureaucracy seeks its own interests .
 Organizational needs, such as large staffs and budgets, come before the actor’s needs, sometimes encourage the sacrifice of the actor's interests to bureaucratic interests .
 Bureaucratic agencies are driven to enlarge their prerogatives and expand the conception of their mission, seeking to take on other units’ responsibilities and powers . Characteristically, bureaucratic agencies .
 In contrast to rational choice theory, bureaucratic agencies and their staff may not agree with the leader’s values and priorities . Moreover, in contrast to the theory of rational choice, agencies and staff may disagree with leader's values .
 Many regarded the attacks on 9/11 as the worst intelligence failure since Pearl Harbor . Many regarded it as a failure to anticipate the attacks .
 The answer to the question was that America's chaotic system of intelligence was paralyzed by the morass of cross-cutting bureaucracies . The answer at first accepted by most analysts was that the answer was that Americas chaotic system .
 They engaged in turf battles with one another and did not share vital information that arguably could have identified and prevented the A1 Qaeda plot . The plot could have been thwarted by the U.S. government .
 As the horror of 9/11 persisted, so did interest and concern about who did what to disrupt the A1 Qaeda terrorist network operation prior to September 11, 2001 . The A1 al Qaeda network operation was disrupted by the terrorist network .
 A bipartisan congressional commission was created to investigate what had gone wrong with national security and counterterrorism . A bipartisan panel was created in order to make needed corrections in the way the U.S. government makes decisions for national security .
 The commission pointed its criticism at the growing complaints about the White blouse’s inaction and pre-9/11 downplaying or ignoring of the loud and clear warnings submitted by U.S. intelligence bureaucracies .
 Scholars often cite groupthink as a process governing policy decision making that leads to riskier choices . Scholars say groupthink is governing policy decisions that lead to risky decisions . Groupthink is a key part of the U.S. policy process .
 This, in turn, leads to more extreme policies than likely would have been made by individuals without the pressures in peer groups . This is a result of pressure from peer groups to make extreme policies more likely to be made .
 President Obama meets with Secretary of State John Kerry to discuss immigration issues . Obama and his team discuss standard operating procedures and deference to precedent .
 Research shows that debate and criticism stimulate, rather than inhibit, ideas . Yet research shows that criticism and debate stimulates ideas, not inhibit them . Debate and criticism stimulates, rather inhibits ideas, research shows .
 Many students, before they entered the workforce, found that the payoffs of rational choice and the pitfalls of bureaucratic politics surrounding actual practice described here were not figments of scholars’ imagination .
 The levels-of-analysis framework introduced in Chapter 1 helps to describe the multiple influences on the decision-making process . In classifying the determinants of international actors’ foreign policies, the levels of analysis framework is described .
 The internal and global levels of analysis also influence foreign policy decisions . Recall that in addition to the level of the individual . decision maker, the internal and . global levels . influence foreign . policy decisions, experts say .
 Nonstate actors have internal attributes that shape their foreign policy decisions . But here we focus on states as they are the most powerful player on the world stage . Foreign policy decisions are most consequential, and factors that influence their capacity to make decisions are arguably different from many of those that influence other
 Different countries' attributes may influence foreign policy choices, including military, economic development, and type of government . To illustrate the impact of internal factors, consider how variations in states’ attributes, such as military capabilities and economic development .
 Although most states may seek similar goals, their ability to realize them will vary according to their military capabilities . The ability of states to achieve their goals will vary depending on their military capability .
 Military capabilities limit a state’s range of prudent policy choices . They act as a mediating factor on leaders’ national security decisions, says John Avlon .
 Libyan leader Muammar al-Qaddafl repeatedly provoked the U.S. through anti-American and anti-Israeli rhetoric . In the 1980s, he repeatedly supported terrorist activities against the United States .
 Qaddafl was able to act as he did largely because neither bureaucratic organizations nor a mobilized public existed in Libya to constrain his personal whims . Neither bureaucratic organizations or mobilized public exist in Libya, allowing him to act alone .
 Qaddafl was doubtlessly more highly constrained by the outside world than were the leaders in the more militarily capable countries toward whom he directed his anger . However, he was doubtably more highly restricted by the world than those in the region .
 Limited military muscle compared with the United States precluded the kinds of belligerent behavior he threatened to use . The United States has limited military muscle in the region .
 What states believe about their own military capabilities and those of their adversaries guide their decisions about war and peace . The lesson is that states should consider their own capabilities and their adversaries' .
 Levels of productivity and prosperity also affect the foreign policies of the poor states at the bottom of the global hierarchy . Levels of prosperity and productivity also affect foreign policy of poor states .
 Generalizations about the economic foundations of states’ international political behavior often prove inaccurate . The world's economic foundations are often difficult to explain, especially in the world .
 Leaders’ perceptions of the opportunities and constraints that their states’ economic resources provide may have a larger influence on their foreign policy choices . Instead, leaders’s perceptions of their economic resources may influence foreign policy decisions .
 Public opinion, interest groups, and mass media are a more visible part of the policy-making process in democratic systems . In democratic systems, interests are likely to spread beyond the government itself .
 The electoral processes in democratic societies more meaningfully frame choices than those of authoritarian regimes . The real choices are made by a few elites behind closed doors, says Julian Zelizer .
 Thucydides observed that what happened within the Greek city-states often did more to shape their external behavior than did the interactions between the states . In ancient Greece, for instance, the realist historian observed that the interaction between cities and states often shaped the external behavior of the states
 Greek leaders often concentrated their efforts on influencing the political climate within their own polities, he said . He added that Greek leaders frequently concentrated on influencing their own countries' political climate .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf rigf constitutional democracy . autocratic rule is a system of authoritarian or totalitarian government in which unlimited power is concentrated in a single leader . autocracy is a form of authoritarian rule .
 The U.S. is called upon to provide visionary leadership for the world . This entails a careful assessment of priorities and strategies . Democratic President Barack Obama has been in office since 2001 .
 President Obama declared that ""I will strengthen our common security by investing in our common humanity" President Obama said he will strengthen his nation's security by "investing in our humanity"
 They move slowly on issues because so many disparate elements are involved in decision making, says the president . They say they move slowly because of the complexity of the decision making process .
 A crisis sufficient to rouse the attention and activity of a large proportion of the population may need to erupt in order for large changes in policy to come about . A crisis of crisis would need to be a major event in order to change policy in the UK .
 Realism anticipates that in order to protect their national interests, states should ideally conduct their foreign policies free of ideological and domestic political constraints . States should be able to conduct foreign policies without ideological or domestic constraints, Realism says .
 democracies may be seen as comparatively ‘vt/eak’ in that they rely on public support and their political power is less centralized . Along those lines, democracies may see as comparatively "vt.eak" democracies .
 Liberal theorists counter that these very constraints may be conducive to peace, as they hinder leaders from making impulsive foreign policy choices . Liberal theorists say that these constraints may hinder leaders' foreign policy .
 The tension between democratic governance and effective foreign policy making was seen in the aftermath of the U.S.-led assault on Libya on March 19, 2011 . This tension was seen within the United States in the wake of the attack .
 U.S. military forces participated in a series of air strikes against Libyan air defenses and government forces . As part of a coalition effort that was authorized by the United Nations Security Council, the U.N. Security Council launched the strikes .
 President Obama faced criticism from members of both parties for not seeking congressional approval before committing U.S. military forces to the mission in Libya . Many members of Congress endorsed the move, but Obama faced firestorm of criticism for not getting congressional approval .
 Obama says he had the power to authorize the strikes . Obama says the strikes were in the national interest and were in national interest . He says he authorized the strikes as president .
 Obama's decision was among the latest in a long line of presidential authorizations of military action without prior congressional approval . Harry Truman's entrance into the Korean War and Bill Clinton's bombing of Kosovo in 1999 were among those .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it . The content is subject to restrictions and restrictions, including the content content .
 Such factors as military alliances and levels of international trade profoundly affect the choices of decision makers . Such factors often affect the decision-making of the United States .
 Two other aspects of the international environment -- the global distribution of power and geostrategic position—affect international decision making .
 It can be concentrated in the hands of a single state, as in the ancient Mediterranean world at the zenith of the Roman Empire . Or it may be diffused among several rival states, as it was at the birth of the state system in 1648 following the Thirty Years�
 Unipolar systems have one dominant power center, bipolar systems contain two centers of power, and multipolar systems possess three or more such centers . As will be explained further in Chapter 4, unipolar systems contain one dominant center .
 Polarization refers to the degree to which states cluster around the powerful . Polarization is a state's tendency to cluster around powerful individuals .
 A highly bipolarized system is one in which small and medium-sized states form alliances with one of the two dominant powers . For instance, a highly bipolarism is one where small and mid-sized countries form alliances .
 The growing prominence of China as an active player in world politics reflects a shift in political power across the globe . The U.S. has increased its attentiveness to developments in Asia, according to the U.K.
 When power is concentrated in the hands of a single state in a unipolar system, it can more easily choose to use military force and intervene in the affairs of others than it would in a system characterized by a distribution of shared power .
 Small state members of each alliance will feel compelled to conform to the dictates of the alliance’s leader . However, when alliances are tight military blocs, the small state members will be compelled to comply with the leader of the leader .
 Some of the most important influences on a state’s foreign policy behavior stem from its location vis-a-vis other states in the international system, and the geostrategic advantages that this conveys . Geopolitical factors are important to a state's foreign policy .
 Map 3. I I I Plateaus and tablelands I I Ice caps I I Lowland Terrain I I Flatlands . I I Rolled plains I I Rolling plains . Pacific Ocean map .
 The number of neighboring states and protection afforded by natural barriers shape how countries interact with one another . Natural barriers are key to countries' relations with each other .
 Geography, location, and other geopolitical factors may have influenced foreign policy priorities of Great Britain, Germany, China, Finland, and states in South America .
 In no case, however, withdrawal from involvement in continental affairs is a practical geostrategic option, says historian .
 Later geopoliticians argued that topography, size, climate, and distance between states, in addition to location, are powerful determinants of individual countries’ foreign policies .
 The trends and transformations currently unfolding in world politics are the products of countless decisions made daily throughout the world . The trends are the product of countless decision-making decisions made every day .
 Some decisions are more momentous than others, and how actors respond to one another has profound consequences for the entire drama of world politics . Some of the world's most powerful actors are involved in some of the most important decisions in history .
 Countries of the Global South are investigated in Chapter 5, followed by examination of nonstate actors . Nonstate actors are examined in Chapter 6 of the book .
 A webbased game that allows you to simulate running your own country and making policy decisions . The game lets you simulate running a country and deciding how to run your country .
 Blogs provide insights into how leading analysts view developments in the area of foreign policy . Blogs that provide current insights into the world's foreign policy are published by leading analysts .
 Offers diverse group of foreign policy viewpoints from a variety of areas, including academics, activists, policy analysts, and business leaders . Offers a diverse range of views from academics and activists .
 Offers a rich array of blog posts from all over the world, as well as daily news feeds . Offers an array of blogs and news feeds from around the world .
 MindTap is a fully online, highly personalized learning experience built upon Cengage Learning content . MindTap was created by MindTap and is now available on Amazon.com and Google Play .
 Dallek, Robert. Roles Political Efficacy Multiple Advocacy • Policy Networks • Autocratic Rule • Geopolitics • Autocracy Rule . Geopolitical issues include the role of the U.S. government .
 Chapter 4 opens by giving you an overview of the great powers -- the actors with the greatest military and economic capabilities . Chapter 4 gives you a look at the world's great powers, including Russia and China .
 People, like states and international organizations, are transnatlonai actors . People like states are transnationalally involved in political change .
 Mobiiized publics often use demonstrations to express their dissent and draw global attention to their cause . Mobii-identified publics use demonstrations as a way to express dissent and to draw attention to the world .
 In Burundi, protestors question the veracity of the electoral process and the decision by incumbent President Pierre Nkurunziza to seek a third term . In violation of the peace accord that ended the 1993-2003 civil war .
 After the close of World War II, the U.S. and the Soviet Union stood at a crossroads . After the war, the United States and Soviet Union were at the crossroads in Russia .
 The decisions that were made, and the actions that were taken, determined whether they would be allies or rivals . The decisions and actions of the people involved in the U.S. helped determine whether they were allies or foes .
 The thermonuclear standoff that became the Cold War might not have occurred had the leaders of the countries made other choices . Indeed, the leaders' choices might have saved the lives of Americans .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin and U.S. President Barak Obama pictured together . Putin and Obama met in 2007 in Moscow, Russia, Russia .
 In the twenty-first century, the United States and Russia continue to influence world politics and each other . Russia and the U.S. are the most powerful nations in the world .
 Learning Objectives 4-1 Discuss the cyclical nature of history as portrayed by long-cycle theory . Discuss a cyclical history of history . Use this week's Daily Discussion to help students understand today's history .
 They see an international system of competitors, with winners and losers in an ancient contest for supremacy . They see the world as a system of international competitors .
 Rivalry between great powers has long characterized world politics . Good leadership in this eentury may or may not be transformational, but it will most eertainly require a careful understanding of the context of change .
 As Toynbee suggested, there is a strong probability that this cyclical pattern is cyclical . As he suggested, this is likely to be true .
 Long-cycle theory focuses on the rise and fall of the leading global power as the central political process of the modern world system . Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time .
 Each global war has led to the emergence of a hegemon . Over the past five centuries, each global war led to an emergence of an hegeman .
 Over time, as the weight of global engagement takes its toll, every previous hegemon has overextended itself . As challengers have arisen, the security agreements have arisen .
 Pakistanis burn a U.S. flag in an anti-American rally in protest of drone attacks in Pakistan's tribal regions . The rally was held in response to drone strikes in the tribal region .
 U.S. Director of Central Intelligence John Brennan defends drone attacks in Pakistan . Brennan: Airstrikes for targeted killings protect lives and prevent terror attacks .
 Pakistani demonstrators charge that many civilians are killed, including innocent children . Pakistani demonstrators, however, say many civilians have been killed in the country's conflict .
 They also take issue with the deterministic tone of the theory, which to them implies that global destiny is beyond any policy maker’s control . They also say that global destructures are beyond policy makers’ control .
 It draws attention to hegemonic transitions, rise and fall of leading states in the global system . In so doing, it provokes questions about whether this long cycle can be broken .
 By the time the first major European war of the twentieth century had ended, nearly 10 million people had died . Three empires had crumbled, three states had been born, seven decades of communist rule in Russia had begun, and the world geopolitical map had been redrawn .
 World War I was inadvertent, not the result of any master plan, according to structural realist explanations . Structural realist theories hold that the war was an accident, not a master plan .
 Structuralism postulates that the changing distribution of power within the anarchical global system is the primary factor that determines state behavior . Structuralists believe that the distribution of the power in an anarchical system is a primary factor in the state's behavior .
 Historians hypothesize that the way in which the great powers were aligned against one another created an environment conducive to an armed conflict . World War I was the start of World War II, the first major conflict in Europe .
 The great powers’ prior rearmament efforts, as well as their alliances and resulting counter-alliances, created a momentum that, along with the pressures created by the pressures of armies and arms races, dragged European statesmen toward war .
 This strength resulted in greater ambition and resentment of British preeminence . This strength led to greater ambition, resentment of Britain's preememence .
 The decline of the AustrianHungarian Empire, Germany's only ally, heightened Germany’s fear of Russia . Archduke Ferdinand's assassination of Archduck Ferdinand was seen in Germany's reaction to the assassination .
 Fearing that a long war might result in an unfavorable shift in the balance of power, Germany sought a short localized war with a more favorable outcome . Fearing a long battle might result from a long conflict, Germany wanted a short war with more favorable outcomes . The war ended in a
 Germany thus supported Austria-Ffungary’s unrestrained assault on Serbia . Germany thus backed Austria-fungaries' unrestrained attack on Serbia, Serbia .
 A victorious war would bolster Austria-Hungary and hamper Russian influence, it turned out to be a serious miscalculation . The logic behind Germany’s calculation was clear, but it was a serious mistake .
 France and Russia joined forces to defend Serbia and were soon joined by Britain in an effort to oppose Germany and defend Belgian neutrality . Britain joined forces with Russia in a bid to protect Serbia from Nazi Germany .
 Archduke Ferdinand’s assassination occurred in the decade prior to his assassination . And that is what happened in the 10th century prior to the assassination of Archduck Ferdinand .
 Russia mobilized its armies in response to Austria’s attack on Serbia . Cross-cutting alliance commitments pulled one European great power after another into the war . The Russian-Austrian conflict was the result of a Russian intervention in Serbia .
 With each side belittling the national character and ethnic attributes of the other, diplomatic alternatives to war become untenable . Diplomacy becomes untenable for the country's future in the Middle East .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ nationalism is a mindset glorifying a particular state and the nationality group .
 Prospect theory provides insights as well, as it stresses that leaders are likely to accept risk to prevent losses . Prospect theory suggests that leaders will accept risk in order to avoid losses .
 History-making individuals model points to the role of the German kaiser who was responsible for many critical decisions in 1914 . There are also questions about the rationality of decision making leading up to the start of World War I .
 Kaiser Wilhelm II had a grandiose vision of himself and often ignored the counsel of his cabinet ministers . He ignored the advice of the cabinet ministers and ignored their advice .
 When he made decisions, “they were often the result of vanity and personal feelings rather than rational calculation," he said . He added that decisions were often “the result of personal feelings”
 Structural explanations emphasize the global distribution of power . Domestic interpretations look at causal factors within states, and decision-making explanations direct attention to the calculations and goals of particular leaders .
 In its wake, three multiethnic empires— Austrian-Hungarian, Russian, and Ottoman —collapsed . The independent states of Poland, Gzechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia emerged in their place .
 Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Latvia and Lithuania were born . Finland and Estonia were born in Finland .
 The emergence of communism under the leadership of Vladimir Lenin produced a change in government and ideology that would have geopolitical consequences for another seventy years . Lenin's success in Russia led to the collapse of the Soviet Union in Russia .
 For the first time in history, broad publics and peacemakers shared a conviction that war was a central problem in international relations . Moreover, the war set the stage for a determined effort to build a new global system that could prevent another war .
 In 1648, 1713, and 1815, the peacemakers had tried to resolve issues of the past and to construct orders that would preclude their reappearance . The peacekeepers have tried to solve issues of past and prevent them reappearing .
 Map on the left shows state boundaries on the eve of war in 1914, as well as members of the two major opposing coalitions that formed .
 The map on the right shows the new borders in 1920, with the nine new states that emerged from the war . The map is based on the original borders of the Great Depression in 1920 .
 A consequence of World War I was a pronounced distaste for war and theories of realism . Theory of realism justified great power competition, armaments, secret alliances, and balance-of-power politics .
 Many European leaders had been offended by the pontificating American president . However, once the peace conference began, parochial national interests resurfaced and undermined Wilson's proposals .
 Germany also lost territory in the west to France and Belgium, in the south to Czechoslovakia, and in the east to the new states of Poland and Fithuania .
 Germany’s defeat in World War I and its humiliation under the Treaty of Versailles did not extinguish its hegemonic aspirations . World War II saw the rise of the Second World War in Germany .
 The world’s fate depended upon the outcome of this massive effort to defeat the Axis threat, the author says . The world's fate depended on the outcome, he says .
 To understand the origins of this devastating conflict, we once again examine causal factors operating at different levels of analysis . We once again look at causal factors in the Syrian conflict .
 Hitler used the fire to justify an emergency edict allowing him to suspend civil liberties and repress communists and other political adversaries . The fire was used as a pretext for an emergency order to repress Communists and other opponents .
 Hitler urged Germany to recover territories taken by the Treaty of Versailles, absorb Germans living in neighboring lands, and colonize Eastern Europe . In his 1924 Mein Kampfi^'Mj Struggle’, Hitler called for the annexation of neighboring lands and the creation of Eastern Europe
 The following year, the goals originally outlined in Mein KampfdimhtA were added to the top of Hitler’s foreign policy agenda . Hitler's foreign policy goals were the first to be added to his foreign policy portfolio .
 He thoroughly ignored the Kellogg-Briand Pact, which prohibited the use of military force as a means for resolving interstate conflicts . He ignored the pact .
 In 1935, he repudiated the military clauses of the Versailles Treaty . In 1936, he ordered troops into the demilitarized Rhineland; in March 1938, he annexed Austria . In September 1938 he demanded control over the Sudetenland, a region of G
 To address the Sudeten German question, a conference was convened in Munich, Germany . The conference was held in Munich to address the question .
 Hitler, British prime minister Neville Ghamberlain, and leaders of France and Italy all attended . Hitler, Britain and Italy attended the event .
 Ghamberlain and the others agreed to Hitler’s demands . Gonvinced that appeasement would halt further German expansionism, they agreed to the demands . Hitler's demands were rejected .
 In the Eastern Hemisphere, Japan had grown disillusioned with Western liberalism and the Paris settlements, and it was suffering from the economic devastation of the Great Depression .
 Japan embraced militarism as key to its global expansion . Like Germany, Japan embraced the idea of militarism in order to expand .
 In the might-makes-right climate that Germany’s imperialistic quest for national aggrandizement helped create, Japanese nationalists led their country on the path to imperialism and colonialism . In Japan, the might makes it seem to be the right to be imperialistic .
 Japan invasions of Manchuria in 1931 and further forays into Ghina in 1937 were paralleled by Italy’s absorption of Abyssinia in 1935 and Albania in 1939 . Italy also absorbed Abyssinia, Albania and Albania .
 Both Germany and Italy intervened in the 1936-1939 Spanish civil war on the side of the fascists, headed by General Francisco Franco . The Soviet Union supported antifascist forces .
 Britain and France formed an alliance to protect the next likely victim, Poland . After Germany occupied the rest of Gzechoslovakia in March 1939, the alliance was formed to protect Poland .
 Hitler invaded Poland, confident that Britain and France would not intervene . Now confident of invasion, he invaded Poland . Hitler invaded the country .
 Within six weeks France surrendered, even though Germany’s forces were numerically inferior to those of France and its allies . France surrendered within six weeks of the war .
 Nazi troops launched a surprise attack on the Soviet Union, Ffitler’s supposed ally, in June 1941 . Instead of invading Britain, however, the Nazi troops attacked the Soviet Russia . The attack was a surprise invasion of Britain, but was not an invasion .
 The United States, Great Britain, and France viewed Japan’s imperial expansion as a threat to their own interests in the region . The U.S. and Great Britain viewed the expansion of Japan as an imperial threat to themselves .
 The U.S. embargoed the sale of strategic raw materials, such as scrap iron, steel, and oil . In an effort to hamper Japan’s ability to carry out its global ambitions, the United States embargoed scrap iron .
 Japan saw the United States as a serious threat to its national security . Poor in natural resources, the U.S. was seen as a major threat to Japan's national security. Poor in resources, Japan saw it as a threat .
 Japan forged the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy that pledged the three Axis powers to come to one another’s aid if attacked by another great power, such as the U.S. Such a pact was forged in September 1940 .
 The United States froze Japanese assets in the United States and issued demands for Japanese withdrawal . The U.S. froze assets in Japan and demanded withdrawal of Japanese assets .
 Japan launched a surprise assault on the United States at Pearl Harbor on December 7th of the same year . Deciding that the eviction of the United . States from the Pacific was critical to its national interest, Japan launched the attack .
 Following this attack, Germany quickly declared war on the United States .
 The Japanese assault and the German challenge ended U.S. aloofness and isolationism, enabling President Roosevelt to forge a coalition with Britain and the Soviet Union to oppose the fascists . President Franklin Roosevelt forged a coalition .
 The number of sovereign states increased at the same time as the number of great powers declined . The post-World War I global system was precarious because of the rise in sovereign states, says the historian .
 In 1914, Europe had only twenty-two key states, but by 1921 the number had nearly doubled . Europe's key states were Europe's most important states .
 In this depressed global environment, Germany and Japan sought solutions abroad through imperialism . Germany sought solutions to the problems of its own domestic problems . The country's economic woes were compounded by a lack of international cooperation .
 Senior Nazi Hermann Goering reflected on the Nazi propaganda success during the Nuremberg Trials after World War 11, when Nazi officials were prosecuted .
 German nationalism inflamed latent irredentism and rationalized the expansion of German borders to regain provinces previously lost in wars to others . Germans living in Austria, Gzechoslovakia, and Poland absorbed Germans in Austria and Poland .
 The rise oi fascism —the Nazi regime’s ideology championing the flag, the fatherland, nationalism, nationalism and imperialism, and anti-Semitism—animated this renewed imperialistic push . It preached an extreme version of realism .
 The war would not have been possible without Adolf Hitler and his plans to conquer the world . Adolf Hitler's plans for the war would have been impossible without Hitler . Hitler was the only man in the world to come from behind .
 Professing the superiority of Germans as a “master race” along with virulent anti-Semitism and anticommunism . Professing of superiority to Germans as ‘master race,’ the book says . Professing of German superiority is part of the book's
 Constructivism emphasizes the role of ideas and identities in shaping world politics . Constructivism is a form of constructivism that focuses on identity and identity issues . The rise of Hitler and Germany's rise of nationalism is part of Constructivism .
 Adolf Hitler persuaded the German people of the need to persecute the Jews and expand German borders through armament and aggression . Adolf Hitler convinced the people that the Jews needed to be persecuted . Hitler convinced them that the Jewish community should be persecuted for their persecution .
 He constructed and cultivated a widespread perception in Germany that, in his words, ""an evil exists that threatens every man, woman and child of this great nation"
 Hitler's "Thousand-Year Reich" vision was of a vastly expanded—and continually expanding—German core, extending deep into Russia . France, the Low Countries, Scandinavia, central Europe, and the Balkans would provide resources and labor for the core .
 German occupation policies during the war saw conquered nations reduced to satellites, satrapies, and reservoirs of slave labor .
 CSS Point were the practical application of Hitler’s conception of the new world order . The CSS Point was the first step in the development of the CSS Point .
 By August of that same year, the United States atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki forced Japan to end its war of conquest . The U.S. atomic bomb of Hiroshima in August 1945 was the end of Japan's war against Japan .
 Germany itself was divided into occupation zones that provided the basis for its partition into Cold War-era East and West Germany .
 In the Far East, the Soviet Union took the four Kurile Islands from Japan, or the “Northern Territories,” as Japan calls them . Korea was divided into Soviet and United States occupation zones at the Thirty-Eighth Parallel .
 Morocco Algeria Algeria yTuoisia OSSA baton In <Mr Franca SovMl annejabont Fnncti ocoipabon Sovwlmiusnca . Europe in 1943 Europe in 1945 Soviet Union Atlantic Ocean Union of Soviet Socialist Republics .
 The map shows the height of German expansion in 1943, when it occupied Europe from the Atlantic Ocean and the Baltic Sea to the gates of Moscow in the Soviet Union .
 The “Big Three” leaders met at the Yalta Conference s February 1945 to design a new world order . Winston Churchill, Franklin Roosevelt, Joseph Stalin and Joseph Stalin met .
 President Obama and Hillary Clinton reached vague compromises on issues of national security . But the compromises concealed the differences percolating below the surface .
 Following Germany’s unconditional surrender in May, the Big Three (with the United States now represented by Harry Truman) met again in July 1945 at Potsdam . The Big Three met in 1945 at the end of World War II .
 Winston Churchill, Franklin Roosevelt, and Joseph Stalin meet at Yalta as victorious great power allies to establish rules for all states to follow in the post-World War II global order . The meeting ended without agreement, and replaced by bitter competition, facade of Allied unity began to disintegrate
 Alexis de Tocqueville foreseen in 1835 that the Americans and Russians now held in their hands the destinies of half humankind .
 World War II caused the distribution of global power from multipolarity to bipolarity . World War I was the most important product of the war, perhaps the most significant product of it .
 Washington and Moscow used the fledgling United Nations to pursue their competition with each other rather than to keep the peace . After 1949, after 1949, became known as the Cold War, Washington and Russia used the U.N. to pursue competition .
 The Gold War and its lessons still cast dark shadows over todays geostrategic landscape . As the third and last hegemonic struggle of the twentieth century, the Gold War still casts dark shadows .
 The U.S. should take the lead in running the world in the way that the world ought to be run . The United States should lead the way the world should be run, says President Obama .
 Second great war of the twentieth century, without parallel in the number of participants and destruction, brought about a global system dominated by two superpowers whose nuclear weapons radically changed the role that threats of warfare would play in world politics . Cold War —Harry S Truman, United States president .
 Circumstances gave each superpower reasons to fear and to struggle against each other’s potential global leadership, writes CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 The domino theory suggested that communism was inherently driven to knock over one country after another, Soviet communism was expansionistic . Soviet communism is inherently expansionistic, according to the Domino Theory .
 Ideological incompatibility may have ruled out compromise as an option . As a result, ideological incompatibility ruled out a compromise as a solution .
 From this constructivist perspective, conflicting interests were secondary to misunderstandings and ideologies . The constructivist view is that conflicting interests and ideologies are secondary to conflicting interests .
 Additional factors, beyond those rooted in divergent interests, ideologies, and images, undoubtedly combined to produce this explosive Soviet-American hegemonic rivalry .
 To sort out the relative causal influence of the various factors, we must evaluate how, once it erupted after the 1945-1948 gestation period, the Cold War changed over its forty-four-year duration .
 At this critical juncture, George F Kennan, then a diplomat in the American embassy in Moscow, sent Washington his famous ‘long telegram” assessing the sources of Soviet conduct . Kennan was then a Diplomat in Moscow .
 Kennan argued that Soviet leaders would forever feel insecure about their political ability to maintain power against forces both within Soviet society and the outside world .
 Their insecurity would lead to an active, perhaps aggressive, Soviet foreign policy . Their insecurity could lead to a more aggressive foreign policy, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says .
 President Truman made Kennan’s assessment the cornerstone of American postwar foreign policy . President Harry S Truman made the assessment a cornerstone of his post-war foreign policy.
 Truman Doctrine defined the strategy the U.S. would pursue for the next forty years, over Kennan’s objections . Eventually known as the Truman Doctrine, this statement is known as “The Truman Doctrine .
 Czechoslovakia in 1948, the Soviet blockade of West Berlin in June of that year, the communist rise to power on the Chinese mainland in 1949, the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 . The Chinese invasion of Tibet in 1950, the invasion of Tibetan in 1950 and the on-
 The Soviet Union sought, however cautiously, to increase its power in places where opportunities appeared to exist . Even so, the Soviet Union looked cautiously, it sought to expand its power .
 From Coexistence to Detente, 1963-1978, U.S. and Soviet military capabilities were the only alternatives . The growing threat of mutual destruction made coexistence or nonexistence appear the only alternative .
 President Nixon initiated a new approach to Soviet relations that in 1969 he officially labeled detente . Nixon's national security adviser, Flenry A Kissinger, called it "detente" In 1969, Nixon officially labeled it "deterente"
 The U.S. linkage strategy aims to shape superpower relations and lessen incentives for war through the continuation of mutually rewarding exchanges . Along these lines, the objective of the United States linkage strategy ' np.,?,?, .
 Visits, cultural exchanges, trade agreements, arms control talks, and joint technological ventures replaced threats, warnings, and confrontations . Visits and cultural exchanges replaced threats and warnings .
 The evolution of U.S.-Soviet relations during the Cold War displays a series of shifts between periods of conflict and cooperation . Key events in Cold War relations between the two countries were key events .
 The arms race resumed feverishly, often at the expense of addressing domestic economic problems . It's not the first time the arms race has resumed feverously .
 Mikhail Gorbachev: "He situation is very complex, very tense" Mikhail Gorbiachev: 'He situation was very complex and very tense' The new Soviet leader: "It is very difficult to understand what is happening"
 Gorbachev’s advocacy of ‘new thinking’ in order to achieve rapprochement, or reconciliation, of the rival states’ interests . Instead, prospects for a more constructive phase improved greatly . Instead of a more destructive phase, prospects improved greatly following Gor
 The former signifies greater openness and individual freedom, and the latter refers to nomic systems . The nomic system means greater openness, individual freedom .
 Gorbachev embarked on domestic reforms to promote democratization and the transition to the market economy . Embracing these principles, Gorbachachev proclaimed his desire to end the Gold War contest .
 The Soviet Union agreed to end its aid to and support of the Gastro regime in Guba, withdrew from Afghanistan, and announced unilateral reductions in military spending . Soviet Union withdrew from the country and withdrew from its support of Guba .
 In 1989, the Berlin Wall came down, and by 1991 the Gold War had truly ended . The Soviet Union dissolved, accepted capitalist free-market principles, and initiated democratic reforms .
 The Soviet Union acquiesced in the defeat of communism, the reunification of Germany, and the disintegration of its east European bloc of allies, the Warsaw Pact . To nearly everyone’s astonishment, the Soviet Union .
 The conclusion of the enduring rivalry between East and West, and with it the end of the seventy-year ideological dispute, was a history-transforming event in which liberalism seemed to triumph . The West and the East were at odds for decades .
 The U.S. helped build a "far-flung" system of multilateral institutions, alliances, trade agreements, and political partnerships . The system helped draw countries into the United States’ orbit .
 Richard Nixon was one of the architects of the U.S.-SOVIET linkage strategy along with Secretary of State Henry Kissinger . The first Strategic Arms Limitations Talks treaty was signed by the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 The unanticipated outcome undermined confidence in the adequacy of conventional realist theories that argued that no great power would ever accept the loss of position to another hegemonic rival without a fight .
 ‘Tough’ policy and intensified arms race communists to ‘give up.’ sheer nonsense. The transformations ... would not have begun were it not for him.”—James A Baker III, U.S. secretary of state .
 “It was man who ended the Cold War in case you didn’t notice.”—Fred Charles Ikle, U.S. deputy secretary of the United States . “The [communist hard-line] conservatives and reactionaries were given predominant influence.
 Containment focused first and foremost on preventing Moscow from seizing key centers of industrial power that lay near its borders . “The acute phase of the fall of communism started outside of the Soviet Union and spread to the Soviet Soviet Union itself.”—David Cortright, political scientist .
 In accepting the decay of their empire, Russian leaders made perhaps the most dramatic peaceful retreat from power in history . Russian leaders accepted the decay and accepted it as part of a peaceful transition .
 Rapid, unanticipated changes in world politics create uncertainty about the global future . Ts Ts THE POST-COLD WAR ERA . Ts The Post-Cold War era is the name of the post-cold war era .
 As time passed, other great powers began to vie for increased influence and visibility in world politics . Other great powers were also vying for greater influence .
 This renewed contest has fueled debate as to whether multipolarity better describes the emerging distribution of power today . The renewed contest is fueled by debate over whether it is multipolarized .
 With the end of the Cold War, the United States stood alone at the summit of the international hierarchy . The U.S. stood alone in the post-Cold War era .
 It remains the only country with the military, economic, and cultural assets to be a decisive player in any part of the world it chooses to choose . It is the only nation with the ability to be decisive players in any region it chooses .
 Defense expenditures in 2015 are larger than those of nearly all other countries combined . The U.S. military is stronger than everybody else’s .
 The United States accounts for over a fifth of global income and almost one-third of the entire world’s combined spending on research and development . With less than 5 percent of the global population, the U.S. accounts for almost one third of the combined spending .
 This is why America’s unique superpower position atop the global pyramid of power seemingly allows it to continue to be a superpower . This is despite the fact that the U.S. is the world's most powerful superpower .
 Bush Doctrine led to a surge of anti-Americanism between 2003 and 2008, author says . Anti-U.S. anti-Americaism was a reaction to controversial foreign policy decisions, not controversial decisions .
 Although the United States may hold an unrivaled position in the world today, in the long run, unipolarity is not likely to endure . The U.S. is in a position that is unrivalied today, but it's unlikely to last long term .
 Robert Gates expressed concerns that the United States force structure is likely out of scale to existing threats . Former U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates has expressed concerns about the size of the American force .
 The U.S.’ predominance in the world has been further eroded by the financial crisis of 2008, which originated in the United States and spread throughout the global financial system . Some are worried about America's ability to sustain its predominant position in the international system .
 Although the United States continues to rank at the top in terms of the size of its military, other indicators signal a relative decline . The U.S. military ranks at the bottom of the list of countries with the largest military strength .
 The U.S. is slowly eroding the foundation of its superpower status, authors say . They conclude that the United States is eroding its superpowers status .
 Fareed Zakaria attributes transformative significance to economic growth experienced by countries during the post-Cold War period . Zakaria: The settlement of key international issues always requires action by the dominant power in combination with other great powers .
 There is growing recognition that the distribution of power in the international system is shifting to uni-multipolar . Political scientist Samuel Fluntington has described the shift in power as uni multipolar . There is a growing recognition of this shift in the global system .
 Although the United States continues to be the only superpower, other states are not easily dominated . According to this perspective, the U.S. is not easily dominant in the world, it says .
 U.S. involvement remains critical in addressing key international issues . Resolution of transnational problems also requires action by some combination of other major states, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The vulnerability of the United States to non-Westphalian threats demanded a rethinking of how security was conceptualized and rendered operational . U.S. needs to re-think how security is conceptualized .
 Many wonder about the future of China's role in the international system . At the same time, China's meteoric rise on the international stage, many wonder .
 Some suggest that the world will eventually fall under China's leadership . Some suggest it will soon fall under the leadership of China .
 China's continued military growth and expanding economy signal global aspirations . China's military growth, coupled with its expanding economy, signals global aspirations, say experts .
 What is certain, though, is that China as a global power is not likely to fade away any time soon . China is the world's most powerful power, but it is not going to fade ever .
 Perhaps the United States and China will follow a path different from that of past global power struggles . Perhaps the U.S. and China's paths will be different from those of past .
 As Flarvard law professor Noah Feldman notes, “The world's major power and its leading challenger are economically interdependent to an unprecedented degree.” The relationship between the U.S. and Russia is “unprecedented”
 There are growing limits on American domination, says U.S. President Barack Obama . The shift in economic and political power has important implications for the world order, he says .
 There is a deepening sense that shifts in the global distribution of power are under way, says David Frum . He says there is a growing sense of a shift in power distribution in the world .
 The shape of global power is decidedly pyramidal—^with the United States alone at the top, a second tier of major countries (China, Japan, India, Russia, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Brazil), and several tiers descending below .
 The U.S. is no longer the single most prosperous country in the world . The United States remains in the top tier with many of its Western allies .
 Predicting what cleavages and partnerships will develop among the great powers in the future is difficult . It is hard to foresee what will become the next major axis of conflict .
 Russia's relations with the United States have oscillated from warm to cool . Concomcomitantly, its relations with U.S. have also been warm and cool .
 Collaboration has been evident in the global war on terror, further reductions in nuclear weapons, and Russia entry into the World Trade Organization . Collaboration is evident in reducing nuclear weapons and entering into the world trade organization .
 Tensions also erupted over the Arab Spring, the overthrow of Libya’s dictator Muammar al-Qaddafl . The United States saw as the nondemocratic election that returned Vladimir Putin to the presidency . The U.S. also saw what the United States thought
 The U.S. and Russia continue to engage in dialogue about key global issues .
 Despite discord caused by Russia’s role in Ukraine, Russia's foreign Top 10 countries are ranked first . Russia's Foreign Top 10 list includes Russia, Ukraine and Russia's other top 10 countries .
 Global prosperity has increased across all regions of the world over the last five years . Despite the worst financial crisis in modern times and citizen uprisings in protest of autocratic regimes around the world, global prosperity continues to rise .
 There is debate as to the extent of Russia's power in the modern period and whether it is once again a geopolitical foe bent on undermining the foundations of U.S. leadership and the existing world order . Yet there is debate over whether Russia is a geopolitical threat to the United States .
 Some see Russia as “pushing back against the political settlement of the Cold War” (Mead, 2014, 4) and seeking to upset the United States as the global hegemon . Russia is chipping away at the relationships and norms that undergird the status
 Russia is strongly asserting itself across Eurasia, as seen in fhe invasion of Ukraine, challenges to U.S. goals in Syria, and Iran's nuclear program . These efforts are seen an attempt to dominate the region and threaten the reigning world order . Russia is seen as an attempt
 Its confrontational actions in Crimea, Armenia, and Georgia have been driven to a great extent by geopolitical vulnerability as the West has moved into its backyard . The West is driven by its vulnerability as it moves into the West's backyard, analysts say .
 The liberal international framework that was shaped following World War II continues to underlie the global economy and mechanisms for addressing global problems . United States power far surpasses fhat of Russia, says U.S. President Obama .
 In 2014, China overtook the United States to become the leading economy in terms of gross domestic product . GDP is measured in purchasing power parity, which removes differences in countries’ price levels .
 By some estimates, the Chinese economy will reach $61 trillion by 2050 . It will far exceed the United States and India, respectively, as the next two largest economies .
 Projections show that the rank order of the largest economies by 2050 will be substantially different from today . The rankings of the world's largest economies will change dramatically by 2050 .
 China’s share of global GDP in PPP will increase from 16. percent in 2014 to 20 percent in 2030 and level off to around 19.% in 2050 . China will remain the world's largest economy throughout the century .
 India's share of world GDP in PPP will rise from just below 7 percent in 2014 to about 13 percent in 2050 . India is also likely to experience significant economic growth over this period .
 The share of global GDP in PPP for the United States and EU is expected to decline from a combined 33 percent in 2014 to 25 percent in 2050 . At the same time, the U.S. and EU's share of PPP in global GDP will fall from 33 percent to
 The speed of the transition in global economic power may vary, but the general direction of the trend is clear, says David Frum .
 Many countries in the Global South, particularly in Asia, are rising in prominence in the global economy . The Global South is becoming a major part of the world's economies .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ purchasing power parity parity is achieved . The index determines what can be bought with a unit of each currency .
 By 2050, the top five ranked countries may inciude the U.S. pius the emerging market economies of China, india, indonesia, and Brazii. The United States may be the most populous country in the world by 2050 .
 Eurozone growth is projected to remain weak, and the rankings of those advanced markets are expected to deciine over the coming decades . The ranking of advanced markets is expected to change over the years .
 Competition could escalate between the globe’s two major contenders for supremacy, the United States and China . If the U.S. practices containment to try to prevent China's rise or China threatens security interests .
 Different political types of great power relations could emerge in the economic and military spheres . Quite different political types may emerge in economic, military spheres, says President Obama .
 The Chinese military’s outreach for international approaches to managing shared security cooperation is not intended to impair the international system, but to become a problems through player and builder of the system . The benefit of security can be truly shared by all. coordinated action .
 The opportunities and challenges we face in the world today call for a multilateral approach, says President Obama . "All of the great powers working cooperatively to achieve global solutions," he says .
 The effort to build a great power coalition to wage a war against global terrorism following 9/11 is a more recent example of multilateralism . Multilateralism to construct a concert through collective action .
 China was the world’s leading economic power for 18 of the past twenty centuries, according to Chris Patten, a former British governor of Hong Kong . Patten: China has been the world's top economic power since 18th century .
 To the West, the notion of a world in which the center of global economic gravity lies in Asia may seem unimaginable . Asia is the world's center of economic gravity .
 U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry meets with Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi . Wang Yi is the Chinese foreign minister of the United States . John Kerry met with Wang Yi in Beijing .
 Hu Jintao: Challenge and opportunity always eome together . Under certain conditions one could be transformed into the other . Of course, we have no way of knowing what the future holds .
 How the great powers react to the eventual emergence of a new global system is crucial . How the future of the world's great powers will depend on how they respond to the situation .
 In Chapter 5, we turn your attention from the rich, powerful, and commercially active great powers at the center of the world system to the poorer, weaker, and economically dependent states in the Global South and the emerging powers in the global east . We turn attention to the poor, weaker
 The Enduring Power of the Liberal Order,” Foreign Affairs (May/ June): 2. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 4 . 5. 5th. 4th. 6th. 7th. 3rd. 4: 5th . 5th:
 A blog discussing current power relations between the U.S. and China . A blog on China's relationship with the United States .
 Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap . Key Term Videos: Hegemon, Structuralism, Nationalism, Multipolarity, Containment, Soft Power, Multilateralism . Additional Videos: Containment and Soft Power .
 Softening of U.S. policy toward Cuba is seen by both supporters and opponents as a ""game-changer"" for relations between the two countries . After more than a half-century of hostile relations, the softening of relations between Cuba and the United States is seen as
 Cuban wears a shirt with a U.S. flag design in Cuba .
 This divide represents a popular way of describing the inequalities that separate rich and poor states . This divide also represents the inequality that separates rich states from poor .
 The division in power and wealth characterizing the Global North and Global South pose both moral and security problems . The division of power in the North and the South poses both moral, security problems, says CNN.com .
 Although poverty and inequality have existed throughout recorded history, today it has reached extremes . The levels of inequality in the UK have reached extremes, with poverty at the highest levels .
 Global North is a term used to refer to the world’s wealthy, industrialized countries iocated primarily in the Northern Hemisphere . What are the causes and consequences of the Global North? Find out .
 Global North countries are wealthy and democratic . Global North is rich and democratic. Global North nations are rich and prosperous. The U.S. is rich.
 Some countries enjoy higher levels of prosperity and global influence than others . Yet there is considerable variation within the Global South, with some countries enjoying higher prosperity .
 Third Worid is a Cold War term to desoribe the less developed countries of Africa, Asia, the Caribbean, and Latin America . The term is used to describe less developed nations in the world .
 The relatively wealthy industrialized countries share a commitment to varying forms of democratic political institutions . The United States, Japan, the European Union, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand are among them .
 During the Cold War, the group of countries, including the Soviet Union, and its Eastern European allies, embraced communism and central planning . Countries with limited political, military, or economic capabilities and influence .
 Many analysts trace the roots of today’s inequalities among states at the global level of analysis . They believe the global system has properties built into it that account for most poor countries’ inability to close the gap with wealthy countries .
 The rules governing international politics today were constructed in the 1648 Peace of Westphalia following Europe’s Thirty Years’ War .
 The origins and persistence of the inequalities of states stem in part from the fact that today’s modern global system was initially, and remains, socially constructed reality by, of, and for the most powerful states .
 A good starting place is to begin your inquiry by taking into consideration the legacy of this system today . So, a good starting point is to start your inquiry with this information .
 Almost all of the independent sovereign sovereign states in the Global South were at one time colonies . They argue that today’s inequalities are a product of that past colonization .
 During the Cold War, the term Third World was used to distinguish the growing number of newly independent but less developed states on either side of the divide that shared a colonial past . The term 'Third World' was used in the 1950s and '60s to distinguish newly developed states from
 The “Third World” was used to refer to those countries that failed to grow economically in a way that was comparable to countries of the First World, the industrialized great powers such as Europe, North America, and Japan . However, the ‘Third World' was soon used
 The so-called Second World, consisting of the Soviet Union and its allies, was distinguished by a communist ideological commitment to planned economic policies rather than reliance on free-market forces .
 Global North refers to what was previously known as the First World . Global South refers to the less developed countries that are mostly located in the Southern Hemisphere . More common today are the terms Global North and Global South .
 Global North includes low-income countries such as Ghana and Haiti, where a majority of the population tries to survive through subsistence agriculture . Middle-income nations such as Brazil and Malaysia produce manufactured goods . Countries such as Kuwait and Qatar, whose petroleum exports have generated incomes rivaling those of Global
 Indonesia and Timor-Leste are among the most populous nations in the world . Timor is an island state roughly the same size as Gonnecticut . Indonesia has more than 17,500 islands, an oceanic expanse larger than the United States .
 Global South countries vary politically and culturally, ranging from democratic Gosta Rica to autocratic Myanmar . Global South South countries also vary politically, culturally, politically .
 Most Latin American countries were independent before World War II . Not until afterward did other countries of the Global South gain that status .
 A diverse array of new sovereign states has joined the global community . Nearly all carved from the British, Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, and French empires built under colonialism four hundred years ago .
 Few colonies exist and the decolonization process is almost complete . Today, few colonies exist in the world .
 Four centuries of the slave trade by the Portuguese claimed more than 13 million lives . The Portuguese slave trade was responsible for 13 million deaths . The slave trade is the largest in the history of the world .
 Although independence was achieved in I960, peace and prosperity did not follow . Peace and prosperity were not followed by prosperity . I960 was achieved by I960 .
 Mobutu Sese Seko established an authoritarian state and controlled the people through fear and repression until his overthrow in 1997 . Rising to power in 1965, he ruled the country from 1965 to 1997 .
 Mobutu perpetuated the colonial legacy of exploitation . Over the course of his reign, he perpetuated a colonial legacy .
 Emerging powers (middle powers) are countries with rising capabilities and influence that seek a more assertive rote in international affairs . decolonization is the process by which sovereign independence was achieved by countries that were once colonies of the great powers .
 The expanding colonial powers eagerly participated in transatlantic slave trade from the mid-1500s through the late 1700s . The slave trade was spurred by the questfor labor in the New World (Africans proved much more resistant than the indigenous peoples to diseases brought by Europeans)
 The first wave of European empire building began in the late fifteenth century . The Dutch, English, French, Portuguese, and Spanish used their naval power to conquer territories for commercial gain .
 Scientific innovations made the European explorers’ adventures possible, and merchants followed them . Merchants followed in their wake, “quickly seizing upon opportunities to increase their business and profits.”
 The economic strategy underlying the relationship between colonies and colonizers during this era of ‘classical imperialism’ is known as mercantilism . The economic philosophy advocating government regulation of economic life to increase state power is known .
 European rulers believed that power flowed from the possession of national wealth measured in gold and silver . They believed that cultivating mining and industry was the best way to become rich .
 Adam Smith argued that national wealth grew not through the accumulation of precious metals but from the capital and goods they could buy . Adam Smith: National wealth grew from capital to goods bought by people who could buy more .
 The Second Wave of European Imperialism washed over the world, as Europe—^joined later by the United States and Japan—aggressively colonized new territories from the 1870s to 1914 .
 In the last twenty years of the nineteenth century, Africa fell under the control of seven European powers . In all of the Far East and the Pacific, only China, Japan, and Siam were not completely conquered .
 The United States acquired Puerto Rico and the Philippines in 1898 Spanish-American War . The U.S. extended its colonial reach west to Hawaii . The Panama Canal Zone was an American creation .
 The ten major imperial powers competed for colonies throughout the globe in the present-day Global South . The Marxist ideology maintains that if society is organized so that every person produces according to his or her ability, a community without class distinctions will emerge . Communism is communism .
 Radical theorists following Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin saw imperialism’s aggressive competition as caused by a capitalist need for profitable overseas outlets for surplus production . Marx and Lenin were adherents of communism .
 World-system theory saw a world division of labor where the “core” areas exploit the (nonindustrial) “periphery,” and colonization provided a means for imperial control over foreign lands . The theory was critical of the capitalist world economy .
 Liberal economists regarded the new imperialism not as a product of capitalism but as a response to certain maladjustments that could be corrected . Liberal economists, by contrast, regarded it as an economic response to maladjustment that can be fixed .
 A Hobson argued, jockeying for power and prestige between competitive empires had always characterized the great powers’ behavior in the European balance-of-power system .
 partition served the imperial powers’ purposes to the detriment of the local populations . partition served imperial powers' purposes, especially in Africa, where partition served their purposes . Its efforts to maintain the status quo help to explain the second wave of imperial expansion .
 Self-determination advocated giving indigenous nationalities the moral right to decide which authority would rule them . Self-determined nationalities should be able to choose which authority to rule them, according to self-determination .
 Wilson and other liberal theorists reasoned that freedom would lead to the creation of states and governments that were content with their territorial boundaries and, therefore, less inclined to make war . Wilson's theory: States and governments content with territorial boundaries .
 The proposition that self-determination should be extended to Europe’s overseas empires did not receive serious support . Other territorial adjustments were also made in Europe, but the proposition was not serious support.
 The territories controlled by Germany and the Ottoman Empire were transferred to countries that would govern them as “mandates” until their eventual selfrule . The territories were transferred under League of Nations auspices .
 Many territorial decisions gave rise to subsequent conflicts across the globe . Many of these territorial decisions have given rise to wars across the world .
 The defeated powers’ territories placed under the United Nations trusteeship system were not absorbed by others but were promised eventual self-rule . This set an important precedent so that after World War II the defeated powers' territories did not have to be absorbed by other nations .
 Realpolitik is the theoretical outlook prescribing that countries should increase their power and wealth in order to compete with and dominate other countries . selfdetermination is the liberal doctrine that people should be able to determine the government that will rule them . Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content
 bloodshed followed closely on the heels of independence in the Congo when the Belgians granted their African colony independence in I960, and it dogged the unsuccessful efforts of Portugal to battle the winds of decolonization .
 Despite these political convulsions, decolonization was extraordinarily rapid and remarkably peaceful . Decolonization in Africa was remarkably rapid but remarkably peaceful.
 Cold War competition for political allies gave both superpower rivals incentive to lobby for the liberation of overseas empires . Cold War rivalry between East and West was an incentive to help liberate overseas empires.
 When World War I broke out, only 62 independent countries existed . Only 62 of the world's largest countries were independent countries .
 With secession from Sudan in July 2011, South Sudan became the world’s newest nation . The United States Department of State says 195 people have been killed in South Sudan .
 Sudan's President Omar al-Bashir visited South Sudan on a visit to Juba, South Sudan . The Sudanese president and South Sudan's Salva Kiir are both in the country's capital .
 The Global South is sometimes described today as a “zone of turmoil” or an “axis of upheaval” in large measure . Most of the people in the Global South face chronic poverty amidst war, tyranny, and anarchy .
 Global North’s history suggests that “economic and technological development bring a coherent set of social, cultural, and political changes . . The continuing expansion of Global South market economies under capitalism appears likely to hasten democratization .
 Some see democracy as failing even while elections become more commonplace . Even so, the continued spread of the liberal democratic community is not guaranteed, with some seeing democracy failing .
 In the average election held among the bottom billion poorest of the world’s population, the incumbent “wins” a healthy 74 percent of the vote .
 Low and middle-income countries have huge gaps on key indicators differentiating them from high-income nations . We compare the differences on some of the key indicators .
 The situation is much more favorable—and the quality of life is relatively advantageous—in the developed countries of the Global North than it is in the Southern Flemisphere . Nearly all the Global South countries are located .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ developing countries /\ category used by the World Bank to identify lowincome Global South countries .
 GNI measures production by a state’s citizens or companies, regardless of where the production occurs . A category used by the World Bank to identify Global North countries with an annual GNI per capita of $12,746 or more .
 Average annual population growth rate, 2010-2020 13% 0.7% Population density 74 25 Women in parliaments 21% 26% Land area 80,385.5% Land areas 80,000 square kilometers . Average annual growth rate is 13% .
 Workers’ remittances received $324,529 $135,695 Refugees by country of origin 11,303 . Exports—Goods and Services $6,997 $16,486 . Imports: $8,444 $40,788 .
 Sometimes described as the “Third World’s Third World” These countries are the very poorest, with little economic growth and rapid population growth that is straining their overburdened society .
 The daunting scale of misery and marginalization is evident across the Global South, from which only a fraction of its countries have begun to escape . Only a handful of countries have yet to escape from the poverty of the South, say experts .
 Other theorists focus on international causes such as the position of developing countries within the global political economy .
 Walt Rostow envisioned countries moving through stages of economic growth . Walt W Rostow was an economic historian and U.S. policy maker . Rostow: "I'm not sure what the future is going to be"
 He predicted that traditional societies beginning the path to development would inevitably pass through various stages by means of the free market and would eventually ‘take off’ and eventually become similar to the mass-consumption societies of the capitalist Global North .
 The countries of the Global South rejected that prognosis and the premises on which it was based, says CNN.com.com's John Defterios .
 Leaders in the Global North did not accept the classical liberal argument that the countries of the North became prosperous because they concentrated on hard work, innovative inventions and education .
 By the mid-1970s, it was apparent that assistance from the rich countries of the Global North had not brought about the expected prosperity or democracy in the Global South . Furthermore, by the mid-'70s, the aid from the North had failed to bring about prosperity in the South
 Classical theory attributes the causes of most developing countries’ underdevelopment to internal conditions within states . Dependence theory emphasizes international factors, specifically the Global South’s dependence on the dominant great powers .
 dependency theory builds on Lenin’s Marxist critique of imperialism, but it goes beyond it to account for changes that have occurred in recent decades . As noted in Chapter 2, dependency theory is a theory of dependency theory . It goes beyond Lenin's Marxist critique, but goes beyond that to
 Classical liberal theorists submit that specialization in production according to comparative advantage will increase income in an unfettered market . Dependent theorists maintain that global inequalities cannot be reduced so long as developing countries continue to specialize in producing primary products for which there are often numerous competing suppliers and limited demand .
 Governments (often dictatorships) became heavily involved in managing their economies, and in some cases became the owners and operators of industry .
 Multinational corporations contribute to dualism by favoring a minority of well-compensated employees over the rest . This increases gaps in pay, and widens differences between rural and urban economic opportunities .
 Twenty years ago North America, Europe and Japan produced almost all of the world’s science . The U.S. and Europe produced almost every aspect of the science .
 They were the aristocrats of technical knowledge, presiding over a centuries-old regime . The aristocrats presided over the regime, which has been in existence for centuries .
 Typically, Global South countries have been unable to develop indigenous technology appropriate to their own resources . They have been dependent on powerful Global North multinational corporations to transfer technical know-how .
 Research and development expenditures are devoted to solving the Global North’s problems, with technological advances seldom meeting the needs of the Global South . This means that research and development expenditure is devoted to . solving the problems of the . Global North's problems .
 Global North remains committed to global research and development, but regional shifts are occurring . Global North is committed to the Global North, but it is also committed to regional research .
 The United States share of global research and development declined from 34 percent in 2009 to 31 percent in 2014 . The U.S. share of the global market for research has declined since 2009 .
 Europe experienced a decline from 26 percent to 22 percent between 2009 and 2014 . Europe experienced an increase of 26 percent from 2009 to 2014 .
 Development theories have waxed and waned depending on their ability to explain and predict current world events . Over time, the perceived effectiveness and credibility of development theories have waned .
 Classical theory prescribed that countries should emulate the path of industrial democracies in order to develop . During its heyday in the 1960s, classical theory was in its heydays in the UK .
 Many Latin American countries suffered from authoritarian rule and abject poverty . For example, many countries in Latin America suffered from dictatorship and poverty . But many Latin American nations have been ruled by authoritarian rule .
 The relevance of this theoretical explanation came to be questioned as well, particularly in light of the success of countries that experienced meaningful growth by participating in the global market and pursuing export-oriented strategies .
 A society's beliefs, values, and traditions shape its larger worldview and engagement with the forces of modernization . A society needs to be able to engage in its modernization, the author says .
 The success of industrialization in the Global East challenges earlier ethnocentric assumptions . Industrialization is a challenge to earlier assumptions, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 There are multiple inflection points, as individual phases of modernization tend to be associated with particular changes in society . The inflection point is when society begins to change, as well as when it comes to modernization .
 Critics fear that the digital divide in access to communications technology is not closing fast enough . Small entrepreneurs in the Global South will be put at a disadvantage, critics say .
 At present, the Global North remains predominant and the primary beneficiary of the information technology revolution . The Global North is still predominant in the information industry .
 Most of the growth in the media and telecommunications industries is expected to occur in the Global South . However, most of the industry growth will be in the Media and Telecommunications industry .
 Global South countries must face the fateful question of whether they dare to call for help from the great powers and dominating international organizations when violence, terrorism, and anarchy prevail . Global South must decide whether to ask for help when violence and terrorism prevail .
 The cry for assistance poses risks, because where there is outside involvement, there tends to be outside influence, some of which may be unwelcome, says the BBC . "The cry for help poses risks," says BBC's Simon Tisdall .
 Faced with seemingly endless conflict at home or abroad, it is not surprising that the Global South countries have joined the rest of the world’s quest to acquire modern weapons of war . Ghina, India, North Korea, and Pakistan have nuclear weapons .
 In the Global South, military spending typically exceeds expenditures on health and education . impoverished states facing ethnic, religious, or tribal strife at home are quite prepared to sacrifice economic development to acquire weapons .
 O North America O South America O Europe O Middle East & Africa O Asia-Pacific -O Russia CIS © Singapore Singapore Denmark Norway O R&D as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product .
 The amount of money a country spends on scientific research and development is one indicator of its global scientific standing . A country spends the most money in scientific research, development is a key indicator .
 Finland claimed the greatest number of scientists and engineers as a proportion of its total population . Israel spent the largest portion of its GDP on scientific discovery in 2014, with Finland claiming the most scientists in Finland .
 Information and communication technology has spread rapidly in recent years . Infraption and communications technology is a key part of the digital revolution .
 A digital divide has emerged in which some countries have high levels of access and others have limited access . However, the level of penetration varies both among and within countries .
 Based on the Digital Inclusion Risk Index, which takes into account access to personal computers, Internet and broadband, and mobile telephones and fixed-line telephones, this map depicts relative levels of access to ICT across the globe .
 Countries grouped into four categories that range from high to low ICT access access . Countries are grouped into . four categories: high, low, high, high and low . Countries grouped in four categories .
 As shown, the United States enjoys high access, whereas countries on Africa's west coast have limited access . The U.S. is more vulnerable to recessions in the global economy than Africa .
 How to cope with dominance and dependence thus remains a key concern in the Global South . The Global South is facing a key challenge: how to cope .
 To gain control over their economic futures, they began coordinating their efforts within the United Nations . Growing numbers and voting power gave them greater influence than they could otherwise command .
 UNGTAD later became a permanent UN organization through which the Global South would express its interests concerning development issues . UNGTad later became an international organization through its membership .
 The Global South sought to compel the Global North to abandon practices perceived as perpetuating the Global South’s dependence . Motivated by the oil-exporting countries’ rising bargaining power, the Global S.S. sought to .
 Group of 77 was the coalition of Third Worid countries that sponsored the 1963 Joint Declaration of Deveioping Countries calling for reform to allow greater equality in North-South trade .
 The 1974 UN policy resolution called for a NorthSouth dialogue to open the way for the less developed countries of the Global South to participate more fully in the making of international economic policy .
 Rising oil prices have created a boom that is transforming both of these Arab kingdoms into zones of prosperity . Dubai and Kuwait are prime examples, as rising oil prices create a boom in both countries .
 One of the world's largest shopping malls is being built in Dubai . The shopping mall will also have an aquarium and a fivestory underwater hotel .
 In 2009, seven Latin American countries agreed to establish the ‘Banco del Sur’ in part to compete directly with the World Bank and circumvent Global North interference by funding big infrastructure projects within the region .
 The BRIGS countries also agreed to establish a New Development Bank . The bank is expected to be operational by 2016 . BRIGs countries agreed to set up the bank .
 Economic strength of BRIGS countries has outpaced increases in their voice at the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund . Economic cooperation within the Global South has greatly expanded .
 Dissatisfaction with these Bretton-Woods institutions has led the BRIGS countries to develop an alternative to global development finance . The BRIGs countries have developed alternative to the Bretton Woods institutions .
 One approach for closing the gap between the Global South and the Global North is the distribution of foreign assistance . Foreign aid and remittances are a key component of the solution to the problem .
 Security objectives have also figured prominently in motives of both economic and military assistance . The U.S. has been involved in Afghanistan in the past two decades .
 The general global trend in the overall amount of foreign aid allocations since 1970 has been toward gradual increases . Foreign aid allocations have increased steadily since 1970 .
 Critics resent what they perceive to be an entrenched state of mind in many Global South cultures that stands in the way of development . Critics resent the profit motive, competition, and consumerism that lie at the heart of capitalism .
 In response to this viewpoint, donors have grown increasingly insistent on “conditionality,” or demands that aid recipients must meet to receive continued assistance . Donors have become insistent that recipients of aid need to meet certain conditions .
 Donors also persist in ‘tying’ development assistance to the donors for their benefit . The World Bank estimates this practice reduces the value of aid by 15 to 30 percent . It violates free-market principles that the Global North claims to promote .
 The wealthy countries of the Global North agreed in 1970 to allocate 0.3% of their GNP as aid for the long-term development of the poorer countries . With UN Resolution 2626, the wealthy countries allocated 0.5% of GNP to help the poor in the long
 Much more money is funneled into Global South economies through remittances from migrant laborers working in the Global North . More than double the global total in foreign aid is funneling into the Global South economy . Migrant laborers send home to their families .
 Global remittances have risen steadily each year since the 1970s . Remittances are not as sensitive to economic downturns as private-capital flows . Not as sensitive as private capital flows .
 They have quadrupled over the past 14 years, from $132 billion in 2000 to $583 billion in 2014 . They have an anticipated rise to $636 billion by 2017, with a rise of $600 billion expected by 2017 .
 The money received is an important source of family income in many developing economies . It represents a very relevant percentage of the GDP of the receiving countries .
 In Lebanon and Tajikistan, remittances in some years have exceeded $5.5 billion . In some years, some of the money is spent in the form of money sent to the region .
 The billions of dollars that migrant workers send home each year are vital to developing countries . Migrant workers send millions of dollars back to developing nations .
 Developing countries have long pleaded for ‘trade, not aid’ to improve their global position . Access to the Global North’s markets is critical to Global South economic growth, says NIG .
 Many countries of the Global South have benefited from a “virtuous cycle” (Blanton and Blanton, 2008), wherein increased trade leads to improved domestic conditions that in turn facilitate trade .
 The General America-Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement aims to emulate NAFTA and create a free-trade zone that includes the United States, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, and Gosta Rica .
 Mercosur, commonly referred to as the “Gommon Market of the South,” is the largest trading bloc in South America and aims for full economic integration of the region . Mercosuro aims to be the largest trade bloc in the world .
 Full members include Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Uruguay and Venezuela . Bolivia, Golombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Peru hold associate membership status .
 The Asia-Pacific Economic Gooperation is an informal forum created in 1989 . The forum is committed to free trade and regional economic integration .
 Members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations agreed to set up a free-trade area . Vietnam, Gambodia, Laos, and Myanmar will also set up free trade area .
 The U.S.-Middle East Free Trade Area includes agreements between Bahrain, Israel, Jordan, Morocco, Morocco and Oman . The agreement includes agreements with Bahrain and Israel .
 The Gulf Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf was established in 1981 . It was established as a regional common market that also included a defense council . The council was also known as the Gulf of the Arab states of the Persian Gulf .
 It includes countries with similar political systems rooted in Islamic beliefs . The founding members included Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates .
 With a membership of fifteen southern African states, its objective is to facilitate socioeconomic cooperation . The African Economic Development Council is based in southern Africa . Its aim is to promote socioeconomic cooperation in the region .
 Economic Community of West African States was established in 1975 as a regional economic and trade union . West African states are part of the West African Confederation of Nations .
 With low-cost production models based on inexpensive local labor and growing domestic markets, companies in the Global South are competing with rich-country multinationals in the North .
 Leaders pledged to finance trade, resist protectionist measures, and assist the Global South . Global leaders pledged to help finance trade and resist protectionism measures .
 Such policies entail considerable risks and trade-offs, and they can create conflict between those with competing values and goals . Such policies can create conflicts between people with competing goals and goals, the author says .
 The primary danger lies in the potential for foreign investments to lead to foreign control and the erosion of the sovereign governments’ capacity to regulate the economy within their borders .
 Foreign investors might not invest their profits locally but channel them abroad for new investments or disburse them as dividends for their wealthy Global North shareholders . An additional danger is that multinational foreign investors may not invest locally .
 Despite the risks, many developing countries have relaxed restrictions in order to attract foreign investors . Many countries are offering Official Development Assistance tax and cash enticements .
 The impact of this new infusion of foreign investments in developing countries has been substantial given the Global South’s relatively small economies . The impact on foreign investment in developing nations is substantial .
 It has paved the way for emerging markets to expand their rates of economic development . The investments are causing income inequalities that the investments are creating .
 Developing countries are intensifying their competition for foreign investment capital to liberate themselves from dependence and destitution . Such fears and consequences notwithstanding notwithstanding, developing countries are looking to invest .
 Small powers are increasingly integrated with those of major powers . The fortunes of small powers are becoming more integrated with other nations .
 Chinese-operated hospital in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, is a Chinese-run hospital . The hospital is one of the world's largest private hospitals .
 Foreign capital has been a primary source for growth in the Global South in the past decade . Foreign capital is a key source of growth in many parts of the world .
 Private eguity, portfolio investment, and FDI experienced great volatility between 2007 and 2009 . Remittances and ODA were more stable than remittances .
 The prospects for foreign aid, trade, or foreign direct investments to contribute to the future development of, and relief of poverty in, the Global South will depend on a number of other factors . Debt Management and Governmental Corruption are key factors in poverty relief .
 One is the extent to which the level of debt facing many Global South countries can be managed . One of the key questions is how much debt facing the Global South can be tackled .
 Corruption undermines essential institutional structures and foments a culture of fear and distrust . National debt is not the only drain on a country’s economic and political resources . Corruption is not only a drain on national debt, it also undermines institutional structures, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Often, public resources are funneled away from the development of infrastructure in areas such as education and health care . Public resources are often used to funnel resources away from infrastructure, especially education .
 Widespread corruption also compromises market structures and discourages investment . Corruption is also a problem in the world's biggest economy .
 The violation of public trust that results from widespread corruption weakens civil society, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Violence of the public trust" weakens society, he says .
 Pervasive apathy and disengagement of ordinary citizens enhances the opportunity for public officials to use their position and national assets for personal gain . Public officials should not be using their position to gain personal gain, experts say .
 Environmental regulations are often ignored, and environmental projects are often easy to exploit for private gain . Environmental regulations often ignored and often ignored by the public .
 Corruption frequently leads to pronounced environmental degradation within a country . Corruption often leads to environmental degradation . As a result of corruption, environmental degradation can lead to environmental problems .
 In the aftermath of the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia in 2011, the breadth and scope of the corrupt practices by the ruling MAP 5 has been revealed . MAP 5 is the country's fifth largest state of the country .
 For a country with a GNP that only reaches $80 billion in a single year, this amount was staggering . This amount is staggering and had enormous implications for the welfare of its citizens . The country's GNP is only $80bn a year .
 Most were colonized by people of another race, experience varying degrees of poverty and hunger . They feel powerless in a world dominated by the affluent countries that once controlled them and perhaps still do .
 Gonsiderable change occurred among the newly emergent states as post-World War II decolonization took place, but much also remained the same .
 The relationships between the world’s great, middle, and small powers will no doubt continue to change . But how exactly how remains uncertain .
 North-South-East cooperation could begin, dedicated to finding solutions to common problems . Gonversely, a new era of North-Sectary cooperation could start, says Gaffes .
 South Korea’s Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade Kim Sung-han noted, “Although great powers are useful in mobilizing cooperation, their efforts are insufficient to coordinate all involved actors”
 Relations between the Global South and the Global North remain dominated by the great powers . Although elements of both approaches are evident, elements are evident . The Global South is still dominated by great powers, according to experts .
 The U.N. and the World Bank have been created by the world's great powers . That domination is funneled in part through powerful international organizations, such as the United Nations .
 Intergovernmental organizations provide an opportunity for the small and middle powers of the Global South to exert influence on world politics . At the same time, intergovernmental organizations give an opportunity to the small, middle powers to influence world politics, says CNN.com .
 To understand world politics and the roots of changes in international affairs, it is important to understand the impact of these influential IGOs as actors in the global arena .
 In 1959, Fidel Castro led a revolution that resulted in the overthrow of the authoritarian dictator Fulgencio Batista . Fidel Castro was the leader of Cuba's communist government in 1959 .
 The United States responded to Castro’s nationalization of private property by imposing trade restrictions on all goods except medical supplies and food . In 1962 President John Kennedy made these economic sanctions permanent .
 In 1982, the United States placed Cuba on its list of state sponsors of terrorism . Cuba’s support for armed revolution and leftist guerrilla groups in countries such as Angola, Ethiopia, Colombia, and Spain .
 Cuba’s relations with the U.S. remained strained for over fifty years, with Cubans attributing their poor economic situation and constrained diplomatic standing in the international community in large part to the United States policy and actions .
 In 2015, Cuba and the U.S. moved toward normalization of relations . The transition has momentous implications for Cuba and could usher in a future of wealth and welfare for its people .
 The United States eased restrictions on remittances, travel, and banking relations . The U.S. eased restrictions to allow travelers to import small amounts of cigars and alcohol . In addition to restoring diplomatic relations, the United States also eased restrictions .
 Cuba was removed from the United States terrorism list . Cuba had been viewed by the Cubans as unjust and undermined its ability to participate in the global economy . The U.S. removed Cuba from the list .
 It is now better able to do business with foreign banks, including U.S. banks, World Bank and other global financial bodies .
 The two countries have also planned to work together on transnational issues such as human trafficking, counter-narcotics, and environmental protection .
 These historic steps signal a new future, with an opportunity to chart a different course for the special relationship of these two respective members of the Global South and the Global North .
 The United States has had long-standing diplomatic and economic ties with China, Russia, and Vietnam . The U.S. has also had diplomatic ties with Russia, China and Russia .
 The prospects of countries in the Global South are shaped by both internal and international factors . Cuba's prospects will be shaped by internal or international factors such as the Cuban economy . Cuba is one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap . Key Term Videos: Foreign Aid Remittances, Decolonization, Mercantilism and Modernization . Collier, Paul. Collier: Decolonized, Decolated and Mercantileism .
 Your future will be determined to a large degree by the capacity of humanity to work together to manage the many common problems confronting the entire world . Y ou are a member of the human race, and your future is determined by your ability to work with humanity .
 The answer for centuries has primarily relied on sovereign territorial states . The answer has been to the question of sovereignty in the past .
 U.S. foreign policy decisions and interactions, more than any other factor, give rise to trends and transformations in world politics, says CNN's John Sutter . States’ foreign policy .
 As liberal theory posits, the extraordinary power of states over global destiny is eroding as our world becomes increasingly complex and interdependent . Nonstate actors continue to multiply and seek greater influence .
 A critical question to consider is whether or not the predicted decline of states’ sovereign authority will ultimately prove to be a cure for global problems . The decline of sovereign authority is predicted to lead to a decline in state power in the world .
 This chapter provides information and insight to help you evaluate this question . It also provides information about how to evaluate the question .
 Nonstate actors are flexing their political muscle in an effort to engineer global changes . Impressive numbers of nonstate actors on the world stage are increasingly flexing political muscle . The U.S. has been in touch with the world for decades .
 This chapter explores two broad types of nonstate actors: international organizations that carry out independent foreign policies as transnational actors . NGOs made up of individual people who band together in coalitions of private citizens to exercise international influence .
 We begin with a look at the general characteristics of both types of nonstate actors . To introduce this discussion, we begin with an analysis of the characteristics of the nonstate agents .
 Intergovernmental organizations are international organizations whose members are states . Nongovernmental organizations are associations composed of private individuals . Intergovernmental groups are intergovernmental organizations with intergovernmental members .
 Intergovernmental Organizations IGOs are purposely created by states to solve problems . Intergovernmental organizations IGOIs are created by state governments to solve the problems of the world's problems .
 IGOs are generally regarded as more important than NGOs, in part because IGO members are powerful state governments and tend to be more permanent . IGO's members are more permanent than NGOs .
 IGOs meet at regular intervals, and they have established rules for making decisions and a permanent secretariat or headquarters staff . The IGO is a non-profit organisation with no permanent headquarters or headquarters .
 Since 1900, the number of independent states has increased dramatically . Growth accelerated after World War II when the decolonization movement began .
 Only thirty-four IGOs qualify as “intercontinental organizations,” and only thirty-six are, like the United Nations , “universal membership’s” Only 36 of the world's largest IGO organizations are “Universal membership”
 The expansion of IGOs has created a complex network of overlapping international organizations that cooperate with one another to deal with a wide range of global issues . The expansion has led to the creation of a global network of organizations around the world .
 They support each other on issues ranging from trade, defense, disarmament, economic development, agriculture, health, culture, human rights, and immigration . They support one another on issues as varied as trade and defense, defense and disarmament issues .
 The term NGO can be applied to all nonstate and nonprofit organizations that operate as intermediaries to build transnational bridges between those with resources and a targeted group . Nongovernmental Organizations are intermediaries that help build bridges between resources and targeted groups .
 According to a constructivist perspective, they are inspired to action by their interests and values . Constructivist perspective: 'They are inspired by their interest and values'
 People speak of NGOs, INGOs, BINGOs, RINGOs (Religious International NGOs), ENGOs , ENGOs (Quasi-NonGovernment) Organizations) and QUANGOs .
 In general, the image of NGOs widely accepted throughout the world is very positive . Most pursue objectives that are held by large segments of society and, therefore, do not provoke much opposition . Most of the NGOs pursue objectives which are held in large parts of society .
 Amnesty International, the International Ghamber of Gommer, Save the Ghildren, and the World Wildlife Federation enjoy widespread popular support . For example, Amnesty International .
 Others are more controversial because they unite people for collective action in ways that can harm others . Terrorist groups, international drug rings, or transnational pirates are some of the most controversial actions . Others, such as terrorist groups, can unite people in collective action against others .
 More than 3000 NGOs consult with UN agencies, maintain offices in hundreds of cities . They also hold parallel conferences with IGO meetings to which states send representatives .
 As IGOs and NGOs rise in numbers and influence, a key question to contemplate is whether a ‘global society’ will materialize to override the traditional state-centric global system . If so, if so, whether this structural transformation will democratize or disrupt global governance .
 The UN's nearly fourfold growth from the 51 states that joined it at the UN’s birth in 1945 has been spectacular . But the admission process has from the start been governed by political conflicts .
 These conflicts show the extent of which the organization reflects the relationships of the five great powers that created it and govern it through veto authority in the Security Gouncil .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union prevented countries aligned with their adversaries from joining . This was especially true during the Cold War, when both the U.S. and Soviet Union kept allies from joining.
 These institutional forms were inspired by the liberal conviction that both war and management of other global problems are best controlled by managing global anarchy . The absence of supranational authority to regulate relations between states on the international scene was inspired by liberal conviction .
 During World War II, the U.S., British, and Russian allies began planning for a new international organization, the United Nations . It was believed that peace could not be maintained unilaterally by any one great power acting alone .
 Faith in UN’s ability eroded when it became paralyzed by the unforeseen Gold War between the United States and the Soviet Union . In the post-Gold War era it was freed from paralysis and returned to its original mission .
 The UN has spread its administrative arm to every corner of the globe to fulfill its primary purpose of spearheading international cooperation . The UN aims to reduce the gap between aspiration and accomplishment . UN's headquarters are located in the United States, Africa and Latin America .
 The UN is responsible for coordinating the UN’s social and economic programs, functional commissions, and specialized agencies . Its fifty-four members are elected by the General Assembly for staggered three-year terms .
 Despite the intentions of the founders of the UN, the General Assembly has assumed wider responsibilities . Countries in the Global South have guided UN involvement in directions of particular concern to them . The one-state/one-vote rules of the United Nations have led UN involvement to particular concern .
 This coalition pushes the UN to address economic and social needs and protests when it fails to respect the Global South’s special interests . The coalition is based on the UN's failure to respect special interests in the global south .
 The growth of the General Assembly's power may not be sufficient to ensure the Global South’s control of the agenda, however, as the original five great powers in the Security Council continue to run the show .
 China surprised many with its refusal to support an Indian bid for a permanent seat in 2008 . In a similar move to maintain power within the UN, China has also refused to support a bid for permanent seat .
 Differences between the Global North and the Global South over perceived priorities are most clearly exhibited in the heated debate over the UN’s budget .
 The placid Thant had a low profile but got flak for pulling UN peacekeepers from Sinai . Thant got a lot of criticism for pulling peacekeepers out .
 The United States is assessed 22 percent of the UN’s regular budget, for a net contribution in 2015 of over $654 million . The U.S. contribution in the United Nations' regular budget in 2015 was $654million .
 The poorest 18 percent of the UN’s members, or a total of thirty-five member states, pay the minimum . Each contributing only $27,136 annually and altogether less than 1% of the 2015 budget . Yet, the poorest 18% of UN members pay minimum of
 In comparison, the richest 20 percent of states were assessed to pay almost 94 percent of the UN’s 2015 budget . The richest 20 per cent of states are assessed to paying 94 per cent .
 The amount allocated to special political missions has grown to almost 25 percent of the budget from just 6. percent a decade earlier . Special political missions account for almost 25 per cent of the overall budget .
 Among the various budget categories, political affairs is the largest with an allocation of 24. percent of the program budget . Political affairs is also the largest budget category with a budget of $1.2 billion .
 A difference in opinion about what is important and which states should have political influence are the real issues . A difference of opinion is the real issue, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Poor states argue that need should determine expenditure levels rather than rich countries’ interests . Major contributors do not want to pay for programs they oppose . Poor states say need should decide expenditure levels .
 The UN’s future remains uncertain, and its persistent financial troubles leave it without the resources to combat global problems and carry out the responsibilities assigned to it . The UN's future is uncertain .
 The UN has undertaken a series of reforms since 2006 to change its management procedures and bring its recruitment, contracting, and training responsibilities into line with its vast new responsibilities . Despite some resistance by members of the Global South, some feared that Ban Ki-moon might bend to big-donor
 The UN is frequently blamed for failures when the real failure belongs to its members, particularly those of the Global North . The UN has been accused of failing to act properly in the past .
 The UN is often faced with very difficult tasks that individual states have been unable to solve, says the UN . The UN has been criticised for not being able to solve any of the world's most difficult tasks .
 Former U.N. Secretary-General U. Thant: "Great problems usually come to the United Nations because governments have been unable to think of anything else to do about them"
 In the final analysis, the UN can be no more than the mandates and power that member states give to it . The UN cannot be more powerful than the mandate and power given to it by member states, says Peter Bergen .
 The protests turned into armed conflict over the legitimacy of al-Assad’s rule . After troops fired on the rioting crowds, however, the protests turned to armed conflict . Al-Assad has been accused of using violence to quell the protests .
 UN estimated that at least 220,000 have perished since the start of the hostilities in Syria . Fighting continued between the Syrian army and various opposition forces, and as of March 2015, the UN estimated at least 200,000 dead .
 Despite international concern over the conflict in Syria, there has been division within the U.N. over the extent to which it should intervene .
 The United States and many other Western governments have condemned the Syrian government’s brutal response to the protests . The U.S. has called for al-Assad to step down from power .
 They have supporfed a sfronger role for the UN in addressing the violent conflict in Syria .
 Many supporters see UN intervention as supported by the UN Charter . UN Charter envisions the protection of human righfs as the responsibility of global society .
 Responsibility to Protect doctrine also calls for intervention by the international community if a state fails to protect its citizens from war crimes, ethnic cleansing, genocide, and crimes against humanity . Unanimously adopted by UN members in 2005, the doctrine was also adopted by the UN .
 Critics argue that action motivated by nonhumanitarian reasons is in contradiction to the UN Charter . UN Charter rests on principle of sovereignty and prohibits forceful intervention that violates the political independence and territorial integrity of any sfate .
 China and Russia have opposed UN actions that they see as constituting intervention into the internal concerns of a sovereign state . They joined the United States and others in calling for a peace process that would bring an end to the civil war .
 This gridlock raises questions about the efficacy of the U.N. effort to stop violence in Syria .
 It highlights the tension between a state’s sovereign authority over its territory, its responsibility to protect and provide for the compelling needs of its own people, and the grounds for intervention .
 Each of these IGOs was created by the great powers in response to the need for a stable international economic order even though it required the voluntary sacrifice of sovereignty . Note that each of these great powers was created .
 The creation of international regimes, as well as authoritative IGO institutions for global governance, can pay dividends, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 After World War II the United States sought to create international economic institutions that would prevent another depression by promoting world trade . Remembering the hardships caused by the Great Depression of 1929, the World Trade Organization was created in 1945 .
 Twenty-three states agreed to a number of bilateral tariff concessions between two states . These calls led to a meeting in Geneva in 1947 in Geneva where twenty-three countries agreed to concessions .
 These treaties were written into a final act called the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . It was originally thought of as a temporary arrangement until the ITO came into operation .
 The ITO represents the most ambitious tariff-reduction institution yet . Although it was not exactly what the ITO envisaged immediately following World War II, it nevertheless represents the biggest tariff reduction institution ever .
 The WTO is a full-fledged IGO with formal decision-making procedures . Unlike GATT, the WTO is an international organization with formal IGO procedures . The WTO has no formal decision making procedures .
 The WTO has been given authority to enforce trading rules and adjudicate trade disputes . Mandated to manage disputes arising from its trading partners .
 At the heart of their complaint is that the WTO undermines the traditional rule of law that prohibits interfering in sovereign states’ domestic affairs, including management of economic practices .
 The WTO developed as a result of voluntary agreements states reached to surrender some of their sovereign decision-making freedom . This pooling of sovereignty would produce more gains than losses, the WTO says .
 The WTO is criticized because it is widely perceived that “the WTO and democracy are incompatible” Nonetheless, the WTO has been criticized because of its lack of transparency .
 Many of the WTO's policies are orchestrated by its most powerful members, often during informal meetings that do not include the full WTO membership . Just as with the United Nations, many of its policies are often orchestrated by powerful members .
 World Bank has set a goal to end extreme poverty throughout the world by 2030 . World Bank: End extreme poverty by 2030 is a goal for the world .
 Thus far, this ambitious goal has met with praise from the donor countries . The goal has been met with the support of donors .
 The five countries with the largest number of shares in the World Bank’s capital stock appoint their own executive directors . The remaining executive directors are either appointed , elected by their states or elected by groups of countries . The United States, Germany, Japan, France, and the United Kingdom
 The weighted voting system recognizes differences among members’ holdings systems . It protects the interests of the great powers that make more substantial contributions to the World Bank’s resources . The World Bank's voting system is based on the differences among the members of the board .
 World Bank's poverty reduction target date of 2030 is 2030 . World Bank is aggressively pursuing innovative ways to address such a pressing issue . The World Bank says poverty reduction targets are 2030 .
 WTO Director General Roberto Azevedo was visiting the Philippines on May 21, 2015 . The outburst was in response to a visit to the Philippines by the WTO's director general . The Philippines is one of the world's largest economies .
 Protesters criticize the impact of economic globalization and the Philippines’ membership to the WTO . The Philippines is seen by many as leading to an enormous influx of imported food and agricultural products .
 At the 1944 Bretton Woods Conference, the United States was a prime mover in creating the International Monetary Fund . The IMF was designed to maintain currency exchange stability by promoting international monetary cooperation .
 IMF sometimes functions as a lender of last resort for countries experiencing financial crises . Further, the IMF sometimes functiones as a lending agency for countries with financial crises, such as Greece .
 Dayto-day business is conducted by a twenty-four-member executive board chaired by a managing director . The managing director is also the administrative head of a staff of approximately 2000 employees .
 Joseph Stiglitz says the policies are anchored in a freemarket dogma that ignores sociocultural contexts of the countries in which they are applied . The policies produce disappointing results, he says, because they're anchored in dogma that is not universal .
 Development strategies for the future should avoid grandiose claims of universality and one-size-fits-all policies . Given the diversity of the Global South, development strategies should avoid such claims of universalality, say experts .
 The tug of war between individual states and groups of states within the UN, the WTO, the World Bank, and the IMF are reminders of the underlying principle that IGOs are run by the states that join them .
 This severely inhibits the ability of IGOs to rise above interstate competition and independently pursue their organizational purposes . The IGO's ability to compete in interstate competition is hampered by this .
 universal IGOs are often viewed from a realist perspective as instruments of their members’ foreign policies and arenas for debate . For this reason, they are often seen as independent nonstate actors rather than independent nonstates actors .
 This limits a given IGO’s ability to foster multilateral decision making to engineer global change, says IGO . This limits the IGO's ability to make multilateral decisions to engineer change, he says .
 A rival hypothesis is that cooperation among powerful states is possible and international organizations help produce it . The theory of cooperation emerges from liberal theory, but it doesn't work .
 The EU serves as a model for other regional IGOs to emulate as the globe’s most successful example of peaceful cross-border cooperation . The EU has produced an integrated security community with a single economy .
 The Organization for Security and Gooperation in Europe and the Gouncil of Europe stand as regional institutions of equal European partners . They are designed to manage regional security and promote human rights of minorities through democratization .
 The EU stands out as the example of how a powerful organization has transformed itself from a single organization to a multiple-purpose nonstate actor . Even within this overlapping network of European IGOs, the EU is the .
 After World War II, European leaders conceived of a bold plan to eradicate the curse of war by removing the incentives for war . That is what happened after World War I .
 Their reform program sought political integration of Europe via a new supranational institution that transcended individual European states . They sought to bring about the transformation of international relations .
 European integration began with the European Goal and Steel Gommunity in 1951 . It was followed by the European Atomic Energy and Nuclear Energy Gommunities in 1957 . The European Union was founded in 1961 .
 Admission procedures for possible new membership are currently under way for eight additional countries . Further expansion is also conceivable because the admission procedures are under way .
 Turkey began accession talks in 2005 and could be admitted between 2015 and 2020 . Turkey is in talks to join the European Union in 2015 and 2016 .
 Other countries in the western Balkans are lobbying for future membership . Albania, Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo, former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina are also lobbying .
 Iceland applied for membership with a targeted date of 2011 for acceptance into the block . Iceland would give increased access to the resource-rich Artie to the region .
 Accession talks stalled due to dispute over mackerel fishing and the sensitive issue of financial reform . However, accession talks are still ongoing .
 EU expansion is not simply a procedure for enlarging membership; it has become a foreign policy in that the process seeks to transform external applicants into member states . EU expansion has not only been an enlargement procedure for expansion, it has also become an EU foreign policy, says David Cameron .
 EU expansion is hardly surprising that even EU expansion does not escape controversy . Having such a transformative effect, it's hardly surprising to even escape controversy.
 Nationalism has crept into the process in recent years, with legal and political hurdles that call into question the sincerity and credibility of EU commitments to states that aspire to membership .
 The prospect of a populous Muslim Turkey joining the EU raises fundamental questions about Europe’s identity . For one, it raises questions about the identity of the EU .
 The possible entry of Turkey and, perhaps, more remote and culturally different countries would have major implications for the way many people, especially within the six Western founders of the EU, conceive of Europe . The possibility of Turkey's entry into Europe has major implications .
 Thousands of North Africans sought refuge during the protests and violence of the Arab Spring in 2011 . These nationalistic inclinations were further reflected in calls for revision of the Schengen rules in Europe .
 Italy, France, and Belgium have called for the rules to be “revised so that national governments can more easily reimpose border controls” under exceptional circumstances . Each sought to control the flow of North African illegal migrants between their countries .
 The twelve newest members of the EU have poorer economies and smaller populations than the previous fifteen EU members . EU enlargement through eastward expansion is further challenged by the fact that the 12 newest members, whose combined economies are less than 10 percent of that of the entire EU, have smaller populations
 As a result, these new members have different needs and interests that can make reaching agreements on policy decisions increasingly difficult . The new members of the House of Representatives will need to be able to reach agreements with each other .
 It has grown in eight expansions from six members in 1951 to 28 in 2013, as shown here . Albania and Turkey, such as Albania, are waiting in the wings .
 This deal sparked the first deadly violent protests in Greece in twenty years . The deal sparked a series of violent protests against the deal in Greece .
 If Germany, France, and other northern European countries join together to oppose smaller, less developed new members, a “club within a club” could split the EU into two opposed coalitions . If Germany and France join together, the EU could split into two opposing coalitions,
 The idea of a single, integrated Europe is compelling for those who are haunted by the specter of European nationalities and states that have been fighting each other ever since the Pax Romana collapsed 1800 years ago . Nevertheless, the idea is compelling .
 As the EU has grown and expanded its authority, its principal institutions for governance have changed . EU Organization and Management has grown in size in recent years .
 The EU’s central administrative unit, the Gouncil of Ministers, represents the governments of the member states and retains final authority over policy-making decisions .
 Gommissioners are nominated by EU member governments, in consultation with the president of the European Gommissions, and must be approved by the European Parliament . Gommmissioners must be nominated by member governments .
 It has existed since the beginning of Europe’s journey toward political unification, although it was initially appointed rather than elected and had little power . The European Council of the Council of Europe has little power since it was first appointed .
 The citizens of the EU’s member states now choose the European Parliament in a direct election . The European Parliament is held in direct elections .
 The European Parliament shares authority with the Gouncil of Ministers . The Parliament’s influence has increased over time .
 The elected deputies pass laws with the council, approve the EU’s budget, and oversee the European Gommission, whose decisions the Parliament can overturn . The European Parliament can also overturn some of the EU's decisions .
 The European Gourt of Justice in Euxembourg has grown to prominence as European integration has developed . The European Court of Justice has also grown in prominence .
 The court was founded to adjudicate claims and conflicts among EU governments as well as between those governments and the new institutions the EU created . It was founded by the European Court of Justice in 2004 .
 The EU is a complex organization, with different responsibilities performed by various units . The European Union is one of the largest economies in the world . The EU has the largest number of countries in the European Union .
 The figure illustrates the relationships among the principal institutions that collectively lead to EU decisions and policies . arise within the EU's institutions, and decides cases concerning individual citizens .
 Several efforts to further integrate the countries of Europe have met with resistance . The Danes rejected the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, the Irish rejected the Nice Treaty in 2001 . Debate continues also over how far and how fast pooled sovereignty should proceed .
 The leaders of the member states agreed to a final draft of the Lisbon Treaty in October 2007 . The Lisbon Treaty is the most recent initiative in the world's major economic initiative .
 It was presented as an institutional treaty that would streamline the decision-making process . It would create a full-time president and a single foreign policy chief to represent the EU governments .
 These detractors remain reluctant to pursue deeper political integration and further constrain the pursuit of individual national self-interest, and concerned about the extent of which EU decision making is democratic .
 Ratification was required by all member states for the treaty to go into force . Ratification of the treaty was initially anticipated before the end of 2008 .
 The Irish initially rejected the treaty in a national referendum, leading to speculation that there was not sufficient popular support for a federal Europe . However, there was speculation that the majority of the Irish did not support it .
 This decision was reversed during a subsequent referendum in October 2009, and with the final ratification by the Czech Republic, the Lisbon Treaty became law on December 1, 2009 .
 Belgian Herman Van Rompuy became the EU’s first full-time president in January 2010 . He assumed office on January 4, 2010 . Herman was the EU's first full time president .
 Since Europe’s initial steps toward integration in the 1950s, more than a dozen regional IGOs have been created in other parts of the world, notably among states in the Global South . Europe's first steps to integration were in Europe's early 1950s .
 APEG held its meeting of trade ministers and economic leaders in Boracay, Philippines, in May 2015 . APEG aims to promote regional economic integration, achieve shared development and common prosperity .
 This organization was established in 1967 by five founding members to promote regional economic, social, and cultural cooperation . It was established to promote economic and social cooperation .
 In 1999, ASEAN created a free-trade zone among its ten Southeast Asian members as a counterweight outside the orbit of Japan, Ghina, the United States, and other great powers . The zone was created in 1999 to counterweight Japan, U.S. and other
 At the ASEAN summit in 2015 in Malaysia, the group focused on deepening economic integration . The group addressed not only the reduction of tariffs but also other barriers such as infrastructure, communications technology and skill levels of workers .
 This organization was established in 1964 from a 1957 accord to promote trade and economic integration among its eighteen North African and Middle Eastern members . This organization is based in North Africa and Middle East .
 This organization was established in 1973 as a common market to promote economic development and integration among its fifteen country and territory members . This organization is based in the United States and Canada .
 A five-year strategic plan outlines specific initiatives to be accomplished between 2015 and 2019 to further the goals of Caribbean unity, resilience, and prosperity . Emphasizing the region’s susceptibility to external shocks as evidenced by the impact of the global financial crisis .
 Established in 1975 to promote regional economic cooperation among its fifteen members, it has a much larger agenda today . Established to promote economic cooperation in 1975, it now has a larger agenda .
 As part of its vision for accomplishments by 2020, it also emphasizes regional peace, good governance, greater human security and development, and environmental preservation . The region is also emphasizing regional peace and good governance .
 This is a military alliance created in 1949 primarily to deter the Soviet Union’s activities in Western Europe . NATO was created to deter Soviet Union's activities in Europe .
 ICO has broadened its mission to promote democratization and to police civil wars and terrorism outside its traditional territory within Europe . ICO has expanded its membership to twenty-eight countries and broadened .
 This organization was established in 1992 to promote regional economic development and . alleviate poverty among its fifteen members . This organization promotes regional economic . development .
 Its strategic goals for 2020 include greater trade and economic liberalization, and combating health pandemics . It also includes sustainable food security, greater human development, gender equality and gender equality .
 Most IGOs are organized on a regional rather than a global basis . As these examples illustrate, most IGO organizations are organized in a regional basis .
 The governments that create them usually concentrate on one or two major goals, such as liberalizing trade or promoting peace within the region . Instead of attempting to address the complete range of issues that they face in common all at once, they should address the issues they face together, says CNN's
 The substantial difficulty most regions have experienced in pursuing the EU’s level of institutional integration suggests the enormity of the obstacles to creating political communities out of previously divided ones .
 IGOs’ expanding webs of interdependence are infringing on the power of states and changing the ways in which they network on the global stage . The IGO network is changing the way they network .
 IGOs are not, however, the only nonstate actors leading the potential transformation of world politics, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . The world's most powerful non-state actors, he says, are not only those involved in world politics .
 They include transnational humanitarian organizations, multinational corporations, transnational religions and ethnic groups, and global terrorist and criminal networks . They include . transnational . organizations, . multinational corporations and . multinational . corporations . groups, religions and . ethnic groups .
 NGOs are growing in number and roaring with voices too loud to ignore, making them increasingly influential in world politics . Such NGOs are now influential in the world politics.
 The near monopoly of power once enjoyed by sovereign entities is being eroded . National or ethnic groups struggling to obtain power and/or statehood . T-a prominent types of nonstate nations .
 Increasing number of people have found that through joining nongovernment organizations they can influence international decision making . Increasing numbers of people find it easier to get involved in international affairs through organizations .
 They have chosen to become international decision makers themselves by electing to join one or more NGOs . They have elected to be international decision-makers themselves by choosing to join them .
 Tens of thousands of ‘transitional activists’ are influencing the policies of state governments and intergovernmental organizations . These tens of thousands are influencing state governments through a variety of strategies .
 Individuals who think nationalistically are very likely to pledge their primary allegiance not to the state and the government that rules them, but to a politically active ethnic group . Members identify with one another because they perceive themselves as bound together by kinship, language, and a common culture .
 Ethnicity is socially constructed in that members of an ethnic or racial group learn to see themselves as members of that group . They thereby perceive their identity as determined by their inherited membership at birth .
 These identities, even in the plural, are usually easily negotiated by their owners and are context-specific . These identities are usually very easily negotiated and are contexts-specific.
 China came under intense international criticism for its crackdown on ethnic Tibetan groups following rioting in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital . China has been accused of ethnic Tibetans of ethnic cleansing .
 Indigenous groups have frequently seen their rights and welfare fall victim to a larger national interest in progress and development as determined by the state government . The Chinese, however, see him as a “splittist,” after the spiritual leader fled Tibet in 1959 following a failed armed uprising
 Indigenous communities demonstrate in Sao Paulo, Brazil, against the construction of the Belo Monte dam at the Xingu River in the Amazon .
 Indigenous people were at one time politically sovereign and economically self-sufficient but now controlled by a state government . In most cases, indigenous people are now politically sovereign but controlled by state government.
 Different languages reflect different views of the world that predispose their speakers to different ways of thought . As Edward Sapir and Benjamin Eee Whorf hypothesized in the 1930s, different languages reflect .
 indigenous peoples are located within many of the globe’s pluralistic states . They also have a transnational dimension because they are geographically spread across existing state boundaries . Indigenous peoples have transnational dimensions because they're located within existing state borders .
 We now turn from ethnic group NGOs to examine the ways religious movements may operate as NGOs as well . For that reason, we now turn to ethnic groups .
 Religion would seem a natural worldwide force for global unity and harmony . Transnational Religious Movements would seem like a natural global force for unity .
 Samuel Huntington’s thesis that in the twenty-first century the globe’�s major civilizations will conflict with one another . This will lead to anarchy and warfare similar to that resutting from conflicts between states over the past 500years .
 Religious conflicts during the Thirty Years’ War between Catholics and Protestants killed nearly one-fourth of all Europeans . Similarly, the religious conflicts during that war between Protestants and Catholics killed nearly 1-4 of Europeans .
 Most of the world’s more than 7 billion people are affiliated at some level with transnational religious movements . Most of those involved in transnational religions are transnational .
 A religion is a system of thought shared by a group that provides its members with an object of devotion and a code of behavior by which they can ethically judge their actions . At the most abstract level, a religion is an idea shared by members of a group .
 This definition points to commonalities across the great diversity of organized religions in the world . But the world’s principal religions also vary greatly in theological doctrines and beliefs .
 They differ widely in the geographical locations where they are most prevalent . The extent to which they engage in political efforts to direct international affairs, and the number of adherents .
 Between 2010 and 2050, the percentage of the world population that is Buddhist is expected to decline from 7. percent to 5. percent . The number of people that are Buddhist in the world will drop to 5 percent in the future .
 The percentage that is Hindu holds steady , as do Jewish and Christian groups . The percentage of Hindu people in the U.S. holds steady .
 MAJOR RELIGIONS I I Eastern Orthodox I I Protestant I I Roman Catholic I I Other Christian I j Jewish I I Shia Muslim I  Sunni Muslim I I Hindu I I Buddhist and Shintoist □ Mahayana Buddhist, onfucianist, Taoist
 Those who study religious movements comparatively note that belief provides religious followers with their main source of identity . Identification with and devotion to their religion springs from the natural human need to find a set of values with which to determine the meaning of life and the consequences of choices .
 This human need sometimes leads believers to perceive the values of their own religion as superior to those of others, which, sadly, often results in intolerance . This need leads to intolerance, often resulting in intolerance, says author .
 The proponents of most organized religious movements believe their religion should be universal . That is, accepted by everyone throughout the world, they say . But that's not true .
 Many organized religions actively proselytize to win over nonbelievers and followers of other religions . Organized religions engage in campaigns to convince nonbeliever and followers to join their faith .
 In evaluating the impact of religious movements on international affairs, it is important to carefully distinguish between the high ideals of doctrines and the activities of the people who head these religious bodies .
 In some countries, the two realms are politically separate, with legal protection for freedom of religion and little or no state support for a particular established religion .
 In many countries, religion and state are tightly linked and almost indistinguishable . In many other countries, the state is almost indistinguishable from religion .
 After 9/11, debate about the impact of religion on international conflict intensified . Debate intensified because of the role the Islamic Al Qaeda global terrorist network played in organizing the attack .
 Religious roots of terrorism and opposition to democracy in the Global South have received much attention, as have religious bodies acting as NGO global actors . As a result, the religious roots of terrorist acts have been much attention .
 Most people equate religion with peace, compassion, and forgiveness, not hatred or intolerance . It is difficult to understand the religious origins of violence because most people equate it with peace .
 Pope Francis called on religious leaders to condemn extremists who use religion to justify violence . In 2014 Pope Francis said “To Kill in the name of God is a grave sacrilege’.
 The world’s major religious movements voice respect and reverence for the sanctity of life . They accept people as equal creations of a deity, regardless of race or color . The world's major religious groups voice respect for life .
 The role of religious NGOs in international affairs is controversial . However, in an age of religious conflict and political violence, it is controversial to use religious NGOs .
 Some hold the view that religious hostility results from the fact that universalistic religions are managed by organizations that often adopt a particularistic and dogmatic outlook . Some believe universalistic religious groups are responsible for religious hostility .
 The virtues that religions uphold can ironically become weapons against those who do not hold such views . The virtues of religions are often used as weapons against people who disagree with them, says author .
 In an effort to believe in unshakable doctrines, believers reject the attempt to separate what they wish to be true from what they or other religions think are true . believers reject attempts to separate religions from their own .
 They tend to see outsiders as threatening rivals whose loyalty and allegiance to other deities represents a challenge to their own religion’s universal claims . In part, they tend to be wary of outsiders .
 In a word, religious movements often practice intolerance—disrespect for diversity and disregard for fhe right of people to freely embrace another religion’s beliefs . The author says religious movements practice intolerance, disrespect for diversity, disregard for the right to freely embrace someone's beliefs .
 It's dangerous to accept stereotypes of religious groups as responsible for terrorism . Yet it is dangerous to believe religious groups are responsible for relenfless attacks .
 Paganistic and atheistic societies recognizing no higher deity have equally long histories of waging violenf wars against external enemies and their own people . Paganism and atheism has equally long history of waging war against each other and their people .
 Most religious bodies have historically coexisted peacefully for cenfurles . Meanwhile, many religions ably perform the mission of peacemaking (Gaetan, 2013)
 It is important for you to objectively weigh the evidence about the impact of religious NGOs on world affairs .
 The religious movement substitutes itself for the government at the local level, involving itself in education, health, and other social welfare programs . In many cases, the religious movement is involved in local government programs .
 The government and all of its domestic and foreign activities must be in the hands of believers or subject to close oversight . This generally means that the government must be closely monitored by believers . This means that all of the government's domestic and abroad activities must go under the oversight .
 International boundaries are not recognized as barriers to the propagation of the faith, even if this means they must resort to violence . In some cases, this means that international boundaries do not recognize them as barriers .
 The first is irredentism —the attempt by a dominant religion to reclaim previously possessed territory in an adjacent region from a foreign state that now controls it, often through the use of force . The second is the attempt to reclaim territory in adjacent regions from foreign states .
 The second is secession, or separatist revolts, an attempt by a religious minority to revolt and break away from an internationally recognized state . The third is the attempt by religious minority .
 Militant religions tend to cause migration, the departure of religious minorities from their countries of origin to escape persecution . Third, militant religion tends to lead to migration, migration .
 Transnational religions compete with one another, which tends to divide humanity and breed separatist efforts that can tear countries apart . This consequence notwithstanding, transnational religions tend to be very different .
 Pope Francis meets with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon at the Vatican . Pope Francis met with the UN secretary-general in Rome at the weekend .
 Ki-moon: Pope speaks loudly of his commitment to the poor . He has a deep sense of humility, his passion and compassion to improve the human condition."
 MNCs receive both credit for the positive aspects of free trade and globalization and blame for their costs . As advocates of liberal free trade, they are also active contributors to the globalization of world politics, they receive credit for their contributions .
 People often see MNCs as the cause of exploitation and poverty . This has made them highly controversial nonstate actors, especially in the Global South . People frequently see them as the causes of exploitation .
 At the start of the twenty-first century, about 80 percent of all MNCs’ employees worked in developing countries, where wages were lower, helped to bolster corporate profits at the parent headquarters in the Global North .
 Outsourcing and corporate restructuring are heralded as critical to facilitating business without borders, enhancing corporate growth and profitability, and better using skilled staff in both the Global North and the Global South . Outsourcing is a key part of corporate restructuring .
 Companies have used the downturn to aggressively trim payrolls, making cuts they’ve been reluctant to make before . Companies have seen a sharp drop in payrolls in recent years .
 Companies have discovered that new software and computer technologies have made many workers in Asia and Latin America almost as productive as Americans . The Internet allows far more work to be efficiently moved to another country without losing control .
 This outsourcing is now eagerly welcomed by the Global South’s developing countries as a means to economic growth, where once MNG domination was resisted . The Global South's developing countries are eagerly welcoming this outsourcing .
 MNGs are increasingly influential NGOs because the world’s giant producing, trading, and servicing corporations have become the primary agents of the globalization of production . The MNG is increasingly influential in the world because of the world's giant corporations .
 The profile shows that of the world’s top thirty-five economic entities, only four multinationals account for only four of the top 30-five .
 MNGs comprise almost 23 percent of the top seventy economic entities in the world . Altogether, they are almost half of the world's top economic entities . The world's largest MNG organizations are based in China .
 In part due to their global reach and economic power, MNGs’ involvement in the domestic political affairs of local or host countries is controversial . MNG’s involvement in domestic politics is controversial due to its global reach, economic power .
 MNGs lobby their governments for more liberal trade and investment policies to enhance the profitability of their businesses . In some instances this concern has extended to the domestic politics of their home countries, where they actively lobby their home governments .
 The most notorious instance of an MNG’s intervention in the politics of a host state occurred in Ghile in the early 1970s . International Telephone and Telegraph tried to protect its interests in the profitable Ghiltelco telephone company by seeking to prevent the election of Marxist-oriented
 A Ranking by Size of Economy and Revenues is based on size of economy and revenues . The U.S. ranks 16,992.99% of the world's GNI/Revenues . The United States is ranked 1th in the world .
 Denmark is ranked 347th in the world's most populous country . Denmark ranks 347th on the list of countries with the highest GNI/Revenues . Denmark's GNI and GNI are the highest-ranked countries on the continent .
 World Bank, World Development Indicators, MNC revenues, Forbes.com, World Bank.com and MNC.com.com .
 For example, MNCs have recently taken steps toward engineering a “responsibility revolution” by “making products and delivering services that generate profits and also help the world address challenges such as climate change and healthcare .
 The blurring of the boundaries between internal and external affairs adds potency to the political role that MNCs unavoidably play as nonstate actors at the intersection of foreign and domestic policy . Blurring the boundaries of the international and domestic spheres adds potency, says Joonoon .
 MNCs’ awesome financial resources are much greater than the official statistics suggest, and this is why many states fear that they are stripping away their sovereignty . Many states fear they are being stripped away from their sovereignty, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In some respects states are losing control of their national economies as MNCs merge with one another . In the process, they cease to remain tied to any one parent state or region .
 Many MNCs are now globally integrated enterprises that produce the same goods in different countries . Their horizontal organization no longer ties them to any single country . MNC's horizontal organization is no longer tied to a single country.
 A growing trend is for celebrities who want to effect change to establish issue-advocacy organizations that promote their issue of interest . Celebrities should set up their own groups to promote their issues .
 Sean Penn founded J/P Haitian Relief Organization to provide temporary housing and medical care . Alicia Keys cofounded Keep a Ghild Alive to provide medical support for AIDS orphans in Africa . Don Gheadle, along with George Glooney, Matt Damon, Brad Pitt, and Brad Pitt
 George Glooney played a role in focusing attention on the political violence and independence efforts civil society in South Sudan . He has continued to raise awareness about genocide and torture rapes .
 Angelina Jolie is a special envoy of the United Nations and focuses on humanitarian and refugee issues . She delivered an impassioned plea to the UN Security Gouncil to intervene in the Syrian civil war in 2015 .
 George Clooney has been involved in Sudan for over eight years in efforts to combat genocide and torture . Clooney helped the people of South Sudan achieve independence .
 Clooney: "Celebrity can help focus news media where they have abdicated their responsibility" Clooney says he hopes the news media will focus on celebrities .
 NGOs are generally seen as agents of policy continuities rather than policy transformation . For this reason, NGOs are often seen as agent of policy continuation rather than transformation .
 These characteristics of NGO efforts to redirect global policy suggest that the mere presence of such groups, and the mere fact they are organized to persuade, does not guarantee their penetration of the global policy-making process .
 On the whole, NGOs have participation without real power and involvement without real influence . The ability of any one to exert influence is offset by the tendency for other, countervailing powers to oppose it .
 A coalition of interest groups seeks to push policy in one direction, other nonstate actors tend to push the opposite direction . Nonstate actors are more likely to push policies in the direction of the U.S. State Department .
 The capacity of a network to push history forward rapidly in a particular direction is constrained . The international community's posture toward many global problems fails to move in any single direction . The result is often that the quest for consensus proves elusive .
 Others argue that these organizations do not meet expectations for NGOs given their illegal activities and use of violence . However, others argue that they do meet expectations given their activities .
 Terrorism has plagued world politics for centuries and, according to historian Max Boot, such irregular warfare is far older than conventional warfare . No matter how we categorize these groups, they are clearly nonstate actors whose behaviors transcend national boundaries and pose a threat to global well-being, Boot says
 Some place the beginnings of terrorism in the first century BGE with the Sicarii Zealots, who violently targeted Jewish high priests . They saw them as collaborating with the Romans in violation of Jewish religious law .
 Premeditated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational, transnational groups, or clandestine agents, usually intended to influence an audience . Premeditate violence is often intended to target noncombatants .
 Terrorists have shifted their tactics from theatrical violent acts to purposeful destruction of a target’s property and civilian noncombatants . Terrorists want to destroy and kill for the purpose of instilling fear in as many people as possible .
 Today many terrorist organizations plan their acts through unprecedented levels of communication and coordination across vast networks of terrorist cells . Terrorists are planning their acts with unprecedented coordination and coordination, says CNN.com .
 The events of September 11, 2001, challenged the conventional view of terrorism as a rare and relatively remote threat . 9/11 challenges the view that terrorism is a rare, remote threat, CNN.com reports .
 Osama Bin Laden, the head of Al Qaeda, was behind the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States, was killed by U.S. forces on May 1, 2011 .
 What arguably made 9/11 a symbolic watershed was that it epitomized a deadly new strain of terrorism . The terrorist attacks were a form of terrorism, not just terrorism, it was terrorism, the author says .
 Al Qaeda is a global network with cells in a number of countries and tied to Sunni extremist networks . Heavy concentration in Afghanistan, the border region in Pakistan, Somalia, and Yemen .
 To establish pan-lslamic rule throughout the world by working with allied Islamic extremist groups to overthrow regimes it deems ""non-llamic" and expel Westerners and non-Muslims from Muslim countries .
 Boko Haram is mainly active in Nigeria, but also active in Chad, Cameroon, and Niger . Primarily Nigeria, Boko Haram active in Niger, Nigeria, Chad, Nigeria .
 Islamic State in Iraq and Syria is Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant . Primarily in Syria and Iraq and Iraq . The group has been fighting for control in both countries .
 To expand its influence beyond Iraq and Syria and establish an Islamic state across Middle Eastern and African countries . To expand influence beyond Syria and Iraq, ISIS wants to establish a state across the region .
 Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia Colombia, with some activities in Venezuela, Panama, and Ecuador . Colombia . Colombia. Colombia . Venezuela . Colombia Colombia .
 Flezbollah established cells in Europe, Africa, South America, North America, and Asia . Flezbollah In the Bekaa Valley, the southern suburbs of Beirut, and southern Lebanon, established cells . Fle Hezbollah established cells across Europe, . Africa, Asia, and North America .
 To establish an Islamic Palestinian state in place of Israel and gain international acceptance of its rule in Gaza, Israel must be established . The aim is to establish a state of Islamic Palestine in a place of place in Israel, Israel .
 Basque Fatherland and Liberty is located in northern Spain and southwestern France . Primarily in the Basque autonomous regions of northern Spain, southwestern France and Spain .
 Real Irish Republican Army Northern Ireland, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. Real IRA . Army . Northern Ireland . Ireland's republican movement .
 To create a united Irish state that includes Northern Ireland and Ireland, the goal is to create a union of Ireland .
 Sri Lankan government declared an end to the twenty-five-year civil war on May 19, 2009 . Sri Lanka had been characterized as the fiercest terrorist force in the world .
 Others, most notably AI Qaeda, Boko Haram, and ISIS/ISIL, are driven by religious convictions and have more sweeping goals . Others, such as AI Qaeda and Boko Haram have religious convictions .
 There is also variation in the manner in which their organizations are structured, with some having a hierarchical structure and newer groups tending to favor networked insulated cells dispersed across the globe .
 Instead of having a hierarchical command structure, Al Qaeda possesses a decentralized horizontal structure . Instead of a hierarchical structure, the Al Qaeda organization has a decentralized horizontal structure.
 Al Qaeda's leadership offers ideological inspiration to small, disparate cells scattered around the world . Leaders do not directly plan and execute most of the attacks undertaken in Al Qaeda’s name .
 Al Qaeda and ISIS/ISIL terrorists are more lethal than previous terrorists . Their religious fanaticism allows them to envision acts of terror on two levels, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 At one level, terrorism is a means to change the political status quo by punishing those culpable for perceived wrongs . Terrorism is also a means of changing the status quo, as well as punishing those who are culpable .
 Terrorism is a sacrament performed for its own sake in an eschatological confrontation between good and evil . At another level, terrorism is an end in itself, a sacrament in itself . Terrorism is also an end-in- itself, as is terrorism in itself as an end to evil .
 Most secular terrorist groups employ suicide missions less frequently, most secular groups do so frequently . Most secular groups are functioning only on the first level of the first .
 Terror expert Robert Pape has noted that even “suicide terrorism follows a strategic logic’s . Pape: “Suicide terrorism is not just a madman bent on death and destruction .
 Take care of how your value judgments can affect your interpretation of the identity and purpose of any group you may believe belongs in this menacing category of nonstate actors . Take care to consider how your . value judgments may affect your . interpretation of any . group .
 Like terrorists, transnational crime groups pose a serious challenge to global security in the twenty-first century . These crime groups are major beneficiaries of globalization, says Louise Shelly .
 There is often an overlap between terrorist organizations and transnational crime organizations . Terrorists are often involved in an array of domestic and international crime . Terrorist organizations often require significant resources to function .
 The specific markets of transnational crime organizations are in constant fluctuation . MAJOR GLOBAL CRIME FLOW flows are in the world .
 Drug epidemics rise and fall; trafficking in humans and firearms expands rapidly in areas of conflict and subsides in times of peace . Traffickers expand rapidly in conflict areas, subsides with times when peace is not in peace .
 It is therefore critical that the international community better understand the way that transnational crime relates to broader social changes . The international community needs to better understand how transnational crimes relate to social change .
 Between 1920 and 1990 this organization was the most prominent international organized crime group in the world . The organization was known for its activities in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Targeted law enforcement in the United States greatly reduced the organization’s activities in that country . It remains active in Italy, Italy and elsewhere .
 Japan’s Yakuza is yet another organized crime group that is heavily involved in global human trafficking . The Yakuz is a member of Japan's largest organized crime syndicate .
 International criminal activity poses a threat to economic growth in legitimate business activities . Emerging states that are vulnerable to internationally organized crime are particularly vulnerable to organized crime .
 Transnational crime ring activities weaken economies and financial systems, undermine democracy, say experts . Criminals are involved in international crime rings that weaken economies, financial systems and undermine democracy .
 These networks often prey on governments that are not powerful enough to oppose them, prospering on illegal activities, such as drug trafficking, that bring them immense profits . These networks preyed on governments not .
 Traditionally states have taken a realist approach to sovereignty, and carefully guarded their own territory . Traditionally, states have been carefully guarded by their own sovereignty .
 To combat this, states must engage in law-enforcement collaboration and transborder intelligence sharing . States must also engage in transborder cooperation and intelligence sharing, states say .
 Displacing international criminal groups is not sufficient, as new groups will simply fill the void . Displaced international criminals will not be able to be displaced, as they will simply be replaced by new groups .
 Criminal groups flourish in areas where there is rampant corruption, instability, and a lack of development . Criminal groups thrive in areas with rampant corruption and instability, according to the report .
 Strengthening laws makes an area less conducive to transnational crime activity in the first place . Strengthen laws provides a more solid foundation from which to combat crime organizations .
 To disrupt cash flows, it is important for governments and financial institutions to work together to regulate and stop informal money transfers . Recycling through real estate, offshore banking, and banking privacy practices that protect criminal profits are important to disrupt cash flow .
 World politics will be increasingly affected by the activities of both IGO and NGO nonstate actors . As the world grows more interdependent and transactions across state borders increase through the movement of people, information, and traded products, it is likely that world politics .
 Nonstate actors such as terrorists and transnational crime organizations prey on the vulnerabilities and misfortunes of others . Many work to improve the human condition, but nonstate actors prey on others' vulnerabilities . Terrorists and criminals prey on vulnerable people's vulnerabilities, say experts .
 Global cooperation is necessary if we are to successfully counter this ‘dark side’ of globalization . Global cooperation needed to counter this "dark side of globalization," says Girona .
 State and other organizations to fight terrorism and international crime must stop displacing the problem from one country to another . Otherwise, the efforts by states and others will result in merely displacing terrorism from one nation to another. Otherwise, it will merely displaced the problem .
 It is misleading to think that politics is only about territorial states in interaction with each other, it is said . It is not only about states exercising supreme authority within their own borders .
 The outlines of a future type of dual global system may be coming into view . The outlines are driven by the continuing importance of relations between states and by the growing impact of multiple cross-border transactions and channels of communication .
 This change would lead to a hybrid, or two-tiered, world in which the clout and authority of governments that rule countries decline while the relative power of nonstate actors rise . Nonstate actors would rise while the power of governments decline, the author says .
 These speculations by no means resolve the question of whether the era of state dominance is coming to an end as nonstate actors increase their clout . Nonstate actors have increased their clout in recent years, according to experts .
 In Ghapter 7, you have an opportunity to examine the global character and consequences of violent threats to security . You have a chance to examine global character, consequences of security threats .
 In Ghapters 8 and 9, we weigh the rival ideas presented by the realist road to security and the liberal path to peace . We also weigh the ideas of the liberal road to peace and realist ways to achieve security .
 A blog on NGOs and various aspects of their performance in global issues . Blog on NGOs' performance in the world .
 The Epic Rivalry between Big Business and Government . The Reckoning that Lies Ahead of the Reckoning That Lies Ahead .
 World politics is about arms, alliances, and the exercise of military force over rivals and other actors on the global stage . Eor many people, world politics is . about arms and alliances .
 An attack by an enemy is the most dangerous direct threat to survival . Preventing such death and destruction is a precondition for attaining all other important values, he says .
 Changes are required in the practices of state and nonstate actors if we are to control armed conflict and reduce its frequency and destructiveness . Yet changes are needed in the ways to reduce armed conflict, the authors say .
 In Chapter 8, the pursuit of national interest defined in terms of military power is examined through the lens of realist approaches to national and international security . Chapter 8: Pursuit of national interests defined as military power defined by military power examined .
 In Chapter 9, you will consider liberal ideas for managing international disputes . These ideas provide alternatives to fighting on the battlefield . In Chapter 10, we will look at liberal ideas that provide alternatives .
 Realists emphasize the need to prepare for war and recommend that it be placed at the very top of a state's concerns . Placing high importance on power, realists emphasize that it should be at the top of their concerns .
 Liberals stress a path to peace that embodies progressive Ideas and cooperative behavior . Liberals stress that peace embodies progressive ideas and cooperative behaviors .
 They have mobilized to exert pressure to contain arms races, warfare, and world poverty, among other causes . They have called for the end of arms races and warfare to be contained .
 Demonstrators gather in Seoul, South Korea, to call for the nations of the world to seek nonviolent solutions to conflict . Protesters call for a nonviolent solution to conflict in the world .
 Protestors express their grief and outrage over a terrorist attack on the office of the satirical publication Charlie Hebdo in January 2015 in the deadliest terrorist incident in Paris in more than fifty years .
 'Je Suis Charlie' became a rallying call of ordinary people around the world for the preservation of civil sociefy in the face of terrorist threats . In the wake of the incident, "Je Suises Charlie" became a . rallying call for civil society to be preserved .
 To destroy can be the thoughtless act of a single day, Churchill said in 2001 . Many observers began to ask if war had become obsolete in the Global North .
 The 9/11 attack and the U.S.-led military struggle in Iraq; the 2006 Israeli-HezboIIah War in Lebanon; and a wave of civil wars dashed all prior hopes for sustained peace . Terrorist attacks elsewhere around the world, such as in Madrid in
 2011 protests and demonstrations across much of the Arab world raised hopes that reforms might take place . However, the violent clashes with state authorities put such reforms in jeopardy .
 Based on even these few events, it becomes understandable why so many people think that armed conflict is the essence of world politics .
 This insight underscores the realist belief that war is a policy instrument that transnational actors use to resolve their conflicts . War is an important policy instrument for transnational organizations to resolve conflicts, the author says .
 In and of itself, conflict is not necessarily threatening because war and conflict are different . War and conflict is different because war is different, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Some conflict results whenever people interact and may be generated by religious, ideological, ethnic, economic, political, political or territorial issues . Therefore, it should not be regarded as abnormal. Some conflict may result from religious or ideological issues .
 Conflict can promote social solidarity, creative thinking, learning, and communication . Conflict can also be beneficial to the resolution of disputes and the durability of cooperation . Conflict is a form of social solidarity that can be shared through social cooperation .
 The costs of conflict do become threatening when the parties take up arms to settle perceived irreconcilable differences or to settle old scores . However, conflict does become threatening if the parties are taking up arms, say experts .
 "When that happens, violence occurs, and we enter the sphere of warfare," says President Obama . "We enter the spheres of warfare. When that happens ... violence occurs," he says .
 This chapter presents information and ideas so you can explore the nature of armed conflict in your world . It presents information about the causes, changing characteristics, and frequency of conflict .
 You will be forced to confront the ethical dilemmas that these military threats create, about when it is moral or immoral to take up arms . The U.S. should confront the moral or moral dilemma it faces when it comes to taking up arms, he says .
 You will have the opportunity to review the leading theories that seek to explain the causes of these three types of armed conflict in world politics .
 A condition arising within states (civil war) or between states (interstate war) when actors use violent means to destroy their opponents or coerce them into submission . Conflict often arising in international relations over perceived incompatibilities of interest armed conflict .
 Throughout history, efforts have been made to explain why people engage in organized violence . Throughout the past, people have been asked to understand why they engage in violence .
 Some causes directly influence the odds of war . Others are remote and indirect, creating the context in which any one of a number of more proximate factors may trigger violence .
 All wars originate from the decisions of the leaders of states or transnational nonstate actors such as terrorist organizations . In a sense, all wars start from the decision of the leader of states, the author says .
 A good starting point for explaining why warfare occurs is to consider the relationship of armed conflict to the choices of individual leaders . So a good start point is to look at the relationship between armed conflict and individual leaders' decisions .
 The repeated outbreak of war has led some to conclude that aggression is an instinctive part of human nature . Sigmund Freud concluded that aggression stems from humanity’s genetic psychological programming .
 Realist theorists believe that all humans are born with an innate drive for power that they cannot avoid and that this instinct leads to competition and war . Realist theories believe that this drive leads to war and competition .
 To pacifism is counterproductive because it is contrary to basic human nature, which they see as aggressive, greedy, and power-seeking, they say . The pacifists see pacifism as counterproductive because they see themselves as aggressive and greedy .
 Most people, at least outwardly, reject killing as evil based on certain ethical principles . Most people don't think killing is evil, but it is based on ethical principles, the author says .
 Liberal theory and behavioral social science research suggest that genetics fails to explain why individuals may be belligerent only at certain times . Liberal theory suggests that genetics does not explain why people are belligerent at times .
 The nature versus nurture debate regarding the biological bases of aggression has not been resolved . Social scientists now strongly disagree with the realist premise that because humans are essentially selfish, they are also aggressive .
 It appears as though this self-sacrifice stems from learned beliefs that some convictions are worth dying for, such as loyalty to one's own country .
 This suggests that factors other than national character (the inborn collective traits of particular peoples) may be better suited to explain why certain countries tend to engage in organized violence .
 Armed conflict occurs most often as a result of the choices leaders make, not because of the popular preferences of their entire societies . Armed conflict is most often a decision leader makes, rather than a popular choice, experts say .
 Unless all members of the group are exactly alike, the characteristics of the collectivity cannot reliably predict the beliefs and behaviors of the individuals in that group . The characteristics of a collectivity (the entire state or culture, for example, cannot predict) the beliefs or behaviors of that group,
 The opposite, what logicians call the individualistic fallacy, is also a mental error . Logicians say the opposite is the individualist fallacy . However, logicians say it is also an error .
 Britain, or Vladimir Putin of Russia, ascribe them to the prevailing preferences of the collective cultures and states that each of them heads .
 What should be obvious is that leaders do make some immoral foreign policy decisions, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Leaders make immoral decisions," he says .
 Many foreign policy decisions by countries’ leaders are the outcome of flawed decisionmaking processes, authors say . They fail to conform to the rational choice model of foreign policy decision making, they say .
 Even intelligent and moral leaders are sometimes prone to make unnecessarily high-risk decisions to wage war . They are pressured through groupthink by influential advisers rather than acting on what they personally believe is the most rational choice .
 This observation about the determinants of leaders’ choices about war and peace directs attention to the domestic factors that encourage some states to engage in foreign aggression . This observation directs attention .
 Internal factors create the context that constrains or enables the policy decisions leaders can make . These internal factors create an internal context for leaders to make policy decisions .
 We next examine some theories about the internal characteristics of states that influence leaders’ choices regarding the use of force . States' Internal Characteristics of states influence leaders' decision to use force .
 This is the assumption that differences in the types or categories of states determine whether they will engage in war . Implicit in this approach to explaining armed conflict at the state level of analysis is that differences between the types of states and types of countries determine the likelihood of war .
 Arguing that prospects for war are influenced most heavily by national attributes challenges the structural realism premise that war is inevitable . Global circumstances, not internal factors, are the most important determinants of warfare, argues the author .
 Duration of independence also influences the likelihood of armed conflict and disputes over territory . The country's duration of independence is also considered a factor in armed conflict .
 Newly independent countries usually go through a period of political unrest following their acquisition of independence as sovereign members of the international community of states .
 They then likely to seek to resolve long-standing internal grievances and www.csspoint.com .
 The high levels of civil wars and wars between neighboring states throughout the Global South may be explained by the fact that nearly all of these less developed countries have recently gained independence, many through violent revolutions . Many of the less developed nations in the region gained independence through violent revolution .
 A country’s behavior is strongly influenced by the cultural and ethical traditions of its peoples . Nationalism and Cultural Traditions is a key part of nationalism and nationalism .
 Most governments encourage their populations to glorify the state and accept whatever decisions their leaders proclaim as necessary for national security, including warfare against adversaries . Instead of glorifying the state, most governments encourage people to accept what leaders proclaim is necessary .
 Advocates of the cultural origins of war argue that most people in most societies are disengaged, or “numb” to what is going on around them . This prevents them from opposing their leaders’ decisions to wage war, they argue .
 nationalism is widely believed to be the cauldron from which wars often spring . As a natural extension of unerring loyalty to a nation, loyalty to the nation is thought to be an extension of loyalty .
 English essayist Aldous Huxley saw nationalism as ‘the religion of the twentieth century’— when history’s most destructive interstate wars were fought .
 This leads many to critique nationalism, although many defend it as a virtue that creates unity and solidarity within a country . This leads to many to say nationalism is not a virtue but a virtue of unity .
 Whatever its consequences, nationalism is seen as a powerful political force in today’s world . The idea and ideology animates the constructed images of many around the world .
 Feminist theory contends that gender roles, supported by realist values, contribute to the prevalence of militarism and warfare . Feminist theory says gender roles contribute to prevalence of warfare .
 What followed from this extreme form of nationalism was a ruthless German world war and campaign of genocide . 6 million Jews and other ethnic minorities were exterminated by the Nazis .
 Many governments indoctrinate militaristic values in their political culture that, taken to the extreme, condone war . Many governments, through educational programs they fund in schools and other institutions, indoctrinate war .
 States often disseminate the belief that their right to make war should not be questioned . States often believe that ethical principles of religious and secular philosophies prohibiting violence should be disregarded .
 Critics highlight the existence of powerful institutions that prepare individuals to subconsciously accept warfare as necessary and legitimate .
 A country’s level of economic development affects the probability of its involvement in war and armed revolution . Poverty, Relative Deprivation, and Demographic Stress are key factors in the country's political instability .
 Violence erupts so frequently because hundreds of millions of people face discrimination or are disadvantaged in comparison to others in their country . A form of cultural exclusion exists between groups, with cultural exclusion existing .
 The probability of armed conflict is the highest in the Global South, where people’s expectations of what they deserve are rising more rapidly than their material rewards . This is partially why the probability of conflict is higher in the global south .
 Popular support is critical to the success of armed rebellions, author says . Poverty is a great motivator for allegiance to armed groups that promise security and an improved standard of living .
 The relationship between poverty and armed conflict is all the more pronounced in countries where there is a youth bulge . A large portion of the population is young and cannot secure jobs, provide for families, and achieve economic security .
 Youth unemployment rate continues to hover around 25 percent . This is one of many of the factors that will continue to contribute to unrest in the Middle East .
 Government policy and changing demographic trends have the potential to alter the outlook in the longer term . Yet government policy and demographic trends could change the outlook .
 The risk of political violence can be reduced to some extent by providing education and employment opportunities . Education and job opportunities can reduce the risk of violence by providing jobs and training opportunities .
 The most impoverished countries have been the least prone to start wars, say experts . Poverty always breeds armed conflict, they say, but it doesn't always do so .
 Most Global South countries agree with the realists’ thesis that weapons contribute to their security . It is questionable whether the acquisition of military power leads to peace or to war .
 As Global South countries continue to equip their militaries, many worry that war will become more frequent . The Global South has invested heavily in the military .
 In other words, militarization has not led to peace in the Global South . "Militarization" is not a solution to the problems of militarization in the South .
 The relationship between changes in military capabilities and war occurred over centuries in Europe . One clue comes from an examination of the relationship between the relationship .
 During the period leading to the peak of the region's development, the world’s most frequent and deadly wars occurred in Europe . The region's most frequent wars occurred during the period of the .
 Developed states of Europe were most energetically building their militaries in competition with one another . Not coincidentally, this happened when the developing states were most energy-intensively building militaries .
 interstate war has not occurred in Europe since 1945 . With the exception of war among the now-independent states of the former Yugoslavia and between Russia and Georgia, interstate war hasn't occurred . Since 1945, however, since 1945, the only interstate war in Europe has not been fought .
 As European countries moved up the ladder of economic and political development, they moved away from war with one another . As the European countries move up the . ladder of . economic . development, the European . countries moved away .
 If the Global South follows the model of Europe before 1945, we are likely to see an ocean of Global South violence surrounding a European island of peace and prosperity .
 According to the communist theory of imperialism, capitalism is mired in excess production . According to Marxists, capitalism should not be a model of capitalism . Capitalism is not a model for capitalism, it is a form of socialism .
 The need to export this excess provokes wars to capture and protect foreign markets, says Thecsspoint.com.com . The need for exporting this excess .
 Rebels comprised largely of the Iran-allied Houthi movement forced the Western-backed Hadi government to flee the country . Houthi rebels are largely comprised of Iran-backed Houthis .
 The neighboring Saudi government formed a coalition of Arab nations to halt the uprising . Saudi Arabia formed a Saudi-Arab coalition to end the uprising in 2011 .
 Saudi-led airstrike on Yemen's capital, Sanaa, on Monday, May 11, 2015 . The airstrike is the latest in a long line of airstrikes on Yemen .
 Marxists believed, and generally still believe, that the best way to end international war was to end capitalism . Citing the demonstrable frequency with which wealthy capitalist societies militarily intervened on foreign soil for capital gain, Marxists still believe .
 Conclusions depend in part on perceptions regarding economic influences on international behavior . Alternative perspectives focus on different dimensions of the linkage, say experts .
 Regime Type Realist theories discount the importance of government type as an influence on war and peace . Realist theory says government type is a factor in war and war .
 liberal theory assigns great weight to the kinds of political institutions that states create to make policy decisions . It predicts that the spread of “free” democratically ruled governments will promote peaceful interstate relations .
 As Immanuel Kant argued, when citizens are given basic human rights such as choosing their leaders through ballots as well as civil liberties such as free speech and a free press, these democracies would be far less likely to initiate wars than dictators and kings .
 This is because a government accountable to the people would be constrained from waging war by public opinion . This would be because of public opinion, a government would not be able to wage war by the people . This is not the case of the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Other liberal reformers have since agreed with Kant, such as Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and Woodrow Wilson . Thomas Jefferson and James Madison also agreed .
 The impact of government type on propensity for armed conflict has taken on great significance following the rapid conversion of many dictatorships to democratic rule .
 The once radical idea that democracy is the ideal form of decision making has prevailed . In a remarkable global transformation from past world history, the idea has prevailed in the past .
 As this figure shows, that has changed with the growth of ""electoral democracy"" worldwide, with competitive and regular multiparty elections conducted openly without massive voting fraud . The figure shows that this has changed .
 Democracies unlikely to engage in any kind of militarized disputes with each other or to let any such disputes escalate into war . Democracies are unlikely to allow such disputes to be escalated into war.
 There is no certainty that liberal democracy will become universal or that the continued democratic reforms will automatically produce a peaceful world order . Yet, there is no guarantee that the reforms will produce a free society .
 Many believe that the nature of the global system is even more critical . However important domestic influences might be as a source of war, they say .
 In the next section, we discuss the global context within which actors decide whether or not to wage armed conflict .
 The key actors in world politics are sovereign states that act rationally to advance their security, power, and wealth in a conflictual international system that lacks a legitimate authority to regulate conflicts or enforce agreements . Realist theories often generate conflicting predictions .
 This is the security dilemma —the possibility that a state’s actions to provide for its security may result in a decrease in the security of all states, including itself . bargaining modei of war is the interpretation of war's onset as a choice by the initiator to bargain through
 International anarchy or the absence of institutions for global governance may promote an outbreak of war . The absence of global governance could lead to a war in the future .
 To capture the many global determinants of armed conflict, also consider how and why global systems change . Consider the many factors that affect armed conflict .
 World War II was an outgrowth of World War I, the U.S. attack of Iraq in 2003 was an extension of the 1990 Persian Gulf War . The successive waves of violent protest and brutal state retaliation in the Middle East that began in 2011 were seen by many as a dom
 The frequency of past wars is correlated with the incidence of wars in later periods . War appears to be contagious and its future outbreaks are inevitable, the author says .
 They embrace the bargaining model of war, which sees war as a product of a rational choice that weighs anticipated costs against benefits . The bargaining model is based on the rational choice of war over anticipated costs and benefits .
 This indicates that armed conflict is not necessarily inevitable and that historical forces do not control people’s freedom of choice or experiences . Armed conflict does not necessarily have to be decided by historical forces .
 This theoretical explanation of armed conflict is a central tenant of structural realism . Structural realism emphasizes that power distribution is a key determinant of the behavior of states . Power distribution is also a key factor in state behavior .
 Emergent challengers can use force to achieve the recognition that their newly formed military muscles allow them . Emerging challengers use force in transition from developing to developed status, say experts . Emerged challengers can also use force as they try to achieve recognition .
 The rapid changes in the power and status that produced the division of Europe among seven great powers nearly equal in military strength are often interpreted as the tinderbox from which World War I ignited .
 The power transition theory provides leverage for "anticipating when and where great power and regional wars most likely will occur," according to the theory of the power transition .
 The theory that war is likely when a dominant great power is threatened by the rapid growth of a rival's capabilities, which reduces the difference in their relative power . With a warning well ahead of time comes the opportunity to construct current policies that can manage future disputes .
 Transition in states’ relative capabilities can potentially lead the weaker party to start a war either to overtake its rival or to protect itself from domination . Transitioning in states' relative capabilities may lead to a war .
 There is concern that there may also be a transition in the ideas and principles that underlie the existing global order, such as democracy, free markets and the acceptability of U.S. military power, may be replaced by illiberal constructions that present an authoritarian capitalist alternative .
 The struggle over international order today is not about fundamental principles, it's not about principles . It's about international order, not fundamental principles . The struggle is not over fundamental principles. It's over the future of the world's future .
 China and other emerging great powers do not want to contest the basic rules and principles of the liberal international order . They wish to gain more authority and leadership within it, says the Chinese leader .
 Emerging powers are benefiting from the rules and institutions that have been shaped by the U.S. While a global diffusion of wealth and power is occurring, emerging powers are taking advantage of the rules of the United States .
 No viable alternatives have emerged to challenge the current construction of the existing international order . And, to date, no viable alternatives to the existing order, have emerged .
 The absence of a clear trend in war’s frequency since the late fifteenth century suggests that world history seesaws between long cycles of war and peace . World history has seen periods of intermittent periods of peace and peace, says historian .
 Hegemonic stability theory expects that a stable world order requires sustained global leadership by a single great power . The theory is based on the theory of a single global leader .
 By exercising its preponderance of power, the hegemon establishes the conditions necessary for order in the international system, and discourages aggressors who would challenge the global status quo . Hegemon exerts the power necessary to order the world's international system .
 In each cycle, overcommitments and costs of empire have led to the delegitimation of the hegemon’s authority and to the deconcentration of power globally . Overcommitments, the costs of empires, and ultimately the appearance of rivals .
 The theory of power cycles contends that the growth and decline of national power holds the key to understanding the occurrence of extensive wars . The theory is based on the growth of power and decline in national power .
 Attempts to influence outcomes of conflicts are often more subtle, such as providing weapons, signaling intent to do so, or generating international support for a given side . Yet attempts to influence the outcomes of such conflicts are more subtle .
 Syrian government drops a bomb near Damascus as the Syrian conflict continues .
 Long-term downswings and recoveries in business cycles profoundly affect subsequent behaviors and conditions . War wars produce after-effects that may last for generations, and may last generations .
 In the relative short term, the pattern has shifted to fewer, but more deadly, armed conflicts . The pattern is shifting to fewer and more deadly conflicts .
 These inventories reflect what the mass media tell us, that violence and global insecurity are inherent in world politics . The inventories show that this is not what mass media tells us, but what it says is .
 Armed conflict in 2015 in Syria, Sudan, South Sudan, Yemen, and elsewhere cast a dark shadow . South Ghina Sea dispute and Syria conflict in Syria and Sudan also cast a shadow .
 Measuring the frequency of armed conflicts each year since 1946, the number of conflicts began to rise in 2003 . In the past, when people thought about armed conflicts, they thought about them, they were afraid of them .
 Both types of wars were frequently under way at similar rates each year between 1816 and World War 11 . Both wars were often under way each year at similar times each year .
 Internal wars have increasingly defined the global landscape . However, since then, internal wars have become increasingly important in the world .
 Civil wars and armed conflicts that do not involve government forces on at least one side have become especially prevalent since 1990 . This new pattern of civil war and armed conflict is especially prevalent in recent years, experts say .
 The conflicts between Eritrea-Ethiopia and India-Pakistan concerned territory, whereas the war between Iraq and the U.S. and its allies was fought over governmental power .
 Nine of the major intrastate armed conflicts were internationalized . Troops from states that were not primary parties to the conflict aided the side of the government .
 These included the conflict between the U.S. and A1 Qaeda, as well as those involving Afghanistan, Mali, Nigeria, Uganda, Sudan, Yemen, Central African Republic, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
 This suggests an increased risk of further armed aggression, fought by irregular militia and private or semiprivate forces . ‘Shadow warriors” commissioned by states as “outsourced” mercenaries or paid militia .
 Armed conflict between states may disappear, but frequency of conflict inside established states is growing . In the long term, armed conflict may disappear but in the long run, it is growing, experts say .
 On December 28, 2014, the United States formally marked the end to its combat role in Afghanistan . Afghanistan is the longest U.S. war to date . The United States has been involved in the country's longest war, Afghanistan .
 9800 U.S. troops are expected to remain through 2016 . They will continue to train Afghan forces and pursue a counterterrorism mission that involves airstrikes .
 Top U.S. commander in Afghanistan General John F Campbell said combat and war and transition, as you know, it's a very complex thing .
 U.S. soldiers conduct a patrol in Chorah, Afghanistan, in the country's Chorah province .
 This incompetence has led to an epidemic oi fragile states throughout the globe . This incompetence led to the rise of fragile states across the globe, says President Obama .
 Some fragile states are victims of widespread but episodic fighting by insurgents and warlords . Sometimes the armed conflict is confined to local regions that seek secession and independence, or other times it is sporadic .
 The citizens of fragile states pay the heaviest price for the internal conflict, political violence, and humanitarian catastrophe that commonly befall states that cannot discharge basic functions . fragile states often suffer from internal conflict and political violence .
 Based upon twelve social, economic, and political indicators, this map assesses countries based on their levels of stability . It assesses the stability of each country based on its social, political, and economic indicators .
 Finland is identified as the only country falling within the ""Very Sustainable"" category . Finland had the strongest score in 2015, according to the 2015 report .
 State fragility and civil war is particularly evident in the high-risk, weak, and impoverished states in Africa . Civil war is especially evident in high risk, weak and impoverished African states, writes CNN.com .
 Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia, Somalia and the Central African Republic are the most vulnerable countries . Sudan's governments are most critically in danger of failing and most likely to collapse in civil war and anarchy .
 An additional thirty-four countries are either on ""High Alert"" or ""Alert,"" where some significant elements of their societies and institutions are vulnerable to failure . Also identified are an additional 30 countries that are either "High Alert" or "Alert"
 These potential ""fragile states"" threaten the progress and stability of surrounding countries . These potential "fragiles states" threaten the peace and security of surrounding nations .
 fragile states share some key characteristics that make them vulnerable to disintegration, civil war, and terrorism . Fragile states share key characteristics such as disintegration and civil war . There are many causes of state failure and civil disintegration in fragile states .
 Most of the sovereign states in the world have one or more of these attributes . It is likely that the prevalence of fragile states is a growing problem in the globalized twenty-first century .
 Between 1989 and 2014, internal armed conflict over government or territory has by far been the most common . Internal armed conflict is by far most common in the years between 1989-2014 .
 Afghanistan, Burundi, Chad, Colombia, Congo, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Lebanon, Liberia, Peru, the Philippines, Rwanda, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Turkey, and Uganda . Consider examples of long-lasting and resumed civil wars in
 Civil wars also have a propensity to diffuse beyond the original state’s borders and increase the likelihood of violent internal conflict within its neighbors . Civil wars are also likely to spread beyond the borders of the original states, experts say .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf enduring internal rivalry . Protracted violent conflicts between governments and insurgent groups within a state. and/or e-versions.
 Data for 1816-1945 courtesy of the Correlates of War project under the direction of J David Singer and Melvin Small . Data from 1946 to 2011 for intrastate armed conflicts with 1,000 battle-related deaths .
 The “infection” of other states is most likely when the civil war is separatist conflict as opposed to one being fought over government power . The states are ethnically polarized, and countries are in near proximity to a civil war .
 Although consolidated democracy is likely to reduce the likelihood of civil war, such is not the case for transitioning democracies or authoritarian governments that hold elections . The likelihood of a civil war is unlikely to be prevented by consolidated democracy, writes Andrew Hammond .
 These countries are often vulnerable to the escalation of internal conflict and more receptive to diffusion across borders . In fact, these countries are more vulnerable to internal conflict .
 Ethnicity and group identity tend to be more salient when there are actors that seek to ensure that the government serves the interest of select groups . In a competitive political environment, ethnicity and group identities tend to become more salient .
 Elites may try to mobilize supporters to win elections by emphasizing group differences, inciting hostility, and engaging discrimination and intimidation, they say .
 Intrastrastate armed conflicts tend to be more severe than other intrastate conflicts . Intrastate conflict is characterized by its severity and severity . The U.S. has been involved in Iraq and Syria since 2003 .
 There are spillover externalities generated by severe civil conflict that spread beyond the original state borders and affect a region broadly, particularly those countries in near proximity . The spillover externities can be traced to countries in close proximity to each other .
 The most devastating indicator of the severity of civil war is the number of lives lost . The number of people who have died in the civil war has been rising in recent years .
 Death from civil violence has always been very high, and casualties from civil wars since World War 11 have increased at alarming rates, especially among children . Children have been both innocent victims and major participants .
 The year 1991 marked a peak in fatalities, with almost 80,000 battle-related deaths, due in large part to the intense war waged in Ethiopia over control of the government .
 A second peak occurred in 1999, when once again over 80,000 people lost their lives to hostilities in the Horn of Africa . Eritrea and Ethiopia clashed over border disputes .
 With the turn of the century, deadly conflicts have been more common in Asia and the Mideast .
 In particular, increased fatalities have been seen in Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Yemen, and Iraq . The deaths have been reported in the past year .
 Sudan has been in an almost continuous state of violent internal conflict since 1955 . Since the outbreak of civil war in 1955, the country has been at the center of a civil war .
 The first phase of civil war erupted when the Arab-led Khartoum government broke its promises to southerners to create a federal system to ensure their representation and regional autonomy in the newly independent state . The Arab government broke promises to ensure regional autonomy .
 More than a half million people were killed in the early 20th century . Compounded by deep cultural and religious differences, violent aggression raged .
 In 1972 the Addis Ababa Agreement was reached which established a single southern administrative region and brought an end to armed hostilities . However, the cease-fire proved to be only a fleeting peace .
 In 1983, civil war broke out again, fueled by racial and religious tensions, competition over oil resources, and struggles for political power .
 The Arab-controlled Sudanese government and government-backed Janjaweed militia suspended democracy in 1989 . They undertook a divide-and-destroy campaign of state-sponsored terrorism against those in the south .
 Attacks on non-Arab civilians in the extremely marginalized district of Darfur escalated . Yet attacks on non Arab civilians in Darfur escalate .
 UN estimates put the death toll at roughly 300,000 people, with another 2 million having fled their homes . By February 2010, when the Sudanese government signed a cease-fire agreement with the JEM, the largest rebel group in Darfur .
 In 2011, a mostly peaceful process for secession of South Sudan took place in 2011 . In 2012, vicious armed conflict sprang up along the border between the two countries over control of the oil-rich regions that lie largely in South Sudan .
 Fierce fighting continued in the Nuba Mountains of central Sudan . The northern Sudanese Army is waging an aggressive campaign to crush rebels .
 The bloodbath in Sudan and South Sudan has made this tragic place of death the worst since World War II . It raises questions about the prospects for lasting peace in the region .
 Another salient characteristic of internal armed conflicts is the resistance to negotiated settlement . The Syrian conflict has been a source of tension in the region for years .
 Making peace between rival factions that are struggling for power, driven by hatred, and poisoned by the inertia of prolonged killing is difficult . Making peace among rival factions is difficult, especially in countries like Syria .
 Few domestic enemies fighting in a civil war have succeeded in ending the combat through negotiated compromise . Few domestic foes fighting in the civil war succeeded in a negotiated compromise.
 The reoccurrence of civil war is often due to commitment problems and uncertainties about the military capabilities of the opponent . Civil war often occurs because of commitment problems, uncertainty about the opponent's capabilities .
 Typically, a civil war settlement requires insurgents to lay down their arms . Civil war settlement typically involves laying down arms . In the U.S. civil war, insurgents must lay down arms in order to reach a settlement .
 This shifts the balance of power in favor of the government, which may be tempted to press its advantage and exploit the cease-fire, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The concerns of insurgents can be addressed through third-party guarantees and institutional safeguards, the authors say . Such guarantees can be adopted by institutional safeguards that promote the sharing of power between domestic groups, they say .
 U.S. and Russia have opposing perspectives on the Syrian civil war . This can be seen in the international negotiations, and the opposing perspectives of the two countries .
 The rise of fragile states and their frequent fall into intrastate conflict may make it tempting to think of armed conflict within states as stemming exclusively from conditions within those countries . The rise in fragile states may make the conflict more likely to break out of the country .
 Take, for example, the consequences of violent government takeover through a coup d'etat . Take, example, a violent coup d’etat through a government takeover . The consequences of such a violent takeover are unclear .
 Since the end of the Cold War, the frequency of coups has declined by almost half . The resulting resulting governments have generally permitted competitive elections within five years .
 The great powers have played roles “behind the scenes,” not only in the occurrence of coup d’etats, but also militarily in intrastate conflict to support MAP 7 . Because of their global interests, they have played global interests behind the scenes to support
 Coups are most common in the Global South, with Africa and Latin America experiencing the greatest number of coups . Coups most commonly occur in Africa, Latin America and Africa .
 At times, external actors have sent armed forces into failed states to contain and control the civil conflict causing violence and attempt to reestablish governing authority . At times the external actor has sent . forces into . failed states .
 Analysts believe that domestic insurrections become internationalized when leaders intentionally provoke an international crisis . Many analysts believe that leaders try to divert attention to the threat of foreign aggression from internal opposition .
 It is logical for leaders to assume that national unity will rise when a foreign rivalry exists . Leaders assume national unity when there is foreign rivalry between them, he says .
 This creates strong temptations for them to seek to manage domestic unrest by initiating foreign adventures and demonstrating their competence . This is a strong temptation for the US to engage in foreign adventures .
 Idi Amin’s invasion of Tanzania in 1978 was part of an effort to counter domestic dissent and cover up an army mutiny in the southwestern region of his own country . This strategy was suspected in Uganda's invasion of the country in 1978 as an effort, in part, to
 Residents of Pakistani district of Dir fleeing fighting between Taliban militants and government forces fleeing the fighting .
 Another potential explanation involves a leader’s “conceptual complexity,” or the degree to which leaders display awareness of nuanced international relations concepts .
 This is particularly true if the leader is inclined to view the use of force as a legitimate and effective foreign policy tool . The U.S. should use force in foreign policy, says Julian Zelizer .
 In sum, intrastate conflicts can become internationalized through the tendency for them to invite external intervention . Leaders of failing governments to wage wars abroad as a means of preventing rebellion at home .
 Leaders today still ready their countries for such clashes, they are increasingly faced with the prospect of asymmetric warfare . Asymmetric warfare is armed conflict between terrorist networks and conventional military forces .
 Pundits and the press too often treat terrorism and guerrilla tactics as something new, a departure from old-fashioned ways of war . The U.S. should not treat terrorism as a new, it's a new way of war, the author says .
 A mixture of drama and dread, terrorism is not senseless violence, it is a premeditated political strategy . Terrorists threaten people with a coming danger that seems ubiquitous and unavoidable .
 The U.S. broadened its definition of terrorism to include the deaths of civilian victims in Iraq . The estimates of the number of global terrorist acts rose dramatically .
 A1 Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden was killed by U.S. Special Forces in May 2011 . The threat of terrorist attacks remains, even after the killing of bin Laden .
 Warns terrorism expert Richard Bloom, “the security threat remains consistent.” Warns Bloom . “The security threat is consistent,” says Bloom .
 Terrorism can be used to support or change the political status quo . Terrorism can also be used in support or to change the status quo, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Repressive terror, wielded to sustain an existing political order, has been used by governments as well as vigilantes . Terrorists have been used in the past by governments and vigilantes, as well .
 Asymmetric warfare is a conflict between belligerents of vastiy unequai military strength . The weaker side is often a nonstate actor that relies on unconventional tactics .
 Shown are the locations of terrorist attacks that occurred from 2000 until the start of 2014 . The locations of the terrorist attacks are shown from 2000 to 2014 . Terrorist attacks occurred between 2000 and 2014 .
 About 5 percent of the 107,000 fatalities from terrorism since 2000 have occurred in the Global North . The Global North has been hit hard by terrorism in the past decade .
 UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon: 'No single country or organization can provide solutions alone' UN chief: 'Complexity and interdependence of these issues mean that no single country can provide . solutions alone. No single nation or organization cannot provide solutions .
 Todays terrorists are so dangerous that they can be dangerous, says CNN's Peter Bergen . Terrorists are able to plan, execute, and learn from these operations that make them dangerous .
 Dissident terror may be grounded in anticolonialism, separatism, religion, or secular ideology . This dissident terror is grounded in anti-colonialism or separatism . It may also be rooted in religion or secularism .
 Two-thirds of recorded terrorist incidents involve the use of explosives . Almost two-thirds are recorded as using explosives in terrorist incidents .
 Flijacking and hostage-taking generally involve more complex operations than planting a bomb in a crowded department store or gunning down travelers in a train station . Flijackers and hostages tend to be more complex than bomb-plotted stores or train stations .
 1970 coordinated hijacking of five airliners by Palestinians led to one airliner being blown up in Cairo and three others in Jordan . The hijacking took place in September 1970, when one airliner was blown up .
 The figure indicates the major methods used by terrorists worldwide from 2000 through 2013 . Terrorist methods were used from 2000 to 2013 .
 The pattern of weapons used in terrorist attacks across the globe is relatively constant . 60 percent of incidents involve explosives, 30 percent firearms, and 10 percent involving other methods .
 Since 2000, 5 percent of all terrorist incidents have involved suicide attacks . Suicide attacks have occurred since 2000, according to CNN's Terrorism Tracker .
 Former U.S. Navy Secretary Richard Danzig called “nonexplosive warfare’s” threat a threat that could become part of the terrorist repertoire . The United States Navy Secretary called the tactic “warfare”
 First, dissidents may acquire weapons of mass destruction to deliver a moral blow against their enemies . First, they may acquire them to deliver an 'moral blow' against enemies . Second, they might acquire them as weapons to deliver moral blow .
 Nuclear armaments may be the ultimate terror weapons, but radiological, chemical, and biological weapons also pose extraordinary dangers . Nuclear weapons are the ultimate weapons of terror, but biological, nuclear, nuclear weapons pose extraordinary risks .
 In 2015, Australian intelligence reports indicated that ISIS/ISIL had “seized enough radioactive material from government facilities to suggest it has the capacity to build a large and devastating ‘dirty’ bomb” that combines conventional explosives with radioactive material .
 Biological weapons based on viral agents are typically more difficult to produce . The inadvertent distribution of live anthrax samples in the summer of 2015 from a United States military base in Utah to laboratories in 19 U.S. states, Washington D.C., Australia, Canada, Britain, and
 Extremists use the Internet as a recruiting tool and a means of coordinating their activities with likeminded groups . They can also hack into a foe’s computer system to case potential targets .
 Viruses and other weapons of information warfare could also cause havoc if they disable financial institutions . Financial institutions could also be targeted by information warfare .
 Cyberattacks have risen as a heated issue between the United States and China . The United States charged China with responsibility for high-tech spying in 2013 that compromised more than two dozen major U.S. weapons systems . Cyberattacks are a hot topic between the two countries .
 Both bioweapons and cyberattacks challenge our thinking about the future of terrorism and war as they pose a strategic quandary . Because they are extraordinarily difficult to trace back to the perpetrator, they defy deterrence and elude defenses .
 Terrorist expert Walter Laqueur sees a future of postmodern terrorism that poses a great threat to technologically advanced societies . Terrorists tend to be less ideological, more likely to hold ethnic grievances, and increasingly difficult to distinguish from other criminals .
 The information age facilitates transnational networking among terrorists . Information age has made available a variety of new methods of warfare, says the author .
 New global environment encourages rapid spread of new weapons and technology across borders . Terrorists are encouraged to commit atrocities and change their tactics in response to successful counterterror operations .
 The growing difficulty of detecting and deterring the attacks of disciplined globalized terrorist networks is further exacerbated by their ties to international organized crime syndicates and international linked networks of thousands of gangs . The difficulty of finding out and preventing terrorist attacks is also exacerbated by the links to organized crime and international
 States have often financed, trained, equipped, and provided sanctuary for terrorists whose activities serve foreign policy goals . Compounding these challenges is the fact that states have often funded, trained and equipped, for terrorists .
 President George W Bush described the threat as a network of terrorist groups as well as rogue states that harbored them in 2001 .
 disagreement about the character and causes of global terrorism remain pronounced . Without agreement on these basic characteristics, a consensus on the best response is unlikely . The U.S. is unlikely to reach a consensus about how to respond to terrorism .
 Much like a disease that cannot be treated until it is accurately diagnosed, the plague of new global terrorism cannot be eradicated until its sources are understood . Much like disease that can't be treated, it cannot be cured until its source is understood .
 Those advocating repression see terrorism springing from the cold calculations of extremists . They should be neutralized by preemptive surgical strikes, they say .
 War between states is disappearing, and this inspires optimists who hope that it will vanish from human interaction altogether . Optimists hope that war between states will vanish altogether .
 Unlike breathing, eating or sex, war is not required by the human condition or by the forces of history, security experts predict .
 Efforts to defeat terrorism must include developing governments that can meet the needs of the people and jobs that provide an alternative to fighting . Efforts must also be to develop governments that meet the people's needs and provide jobs that can provide a better alternative .
 Lieutenant Colonel Brett Jenkinson, commander of the United States battalion in the Korengal Valley, explains that “What we need is a better recruiting pitch for disaffected youth.”
 Strategists often fail to distinguish different types of terrorist movements and their diverse origins . Moreover, strategists often don't distinguish different groups of terrorist groups .
 Your search for solutions will necessarily spring from assumptions you make about terrorism's nature and sources . These assumptions will strongly affect your conclusions about the wisdom or futility of contemplated remedies .
 What may appear to be a policy around which an effective counterterrorist program might be constructed could potentially make the problem worse . Keep in mind that what may look like a policy could make the situation worse .
 Syria and Iraq replaced Afghanistan as the least peaceful countries . Scores dipped most sharply for Libya, Ukraine, Djibouti, and Niger . Libya and Ukraine also made the list for peaceful nations .
 Europe remains the most peaceful region, with 15 of the top 20 most peaceful countries in the world . Europe remains most peaceful in the Middle East, with fifteen of the world's most peaceful nations .
 Armed conflict between and within states threatens everyone in the borderless globalized world, all of humanity is at risk . However, that threat remains, and because armed conflict .
 Between 2008 and 2015, the level of peace in the world declined by 12 percent . Peace was deteriorating in eighty-six countries around the world and improving in only seventy-six . Peace is deteriorating in over 80 countries, according to the study .
 Your life and livelihood is certain to be threatened by the continuing onset of armed conflict . But the sad news is that your life is likely to be in danger by the conflict .
 Much of world history is written about the causes and consequences of armed conflict from the vantage point of all peoples’ and professions’ perspectives . That threat imperils the future and affects all other aspects of world politics, which is why much of history has been written .
 In order to reduce and possibly eliminate the plague of armed conflict in the world, it is necessary for us to first understand what drives violent conflict . Yet in order for us, we need to understand the causes of violent conflict in order to prevent it from happening .
 In this chapter you also have the opportunity to examine the many leading causes of armed conflict that theorists have constructed to explain why political violence in its various forms erupts . ft is the alternative potential paths to peace, security, and world order that we next consider .
 In Chapter 8, we examine the vision realism advances about dealing with the threat of war . We examine arms, military strategy, alliances, alliances and the balance of power .
 Throughout history, countries have used weapons to back their enemies into surrender . The U.S. has been known to use weapons to defeat enemies .
 Realists regard the prudent use of armed force as a powerful instrument for maintaining security and stability in world politics . Realists say armed forces are a powerful tool for maintaining world peace and stability .
 Learning Objectives 8-1 Discuss the implications of realist theory for the examination of armed conflict . Discuss a series of discussions on the implications for realist theories .
 Nixon: "I magine yourself someday becoming the next secretary-general of the United Nations" "They are armed because they are in conflict and have not yet learned peaceful ways to resolve their conflicting interests" Nixon: I magine you someday become the next Secretary-General .
 Many countries are engaged in armed conflict and that those wars are destroying life and property . But looking at the globe, you would likely see that many countries are still engaged in conflict . The U.S. has been involved in more than 1,000 wars since 2001 .
 "You would undoubtedly also be distressed by the countries and possibly some transnational terrorist groups with the new capacity to annihilate their enemies with weapons of mass destruction," he says .
 UN members most feverishly working to increase their capacity to resist threats to their physical survival are the same countries whose national security, or psychological freedom from fear of foreign aggression, seems to be declining rapidly .
 As you watch the jockeying for power and position among the UN members, you also notice that countries tend to forge partnerships, based on converging and clashing interests and values . The United Nations is one of the world's most powerful nations .
 Policy makers turn to realist theory for guidance in periods when international tensions are high, policy makers say . Realist theory is used to explain the meaning of war and peace in the United States .
 Nearly all states continue to believe that the anarchical global system requires them to rely on self-help and depend only on themselves for security . Our interests are eternal and perpetual and those interests it is our duty to follow .
 The school of thought that the drive for power and the domination of others for self-advantage is a universal and permanent motive throughout the world .
 In this chapter, you will explore states’ efforts to follow the realist recipes for reducing threats to their national security by creating a favorable balance of power . The next chapter will explore how states are trying to reduce threats by creating favorable balance-power .
 Hobbes advised that successful states are those that hold the “posture of Gladiators; having their weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one another” This chapter introduces the acquisition and use of arms, major trends in weaponry, and the role of alliances .
 Realists believe power is key to driving world politics . They believe power has, throughout history, been key in driving world power . This discussion begins by underscoring the high importance of power .
 Realistic recommends that war be placed at the very top of a state’s concerns . To contain dangers, the pursuit of power must be the top priority, he says .
 Standards of right and wrong apply to individuals but not to states . In world affairs amoral actions are sometimes necessary for security, writes David Frum .
 "Strive to increase military capabilities and fight rather than submit to subordination," says President Obama . "Fight not submit to submit to submissibility," says Obama .
 Even texts such as the Bible reflect this assumption, as it observes and warns that people seem born to sin . The drive for power is one of their inalterable compulsions, says the Bible .
 Realists assume that power is humanity’s primary objective, but it defies precise definition . That said, the abstraction called power, which realists assume to be humanity's main objective, defies definition .
 Constructivists recognize that in the broadest sense power is usually interpreted as the political capacity of one actor to exercise influence over another actor to the first’s benefit . Constructivism is a form of power that can be interpreted as a political capacity to exercise power over others .
 "Power is an ambiguous concept, and difficult to measure. Power is the exercise of influence to control others," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Realists see military capability as by far the most important part of state power . The Elements of State Power: Realists think military capability is by far most important . Realists say the U.S. needs to have a strong military presence .
 Realist theory maintains that the ability to coerce militarily is more important than rewarding favors or buying concessions . Realist theorists say that the key to winning power is coercing it militarily, not rewarding favors .
 Following tradition, one way to estimate power potential of states is to compare their military expenditures to their power potential .
 The United States is the undisputed military powerhouse of the world, with defense spending that leaves all other countries far behind . On this dimension, the U.S. is undisputed .
 Since the peak of U.S. military spending in 2010, the United States has decreased its expenditures in real terms by 19. percent . The United States is spending 19.6 percent less than the previous peak of military spending .
 Analysts also consider the relative size of a state’s economy, its population and territorial size, geographic position, raw materials, technological capacity, political culture and values, efficiency of governmental decision making .
 The U.S. continues to be regarded as a true hegemonic superpower without rival .
 In 2016, U.S. military spending is expected to include $534. billion in base budget, which excludes nuclear expenditures . That figure includes $50. billion to support the drawdown in Afghanistan, counterinsurgency in Iraq and Syria .
 This brings the United States defense budget to $ 585. billion in 2016 . Trade, educational level, national morale, and internal solidarity are key factors in defense spending .
 If power potential were measured by territorial size, Russia would be the world's most powerful country . Russia is twice as large as its closest rivals (Canada, China, the United States, Brazil, and Australia, in that order)
 China, India, the United States, Indonesia, Pakistan, Nigeria, and Nigeria would be the most powerful countries in the world by 2025 . Brazil, China, the U.S. and Indonesia would be most powerful, according to the UN .
 Another measure of power projection is the number of uniform personnel in states' armies, navies, and airforces . State's uniform personnel is a key factor in power projection .
 In the more recent past, Vietnam succeeded against a vastly stronger France and, later, the United States. In the 1970s, the Vietnam government succeeded against France and the U.S. in the war .
 The United States’ superior military power did not prevent Iran from taking American diplomats as hostages or the A1 Qaeda terrorist network’s 9/11 attack . Similarly, the U.S. could not prevent A1 al Qaeda from taking Americans hostage or taking hostages .
 Intangible factors, such as the will of the target population to resist a more powerful army and their willingness to die for their cause, were key elements in the capacity of each of these weaker actors to combat a much stronger military force . Intangible . factors, like the will . of
 Security analysts believe military capability is a prerequisite for the successful exercise of coercive diplomacy through the threat of limited force . Most security analysts believe that this is because military capabilities are a prerequisite .
 World military spending rose to $1.78 trillion in 2014, which represents slightly more than a 2 percent increase since 2011 . Military power is central in leaders’ concepts of national security .
 The world is spending $3,378,995 each minute preparing for war . The world spends $3.378,000 each minute to prepare for the war .
 As 2015 began, the Global North was spending $1,277 billion for defense, in contrast with the developing Global South’s $467 billion . The Global North spent $1.277 billion on defense, compared to $467 million on defense in 2015 .
 When measured against other factors, the differences become clearer . However, when measured against factors such as the cost of living in the U.S.
 Military expenditures incur opportunity costs — when what is gained for one purpose is lost for other purposes . The cost of a particular choice means the cost of some lost opportunity must be paid .
 The substantial costs of defense can erode national welfare, the authors say . Policy makers hope to defend with military might, but can't afford it .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent opportunity costs are lost . The sacrifices that resuit when the decision to seiect one option means that the opportunity to realize gains from another options is lost and/or eChapter.
 Many countries have gained a relative competitive edge by investing in research on the development of goods to export abroad, while conserving resources by relying on allies and global institutions to provide defense .
 The United States has also been the dominant investor in research and development funding . In addition to its high military spending, the U.S. has also invested in research, development .
 Some believe that this miliI tary-industrial complex exercises enormous influence over the U.S. defense budget and arms sales agreements . Some believe this is because of its influence on the United States defense budget .
 Defense contractors can charge the Pentagon inflated prices for their products . One symptom of this influence is the ability of defense contractors to charge inflated prices . Defense contractors have been accused of overcharging the Pentagon for defense products .
 Shares of Global Military Expenditiires, 2014 UAE 1-3% Australia . Shares of global Military Expenditure Expenditure of the UAE in the UAE at 1.3% .
 Global military budgets have fluctuated since 1960 . Total expenditures worldwide peaked in 1987, after which they fell about a third until the 9/11 terrorist attacks .
 The military budget of the Global South's developing countries has grown to command a significant portion of world military expenditures, amounting to almost 25 percent of the world's total at the start of 2015 .
 U.S. military expenditures continue to far exceed those of any other country . Military expenditures are almost three times more than the expenditures of the next closest country—China .
 In 2012, global military expenditures began to reflect this economic reality with the first decrease in world military spending since 1998 . The United States’ reduced spending as it continued to disengage from its wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and address its budget deficit .
 In 2013 and 2014, overall military spending continued to decline in North America, much of Europe, and Latin America . Overall military spending continues to decline .
 Politics requires making hard choices about priorities and how public funds should be spent, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "Politicians need to make hard choices on how public money should be allocated"
 The former category looks to arms to combat threats and preserve national security, and the latter stresses human security . The latter places an emphasis on protecting the well-being of individuals .
 Different countries deal with this dilemma in different ways . Neither goal can be pursued without making some sacrifice for the other .
 Share of resources used for military purposes has increased steadily since 2000 . Military burden now corresponds to 2. percent of world GDP . Militaryindustrial complex is a lobbying coalition to pressure governments to appropriate expenditures for military preparedness .
 Map shows percentage of GDP allocated toward military spending . Military spending is a large percentage of the country's gross domestic product . The map shows wide variations in percentage of military spending allocated toward GDP .
 Many countries allocate a high proportion of their total GDP to defense . Others spend their wealth to enhance human security .
 Some comparatively wealthy states bear a heavy burden, while others provide a high average income for their citizens . Japan, Austria, and Luxembourg have a low defense burden, but others have a high defense burden .
 These skeptics of high military spending believe the high costs can easily reduce the human security found within a particular country . These skeptics believe the cost of military spending can be easily reduced in a country .
 A growing trend since the beginning of the Iraq War has been the increased use of private military services, which enhances a state’s military capabilities by allowing the government to conduct operations with fewer troops than would otherwise be needed .
 During the Cold War, many states sought to increase their security by purchasing arms produced by suppliers seeking allies as well as profits from exports . The Cold War saw arms purchased by suppliers eager to seek allies .
 There have been troubling trends in the global arms trade in recent years, including the rise in arms sales .
 Major recipients of global arms shipments remain heavily concentrated in a subset of Global South arms purchasers . Overall, the major recipients are heavily concentrated on the Global South .
 The top five arms recipients included India, China, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and the United Arab Emirates . The top arms recipients accounted for 33 percent of arms imports .
 The stream of weapons to these insecure and eager buyers with money to spend is not likely to end soon . The shortand long-term consequences of arms transfers to countries experiencing internal conflict is a concern, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Nigeria and Cameroon purchased helicopters from Russia and China and armored vehicles from South Africa, China, Czech Republic and Ukraine to aid in the fight against Boko Haram .
 Changes in the activities of arms suppliers are also important, say experts . Arms importers and arms importers are also key to arms sales .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ private military services are needed . Outsourcing activities of a miiitary-specific nature to private companies, such as armed security, equipment maintenance, logistics, and intelligence services .
 The United States and Russia still dominate the arms export market, supplying 31 and 27 percent of all conventional weapons exports, respectively, between 2010 and 2014 .
 The 2013 arms sales of Lockheed Martin, an Americanbased company, were greater than the GDPs of ninety-four countries . Lockheed Martin's arms sales are greater than any of the world's largest arms sales .
 Sales of weapons by British-based BAE Systems exceed the baseline budget of the Marine Corps in 2013 by roughly $3 billion . The sales of weapons are by the British company, which sells weapons to the Marines .
 The post-Gold War era has been likened to modern-day mercenaries . Companies that provide private military services for hire on the global market are growing .
 The outsourcing of military-like activities enables governments to maintain their force structure for a lower cost than otherwise would be possible . The outsourcing allows governments to keep their forces in shape for a shorter time .
 Lockheed Martin 35.5% of the world's top arms-producing companies have arms sales . Lockheed Martin is one of the most successful arms-producers in the world . The U.S. has produced the most arms-producing companies in history .
 An angry Iraqi government blamed them for the shooting deaths of 17 civilians and the injuries of twenty others . Some of the dead were women and children .
 Others say the shooting was unprovoked and the guards fired indiscriminately . Blackwater said the guards were responding to an ambush by insurgents and were innocent .
 The incident inflamed anti-American sentiment in the country . It raised questions about the role and accountability of private military companies in war zones .
 In 2011 Muammar al-Qaddafi’s government recruited mercenaries from Guinea and Nigeria, offering up to $2,000, to quash the ongoing protests in Libya against his regime .
 Supporters of private military services point out that private contractors like Blackwater, Triple Canopy, and DynCorp are not of the same ilk as al-Qaddafl’s mercenary forces .
 Military contractors from repufable companies tend to be professional, efficient, and effective . Repufable military contractors are more efficient, efficient and effective than ever .
 Critics point out that private military companies operate in a legal gray area . Critics say they do not receive adequate monitoring and evaluation .
 In the Blackwater case, it was unclear whether the employees were subject to Iraqi, U.S., civilian, or military law . It's unclear whether Blackwater employees are subject to military or Iraqi law .
 It is difficult to establish corporate liability unless it can be proven that the company itself intended to break the law . And even if employees are found culpable, it is difficult for the company to prove it intended to do so .
 During the Cold War, the U.S. and the Soviet Union thought they could maintain peace by spreading arms to strategically important countries . For example, the United States and the Soviets tried to maintain peace in order to keep the peace .
 Many recipients went to war with their neighbors or experienced internal rebellion . Yet many of these recipients went on to war . Many of the recipients went from war with neighbors to internal rebellion or internal rebellion.
 As arms exporters “peddle death to the poor,” they seldom acknowledge how this scouting for customers contradicts other proclaimed foreign policy goals . Arms exporters rarely acknowledge how they’re doing this contradicts other goals .
 Between 2010 and 2014, the United States was responsible for 31 percent of all global arms exports . Major weapons delivered to ninety-four countries, including many with human rights problems such as the UAE, Qatar and Saudi Arabia .
 The inability of arms suppliers to control the uses of their military hardware is troubling . Arms suppliers should be able to control their military equipment, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The missiles the U.S. supplied to Taliban forces resisting the Soviet Union’s 1979 invasion in Afghanistan fell into the hands of terrorists who later used them against the United States . This also happened when the Stinger missiles the . United States supplied to the Taliban forces resisted the Soviet
 In 1982 Great Britain found itself shipping military equipment to Argentina just eight days before Argentina’s attack on the British-controlled Falkland Islands . In 1998 U.S. military technology sold to Ghina was exported to Pakistan, making its nuclear weapons test possible .
 Nuclear security of the arsenal is now a lot better than it was, says Graham Allison, a leading nuclear expert . Graham Allison: “He nuclear security . of the . arsenal is . now a matter of concern, says Allison .
 The use of nuclear weapons could not only destroy entire cities and countries but also, conceivably, the world’s entire population . Nuclear weapons could destroy cities, countries and entire populations .
 horizontal nuclear proliferation is an increase in the number of states that possess nuclear weapons . vertical nuclear proliferation involves the expansion of the capabilities of existing nuclear powers to inflict increasing destruction with their nuclear weapons. horizontal nuclear proliferations are the result of horizontal nuclear weapons proliferation .
 Most have been dismantled since the 1986 peak, but as many as 4300 remained deployed at the start of 2015 . Most of the world's largest arsenals of weapons are now dismantled .
 The United States possessed 2080 deployed warheads; Russia, 1780; France, 290; and Britain, 150 . Russia, Russia, France, France and Britain possessed more warheads than the United States .
 The proliferation of arms is a serious global concern, writes Peter Bergen . The so-called Nth country problem (the addition of new nuclear states) is expected to become increasingly probable .
 Both horizontal nuclear proliferation and vertical nuclear proliferation are likely to be likely . Both horizontal and vertical proliferation is likely to lead to more nuclear weapons .
 Iran and Syria have self-proclaimed aims to acquire nuclear weapons . Consider India and Pakistan's successful nuclear programs and North Korea’s nuclear tests . North Korea and Iran have nuclear programs .
 Nuclear proliferation is likely to continue as states face strong incentives to join the nuclear club and acquire missiles and bombers for their delivery .
 Argentina, Brazil, Libya, and Taiwan once had active nuclear programs . The threat remains that these countries could revive these capabilities to manufacture nuclear weapons .
 There is widespread international concern regarding the expansion of existing nuclear programs . Likewise, there is widespread concern regarding expanding existing nuclear facilities in Iran .
 In April 2013, China and Pakistan reached a formal agreement whereby China will help Pakistan build a third nuclear reactor in Chashma . Further propelling the arms race, Pakistan and China reached an agreement in April 2013 .
 In 2015 negotiations between Iran and the United States, Britain, France, Germany, Russia, and China resulted in an agreement that limited Iran’s capacity to build a nuclear bomb and imposed inspections of Iranian facilities . In exchange for lifting international sanctions, Iran lifted international sanctions that have greatly
 The complaint of former French President Charles de Gaulle, who argued that without an independent nuclear capability France could not “command its own destiny,” reflects the strong incentive of nonnuclear states to develop weapons similar to those of the existing nuclear club .
 In 2013, North Korea conducted further nuclear tests, adding to global tensions . North Korean leader Kim Jong-un’s defiant rhetoric added to global tension . North Korea has challenged other countries, including the United States, with the threat of nuclear annihilation .
 Iran and North Korea regard the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as hypocritical because it provides a seal of approval to the United States, Russia, China, Britain, and France for possessing nuclear weapons while denying it to all others . Many countries, such as Iran, regard the treaty as hypocritical
 The underlying demand for nuclear weapons is rather straightforward, the supply of nuclear weapons does not appear to make as much sense . The supply of nukes does not seem to make a much sense, according to experts .
 Nuclear-capable states have contributed to the global spread of nuclear weapons by providing sensitive nuclear know-how to non-nuclear states . Aside from economic reasons, it is less clear why nuclear-capifiable states themselves contributed to global spread .
 Israel built its first nuclear weapon just two years after receiving nuclear assistance from France in the early 1960s . Israel also received nuclear assistance in the 1960s from France, which helped build its first weapon .
 In April 2012, North Korea launched a ballistic missile in defiance of UN Security Council resolutions and an agreement with the United States . Shown here, the North Korean state of North Korea has a "rogue nuclear power"
 Third, states that are less vulnerable to superpower pressure are more likely to provide sensitive nuclear assistance . States that are not vulnerable to superpowers' pressure are less likely to give sensitive nuclear aid .
 The number of new operational nuclear reactors is certain to increase . About 66 new nuclear reactors are now planned or under construction .
 There's not a snowball’s chance in hell we’ll eliminate all nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth, experts say .
 The Revolution in Military Technology is increasing the lethality of the weapons of war . The rapidity of technological refinements that increase the capacity of states to send their weapons great distances with ever-greater accuracy .
 Missiles can now send weapons from as far away as 11,000 miles to within one hundred feet of their targets in less than thirty minutes . Missiles are now able to send weapons to within 100 feet of targets within 30 minutes .
 Many warheads on a single missile can be launched at different targets simultaneously and accurately . This allows these countries to launch many warheads on one missile . The missiles can be fired at multiple targets simultaneously .
 Laser weapons, nuclear-armed tactical air-to-surface missiles and stealth air-launched cruise missiles have become a part of the military landscape . Laser weapons can project force and wage war from outer space .
 The new generation includes sounds, shocks, and smells to disperse or incapacitate crowds . The new technology includes sounds and shocks to disperse crowds .
 Since the dawn of the nuclear age, the secrets for making nuclear weapons have spread, either through intentional transfer, leak, or espionage . The secrets have spread either intentionally transfer, or through espionage .
 Halting nuclear proliferation continues to be seen as one of the most urgent challenges facing the world . by giving them an instant and intense headache. by . giving them a headache . Halting the nuclear weapons of the world is seen as an urgent challenge .
 Air Force’s ‘active denial technology’ uses electromagnetic radiation to penetrate clothing and cause water molecules to vibrate and burn skin tissue . Another example is the U.S. Air Force's “active denial tech” that uses electromagnetic .
 NLWs already deployed in information-warfare squadrons to protect military computer networks from electronic sneak attacks . NLWs are already deployed to protect computers from electronic attacks .
 The electromagnetic pulse bomb can be hand-delivered in a suitcase and can immobilize an entire city’s computer and communications systems . Other futuristic weapons include logic bombs that can confuse and redirect traffic on the target country’�s air and rail systems .
 A revolution in robotic military technology is already under way, with new unmanned systems such as the forty-two-pound PackBot used in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 At least 22 different robot systems are now in use on the ground, with prototypes for a variety of others . Altogether, at least twenty-two different robots are now being used in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Only the United States, United Kingdom, and Israel have used armed drones . Many other countries are developing and enlarging their drone capabilities .
 India has indicated that it is equipping its existing drones with precision-guided munitions . The country has indicated it wants to use the drones to conduct cross-border attacks on suspected terrorists . India has also indicated that its drones will be equipped with precision munitions .
 Of growing concern is that countries might use drones in ways that they would not use manned aircraft . This might lead to an escalation of disputes between countries using drones .
 China flies drones over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, eight uninhabited islands in a strategically important location . The islands lie at the heart of a continuing territorial row with Japan .
 This revolution in military technology is reshaping the conduct of war . Weapons that are symbols of military might like stealth bombers and nuclear submarines are of little use in asymmetric warfare . Individual soldiers equipped with the latest technologies are needed for search-and-destroy missions .
 A major development in the conduct of \A/arfare has been the widespread use of unmanned aerial vehicles . Unexplained aerial vehicles are commonly referred to as drones .
 The bulk of drones deployed around the world function as tools for unarmed surveillance . The U.S. has provoked controversy over its growing use of drones as lethal robots of war both on and off battlefield .
 Such capabilities raise important questions about the limitations that should, or should not, be placed on the use of drones .
 Proponents of drones point out that they are operated by trained personnel as part of a security strategy . They are not controlled by voyeuristic amateurs, they say . Drones are not monitored by amateurs .
 There is growing concern about the extent to which drones are used to observe domestic noncombatants for nonmilitary security purposes . There are also concerns about the use of drones in the U.S.
 Technological advances may make obsolete current ways of classifying weapons systems and measuring power ratios obsolete . Technology advances may also make current methods obsolete .
 New weapons have been heralded as a way to accomplish the mission without exposing soldiers to the risks of combat . There are concerns about long-term implications of the weapons .
 The war in Afghanistan is the first time that robots have been used by the U.S. military for combat purposes . It's the first use of robots by the United States military in combat .
 Chemical weapons are toxic chemicals contained in a delivery mechanism such as a shell or bomb that have immediate consequence at the point of skin contact or inhalation . Chemical weapons include toxic chemicals that are contained in delivery mechanism .
 They kill or injure through toxic effects on the lungs, skin, blood, nerves, eyes, or other organs . Examples of each, respectively, include chlorine, mustard gas, hydrogen cyanide, and sarin .
 Biological weapons are infectious agents that cause disease or death . The release and effects of these weapons may not be apparent until after the weapon has been dispersed .
 These weapons are categorized as bacterial, viral, or toxic agents . They include anthrax, smallpox, yellow fever, pneumonic plague, and botulism .
 Twelve other states have declared past production of chemical weapons, still others are suspected of secret production . Many terrorists claim they intend to acquire and use them .
 Following the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the United States, there were fears that the spread of anthrax through the U.S. mail system was the first step in an endless series of future biological warfare attacks by terrorist networks .
 Advances in biotechnology have made it easier and cheaper to develop dangerous bacteria, viruses, and toxins . This has increased the likelihood that such weapons will proliferate to an increasing number of countries . Nonstate actors also will develop or acquire these weapons of mass destruction and use them to attack
 International law prohibits the use of chemical and biological weapons . International law does not allow such weapons to be used .
 The 1925 Geneva Protocol banned the use of chemical and biological weapons in warfare . Some signatories indicated that they would not abide by the Protocol if their enemies used such weapons .
 Israel signed the treaty in 1993, but as of June 19, 2015, had yet to ratify it . The treaty was signed in 1993 .
 Only North Korea, Angola, Egypt, and South Sudan have declined to sign or accede to the Chemical Weapons Convention . South Sudan and North Korea are the only nations to have signed or acceded to the chemical weapons Convention .
 The 1972 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention extends the 1925 Geneva Protocol’s restriction on the use of biological weapons to also prohibit the acquisition, development, production, and stockpiling of such weapons . The Geneva Protocol also prohibits the acquisition and development of biological and toxin weapons .
 There is concerted global attention to the threats of chemical and biological weapons . The ability to verify and thwart their development and use is limited, experts say .
 Iran and Iraq’s use of gas in their eight-year 1980s 1980s war against each other . Iraq and Syria's use of sarin and chloride against unarmed civilians demonstrate the weaknesses of this, and similar, legal barriers . Syria’S use of chemical weapons against
 Many radical extremists see chemical and biological weapons as a cheap and efficient terrorist method . In addition, many radical extremists, often beyond the control of weak state governments, see them as a means of warfare .
 The most important event distinguishing pre-World War II politics occurred on August 6, 1945 . The United States dropped the first atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, on Hiroshima .
 Both the immediate and delayed effects of weapons of mass destruction are terrifying to contemplate . The search for answers is critical because both the immediate or delayed effects are terrifying .
 A short war using a tiny fraction of any great power’s nuclear arsenal would destroy all life as we know it . Consider that even a short war with a small fraction of the world's nukes would destroy life as well as life .
 A nuclear winter would result, with devastating consequences that could make the planet uninhabitable . The world would be hit by a nuclear winter, which could leave the planet inhabitable .
 Pervasive insecurity haunts much of the world because real supranational controls over the proliferation of biological and chemical weapons do not exist . Even a more limited nuclear conflict would greatly affect the atmosphere, with the INSIDIOUS WEAPONS OF WAR .
 unexploded artillery shells from World War I believed to contain chemical warfare agents are still being cleared from the border area between France and Germany . The unexploded shells are believed to have been found in France .
 Many have come to think of biological, chemical, and radiological weapons as weapons of mass destruction because of their capacity for large-scale devastation and casualties . Since World War II, nuclear arsenals and the number of states that possess nuclear capabilities have grown .
 Rogue states and nonstate actors pose a threat to global security with their potential use of WMDs . Terrorist organizations, rogue states and terrorist organizations also pose a security threat to the world .
 Military strategies that respond to changes in technologies, defense needs, capabilities, and global actors and conditions are critical . Military strategies must respond to changing technologies and needs, says U.S. President Obama .
 A country can exercise influence over enemies simply by demonstrating the power of its weapons and signaling its willingness to use them . Military capabilities do not have to be used for them to be instrumental, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Through a show of force, countries can use compellence as a strategy to convince others to do what they might not otherwise do . The U.S. can use it as a way to persuade others to take action .
 The U.S. adopted the strategy of compellence when it enjoyed a clear-cut nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union .
 The United States sought to gain bargaining leverage by giving the impression that it would actually use its nuclear weapons . The U.S. sought the impression of using nuclear weapons to gain negotiating leverage .
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles practiced brinkmanship during Eisenhower administration . He deliberately threatened U.S. adversaries with nuclear destruction so that, on the brink of war, they would concede demands .
 To contain communism and Soviet expansionism, this doctrine called for aiming United States nuclear weapons at what the Soviets valued most . U.S. nuclear weapons aimed at population and industrial centers, the doctrine said .
 Massive retaliation heightened fears in the Kremlin that a nuclear exchange would destroy the Soviet Union but permit the survival of the U.S. The Kremlin feared that a massive retaliation would kill the Soviets .
 The United States for the first time faced a nuclear threat to its homeland . Thus, the superpowers’ strategic competition took a new turn as the United States faced a threat .
 Deterrence seeks to dissuade an adversary from undertaking some future action . A strategy of compellence relies on an offensive threat aimed at persuading an adversary to relinquish something without resistance . Deterrence is a strategy of competition instead of comprellence .
 The chief assumption of deterrence theory is that the defender has the ability to punish an adversary with unacceptably high costs if it launches an attack . Deterrence theory says the defender can punish its adversary with high costs . This is not the case for deterrence theory .
 The ability to send a potential aggressor the clear message that the threat will be carried out is key to the success of the military .
 A deterrence strategy depends on obtaining the unquestionable ability to inflict intolerable damage on an opponent, says President Obama . "A deterrence strategy must be able to inflict unbearable damage," says Obama .
 A state seeking to deter an enemy must build its weapons to acquire a second-strike capability . This requires having sufficient destructive weapons to ensure that the country can withstand an adversary’s first strike and still retaliate .
 Deterrence rationalizes an unrestrained search for sophisticated retaliatory capabilities . To guarantee that an adversary is aware that a second-strike capability exists, deterrence rationalizes the search for retaliatory capability . The U.S. has a second strike capability .
 Regardless of who struck first, the other side could destroy the attacker . Regardless of the first strike, the attacker could be destroyed by the other .
 Using an integrated system of ground, sea, and space-based radars and weapons, this defense technology detects, intercepts, and destroys weapons launched in fear, anger, or by accident .
 The goal of ballistic missile defense is to make nuclear weapons “impotent and obsolete” and to shift nuclear strategy away from mutual assured destruction . President Reagan’s words, in U.S. President Reagan, said the goal of missile defense was to make nukes �
 The United States’ pursuit of antiballistic missile defense currently includes twenty-nine Aegis BMD ships . Shown here is a United States test of a nuclear bomb in 1954 when only the United States and the Soviet Union had nuclear capabilities .
 Realist theory looks on the acquisition of military power and its consequences as the most important dimension of world politics . What to do with such weapons for war and for peace is the central concern of realist theorizing, says Realist Theory .
 The map above shows countries with ballistic missiles . The map also shows how countries in the world have ballistic missile capabilities .
 Although the direct threat is limited, such military capacity is widely feared . The U.S. has a limited military presence in the region .
 Some worry that BMD undermines the deterrence strategy, rather than complements it . Others worry that it may lead to more nuclear missiles worldwide instead of fewer .
 Preventive warfare outlawed by international law . War undertaken by choice against an enemy to prevent it from suspected intentions to attack . If and when the enemy might acquire the necessary military capabilities, the war will be fought .
 Strategic planning continues to find new ways of dealing with the constant danger of emergent military threats . Preemption is a strategy to deal with emergent threats in the world .
 The United States has led the way in forging new strategies to deal with global terrorism and belligerent enemies in the post-9/11 world . The U.S. has forged new strategies in the aftermath of 9/11 .
 From that threat has emerged thtt preemptive warfare strategy, which calls for striking a potential enemy before it undertakes armed aggression . The U.S. has emerged from that threat .
 A preemptive strategy calls for attacking a potential enemy before it engages in armed aggression . The U.S. should attack its enemies with or without the support of allies and international institutions, the author says .
 Preventive warfare involves the use of force to eliminate any possible future strike, even if there is no reason to believe that the capacity to launch an attack currently exists . Preventive war aims to eliminate the possibility of a strike .
 Critics say the preventive use of military force sets a dangerous precedent . Critics say it is a violation of the Constitution .
 Predicting an adversary's future behavior is difficult because its leadership’s intentions are hard to discern . Information about long-term goals may be shrouded in secrecy, and signals of its policy direction may be missed .
 In 2009, President Barack Obama signaled a shift from the preemptive and unilateral policies of the prior administration . Obama's administration has been criticized for its unilateral policies .
 President Obama calls for an approach that maintains America’s military strength but also seeks to broaden engagement with the global community . In its place, he calls for the approach that maintained U.S. military strength .
 The ever-present threat of armed aggression raises timeless questions about the conditions under which, and the purposes for which, using military force is justified, justified .
 Threats are made to force an adversary to reach a compromise or, even better, to reverse its policies . Drawing on aspects of a strategy of compellence, threats to use arms are made by threats to force a compromise .
 The goal is to alter the target state’s costs and benefits calculation, so that the enemy is convinced that acceding to demands will be better than defying them . The target state's costs and benefit calculation is to be altered so that it is better to accede to demands
 Intervention can be practiced in various ways—physically through direct entry of military forces into another country, indirectly by broadcasting propaganda to the target’s population, or through covert operations .
 Global actors also can take a unilateral or multilateral approach to intervention . Global actors can also take a multilateral or unilateral approach to the situation .
 States send their troops into the sovereign territory of other states in order to influence the target, even though military intervention is under most circumstances prohibited by international law .
 The frequency of forceful coercive diplomacy fluctuates from year to year . Military interventions rise and fall in response to changing global circumstances and shifting perceptions about the advantages and disadvantages of intervention as a means of coercive diplomacy .
 These questions are hotly debated now because of the prevalence of fragile states . These questions have been hotly debated since the start of this year's election season .
 The great powers have not reached a consensus about whether to intervene in sovereign states when tyrants victimize innocent civilians . Great Powers have not agreed on intervention in the past .
 These interventions undermine state sovereignty and the deeply entrenched nonintervention norm . Primarily because these interventions undermine states sovereignty, they undermine the state sovereignty .
 Research on coercive diplomacy suggests that its success depends upon each specific context, such as coercive diplomacy .
 The following conditions are thought to favor the effective use of coercive diplomacy (Art, 2005; George, 1992); ■ Clarity of user objectives. ■ A clear-eyed eye on the user objectives of the user. ■ The user's objectives should be clear and clear .
 The coercing power must convince the adversary mind that compliance with its demand is an urgent matter . The coercion of the state must convince its adversary mind to comply with its demands, the government says .
 The coercing power must be able to articulate the specific conditions for ending the crisis, as well as assure that it will not formulate new demands for greater concessions once the target capitulates . It must also assure that the target will not be subject to new demands once it capitulates, says
 History shows that leaders who rely on military intervention for coercive diplomacy often start a process that they later find they cannot control . Many states that have ventured down this path have come to regret it, experts say .
 In the aftermath of failed interventions, confidence in this military method of coercive diplomacy vanishes . The search for other means to exercise power in world politics has intensified, he says .
 At issue is whether the traditional realist emphasis on arms and military strategies that require either the threat or actual use of weapons for coercive diplomacy is the best and safest route to national and international security .
 Other realists recommend an alternative path: Acquiring allies in order to maintain a balance of power among rivals . This will prevent any transnational actor from using force against the others, realists say .
 Warfare is not a question of brute strength, but rather of winning and losing friends . Alliances in world politics require agreements between parties in order for them to cooperate .
 According to liberal theory, states may form an alliance even if their immediate interest is not realized in order to maximize their long-term collective interest . States may form alliances even if they are not realizing their immediate interests are not realized .
 Realism provides the dominant lens through which the dynamics of alliance formation and decay, and the impact of these dynamics on global security, are most often interpreted . Realism, however, provides the majority view of how these dynamics are viewed .
 Realists see alliances as a method for states to protect themselves from threats posed by predatory common enemies and as a mechanism by which a “balance of power” can be maintained . Realism provides the most compelling explanation of the coldly calculating motives underlying alliances .
 Realism posits that military alliances are forged when the parties perceive that the advantages of an alliance outweigh the disadvantages . Realism says military alliances should be formed when the advantages outweigh the advantages .
 Map shows a number of regional security partners that were created, in part, to integrate joint military or economic security interests and promote cooperation . Map shows the map of the countries' security cooperation in the region .
 Highlighting the importance of alliances in U.S. national security strategy . Highlighted the need for alliances in the United States .
 Under anarchy a state must rely on self-help for its own security . State cannot really count on allies to come to its defense if attacked if attacked .
 State alliances bind a state to a commitment that may later become disadvantageous . Moreover, alliances bind states to an alliance that may be advantageous to them, say experts .
 Heads of state usually recognize that allies can easily do more harm than good . When considering whether joining a new alliance is a rational choice in which the benefits outweigh the costs, heads of state often recognize that .
 Many states throughout history have chosen to ally because, the risks notwithstanding, the perceived benefits to security in a time of threat justified the decision . Despite their uncertain usefulness, many states have opted to ally .
 To best picture how alliances affect global security, it is instructive to move from the state level of analysis to the global level . The impact of alliances on the frequency of interstate war can be seen by looking at the global impact .
 Supporters envision it as an equilibrating process that maintains peace by counterbalancing any state that seeks military superiority . They say it will distribute global power evenly through alignments or shifts by nonaligned states .
 At the core of “balance of power” is the idea that national security is enhanced when military capabilities are distributed . The idea is that no single state is strong enough to dominate all others . No single state can dominate all other states, the idea says .
 Balance-of-power theory predicts that if one state gains inordinate power, it will take advantage of its strength and attack weaker neighbors . This gives compelling incentive for those threatened to unite in a defensive coalition . Balance of Power Theory predicts that such a state will attack its neighbors .
 The theory is that the threatened states’ combined military strength would then deter the state seeking to expand . According to the theory, the threat would then be deterring the state from expanding . The theory has been debunked by the U.S.
 For realists, laissez-faire competition among states striving to maximize their national power yields an international equilibrium, ensuring the survival of all by checking the hegemonic ambitions of any nation .
 The acceptance by a neutral state threatened by foreign enemies of a special relationship is short of formal alliance with a stronger power able to protect it from attack . Realists assume that a strong ally will not be able to defend itself from attacks .
 It follows that all countries are potential adversaries and that each must strengthen its military capability . Invariably, this reasoning rationalizes the quest for military superiority, because others pursue it .
 This rationale springs from the realist belief that a system revolving around suspicion, competition, and anarchy will breed caution . Uncertainty creates restraints on the propensity for war, he says .
 The use of alliances to balance power is intrinsically tied to shifts in the global structure of the international system, says the author of the book .
 Historically, these have ranged from unipolarity, to multipolarity, where the power distribution is highly dispersed among multiple actors . Historically, this has seen a high concentration of power in the hands of a single hegemon .
 Examples of unipolarity include regional empires such as the Roman Empire, as well as the United States in the years immediately following World War II .
 European powers at the conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 was the approximate equality of power held by the European powers . An example of the latter is the same as the current equality of powers in the world .
 In between these two ends of the continuum is bipolarity - the division of the balance of power into two coalitions headed by rival military powers . Each seeking to contain the other’s expansion, each seeking to prevent the other's expansion, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In 1949, when the Soviets broke the United States monopoly on atomic weapons, a redistribution of power began to emerge . The U.S. had a monopoly of atomic weapons .
 Military capabilities became concentrated in the hands of two competitive “superpowers” that made comparisons with the other great powers meaningless . “Superpowers’ capacities to destroy anyone else make comparisons with anyone else meaningless .
 Both superpowers attached great importance to balancing power by recruiting new allies . Superpowers needed new allies to balance power in order to achieve victory .
 The formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, linking the U.S. to the defense of Western Europe, occurred due to this polarization . The Warsaw Pact was formed due to the former Soviet Union's alliance with its Eastern European client states .
 Realists recognize that national actors need to see the value of rapidly shifting alliances . To balance power, realists say, national actors must balance power .
 Most realists see it as the result of deliberate choices undertaken by national leaders to maintain equilibrium among contending states . Realists say balancing is not an automatic, self-adjusting process .
 Such choices must be made by rational, self-interested actors who recognize the costs and benefits of various strategic options . The U.S. should be able to make a rational choice in the future, the author says .
 Many theorists have attempted to specify a set of rules that leaders must heed in order to effectively balance other states . Theories have tried to suggest a number of rules for leaders to deal with other nations .
 When relationships and conditions change, new alliances form and established alliances dissolve . Transnational actors are all obsessed with the power of their rivals, transnational actors—all obsessed with their rivals .
 States sitting on the sidelines, riders, cannot as rational actors risk nonalignment . States sitting in the sidelines risk non-alignment, states sitting on sidelines cannot sit on sidelines . States of the sidelines will not sit in the future, states of the U.S. risk non
 Alliances must be made without regard to similarities of culture or ideological beliefs . Past experiences should not predispose states to accept or reject any potential partner, says the author .
 Great Britain once played as a balancer in European diplomacy . Nowhere is this philosophy better seen than in the role Great Britain played in Europe . Great Britain's role in Europe is to be seen as a balancing point in diplomacy .
 A foreign policy posture in which states do not participate in military alliances with an alliance bloc for fear it will lead to involvement in an unnecessary war . Under a baianceof-power system, an influential global or regional great power throws its support in decisive fashion to a defensive coalition .
 China and Russia have sought to put Cold War rivalries behind them, strengthen bilateral ties, and rise as a counterbalance to U.S. global dominance . Over the last few years, the two countries have been trying to put their Cold War rivals behind them .
 Victors that couple firmness regarding their own interests with fairness with fairness toward the interests of others encourage defeated powers to work within the postwar balance of power . Victors should be firm about their interests and fairness toward others . Victories that work within balance-power balance are encouraged to work
 Human beings and states, they argue, are selfish by nature, but balancing rival interests stabilizes their interactions . Balance of interest stabilizes interactions between states and human beings, they say .
 The resistance of Germany, France, and many other countries to the 2003 U.S. decision to launch a preemptive war to prevent Iraq from acquiring and using . Iraq’s possession of such weapons, ties to 9/11 terrorist attacks, or intention to wage war were highly
 France’s decision to sell Mistral-class assault ships to Russia provides another example . Estonia, Eatvia, and Eithuania, among Baltic nations, have raised alarm over the decision .
 www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net ngage Learning.net . ngage learning.net is a great way to learn, but sometimes bandwagoning .
 Intangible factors, such as leadership skills, troop morale, or public support for adventuresome or aggressive foreign policies, are even more difficult to gauge . The U.S. has been criticized for its aggressive foreign policy .
 Military planners engage in worst-case analysis, which can spark an arms race . The uncertainty of power balances due to difficulties in determining the strength of adversaries and the trustworthiness of allies frequently causes military planners to engage in such analysis .
 Historical record has led some theorists to construct the hegemonic stability theory as an alternative to the balance-of-power theory .
 The potential for great power harmony to be replaced by great power rivalry is what alarms many realist observers . The potential of great harmony to replace great power .
 BRIGS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) held their seventh annual summit in Ufa, Russia . The BRIGs were held on July 9 and 10, 2015 .
 BRIGS New Development Bank is a product of the growing desire to have greater influence in shaping the global economy and the political order . Seen as a balancing maneuver, this cooperative venture is a result of a growing desire for greater influence .
 Although the group has economic heft, its political clout is uncertain . The group has no political clout, but it has a reputation for its economic clout .
 Former Indian ambassador to the U.S. Lalit Mansingh: "They don't see eye to eye on many international issues" Says former Indian Ambassador to the United States .
 Most realists conclude that international conflict and competition is a permanent feature of world politics . These difficulties associated with balancing power lead most realists to conclude that .
 America’s predominance will inevitably fade, and some new distribution of power will develop . Sooner or later, America's predominance . It will eventually fade, but some new sharing of power must develop .
 Others see a more complex multipolar pattern of balance-of-power competition . The United States, China, Japan, Russia, India, and the European Union would constitute six centers of global power .
 An enlarged global chessboard of multiple geostrategic relationships will develop and lead to uncertainty about others’s allegiances . The U.S. will have to rely on allies in the form of allies in order to survive .
 One-time friends and allies begin to grow apart, formally ‘specialized’ relations begin to dissolve . Former enemies forge friendly ties and begin making a common cause against other common threats .
 Much counterbalancing and shifting in flexible and fluid alliances is occurring . Much is shifting in the world's most powerful institutions, the U.S. government says .
 The U.S. and its closest allies have been at odds over how to pursue the war on terrorism . For example, friction grew between the United States and its allies over the war in Iraq . The United States has a history of friction with its allies, particularly with regard to the
 It is difficult to confidently predict what the twenty-first century will look like and whether it will be chaotic or stable . The future of the 20th century is uncertain and chaotic, but the future is likely to be chaotic, stable .
 China's rapid rise toward becoming the globe’s biggest economy . Fears that this coming financial clout will translate into Chinese hard power and a military threat .
 Realists think that great power competition will continue because the U.S. military giant is unlikely to quietly accept a diminished stature .
 In the next chapter of World Politics, turn your attention away from balance-of-power politics of realism to examine what liberal theorists say about institutional reforms that they contend lead to a more orderly world .
 Leaders from around the world gathered at a meeting of the Group of Seven industrial nations in Kruen, Germany, on June 7, 2015 .
 Leaders gathered to discuss an array of global issues, including ways to foil the threat of terrorism, strengthen the global economy, and address climate change . Leaders gathered in Paris to discuss the global economic, terrorism and climate change issues .
 How 21st Century technology is changing the way we fight and think about war . The U.S. military says it will use the technology to fight for the future .
 Progressive ideas and global cooperation create the possibility of a world without violence . Progressive ideas are the hope for a world of peace, says David Frum .
 The sculpture by Swedish artist Carl Fredrik Reutersward was given to the United Nations in 1988 by the government of Luxembourg . It symbolizes hope for peace .
 Link liberal ideas to the development of peaceful norms, laws, and institutions . Ob 9-1 Link liberal and constructivist ideas to development of peace norms, law, institutions . Link liberal/constructivist ideas .
 You are joining Andrew Carnegie, Bill Gates, Warren Buffet, and other exceptionally wealthy philanthropists who generously chose to give large portions of their fortunes to causes that attempt to change the world for the better . You join Andrew Carnegie and Bill Gates .
 You could seek humanitarian relief for refugees, fight poverty and disease, join others in seeking to stem the threat of global warming . You could also subsidize a global campaign to educate all youth throughout the world .
 "The greatest threat to the world is the awesome danger of armed conflict," says the author . "Sorting through your moral values, however, you conclude that the world's greatest threat is armed conflict"
 You make it your mission to help others find better ways than violence to settle conflict . Acting on this conviction, you make it .
 So now you have found your cause—finding peaceful methods for settling potentially violent disputes . So now, you've found a cause for finding peaceful methods .
 In the quest to better understand nonviolent approaches to world security, you draw insights from policy makers and philosophers who have spent their lifetimes probing the same question you are now asking yourself .
 This chapter presents some of the major ways in which liberal international thought directly challenges the assumptions underlying realist thinking about world politics . This chapter includes some major ways that liberal international thinking directly challenges assumptions underlying realism . The book is published by Simon Tisdall at the University of Cambridge, Cambridge
 It looks at the importance of progressive ideas and norms in shaping international behavior and norms . Also, from constructivist and identity perspectives, it looks at constructivist perspectives . The book also looks at how progressive ideas are shaping world politics .
 The various paths to peace that liberal thinkers depict differ greatly in their approach to world order . But they all share a fear of states’ historic propensity to wage war .
 Liberal liberals emphasize the role of collaboration and rulemaking in shaping behavior in world politics . Resting on the liberal premises that principled moral behavior reaps higher rewards for all, liberalism leads us to emphasize collaboration, rulemaking, rule making .
 Constructivism tells us that popular ideas have meaningful consequences, and that when a favorable climate crystallizes around the preferred conduct for interstate relations, those constructed images influence perceptions about the rules by which world politics should be governed . To understand how international norms and rules are created, constructivism .
 Constructivists take into account both the material and communicative sources of war and peace . Realists and liberals emphasize the material underpinnings of war, but constructivists emphasize them .
 The constructivist perspective often compliments the liberal emphasis on institutional and normative paths to peace, and the idea that constraints on the development and spread of weapons of war are critical to global security . As ideas “do not float freely are embedded in an elaborate set of rules, norms, regimes
 Many experts see international law and collective security regimes mirroring changes in the most popular constructions of images about the ways in which states are habitually acting or should act toward one another in any particular period of history .
 Reduction in armaments will lead to less armed conflict and a safer and more secure world . Here, rivet your focus on the hope that reduction of armaments lead to a safer world .
 Liberal and constructivist views on war and peace are influenced by the importance of shared ethics and morality around the globe . A call for peace is a call for the world to unite in peace .
 Mourners gather to remember the eleven victims of a bomb blast at a cafe in Pune, India . Shown here, mourners gather for the first time since the blast .
 If a country is militarily stronger than its rivals, it is not very likely to be attacked . If a nation is strong enough to defend itself, it will not be attacked by its rivals .
 It is possible that a country would become less secure, not more, as it builds its military might . It's possible that the U.S. would be less secure if it builds military might, as well as more .
 When a country builds armaments, alarmed neighbors mistrust its claims that the weapons are only for defensive purposes, they begin to vigorously arm themselves . In this construction, the security dilemma figures prominently .
 All of the arming parties are now more vulnerable—wanting peace, war preparations increase the likelihood of war . All parties are more vulnerable to each other .
 There is no single constructivist position on armaments or armed conflict . There is a widespread interest in moving beyond a limited conception of security to one that takes into account the consequence of progressive ideas and human creativity .
 Feminist scholars are critical of the role of weapons of mass destruction in ensuring global security . Many feminist scholars have criticized the use of WMD .
 There is optimism that by reducing the supply of arms, armed conflict will be less likely and will result in a more secure world . There is also optimism that reducing arms supply will lead to a better world .
 In thinking about the control of the spread of weapons around the world, keep in mind that it is not strictly a tenet of liberal or constructivist theory . But in thinking about it, keep a close eye on the control .
 An arms race is a buildup of weapons and armed forces by two or more states that threaten each other . The buildup is driven by the conviction that gaining a lead is necessary for security .
 Several distinctions must be made in this approach to international security . Disarmament Versus Arms Control as Routes to Peace must be different, says Peter Bergen .
 It aims to reduce or eliminate armaments or classes of armaments completely, usually by negotiated reciprocal agreements between two or more rivals, in an effort to prevent their use in warfare .
 Where they part ways is in their respective postures toward the advantages of disarmament versus arms control, they say .
 Liberals are more willing to take a leap of faith and consider disarmament as a workable possibility for peace . Liberals are willing to accept disarmament is possible for peace in the U.S.
 Most disarmaments have been involuntary, the product of reductions imposed by the victors in the immediate aftermath of a war . In addition to differentiating between arms control and disarmament, you should also distinguish between bilateral agreements .
 Because of only two countries, such agreements are often easier to negotiate and to enforce than those of three or more countries . Because the former involves only two nations, the agreement is often easier than the latter, which are agreements between three countries .
 By far the most revealing examples are the superpower agreements to control nuclear weapons . The agreement is a key part of the U.S.-led world's nuclear arsenal .
 This chapter looks briefly at the record of Soviet-American negotiations . It examines the checkered history of multilateral arms control and disarmament . This chapter examines the history of arms control .
 Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States never degenerated into a direct trial of military strength . Bilateral Arms Control and Disarmament was first place in the Cold War .
 The series of more than twenty-five arms control agreements that Moscow and Washington negotiated in the wake of the Cuban Missile Crisis . One of the reasons was the series of arms control deals that Washington and Moscow signed .
 The most important agreements between the superpowers were the Strate^c Arms Limitation Talks of 1972 and 1979 . The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty of 1987; the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty of 1991, 1993, 1997, and 2010; and the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty of 2002
 The first two agreements stabilized the nuclear arms race, and the remaining agreements reduced each side’s stockpile of nuclear weapons .
 At the end of the Cold War in 1991, the U.S. still had more than 9500 nuclear warheads and Russia had about 8000 . Even with these initial steps, the United States had about 9500 warheads .
 Since their 1986 peak, the sizes of the two superpowers’ nuclear arsenals have declined by over 90 percent . The new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty entered into force on February 5, 2011, .
 According to this agreement, both sides will reduce strategic warheads to 1550 in seven years . The agreement is a 74 percent reduction from the limit established by the 1991 START treaty .
 This achievement has inspired other nuclear powers to discontinue building and expanding their nuclear arsenals . This achievement inspired other nations to stop building nuclear weapons . The U.S. has not been able to expand its nuclear arsenal .
 Most nuclear powers have not increased their stockpile of nuclear-warhead stockpile, in thousands of thousands .
 The record of successful bilateral arms control and even disarmament between the U.S. and Russia attests to the possibilities for rival military powers to contain by agreement a dangerous arms race .
 As shown here, the nuclear warhead stockpiles of both countries have been reduced significantly in the post-Cold War period . Both countries have nuclear warheads in their nuclear arsenal .
 Both countries have slowed their disarmament in the midst of their confrontation over the conflict in Ukraine . However, the fragility of these agreements underscores the difficulties associated with maintaining and implementing such commitments, the authors say .
 The U.S.-Russian series of negotiations that began in 1993 and with the 1997 START-Ill by Russia in 2000, pledged to cut the nuclear arsenals of both sides by 80 percent of the Cold War peaks to lower the risk of nuclear war . The treaty was reached in 2000
 Progress achieved by both Russia and the United States in limiting their nuclear arsenals is threatened by their political dispute over the U.S. missile defense system in Europe . In fact, the progress achieved by the two nations is threatened, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In 2015, disarmament efforts slowed due largely to tensions between Russia and the U.S. over the conflict in Ukraine . The Russians indicated they would not be attending the Nuclear Security Summit hosted in the United States .
 Progress made by the U.S. and Russia in reducing their nuclear weapons stockpiles illustrates the possibility for rival military powers to take steps to de-escalate a risky arms race .
 The 1968 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty prohibited the transfer of nuclear weapons and production technologies to nonnuclear weapons states . The treaty is one of the most important nuclear disarmament treaties ever made .
 The 2400-word contract that some say saved the world is historically the most symbolic multilateral arms control agreement . It was signed by the U.S. in 1994 .
 Two years later, at the second Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul, South Korea, progress seemed to be slowing . Two years after the summit, progress seems to have been slowing in nuclear disarmament .
 North Korea violated the NPT with its secret development of nuclear weapons . NPT violated NPT by developing a nuclear weapon in secret . North Korea has been accused of violating NPT .
 Fears of nuclear proliferation were further inflamed by Iran’s pursuit of nuclear capabilities . Fears have been raised by Iran's pursuit of a nuclear capability .
 In September 2009, Iran test-fired missiles capable of striking Israel, Europe, and American bases in the Persian Gulf . The United Nations subsequently adopted new sanctions against Iran . The sanctions include a prohibition on Iranian investment in uranium mining .
 Iran’s announced testflring of a land-to-sea ballistic missile in April 2013 . Further speculation about Iranian military capabilities was raised by Iran's announced test-flring .
 Many countries in the Middle East have a vested interest in preventing Iran from becoming a nuclear power . Israel has been vocal in the past about Iran's nuclear program .
 In an anarchic international system, each country must ensure its own survival . This demands that countries strive to become more powerful fhan their potential opponents .
 Milifary capabilities for defensive purposes tend to result in escalating arms races that diminish security of all . Yet, as described by the imagery of the spiral model, this enhancement of capabilities for defense purposes tends to lead to escalation of arms races .
 The increase in armaments, that is intended in each nation to produce consciousness of strength and a sense of security, does not produce these efforts . "Armament increases in nations, but not in nations," says President Obama .
 Pakistan under way to double its nuclear weapons arsenal by 2021 . Relations between Pakistan and India remain tense . Pakistan has been criticized by India for wanting to use nuclear weapons .
 Liberal theory posits that security may depend as much on the control of force as its pursuit . Liberal theory: Security may depend on control, not pursuit, as much as pursuit .
 Expanding confidencebuilding measures that reduce fear and suspicion is critical to countering the uncertainties of the security dilemma . Increased transparency and increased transparency and a global culture of disclosure are critical to reducing the uncertainties .
 A metaphor used to describe the tendency of efforts to enhance defense to result in arms races . Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content from this article .
 The nuclear accord would not permanently eliminate Iran’s capacity to produce nuclear weapons . It signaled an interest and willingness of Iran to collaborate and pursue a path to peace with the global community .
 Some states that signed the original agreement wonder whether the deal they were handed by the ‘nuclear club’ in 1968 was fair . Furthermore, some states that agreed to the agreement are questioning whether it's fair .
 The ability and will to stem further nuclear proliferation remains in doubt, and in recognition of these serious trends, the ability of the U.S. to stem nuclear proliferation is in doubt .
 President Obama challenged the world to renew its commitment to confronting nuclear proliferation . President Obama challenges the U.S. to confront nuclear proliferation.
 Gritics complain that these agreements frequently regulate only obsolete armaments or ones that the parties to the agreement have little incentive to continue developing in the first place .
 Like a balloon that is squeezed at one end but simply expands at the other, constraints on certain parts of a country’s arsenal can lead to enhancements elsewhere . The U.S. needs to be able to expand its arsenal in the coming years, experts say .
 The 1972 SALT I agreement limited the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles possessed by the United States and the Soviet Union . An example can be seen in the 1972 agreement .
 No limits were placed on the number of nuclear warheads that could be placed on each missile . The number of missiles was restricted, but no limits on nuclear warheads were placed . No limits on the nuclear warheads the missiles could carry .
 In short, the quantitative freeze on launchers led to qualitative improvements in their warhead delivery systems . The freeze led to improvements in the delivery systems of warheads .
 The slow and ineffective ability of the global community to ban some of the most dangerous and counterproductive weapons reduces optimism in the future of meaningful arms control .
 Gonsider the case of antipersonnel landmines that cannot discriminate www.cssbooks.net igage Learning .
 Each year they kill or maim more than 26,000 people each year, almost all of them civilians . It is estimated that about one mine exists for every fifty people in the world . About one of the world's most deadly mines is estimated to be a mine .
 It took peace activist Jody Williams to organize the International Campaign to Ban Landmines . The Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Production and Transfer of Antipersonnel Mines opened for signature in December 1997 .
 The United States, Russia, and other great powers resisted the APL convention . A coalition of NGO peace groups mounted sufficient pressure for them to produce this important treaty .
 A final problem facing those advocating arms control and disarmament is continuous innovation in the defense industry . The U.S. needs to be able to find a solution to arms control .
 Significant controls would save money, reduce tension, decrease environmental hazards, and diminish the potential destructiveness of war . Significant controls could save money and reduce tension and decrease environmental hazard .
 Realists and liberal theorists agree that the world could be a better place if countries see their self-interests served by international cooperation . Realists say that countries should see their own interests served by cooperation .
 Antipersonnel mines are triggered by the contact or presence of a person . Antibonnel mines can be triggered by contact, presence of an individual .
 Realism insists that national security is best protected by developing military capabilities, not by reducing armaments or military spending as advocated by liberalism . Realism is best for national security not to reduce armaments and military spending, it says .
 Realists regard treaties as dangerous in an anarchic world in which the promises of self-interested rivals cannot be trusted . Realists say treaties are dangerous in a world where self-interest rivals can't trust trust .
 The district attorney only has enough evidence to convict suspects on an illegal weapons charge . To illustrate, imagine two suspects following an armed robbery are taken into police custody and placed in separate cells .
 If one prisoner confesses and the other doesn’t, he will be given immunity from prosecution for providing evidence . His accomplice will get a sentence of ten years in prison . If he doesn't confesses, his accomplice gets ten years .
 If neither confesses, they each will be convicted on the weapons charge but serve only six months in prison . If neither will confess, they will each be convicted of a weapons charge and serve six months .
 They both want as little time behind bars as possible, and they are being interrogated separately so they cannot communicate . The pair are being held separately and interrogated separately .
 This situation, which can be roughly applied to interactions between transnational actors, has some interesting consequences . This situation can be seen as an example of the consequences of transnational cooperation .
 Prisoner A cooperate defect cooperates 2,2 win-win 4, 1 lose more-win more, 1,4 win more-lose more, 3,3 lose more . Prisoner B defect is a 2-2,2, 2-1, 2, 2
 The matrix depicts the results that will occur depending on whether each prisoner chooses to cooperate with his accomplice by remaining silent or confessing to the district attorney . The results are shown depending on the outcome of each prisoner's decision .
 The first number shown in each cell is Actor A's outcome; the second number is B's outcome . Actor A is shown to have an outcome of Actor B is shown in a cell .
 They both receive less optimal result (the lose-lose outcome 3, 3 in the matrix—five years in prison) than if they had tacitly cooperated and remained silent .
 The dilemma is that seemingly rational calculations by each individual actor can yield collectively worse results than had they chosen other strategies . The dilemmas are often the result of a seemingly rational calculation by individual actors .
 As a result of their joint defection , they end up worse off by locking themselves into an expensive arms race that may destabilize the prevailing balance of power . The pair end up locking themselves in a costly arms race . The arms race could destabilize Russia's position in power .
 The U.S. rejected an array of international treaties designed to control the threat of nuclear weapons . This mind-set was very evident in the United States decisions at the turn of the century to reject treaties .
 During 2001 alone, the United States decided to abrogate the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, withdraw from a UN conference to impose limits on illegal small arms trafficking, and reject proposed enforcement measures for the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention .
 The 1972 ABM treaty was regarded by many as the cornerstone of nuclear arms control . It was the first time in modern history that the U.S. had renounced a major international accord .
 U.S. President Obama indicated renewed interest in controlling the spread of deadly weapons . Flowever, while acknowledging a continued commitment to defensive military preparation, Obama said, “We are spending billions of dollars on missile defense.”
 As indicated in the timeline, nuclear testing has declined dramatically since the 19B0s . Nuclear testing has decreased dramatically since that date .
 This commitment to arms control is reflected in support for the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty . This commitment is reflected by support for a test ban on nuclear weapons, the UK says .
 13 states still have not signed the agreement, including Pakistan, India, and North Korea .
 Nineteen of the countries that have signed have yet to ratify the treaty . The United States, China, Iran, and Israel are among those who have not yet ratified the agreement .
 China and U.S. regularly conduct zero-yield nuclear experiments . China and the United States are suspected of conducting explosive tests so small that they can't be detected .
 Over three-fourths of all nuclear tests took place after the ban went into effect . Over 3,000 nuclear tests were conducted in the 1950s and 1960s .
 North Korea conducted an underground nuclear test on February 12, 2013 . The test took place in North Korea's eastern part of the peninsula .
 The past record of arms control and disarmament has dispirited liberal and constructivist reformers . Reformers hope that negotiated compromises will curtail the global arms race .
 It appears that realism, and its abiding emphasis on peace through military preparations, is trumping liberalism’s premise that weapons acquisitions are not a safe road toward world order .
 Woodrow Wilson’s cause of world disarmament may yet triumph . Someday, however, Wilson's cause may still triumph. Someday it may triumph .
 As long as the threat of armed conflict haunts the world, leaders are unlikely to think it prudent to disarm . Leaders are likely to be wary of disarmament as long as they fear armed conflict .
 One of the prime rationales for the formation of international organizations is the preservation of peace . Ts MAINTAINING COLLECTIVE SECURITY THROUGH INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS .
 An institutional pathway to international peace is sculpted in liberal and constructivist thinking . Liberals focus on interdependence and cooperation and constructivists emphasize the centrality of ideas and norms .
 These approaches are voiced as alternatives to the balancing of power advocated by realist thinkers . Realist thinkers are concerned about balancing power between power and power .
 Classical realism opposes relying on international organizations . Note that classical realism vigorously opposes relying upon international organizations.
 Realism prizes the sovereign independence of states as a core value and berates any international organization as a barrier to states’ foreign policy autonomy, freedom, and flexibility of unilateral action . Realism, it should be recalled, prizes the sovereignty of states .
 Realistic rejects prescriptions for the global community to “get organized” by creating institutions above states as a route to global stability . Realistic rejection of ‘organization’ of states above states is rejected by the West .
 By definition, collective security requires collective decisions for collective goals, such as containing armed conflict . Collective security is guided by the principle that an act of aggression by any state will be met with a unified response from the rest .
 The collective security organization would also contain a judicial organ authorized to issue binding verdicts on contentious disputes . In addition to providing a mechanism for the mediation of disagreements, it would also provide a mechanism to issue a binding verdict on disputes .
 A final assumption underpinning this theory holds that members of the collective security organization would be willing and able to give mutual assistance to any state suffering an attack . The theory is based on the assumption that members would be prepared to assist in any attack .
 Sanctions could range from public condemnation to economic boycott to military retaliation . Sanctions may include public condemnation, economic boycott or military retaliation.
 This approach to international peace through collective security organizations aims to control anarchical self-help warfare by guaranteeing every state’s defenses through collective regulation . Putting the pieces of these premises together, this approach to . international peace .
 Liberal reformers accept the use of military might, not to expand state power, but to deter potential aggressors by confronting them with armed force . The United States is facing a united opposition of the entire global community, the authors say .
 Many liberals viewed power balancing as a cause of war instead of as an instrument for its prevention . Citing arms races, secret treaties, and competing alliances as sources of divisive tension, many liberals viewed arms races as a source of war .
 The League of Nations was formed to replace the balance of power with a global governance system for world order in which aggression by any state would be met by a united response . This plea led to the formation of the United Nations, a precursor to the United States .
 The belief that an organized ‘community’ of power would be more effective in preserving peace than shifting alliances aimed at balancing power served as a foundation for these proposals .
 To the disappointment of its advocates, the League of Nations never became an effective collective security system . To the disappointed of its critics, the . disappointment of . advocates, it never became . effective collective . security systems .
 It was not endorsed by the United States, the very power that had most championed it in the waning months of World War 1 . The U.S. did not endorse the idea, but it was later endorsed by Germany .
 Its members disagreed over how to define ‘aggression,’ and how to share the costs and risks of mounting an organized response to potential aggressors .
 The League of Nations failed to realize its lofty goal, but the principles of collective security guided the subsequent formation of the United Nations . Although the league failed to achieve its lofty goals, the U.N. was formed in 1973 .
 Like the league, the United Nations was established to promote international peace and security after a gruesome world war . The league was established by the U.N. to promote peace after the war .
 The UN’s founders voiced support for collective security, they were heavily influenced by the idea of a concert of great powers that together would manage global issues .
 During the Cold War the United Nations fell short of many of its ambitious ideals . Because the UN’s structure limited its ability to function as a true collective security organization, the UN's structure failed to function properly .
 The United Nations found other ways to overcome its compromising legal restrictions and lack of great power cooperation that inhibited its capacity to preserve world order . Nevertheless, like any adaptive institution, the U.N. was able to overcome legal restrictions .
 Dag Hammarskjold sought to manage security through what he termed preventive diplomacy by attempting to resolve conflicts before they became a crisis, in contrast to ending wars once they erupted . In I960 Secretary-General Dag Hammarkjold tried to manage I960 through preventive diplomacy . Dag Hamm
 In 1989 Secretary-General Javier Perez de Guellar pursued peacemaking initiatives . He was frustrated with the superpowers’ prevention of the U.N. from playing “as effective and decisive a role as the charter certainly envisaged for it,” he said
 These programs were designed to end fighting so that the UN Security Gouncil could establish operations to keep the peace . The UN Security Council was then established to establish operations in order to keep peace .
 UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan concentrated the UN’s efforts on peace building by creating conditions that would make renewed war unlikely, while working on peacemaking and managing the UUW peace operations .
 UN forces are trained and equipped to use military force if necessary without the prior consent of the disputants . These endeavors have emphasvLed peace enforcement opemriotts, relying on UN forces that are trained . UN forces will be able to use force without the consent of disput
 For over four decades, the U.N. was a victim of superpower rivalry . The United Nations has been a victim to superpower rivalry for decades .
 The end of the Gold War removed many of the impediments to the UN’s ability to act to preserve peace . However, the UN was not able to act after the end of Gold War .
 Security Gouncil voted in 1999 to authorize military coercion to force Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, which it had invaded . In 1999, the Security Council voted in favor of military coercion against Iraq's invasion of Kuwait .
 This successful collective security initiative jump-started optimism for the usefulness of the UN’s peacekeeping leadership . The UN's peacekeeping force has been in the forefront of peacekeeping efforts .
 After 1990, the United Nations launched over three times as many peacekeeping missions as it had in the previous forty years of its existence . The U.N. launched three times more peacekeeping operations after 1990 than before 1990 .
 The U.N. faces constraints that it faces as an organization may be due to its reliance on power politics . Although liberals have great hope for the United Nations as a means of promoting human rights and a global rule of law .
 In its first forty years, the U.N. undertook a mere eighteen peacekeeping operations . The United Nations undertook just 18 peacekeeping missions during that period . UN Peace Operations Operations: 1948-2015 .
 Since 1990, the United Nations has been much more active, sending peacekeepers to fifty flash points . U.N. peacekeepers have been sent to 50 flash points since 1990 . The United Nations says it has been more active since then .
 Most of the seventy-one missions between 1948 and 2015 lasted at least a decade . As the map shows, most of the missions were at least ten years old .
 UN analyst Brian Urquhart embraces this view, which he sees as critical to the continued relevance of the U.N. in the age of globalization . If governments really considered the effectiveness of the United Nations an urgent priority, this would be the first problem they would have to tackle .
 The application of military force to warring parties is normally pursuant to international authorization . Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights are rescinded .
 The CSS Point can only wonder which of the great global problems will provide the cosmic disaster that will prove beyond doubt, and probably too late, that our present situation demands a post-Westphalian international order .
 In 1945 , there were few global problems that a single state could not successfully address alone . In 1945, the U.S. could not solve any of the world's most pressing problems .
 Today, the world faces intimidating challenges such as nuclear proliferation, international terrorism, global pandemics, environmental deterioration, and resource scarcities . Global problems that require cooperative solutions need cooperative solutions, experts say .
 It is not only the interests of the Security Council’s permanent members that constrain the United Nations, but also its limited infrastructure and financial resources . The U.N. has a limited budget, infrastructure and resources to spare, it says .
 For the U.N. to succeed, the world community must match the means given to it with the demands made on it . The United Nations must match its means with those made demands on it, says David Cameron .
 In support of the UN’s seventy-one peacekeeping operations since 1948, expenditures have totaled almost $84.33 billion . The UN has spent almost $83 billion in support of peacekeeping since 1948 .
 For the period from July 2014 through June 2015, the budget support to more than 125,000 UN peacekeeping personnel was $8.47 billion . The budget support for the period between July 2014 and June 2015 was $9.7 billion . UN peacekeepers are funded by more than
 To put this in perspective, compare this to United States military spending during the same period, which was $615 billion . Compare this to U.S. military spending in same period .
 The total number of peacekeepers involved in peacekeeping missions has increased sevenfold since 1999 . Peacekeepers are often referred to as ""Blue Helmets" because of tbeir blue helmets or berets .
 Regional IGOs are stepping into the breach in those situations where UN Blue Helmets have not been given the necessary support to do the job . However, the use of regional security organizations is rising as the use is rising .
 If the United Nations reflects the lack of shared values and common purpose characteristic of a divided global community, perhaps regional organizations offer better prospects . Regional security organizations already share some interests and cultural traditions, such as those in the region .
 The kinds of wars raging today do not lend themselves to being controlled by a worldwide body . These conflicts are now almost entirely civil wars, says the U.N. secretary of state secretary .
 The United Nations was designed to manage international wars between states . It was not organized or legally authorized to intervene in internal battles within sovereign borders .
 Regional IGOs see their security interests vitally affected by armed conflicts within countries in their area . Historically they have shown the determination and discipline to police these bitter intrastate conflicts .
 Regional organizations with broader political mandates include the Organization of American States and the League of Arab States . The Organization of African Unity, the Nordic Gouncil, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and the Gulf Gooperation Gounci .
 Regional security organizations face the challenge of preserving consensus and solidarity without a clear sense of its mission . Many of todays regional security organizations are struggling to preserve consensus .
 In the years since the end of the Gold War, the ambiguous European security setting has been marked by ethnic and religious conflicts that NATO was not originally designed to handle . NATO was designed to deal with the problems of ethnic, religious conflicts .
 Its original charter envisioned only one purpose—mutual self-protection from the Soviet Union . The original charter of the U.S. was intended to protect itself from Soviet Russia . The U.N. was founded in 1953 .
 Until 1995, NATO took charge of all military operations in BosniaHerzegovina from the United Nations . It was uncertain whether NATO could adapt to the new security environment .
 NATO joined the war in Afghanistan in 2001 in a strong show of support for the United States following the terrorist attacks on 9/11 . For the first time invoking its Article 5, which requires collective defense of a member under attack, NATO joined in 2001 .
 NATO took over responsibility for military operations in Libya in March 2011 . The United States, France, and Britain were initially involved in the Libyan conflict .
 NATO condemned Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the destabilization of eastern Ukraine by Russia and Russian-backed separatists as a violation of international law . In 2014, NATO condemned the annexation and destabilization in eastern Ukraine as an international crime .
 The alliance declared its support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine . The alliance agreed to help Ukraine provide for its security . Ukraine agreed to provide security to Ukraine .
 A number of countries in Eastern Europe are candidates for future membership . Many feel that it is in NATO's and Europe’s interest to integrate Russia into the NATO membership as well .
 Albania and Croatia formally joined as the newest members of NATO on April 1,2009 . Albania and Croatia formally joined NATO on March 1, 2009 . NATO's expansion to twenty-eight full members has transformed the geostrategic landscape .
 NATO now casts its security umbrella across and beyond Europe in its endeavor to create a collective security regime, including states that were once its enemies . As shown in this map, the map shows that NATO has joined forces with some of its former enemies .
 NATO is widely seen as a proxy for the Global North . Collective security operations under its authority convey a legitimacy that unilateral interventions tend to lack . NATO's collective security operations convey legitimacy, unlike unilateral interventions .
 NATO faces barriers to its success as a collective security organization, NATO says . NATO has been criticized by some for its lack of transparency in recent years . The U.N. and other regional organizations have similar problems with NATO .
 NATO is most capable of conducting successful peacekeeping operations only when it’s most powerful members reach agreement about any proposed operation . NATO has been criticized for not reaching agreement on any proposed peacekeeping operation .
 The mandate was narrowly focused on civilian protection in order to secure tacit approval through abstentions, and avoid direct opposition, from Russia and China . In the case of Libya, the mandate as approved by the UN Security Council resolution was narrowly .
 NATO's mission is constrained as it is unlikely to target any country that is a great power or has a military alliance with one . Second, the scope of NATO’s mission is limited, as it would not target any great power .
 NATO and Russia should work together to confront terrorism, nuclear proliferation, piracy, piracy and the illegal drug trade . NATO's traditional foe, Russia, agrees that in the twenty-first century, NATO should work with Russia . Russia agrees that NATO and NATO should confront terrorism and piracy .
 Russia is still far from reconciled to NATO’s presence in countries that it regards as being within its ‘sphere of privileged interests’” The Economist, 2010a, 67, says the tension between Russia and NATO over the military escalation in Crimea and Russia�
 The U.S. remains dependent upon the United States to take the lead in military operations and provide most of the weapons . The United States is the only nation to provide most weapons in the region .
 The United States accounts for almost three-fourths of all military spending by NATO countries . The U.S. accounts for nearly three-quarters of all NATO countries' military spending .
 NATO investment by other NATO members is often matched by limited political will . Further, the limited investment by the U.S. in NATO membership is frequently matched by little political will, he says .
 Collective security organizations represent a major liberal path to international peace, author says . Collective security groups are a major part of the world's future .
 Liberals have long advocated that international law be strengthened in order to more capably provide for world order . Liberals have also long advocated for international law to be strengthened . International law should be strengthened to provide world order, they say .
 The idea that it should be legalised has only gained ground in recent history . But it's not the first time it's been in the news .
 International law has been conceived and written mostly by realists, who have placed the privileges of the powerful as their primary concern . Realists have historically advocated that the use of force should be acceptable practice to protect a dominant state’s position in the global hierarchy .
 No principle of international law is more important than state sovereignty, says U.S. President Obama . State sovereignty is a key principle in international law, says Obama .
 Recall that sovereignty means that no authority is legally above the state, except that which the state voluntarily confers . No authority can be legally above a state except that of the state's consenting consent .
 Since the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia, states have tried to preserve the right to perform within their territories in any way they choose .
 The key concepts in international law speak to the rules by which sovereign states say they wish to abide . That norm is the basis for all other legal rules, including that of international law .
 The rules of international law express codes of conduct designed to protect a state’s freedom to preserve its sovereign independence and act in terms of their perceived national interests . In fact, as conceived by theoreticians schooled in the realist tradition since the seventeenth century, the rules of
 The 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights addressed concerns about the state’s treatment of individual people . However, states remain supreme, and the 1948 U.N. Declaration of Rights was addressed to individuals .
 Most rules address the rights and duties of states, not people, rather than people . Most rules deal with the rights of the state, not the people, as well as rights of people .
 The right of independence also guarantees states’ autonomy in their domestic affairs and external relations . The independence of each presumes the independence of all, under the logic that the independence presumes all .
 Noninterference principle forms the basis for the nonintervention norm, which requires states to refrain from uninvited activities within another country’s territory . The noninterference norm is the basis of the noninvited activity within a state's territory .
 Although international law has deficiencies, this does not mean that it is irrelevant or useless . International law is not always relevant or useless, it is still relevant to the world, says David Cameron .
 States find international law useful and expend a lot of effort to shape its evolution . States themselves find it useful and spend much of their own time shaping international law .
 This behavior demonstrates that countries interpret international law as real law and obey it most of the time . This behavior shows that countries are more likely to obey international law .
 These rules might designate that the tree is out of bounds, the swing set is a safe base, once touched a player is “frozen” and cannot move, and so forth . These rules may designate that a player can’t move, or that a tree is
 There is no enforcement mechanism or real punishment for violating the rules . Rules help organize the game, create certain expectations, and make it a pleasurable interaction .
 These communication functions serve every member of the global system by allowing for states to trust one another . They allow states to communicate with each other and trust each other .
 Even the most powerful states usually abide by international laws because they recognize that adherence pays benefits that often outweigh the costs of expedient rule violation . Even powerful states often abide by laws because of the benefits of adherence .
 Those that ignore international law or opportunistically break customary norms engender penalties for doing as they please . International actors that obey the rules receive rewards, whereas those that ignore law or break norms get penalties . Those who break international law receive rewards .
 International reputations are important, and contribute to a state’s soft power, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . International reputation is important, says Mr Hammond .
 States that violate international legal rules are likely to find that other countries will be reluctant to cooperate with them . States that routinely violate international law will find that they will find it difficult to work with others .
 Violators must fear retaliation for those they victimize, as well as the loss of prestige . Violators also must fear the retaliation of those who victimize them, and also fear losing prestige .
 Only the most ambitious or reckless state is apt to flagrantly disregard accepted standards of conduct . For this reason, only the most . reckless state . state of China is a state of state of mind, not of state .
 To liberal theoreticians, putting the state ahead of the global community was a serious flaw that undermined international law’s potential effectiveness . Nonetheless, to liberal theorists, it was a flaw that undermines international law's potential effectiveness, they say .
 Many theorists consider the international legal system institutionally defective due to its dependence on state participation . Many theorists think the international system is institutionally deficient due to state participation in the legal system .
 Critics say formal legal institutions are weak at the global level . Critics point to several major limitations in the global legal system .
 In world politics, no legislative body is capable of making truly binding laws . No legislative body in world politics can make binding laws, says John Defterios .
 Rules apply only when states willingly observe or embrace them in treaties to which they voluntarily subscribe . Rules only apply when states voluntarily observe them in the treaties they are part of the treaties .
 In world politics, as in ordinary life, there are norms and expectations of state and nonstate behavior . Generally accepted as the authoritative FOLLOWING THE RULES OF THE GAME .
 As liberalism and constructivism contend, such principles help to create order and predictability which contribute to global peace . Such principles help create order, predictability and order, such as liberalism .
 In world politics, no judicial body exists to authoritatively identify and record the rules accepted by states, interpret when and how the rules apply, and then identify violations . Second, in world . No judicial body . exists to . authoritatively . identify, record, interpret and interpret rules accepted
 Enforcement usually occurs through the unilateral self-help actions of the victims of a transgression . Victims of the transgression or with the assistance of their allies or other interested parties . Enforcement usually takes place through the victim's own self help .
 The whole system rests on states’ willingness to abide by the rules to which they consent . States must also be able to use retaliatory measures to punish violations of the norms and behaviors they value, the author says .
 According to the precept of Roman law, ubi societas, ibijus , shared community values are a minimal precondition for forming a legal system . Shared community values were a prelude to forming a law, according to Roman law .
 International order is incredibly diverse culturally and ideologically and lacks consensus on common values . Yet the contemporary international order is very diverse culturally, ideologically and ideologically . This is a result of a lack of consensus on shared values .
 The simultaneous functioning of often-incompatible legal traditions throughout the world undermines the creation of a universal, cosmopolitan culture and legal system, says the author .
 As in any legal system, in world politics what is legal is not necessarily legitimate . In world politics, what's legal and what's legitimate is not always legitimate, says David Cameron .
 Although legality is important in determining an action’s legitimacy, other values play a role . Popular normative acceptance of international law as having authority is also a role, such as popular acceptance .
 The legality of an action does not always imply wisdom or usefulness . Moreover, the legality of a lawless act does not necessarily imply wisdom, usefulness or wisdom .
 Eminent legal scholar Hans Kelsens contention that “states ought to behave as they have customarily behaved” K^itcts positivist legal theory that when a type of behavior occurs frequently, it becomes legal .
 positive legal theory stresses that law is socially constructed . Positive legal theory stressed that law was socially constructed. Positive law theory stresses law is social constructions .
 States’ customary practices are the most important source from which laws derive in the absence of formal machinery for creating international rules . States are important source of lawmaking, says John Defterios .
 Positivist legal theory stresses states’ customs and habitual mys of behaving as the most important source of law . This ambivalence makes it possible for states to exploit international law to get what they can .
 Liberal and constructivist reformers have a long way to go in order to fulfill their dream of seeing international law strengthen so that it can more effectively police international conflict . The Judicial Framework of International Law is a judicial framework of international law .
 Reformers take heart from recent trends that have enabled international law to increase its capacity to manage the threat of war within states, between states, and through global terrorism . They question cynics who still contend that international law should remain irrelevant to states’ use of armed force .
 Whether a war is seen as defensive or aggressive is often a matter of which side the participant is on in the conflict . It is a mistake, therefore, to claim that international law is broken whenever war breaks out .
 War is a method of last resort to punish aggressors and thereby maintain the global system’s legal framework . War is also a way to maintain the legal framework of the world's legal system, says Peter Bergen .
 For rule of law to gain strength in world politics, it is also necessary to strengthen the international adjudicative machinery to enhance its effectiveness and legitimacy . The rule of the law should also be strengthened in the international legal system .
 The International Court of Justice was created in 1945 as the highest judicial body on Earth . The World Court is the only international court with universal scope and general jurisdiction .
 In accordance with international law, it settles legal disputes submitted by states . The dispute is settled by the countries involved in it .
 It offers advisory opinions on legal questions submitted by the U.N. and its specialized agencies . It offers legal advice to the world about legal issues .
 A weakness in the World Court is that it can only make rulings only on disputes freely submitted by the states . The court cannot rule on cases that states do not bring forward . A weakness is that the court can only rule on disputes submitted by states themselves .
 Many states have traditionally been hesitant to use the ICJ because ICJ decisions are considered final . State sovereignty is protected, and there is no opportunity to appeal . ICJ decision is considered final; state sovereignty has been protected .
 The number of sovereign states since 1950 has tripled, the court’s caseload has not seen a similar increase . The court has not had an increase in sovereign states in the last 50 years .
 Once the court has ruled on cases, the disputants have complied with ICJ judgments only a little more than half of the time . The ICJ has complied with its judgments only about a little over half of them, the court says .
 This record suggests that approval for using the court of law to resolve international conflicts is increasingly voiced . Most states remain reluctant to voluntarily use judicial procedures to settle their most important international disputes, says Simon Tisdall .
 In 2004, scandal erupted when graphic photos taken at Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad were televised worldwide . U.S. personnel tortured Iraqi prisoners, ostensibly showing United States personnel torturing Iraqi prisoners .
 Similar methods were purportedly used to interrogate terror suspects detained at the United States Guantanamo Naval Base .
 Both became a negative symbol of U.S. power in the Muslim world, and cast doubt upon the United State's commitment to moral and ethical principles .
 This was true even when their commands ignored the laws of the appropriate conduct of war . This is true even though they ignored the law of war, the law was passed .
 Attempts to bring armed conflict under more potent legal controls are spread across the jurisdiction of several international judicial bodies . Attempts are now spread across several international courts' jurisdiction .
 The international criminal tribunals formed in 1993 signaled to would-be perpetrators that the global community would not tolerate these atrocities . The tribunations were formed to show that the international community would no longer tolerate such atrocities .
 Milosevic was the former Yugoslav president who perpetrated four wars in the 1990s that killed more than 250,000 and tore the Balkans apart . He died of a heart attack in 2006 in his Hague prison cell while facing trial in the Netherlands .
 In 2002, the Rome Statute launched the International Criminal Court as an independent court of last resort . The court investigates and prosecutes terrible mass crimes such as genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes .
 ICC only pursues a case when a state’s courts are unwilling or unable to do so . ICC only brings charges only against individuals as opposed to states . ICC brings charges against individuals rather than states .
 The United States suspended its signature of the Rome Statute and declared that it did not intend to become a member of the ICC due to concerns over the court’s statute, accountability, and jurisdiction . The U.S. has long been a leader in developing standards for international law
 The United States' opposition to the ICC is also due to the conviction that its citizens would be treated unfairly by the court and would war crimes . Acts performed during war that the international community defines as crimes against humanity, including atrocities committed against an enemy’s prisoners of war, civilians
 The International Court of Justice was established by the UN Charter in 1945 . It is known as the World Court . The World Court was established in 1945 by the United Nations .
 The U.N. is the primary judicial body of the United Nations . It has global jurisdiction to settle legal disputes between states and provide advisory opinions .
 Peace Palace is the Peace Palace, which houses the ICJ in The Hague, Netherlands .
 The International Criminal Court is an independent court of last resort that tries those accused of committing the most horrendous of mass crimes . Also commonly referred to as a ""world court,"" the International Criminal court is a "world court"
 The United States sought to guarantee that Americans would be immune to the court’s jurisdiction . The U.S. pressed other states for bilateral immunity agreements that take into account its concerns .
 The United States has become less hostile to the ICC and has agreed to cooperate with the court on a case-by-case basis . More recently, however, the U.S. has become increasingly hostile to ICC .
 ICC ruled in February 2010 that Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir could be charged with genocide for his part in the five-year campaign of violence in Sudan’s Darfur region . UN estimates that 300,000 people their lives and 2. million from their homes .
 A Congolese militia leader was found guilty of conscripting and using child soldiers . The case stood as a milestone in international justice and deterrent of war crimes .
 ICC is gaining legitimacy as the appropriate court of last resort for cases involving crimes against humanity, genocide, and war crimes . It is often criticized for the length of time it takes for cases to be brought to trial . ICC lacks independent ability to enforce its decisions or detain the accused .
 Many people are confused by international law because it both prohibits and justifies the use of force . William Fulbright, former U.S. senator 9-5 LEGAL AND DIPLOMATIC RESPONSES TO ARMED CONFLICT TO ARMADICT .
 It is important to understand the origins of just war theory and the way it is evolving today . The rules of law shape military interventions and negotiated solutions to international disputes . Principles clarifying the difference between good and evil and situations in which they are opposed .
 Augustine said the City of Man was inherently sinful, in contrast to the perfect City of God . Augustine said that the 'City of Man' was inherently sin-inflicted . Augustine also said that God's "perfect city" was God's perfect city .
 There are references to just war principles in classical Greek political thought, as reflected in Aristotle’s reference to “war that is by nature just” and Ciceros’ writings on helium justum .
 The former sets the legal criteria by which a leader may initiate a war . The former set the legal threshold for a leader to start a war, and the former set it up .
 Thomas More contended that the assassination of an evil leader responsible for starting a war was justified if it would prevent the loss of innocent lives . Thomas More said the assassination was justified because it was necessary to prevent the deaths of innocent people .
 War can be just only if employed to defend a stable political order or morally preferable cause against a real threat . War can only be just if employed in order to defend political order, moral cause against real threat or to restore justice after injury has been sustained .
 A just war must have a reasonable chance of succeeding in these limited goals, says the U.S. president . A war must succeed in a war that aims to achieve a just cause of war .
 Advanced technological innovations have blurred many of the lines between acceptable and unacceptable conduct in war . The U.S. has been involved in the Vietnam War since Vietnam .
 Insurgent terrorists and now the armies fighting them are increasingly relying on improvised explosive devices planted on animal carcasses, mobile cell phones, or human cadavers . LEDs left in the open in order to kill with minimal risk to the attacker .
 Today’s lEDs are cheap and easy-to-make gadgets such as garage-door openers used to detonate bombs . LEDs were invented by the United States and are now available on the global black market .
 Just war theory reflects the quest to place legal constraints on the use of armed force in order to create a moral consensus about the conditions under which ends justify means, even though vehement disagreements continue today about what criteria should be accepted .
 These differences became especially evident in the heated debate after the U.S. preemptive invasion of Iraq in 2003 . These differences were especially evident after the Iraq invasion of 2003 .
 Some argue that Saddam Hussein intentionally let the U.S. believe Iraq had weapons of mass destruction . Others argue that the war was justifiable as Saddam Hussein deliberately let the United States think Iraq had WMD .
 The U.S. invasion of Iraq made the legality of the use of force a hot topic . Concerns emerged regarding the preemptive and preventive use of military force . The legality of force is still a big question .
 Legal restraints on the historic right of states to start a war have fluctuated over time, but have increased steadily since World War I . The global community has made wars of conquest illegal since that carnage prompted the global community to make it illegal .
 liberals advocate institutional methods that pool sovereignty to collectively manage global problems . Thus, liberals advocate pool sovereignty in order to solve global problems.
 Changing conceptions of sovereignty and global responsibility are shaping state responses to military intervention and the diplomatic resolution of crises . Here, consider the ways in which . changing conceptions of . sovereignty and . global responsibility . are shaping responses to . military intervention .
 International law has begun to revise its traditional prohibition against military intervention in the wake of the recent wave of terrorism by states against their own people .
 The belief that governments have a right, even an obligation, to intervene in the affairs of other states under certain conditions for humanitarian purposes has won advocates . Advocates say governments should intervene in other states' affairs for humanitarian reasons .
 International law relaxed its restrictive definition that defines when the global community can legally use military intervention to intervene in other states . International law relaxes definition of when a state can legally intervene in such intervention .
 The world has made a choice on genocide and has declared organized savagery illegal . "The world has decided on genocide," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The world made a decision on genocide .
 Near-universal support for humanitarian intervention has emerged as a legal right to protect human rights . Political rights and civil liberties are now recognized by the global community as inalienable and universally applicable .
 NATO's intervention in Libya in 2011 proved an exception . Many states and IGOs have been reluctant to intervene in internal conflicts outside their spheres of influence .
 The UN Security Council argued that Muammar al-Qaddafi’s response to the popular uprising posed an imminent threat of mass atrocities . The UN said that al Qaddafi's promise to ""cleanse Libya house by house" of the rebel ""cockroaches" posed an
 International law develops most rapidly when global problems arise that require collective solutions and legal remedies . This sea change suggests that international law develops and changes most rapidly . International law is changing rapidly when it comes to global problems that need collective solutions .
 The spread of genocide and atrocities in failed states and countries ruled by tyrants has spawned new sets of legal rules that attempt to arrest these dangers and to permit interventions within these countries .
 The rising frequency of global crises has pushed efforts to rewrite international law so as to facilitate diplomatic negotiations that bring about a nonviolent settlement of disputes . Likewise, the rise of the number of crises in the world is pushing for a nonviolent solution .
 International Crises and the Negotiated Settlement of Disputes Crises have been very frequent in modern history . Crises are often followed by negotiations to resolve international disputes .
 "The threat of force causes stress and reduces the amount of time available to reach decisions that might successfully end the crisis peacefully," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Diplomatic crises resulting from coercive diplomacy have escalated to the use of force when bargaining failed and the adversaries took up arms . And, often, such crises have escalated .
 The problem that liberal reformers identify is that these crises and armed conflicts could potentially have been settled by diplomatic negotiations had that avenue for dispute settlement been tried .
 To liberals, it is always better to talk about divisive issues at a negotiating table than to let anger and anxieties sizzle and tempt the disputants to take up arms . Liberals say it's better to discuss divisive issues instead of sizzling anger and anxiety .
 Only through discussion and bargaining can positions be clarified and, possibly, concessions and compromises be reached that terminate the threat of warfare . The U.S. needs to find a way to reach a solution to the problem of war in Syria .
 Negotiating is a process of bargaining between two or more actors in an effort to deal with an issue or situation and reach an agreement . Embedded in international law, negotiation is a part of international law . Negotiations are a form of bargaining in an attempt to find an agreement
 As an approach to conflict management, the goal is to facilitate communication between the parties regarding their intentions and goals, and to produce options that address those involved .
 In the give-and-take required to negotiate a solution, there is a strong tendency for some level of reciprocity to emerge from the action and reaction sequence of communications . The writer says reciprocity is a tendency to return in kind or degree the kind of friendly or hostile communication received
 Negotiating is not a sure-fire way to resolve global conflicts and crises, says John Defterios . Negotiations are not a good way of resolving global conflicts, he says . Negotiation is a "sure-fire" way to solve global crises, he adds .
 Negotiations make the settlement of disputes possible by providing reciprocated concessions between disputants . Still, negotiations make the settlements possible by reciprocating concessions, negotiations .
 Reciprocated gestures of goodwill and empathy for the opponent’s situation pave the way for a compromise . The gesture of goodwill is a sign of respect for the people involved in the conflict .
 Diplomacy aims to revolve international disputes peacefully, which is why liberals favor it . Diplomacy is aimed at revolving international disputes, which liberals favor . Liberals favor diplomacy .
 Realists, for whom the state’s primary interest is the pursuit of power, believe that threats of war preserve peace better than diplomatic efforts . Conversely, realists believe that war is the best way to preserve peace, rather than diplomacy, they say .
 Chinese former foreign minister Zhou Enlai said “all diplomacy is the continuation of war by other means” A tit-for-lat strategy is a bargaining approach that reciprocates in kind the offers or threats made by the other party in a negotiation .
 To liberal reformers, direct negotiations between adversaries are a crucial step on the path to peace . Boris Yeltsin and Bill Clinton, 1994 Vladimir Putin and George W Bush, 2002 Dmitri Medvedev and Barack Obama .
 Talks allow both sides to put their interests on the bargaining table and discuss issues openly . Talks are far better than resolving them on the battlefield, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Diplomatic negotiations, international courts, collective security, and other methods of conflict resolution are advocated by policy makers whose image of world politics is informed by liberal and constructivist theories . These methods include diplomatic negotiations .
 Diplomacy requires great intelligence, information, imagination, flexibility, ingenuity, and honesty, to successfully maintain peaceful negotiations . Diplomacy is diplomacy, intelligence, imagination and flexibility, flexibility and ingenuity .
 Diplomats are sent to negotiate for their countries, no matter what their skill or sincerity, they cannot succeed unless they have the full backing of their government’s authority . Compounding the challenge is the common liability that while diplomats are sent . Diplomats cannot succeed without the backing of
 As former UN Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold similarly cautioned, “The best results of negotiation cannot be achieved in international life any more than in . our private world in the full glare of publicity”
 International politics has been inventive in creating supplementary methods to reduce the threat of war . Fortunately, those playing the game of international politics have created supplementary methods that enable negotiations .
 When two conflicting parties have a history of relatively peaceful negotiations, often a “good office” will be provided by a third party as neutral ground for negotiation . A “Good office’s neutral ground” is often a neutral ground to negotiate with conflicting parties .
 In these circumstances, the good office provider does not participate in the actual negotiations . "Good office provider" is not expected to participate in negotiations .
 When two or more conflicting parties wish to negotiate a dispute resolution but wish to maintain control over the final compromise, often a third party will assist both sides during the negotiations and attempt to offer unbiased opinions and suggestions to help achieve a solution .
 A temporary ruling board considers both sides’ arguments and reaches a decision . When disputing parties are willing to allow a third party to make a binding decision to resolve their dispute, a temporary panel of judges will decide .
 This is roughly the equivalent of arguing a case in court and accepting a binding decision or ruling by a judge . Perhaps the most formal of the dispute resolution options, this is the same as arguing for a ruling in a court .
 The quest for international security involves the unconditional surrender by every nation, in a certain measure, of its liberty of action, its sovereignty that is to say . Einstein: "No other road can lead to such security. No other road"
 Liberalism is based on the idea that peace depends on actions driven by moral convictions . Liberalism places the power of principle over the principle of power, says Julian Zelizer .
 Feminist theory stresses the importance of gender in studying world politics . It explores the extent to which a “masculine"" conceptualization of key ideas—such as power, interest, and security—shapes the way transnational actors conduct foreign affairs .
 realism portrays a competitive world in which a masculine approach to decision making reigns . With its emphasis on the role of power in the amoral pursuit of narrow self-interest by rational actors, realism portrays the world of power .
 Power is typically viewed as the ability to influence another to do what you want them to do . The accumulation of power is achieved through greater strength and authority, and at the expense of others .
 Some argue that due to their traditional social roles, women have interdependent self-schemas and a nurturing orientation that gives them valuable perspectives that are an asset to conflict negotiation .
 Women understand events in a context that accounts for relationships as well as evolving situations, says CNN.com's new book, "Women of the Year"
 Eschewing the realist perspective of power achieved through competition, women tend to be more inclined to a liberal view of mutual empowerment achieved through cooperative interactions that construct connections and understandings .
 The liberal road to peace begins with a dedication to doing what is right and not what is wrong . Constructivism, although itself conventionally thought of as ethically neutral, serves as a means for explaining systems of ethical beliefs . constructivism is thought to be a means to explain systems of
 Future generations will likely judge whether disarmament agreements, multilateral international organizations, and international law can lead to a collective response to the multitude of global needs .
 This survey can aid in understanding the world as it presently exists and allow you to contemplate, as caring and responsible global citizens, the prospects for transformations that could create a better world .
 Each chapter explores some facet of the challenges to prosperity and human security that we face in our globalized world, and the extent we have the ability, and responsibility, to respond and seek solutions to them .
 Chapter 12 examines the demographic dimensions of globalization as well as how increased access to information is shaping culture and perceptions of identity . Chapter 12 then examines how the demographic dimension of globalization .
 Chapter 14 considers threats to the global environment that pose a serious challenge to the planet and humanity’s continued survival . Chapter 14 also considers threats that pose serious challenges to the world's future .
 The growing web of globalization enhances the prospect and need for mutual toleration and cooperation . MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING IN A GLOBALIZED WORLD is the book .
 World leaders focused on measures to spur balanced and sustainable economic growth . Measures include effective regulation, jobs creation and investment, and bolstering trust and transparency .
 Even though such aphorisms and cliches are contradictory, they all contain elements of truth . Even though they are somewhat contradictory, there are elements of the truth .
 Your challenge is to separate fact from fiction by determining the place of money in your life and the world around you . Your challenge: Separate fact from . fiction by deciding the place in your . life .
 The quality of your conclusions will depend on your analytic skills in evaluating how money affects the many dimensions of world politics and your own personal financial fate . However, the quality of these conclusions should be considered .
 Money truly is moving around the world, and with increasing speed . Today, more than ever, money is moving in the world .
 When you buy a sandwich, a sweater, a car, or the gasoline to make it run, the cost is very likely to be affected by the rate at which your own country’s currency is valued and exchanged for the currency of the producer abroad . What is more likely to
 The global exchange of national currencies will determine whether you can afford to attend a concert or buy that extra bottle of wine .
 It looks at the processes governing currency exchanges, particularly on how the transfer of money across borders affects levels of prosperity and human security .
 This is an introduction to international trade, which is discussed in Chapter 11 . Note that this topic is part of the larger one of international economics in general .
 Neither dimension of international economics -- money or trade -- can be considered without the other . Money or trade can't be discussed without the two dimensions of the economy .
 Money and markets drive the rise and fall of individual and national wealth . They are inextricably linked, and only by looking at both together can you understand how money and markets are driving the rise in wealth .
 You will be looking at a phenomenon as old as recorded history and inspecting how it influences life in the twenty-first century . You will look at the phenomenon as well as the social implications of it .
 Financial markets are like the mirror of mankind, revealing every hour of each working day the way we value ourselves and the world around us . When changes occur in the world, they force people to think about and interpret world politics in fresh ways .
 The relationship between geography and the economic conditions and behavior of states that define their levels of production, trade, and consumption of goods and services . Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf rigr rigf geo-economics .
 Bond purchases by Chinese investors, or statements about future purchases, influence the relative value of currencies worldwide . Bond purchases are seen as a factor in the value of currency .
 Financial crises in the U.S. can likewise create turbulence in markets around the world . Crisis in the United States can also create turbulence around the globe .
 Revolutionary activity in the Middle East causes rapid increases in world oil prices . The Middle East is a source of oil production in the region .
 The undercurrents of the global economy have assumed increasing importance as they are inextricably linked to world politics . These are only a few of the consequences of globalization .
 Some regard globalization as little more than a euphemism for capitalism . It is a multifaceted phenomenon that encompasses the development of interconnected material relations, the increasing rapidity with which they take place, and the shift in public perception of these changes .
 The 2015 Index of Globalization was released by the KOF Swiss Economic Institute . This map depicts the extent of globalization across the globe and is rendered from the 2015 Index .
 The United States ranked thirty-fourth, with a globalization index score of 74.81 out of 100 . The U.S. ranked 30th in the globalization index of 100, according to CNN .
 Most analysts would probably agree that globalization is a permanent trend leading to the probable transformation of world politics . The end of one historic pattern and the beginning of a new one, he says .
 This new era of globalization will prove to be such a difference of degree that it will be seen, in time, as a difference in kind . It will be remembered as one of those fundamental changes, like the rise of the nation-state or the Industrial Revolution, he says .
 This chapter deals with different dimensions of globalization and their implications . Given the broad and multifaceted scope of globalization, this chapter, as well as the remaining chapters in World Politics, deals with the different dimensions .
 We next focus on the dynamics of the international monetary system through which currencies and credits are calculated . Capital moves freely across national boundaries by way of investments, trade, foreign aid, and loans .
 The financial procedures used to calculate the value of currencies and credits when capital is transferred across borders through trade, Investment, foreign aid, and loans . The international monetary system is the world's most complex monetary system .
 For its part, the state seeks to provide some operational rules for the system . State seeks to mitigate the more disruptive effects of the marketplace upon its citizenry .
 A number of governments have taken some tentative steps in creating rules for adjusting their currencies with one another and stabilizing wide fluctuations in their exchange rates .
 The process through which money is exchanged between countries does not have strong supranational regulatory institutions . Ffowowever, the process through . money exchanges between countries is not .
 States often have very limited ability to control transactions or the relative value of their currencies on the world market . States have limited control of transactions and currencies, but can't control the value of those transactions .
 At the same time, these transactions, as noted above, are escalating at a furious rate . The transactions, including those of the U.S. President Barack Obama, continue to escalate .
 This globalization of finance refers to the increasing transnationalization and centralization of these markets through integrating worldwide capital flows . The globalization of finance is the result of the integration of global capital flows into global markets . This is a form of globalization that involves centralization and transnationalizing
 The most fundamental characteristic of this emerging system of financial arrangements is that it is not centered on any single state . The new financial arrangements will not be centered on a single state, experts say .
 Financial specialists talk about the “end of geography’s geography” because geographic location is no longer a barrier to finance, they say . Financial experts talk about how to make money from distance and distance .
 Growth in the arbitrage market, which is bought and sold for profit based off differences and fluctuations in their relative values, has been truly staggering .
 By way of comparison, the total value of all goods and services produced in the U.S. during 2014 was $17. trillion .
 The amount of currency that circulates in four days is greater than the total yearly production of the U.S. economy . Viewed another way, the currency circulates faster than the annual United States economy does .
 Even more speculative financial instruments have exponentially increased the size and scope of these capital flows . Today, even more spec speculators have exponentially grown the size of these financial instruments .
 By 2014 the total value of all the stock markets in the world was $69. trillion, which was somewhat less than actual global GDP of $77 trillion . For example, by 2014 the value of the world's stock markets had been $69 trillion .
 The value of the derivatives market was much greater than the value of stocks and bonds . Yet the value was greater in derivatives market . New financial instruments are essentially “side bets’ placed on the prospective future value of assets such as stocks .
 In an early form of globalization, a network of financial centers flourished along the Baltic and North seas . City-states such as Liibeck, Flamburg, and Bergen dominated finance and trading .
 The “manics, panics, and crashes” of global finance began in the early seventeenth century, economist Charles Kindleberger says . Twenty-seven major financial crises occurred before the beginning of the twentieth century, Kindleberger writes .
 The difference is the speed and breadth of finance capital flows throughout the entire globe . The difference between the two countries is the size of the world's financial capital flows, say experts .
 The combination of computer-driven trading and sheer volume of shares processed can produce rapid swings in global stock markets for very idiosyncratic reasons .
 The Associated Press hacked the Associated Press Twitter account on April 23, 2013, when two explosions occurred at the White House and President Obama was hurt .
 Over the course of two minutes the United States stock market plummeted $200 billion . The U.S. stock market dropped $200 million in two minutes .
 Although this is only part of global finance, it does provide some indication of the centers of the global finance industry .
 The NYSE and NASDAQ are larger in size than the next eight exchanges combined . A clear pattern is continued U.S. dominance, as its two largest exchanges are larger than any other .
 Shanghai Security Exchange overtook the Japan Exchange group in early 2015 . At the same time, Chinese exchanges are growing, and the Shanghai Security exchange overtook Japan Exchange Group .
 There is also some indication of emerging economic powers, including India, South Korea, and Brazil .
 Only nine countries in the world have no stock exchanges . Broader patterns in stock exchanges reveal almost universal participation in global finance .
 An increasing number of countries are participating in the stock exchange system . Power centers remain, although power centers remain .
 The structure of financial markets is somewhat indicative of a state’s economic power . But other aspects of the global capital market reveal limitations in the power of the state . Financial markets are a reflection of state's economic power in the world .
 The volume of currencies traded far exceeds the actual amount of reserve currencies held by governments . This limits the ability of governments to influence exchange rates .
 The value of a country’s currency can fluctuate wildly no matter the wishes of a particular country . Indeed, the value of the currency fluctuates wildly . No matter how much a country's currency is worth, it fluctuates .
 The value of the Russian ruble decreased 85 percent during 2014, which greatly increased the economic cost associated with its assertiveness in the Ukraine . For example, the value of Russia's ruble dropped 85 percent .
 Taiwan 0.919 BM&FBOVESPA Brazil 0.740 Singapore Exchange Singapore 0.774 •As of May 31,2015.
 The globalization of finance also has implications for international trade . The currency exchange rate directly affects the price of goods traded internationally .
 The international monetary system is the most critical factor facilitating international trade . International transactions could not exist without a stable and predictable method for calculating the value of sales and investments . The International Monetary System is a critical factor for international trade, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Currency values are at the heart of a key issue of contention between the U.S. and China . United States officials contending that China undervalues its currency .
 China’s relatively low exchange rate reduces the relative cost of Chinese goods shipped abroad . This gives them a competitive advantage over goods produced in other countries . China's relatively low currency rate gives them an advantage .
 The U.S. still maintains that the renminbi is undervalued, and that China has not yet fully liberalized its currency . The renminable currency is not allowed to trade freely on the global market .
 It is important to note that such ‘conflicts’ are still within the context of mutually beneficial economic relations . It is also important to point out that such conflicts are still in the context .
 The globalization of finance does not affect all countries equally . Yet, it does affect many of the world's most important countries .
 Though a majority of global capital goes to the Global North, all countries are mutually vulnerable to rapid transfers of capital in this globalized system . All countries in the world are exposed to rapid transfer of capital .
 Historically the Global South has been the most dependent and vulnerable to shifts in the financial marketplace . Yet historically the GlobalSouth has been most dependent on shifts in financial markets .
 In accordance with neoliberal institutionalist approaches, this multitude of crises suggests why bankers and economists have called for more reliable multilateral mechanisms for policy coordination to better manage cross-border capital .
 G-20 is a grouping of the twenty largest economies that was formed in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis . This was the raison d’etre for the organisation, which was formed after the Asian crisis .
 In assessing the implications of capital mobility for the global system, it is necessary to understand the international monetary system and the processes through which the relative value of each state’s currencies are set. It is necessary for the international system to understand how it works .
 We next examine the core concepts of the global monetary system, some of the key issues and dilemmas surrounding monetary policy, and its recent historical context .
 A country’s exchange rate fluctuates frequently and the challenges states face in dealing with these fluctuations . The importance of a state's monetary policy in determining its well-being, we look at how these factors are related, and how they are related .
 States face a variety of trade-offs in navigating monetary policies . They must seek a difficult balance between competing values, goals, and priorities . As you will see, states must balance competing values and goals .
 Money must store value, so that people will be willing to keep some of their wealth in the form of that particular currency . Second, money must be stored in value, and people will want to keep that money . Money must also store value so that money can be used to store value
 Movements in a state’s exchange rate occur, in part, when changes develop in the people’ assessment of a national currency’�s underlying economic strength or the ability of its government to maintain the value of its money .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigf rigf monetary policy is not met .
 Budget Deficit Yearly amount of debt necessary to fund a balance-of-payments deficit . Deficit is the largest deficit in the United States since 2001 .
 Money is most commonly raised by selling bonds to foreign and domestic investors . Money is often raised from bonds sold to foreign investors . Bonds are most commonly sold by foreign investors in the United States .
 National Debt Cumulative amount of debt that a country owes its various bondholders, both foreign and domestic . National debt Cumulative Amount of debt owed to a country .
 An expansionary fiscal policy would consist of lowering taxes and increasing spending . A “tight” or contractionary policy would involve raising taxes and/or decreasing spending .
 Flowever, it can also reduce the spending power of citizens within that country . Flowever: It can also . reduce the . spending power within that nation .
 Daily changes are generally quite small, although they can vary greatly over the long run . Daily changes can be very small, but they can be significant over the years .
 Fixed Exchange Rate is a system in which a government sets the value of its currency at a fixed rate for exchange in relation to another country’s currency or another measure of value (such as a group of different currencies or a precious metal such as gold) so that the exchange value
 Fixed-but-Adjustable Exchange Rate System is a system in which a government fixes its currency in relation to that of another country’s currency . A fixed price may still change in the fixed price to reflect changes in the underlying strengths and weaknesses of its economy .
 Inflation is a decrease in the value of money, which increases the prices paid for goods and services . Inflation increases the price of things and increases the amount of things paid for .
 Zimbabwe's inflation rate was over 12,000 percent in 2010 . Inflation rates in Zimbabwe are over 12.000 percent per year .
 Zimbabwe abandoned its currency and adopted the dollar in 2009 . The following year, Zimbabwe adopted a new currency, the dollar .
 If they believe that the yen will be worth less in three months, they can sell yen today for a certain number of dollars and then buy back the same yen in 3 months for less money . Conversely, if they . believe that . the yen is worth less, they . can sell
 The globalization of finance allows investors to rapidly move funds from one currency to another in order to realize gains from differences in states’ interest rates and the declining value of other currencies .
 Success depends on predictability in the value of the currencies in which they deal to carry out transnational exchanges . Their willingness to do so is important to importers and exporters .
 Governments intervene when their central banks buy or sell currencies to change the relative value of their own . Central banks intervene when they sell or sell currency to change its relative value to change it .
 Unlike speculators, governments should not try to manipulate exchange rates so as to gain unfair advantages . That could tarnish their reputations as custodians of monetary stability, says the IMF .
 Governments are faced with the difficult task of balancing the demands of the global currency market with the need to manage their economies . Within this system, governments must balance the needs of the world currency market and the need for managing economies .
 Inflation occurs when the government creates too much money in relation to the goods and services produced in its economy . Inflation is caused by the government creating too much of the money it creates .
 The creation of money, whether through increasing the money supply or lowering interest rates, does serve to stimulate the economy . However, the creation of the money does not serve to boost the economy, economist says .
 Restrictive monetary policy is very useful in curbing inflation or helping the government reduce debt . Alternatively, restrictive monetary policy could be very useful to curbing in inflation or reducing debt .
 Such actions slow an economy down, which can result in increased unemployment and even recessions . Yet such actions can result from increased unemployment, even recessionary times .
 States are generally expected to refrain from manipulating the value of their currencies, or the currencies of other countries, in order to maintain predictability .
 People from the U.S. who travel abroad must use currency exchange rates to convert the price of their purchases abroad to the value of United States dollars . Sometimes they are alarmed at the higher price of purchases abroad .
 Economists usually calculate currency exchange rates in terms of purchasing power parity . The index of the value of exchange rates measures the cost of identical goods or services in two countries .
 On January 22,2015, the least expensive burger could be purchased in the Ukraine for $1.20 versus an average price of $4.79 in the U.S. The average burger in the United States is an average of $5.99 .
 Inflation also affects the cost of goods and services, as a general increase in the level of prices means that each unit of currency purchases less .
 Inflation is higher in the Global South than the Global North, but overall inflation levels have declined since the 2008 global financial crisis . Inflation has declined since that crisis, however .
 A weaker currency has a negative effect on the spending power of domestic consumers . It makes exporting industries more competitive because their goods become relatively less expensive in the global marketplace as compared to those with a stronger currency .
 Conflicting Goals in Financial Policy Policy Tools Dilemma: Inflation vs. unemployment . Stimulative policies may create inflation . Monetary policy (interest rates and money supply) Stimulative policy (money supply) could create inflation. Policy tools may also create unemployment.
 Any choice hurts some segments within the country, such as exporting industries or consumers . Strong vs. weak currency is a tough choice for some segments of the country . Currency devaluation, capital controls, currency controls and currency controls are key factors .
 Currency stability vs. policy autonomy vs. currency autonomy . Cannot have both stability and autonomy in an open economy in open economy . Unfair competition in the global marketplace is unfair competition in global marketplace .
 This speaks to the trade-off that is at the core of global monetary policy, namely the choice between currency stability and policy autonomy . This is the choice of currency stability versus policy autonomy, the author says .
 The basic problem is that in a system in which capital flows freely , it is impossible to have both stability and autonomy . The problem is not only in a financial system that allows capital to flow freely .
 In this case, autonomy is gained, although there is no guarantee of stability, as the currency is subject to the vicissitudes of the global currency markets .
 A fixed exchange rate regime provides currency stability, yet it gives states practically no freedom to conduct monetary policy . Fixed exchange rate regimes provide currency stability but give states virtually no freedom from conducting monetary policy, experts say .
 A fixed exchange rate could not move to take the decreased demand for the currency into account . For example, if a country with a fixed rate were to lower interest rates, the exchange rate would not move in response to decreased demand .
 To fill this deficit, the country would need to reduce the oversupply of currency . A “tight’ monetary policy that would essentially undo the initial policy—or get rid of the original policy .
 Greece has been confronting such dilemmas since 2010 . The United States near the end of the Bretton Woods era and Argentina in the late 1990s faced such dilemas . Greece is facing a similar dilemma .
 States have to balance competing interests when creating monetary policy . States must balance the desire to help their economy grow with the necessity to maintain their currencies, the relative utility of strong versus weak currency valuation .
 It is helpful to keep these trade-offs and limitations on state power in mind as you consider the monetary policies of the Bretton Woods era .
 Liberal International Economic Order was created after World Ward, designed to promote monetary stability and reduce barriers to the free flow of trade and capital . The set of regimes created after the World Ward were designed to reduce barriers .
 The perceived causes of the economic catastrophes of the previous decade, as well as the states’ beliefs about the need for active U.S. leadership, shaped the proposals . The proposals are based on the perceived causes and beliefs of the states .
 British delegation won support for the principle of strong government action when states face economic problems . John Maynard Keynes' theories about the state's role in managing inflation, unemployment, and growth still influence economic thinking around the world .
 First, power was concentrated in the rich Western European and North American countries, which reduced the number of states needed to reach decisions . Second, power concentrated in rich Western Europe and North America .
 The onset of the Cold War helped cement Western unity along these lines . Western unity was cemented by the onset of Cold War .
 Bretton Woods worked because the U.S. assumed the burdens of hegemonic leadership, which others willingly accepted . Third, it worked because of the United States assumed the burden of leadership, the author says .
 It is still useful to characterize the contemporary international economic system as a Liberal International Economic Order . The order is based on such free-market principles as openness and free trade .
 Former World Trade Organization Director-General Pascal Lamy remarked that "the wealth of the great Merchant Cities extends far beyond money"
 The global economic collapse of the 1930s provided important lessons for monetary relations . The Bretton Woods Monetary System was founded in 1944 . The system was designed to help the world's economies cope with economic downturns .
 As major economies contracted in the late 1920s, they found themselves unable to maintain their fixed exchange rate regimes . In particular, as well as the major economies, they had to maintain fixed exchange rates .
 The resulting flexible currency regime was highly unstable, replete with speculative attacks on currencies and currency devaluations . The resulting currency regime is now highly unstable .
 Leaders sought to construct a common set of practices regarding monetary and currency policy . To avoid repeating history, leaders sought to build a common currency policy to help simplify trade and finance .
 The negotiating parties agreed that the postwar monetary regime should be based on fixed exchange rates . Governments were tasked with maintaining this new currency regime .
 The IMF was to function somewhat like a global credit union . Countries contributed to the fund and were able to draw capital from it to help them maintain a balance-of-payments equilibrium .
 Massive sales of a country's currency caused by the anticipation of a future decline in its value . A system in which a government sets the value of its currency in relation to another country’s currency at a fixed rate of exchange and does not allow it to fluctuate in the global
 IMF and World Bank continue to be important, if controversial, players in global monetary and financial systems . The IMF and the World Bank are important players in the global monetary, financial systems.
 It was used in exchange markets as the reserve used by monetary authorities in most countries and by private banks, corporations, and individuals for international trade and capital transactions . The reserve was used by most countries, most of the world's monetary authorities .
 Bretton Woods monetary regime was based on fixedbut-adjustable exchange rates that were pegged to the dollar and gold . It ultimately required government intervention to maintain . The Bretton-Woods Monetary System was created in 1944 .
 The Marshall Plan provided Western European states billions of dollars in aid to buy the U.S. goods necessary to rebuild their war-torn economies . The plan was designed to get U.K. dollars into the hands of those who needed them most .
 Currency now moves effortlessly across borders, and the globalization of international finance is wreaking havoc on the efforts of state governments to control rapid fluctuations in economic conditions . State governments are trying to control the pace of global finance .
 As part of the Occupy Wall Street movement, May Day protestors expressed outrage and frustration over the corrupt and fraudulent practices of financial institutions . Protesters expressed popular outrage over the failure of governments to hold them accountable .
 Around 32,000 people took to the streets in Tokyo on May 1, 2013, to protest economic conditions for the common man . The protests were held in response to the government's failure to adequately address the problem .
 The protests in Greece have taken place since 2010 . The protests are perhaps the most visible example of contentious action against the IMF and World Bank .
 In the case of Indonesia in 1998, such profesfs and riots can sometimes even contribute to overturning a government . In 1998, Indonesia's government was overthrown by riots .
 The greatest sources of tension are structural adjustment policies . The strings attached to IMF and World Bank financial assistance are tied to the IMF .
 The political and economic results of these measures have been subject to a great deal of crificism . Although this ‘playbook’ is in line with basic macroeconomic principles for reducing deficits, the results of this measure have been crificicism .
 Interest rate increases make it more expensive for citizens to acquire loans, and currency devaluation lowers individual spending power . Interest rates are more expensive than for individuals to obtain loans .
 In many instances, reducing state subsidies may result in drastic increases in the prices that citizens pay for basic services, such as electricity and water, or goods that were formerly subsidized, including fuel and food .
 These difficulties can be further exacerbated by trade liberalization, writes Andrew Hammond . Inefficient domestic industries are likely unable to compete with their foreign competitors .
 Politically, participation in SAPs is also problematic . The IMF, World Bank, and World Bank are among those involved in the SAPs .
 Countries in the Global South may view these institutions as another manifestation of “neocolonialism” The institutions serve more to meet the interests of global investors and corporations, rather than the needs of the global South .
 Many large state-run companies are sold to multinational corporations from the Global North . Privatization of industries often results in privatization of industries .
 Flowever, studies have begun to systematically examine the impact of SAPs on their recipient states . Flowever says SAPs are often more successful in the United States than in other countries. Flowever: "SAPs are more likely to have a positive impact on the lives of people
 The World Bank and the IMF defend their role in the international financial system . Although acknowledging, and currently reforming, their imperfect record, they are currently reforming .
 IMF has played a key role in helping countries recover, officials say . Pointing to successes, such as in Poland, officials note that the IMF has helped recover .
 Political leaders may find it expedient to “scapegoat’t the IMF and the World Bank, which can provide them with “cover” for enacting unpopular, though unpopular, economic policies . Finally, political leaders might find it .
 The U.S. assumed a disproportionate share of the burden in rejuvenating Western Europe and Japan . In addition to providing liquidity, the United States has also provided a disproportionate burden .
 The End of Bretton Woods: The end of the system grew overly burdensome . The end was the end to the system . The system grew too burdensome and was replaced with a more rigorous system .
 By the 1960s, it had become apparent that the system would ultimately be unsustainable . The system would have to be replaced by a new government .
 As use of the dollar grew, the U.S. balanceof-payments deficit became increasingly problematic . The dollar's use of dollars and circulation in the United States became more and more frequent .
 The United States was not able to adjust the value of its currency because it was pegged to gold . Unlike other countries, the U.S. could not adjust its value because of the currency's value .
 Although the dollar was officially “as good as gold,” the monetary reality was far different . Simply put, although the U.S. dollar was . officially ‘as good . as gold’, it was far from gold . The U.N. dollar is
 This left the Bretton Woods system in a tenuous position, and the U.S. had few options . The United States was left with few options after the collapse of the system . The Bretton-Woods system was left in a fragile position .
 Such policies would have international ramifications as well because reducing the supply of dollars would damage countries that relied on the dollar for liquidity purposes . The U.S. government has been criticized for its policies in the past .
 Although some of the other major economies were willing to intervene to support the dollar, there were limits to what these countries would do . The status quo was not sustainable, and it was widely known that the status quo is not sustainable .
 In 1971, President Richard Nixon cut this Gordian knot by abruptly announcing—without consulting allies—that the United States would no longer exchange dollars for gold . The ultimate key is not economics or finance, but politics .
 Bretton Woods system gave way to a system based on floating exchange rates . With the price of gold no longer fixed and dollar convertibility no longer guaranteed, the Bretton-Woods system was replaced with floating rates .
 Market forces, rather than government intervention, now determine currency values . Market forces now determined currency values, says Fed chief .
 States should closely monitor their fiscal and monetary policies to avoid balance-of-payments deficits and inflation . As a result, states should be forced to closely watch their fiscal policies, authors say . States should also monitor their monetary and fiscal policies for their balance of payments .
 In the Global South, the situation was particularly grim during the 1980s and 1990s . The situation was especially grim during those years .
 A massive debt crisis in Latin America, as well as unsustainable debt levels throughout the developing and transitioning economies, raised alarms throughout the global financial system . The debt crisis has raised alarm bells for the world's economic system .
 The debt picture within the developing world has improved markedly during the twentyfirst century . Yet the debt picture in developing countries has also improved markedly .
 Increased export performance, as well as higher prices for many of the commodities sold by these countries, similarly enhanced economic conditions . Increased exports and higher prices of commodities have boosted economic conditions in the United States .
 Map shows the global distribution and frequency of systemic banking crises . This map shows the frequency of these crises, marked by significant financial distress in the banking system .
 Greece, for example, has perennially dealt with debt issues . Controversy still surrounds the tight fiscal policies that the country is forced to enact to reduce its debt .
 These cuts have translated into massive layoffs of government employees, decreased spending on social services, increased taxes and higher ages for retirement .
 Greece has shrunk the Greek economy and increased unemployment, which stood around 26 percent . In addition to generating controversy, such measures have shrunk the country's economy and unemployment .
 Conditions ripe for financial crises due to poor government practices or massive ‘boom and bust’ patterns of global investment and currency markets . Conditions have been ripe for crises, whether due to government practices, or the massive “boom-and-bust” patterns of
 In the absence of a financial crisis, these countries would have produced almost a quarter more goods and services . To put such loss in perspective, it would have been much more than a quarter higher .
 Next section focuses on the causes and effects of one of the largest financial collapses in history . The 2008 global financial crisis was the biggest financial collapse in the world . The next section will examine the dynamics and far-reaching effects of the financial crisis .
 The remainder of the chapter assesses the aftermath of the crisis and the future challenges facing the global financial system . As the global economy is to a large extent still recovering from the crisis, the chapter concludes .
 Demonstrators have thrown furniture, rocks, and even yogurt at police . Police have responded with the widespread use of tear gas and clubs to disperse the crowds .
 Official unemployment rate is 27 percent overall and almost 62. percent for workers under age 25 . Greek economy is in a tailspin; official unemployment rate stands at 27 percent .
 Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras' Syriza party campaigned heavily against austerity . Anger at austerity was the key factor that led to the January 2015 election of the Greek PM .
 The crisis was initially set off In December 2009 when President Papandreou ‘revised’ his estimate of the Greek budget deficit from 6. percent of GDP to 12. percent . The Greek debt crisis was set off in December 2009 . The debt crisis began when the Greek government
 Many argue that the country is “too big to fail” and that debt default will hurt markets throughout the EU as well as the rest of the world . Yet many argue that defaulting will hurt the country's economy, and that it will hurt other European economies .
 The role of private investment banks, such as Goldman Sachs, in this crisis has generated controversy . Private investment banks have generated controversy over their role in the crisis .
 Recent reports indicate that over the past decade they have helped Greece hide portions of its debt from public view through a complex array of derivatives and side deals . Reports: They've helped Greece to trade away future rights to long-term government revenues such as airport fees and lottery proceeds .
 There are no regulations that govern how a country handles its sovereign debt . Yet such measures are legal, as there are no rules on how to handle the debt . The measures are still legal in the United States .
 There were several developments that brought increased attention to the mortgage and securities markets during the beginning of the century . The real estate boom in the U.S. and extremely low interest rates in the United States also brought attention to mortgage markets .
 Low interest rates also mean that mortgages are less expensive for U.S. homeowners and businesses . At the same time, businesses had access to very inexpensive loans that could be leveraged for investment purchases .
 As housing prices are increasing, buying new or larger homes is a good investment . Buyers need to be able to keep up with rising prices and buy new or bigger homes . Buy a new home or a larger home is an important investment, experts say .
 Banks created instruments to link the ‘pool’ of money to the housing market, by selling securities based off of the value of these mortgages to large investors . Banks sold the securities based on the sale of mortgages to investors .
 Everyone in this chain of economic interactions—from mortgage brokers to investment banks—made billions of dollars as intermediaries . As a result, the investors made a higher rate of return from the mortgages, homeowners reaped the benefits of lower interest rates .
 The investments were backed by houses whose values had been steadily increasing . Many of these securities were highly rated by the credit agencies . The investments had been backed by house prices .
 The perception was that these investments were almost as safe as a money market account account . Thus the perception was . that they were almost safe as money market accounts .
 Huge derivative markets based on the performance of these instruments began to emerge . To further service the “pool,” banks began to invent more investment instruments .
 At some point in this process, the market for traditional mortgages became saturated . Everyone who was willing and able to purchase and/or refinance a home had already done so .
 The “pool” continued to grow, and demand for these securities continued to increase . Yet the ‘pool’ of these securities continues to grow .
 Financial crises are “periods of dramatic change"" during which much of the economic and political status quo—including the competency of the state, may be called into question . Financial crises often occur during which the status quo, including the state's competency, is at risk .
 Post-crises policies may exacerbate this situation, as they commonly entail debt reduction measures, such as lower government spending and higher taxes . Post-crrises policies often involve higher government spending, higher taxes and less government spending .
 The trade-off entailed with these measures is that they are recessionary and can produce a politically difficult combination of increased unemployment, higher taxes, and fewer government services . It's a tough combination of unemployment and higher taxes .
 Protestors are acting in response to the so-called austerity policies enacted in the wake of their financial crisis pay off their mortgages . Shown above are protestors outside Parliament in Athens, Greece, who are protesting against austerity policies .
 Real estate was considered at the time to be an ever-appreciating asset . Even if the loans defaulted, the banks would get the real estate, which was considered a valuable asset . The banks would still get the property .
 Investment banks continued to use a mind-boggling array of speculative instruments based off the mortgage securities, including derivatives linked to the performance of mortgage-backed securities . Synthetic securities were essentially repackaged derivatives based on the securities themselves .
 The market for collateralized debt obligations , which functioned as de facto insurance for the mortgage-backed securities and the various derivatives, boomed . The market is booming now .
 For many investment banks it was a ‘no lose’ situation . They made fees for processing all of these investment flows . Even if the securities crashed, they could still recoup their losses via the CDOs .
 Their ‘bets’ were effectively covered, and they stood to make a profit regardless of the actual outcome of the investment . Thus their ‘bet’ was effectively covered and they made a profit .
 Investment banks maximized profits, as well as their exposure, through excessive use of leveraging to obtain additional investments . Investment banks further maximized their profits, according to the report .
 As homeowners fail to repay the mortgages, banks quickly found themselves without a stream of income from mortgage holders and holding properties of declining value that they were unable to sell .
 For their part, the highly-leveraged investment banks found themselves facing debt loads more than thirty times greater than their own net worth . The banks' debt loads are more than 30 times their net worth, according to experts .
 The 2008 financial crisis had a profound and broad-based impact on the global financial system . Financial crises are not new to the world financial system, but the 2008 crisis was a particularly profound .
 The crisis drove global FDI and trade to unprecedented declines in 2009 . FDI outflows fell approximately 42 percent, and world trade slipped over 12 percent .
 Global markets are still recovering from the crisis, and the recovery has been fairly weak and uneven . Moreover, global markets have not fully recovered since the crisis . The recovery has also been uneven and weak, with the recovery being uneven .
 The crisis and its aftermath raise broader concerns that call into question some of the fundamentals of the global financial system, including leadership of the U.S. and dominance of the dollar, the relevance of commercial liberal perspectives and policies .
 We now turn to these issues, which figure prominently in assessing the future of global finance, to discuss .
 Although Germany and Ganada remained strong, the U.S. entered a multiyear recession . The United States entered a recession in 2008 .
 The Global South experienced rapid economic growth in the wake of the crisis . At the same time, the Global South was much less affected by the immediate crisis and experienced rapid growth .
 These effects have implications for the structure of the global financial system, particularly the continued leadership of the U.S. The U.K. continues to lead the world's financial system .
 The U.S. was unable to assert leadership in the immediate wake of the 2008 crisis, the author says . The United States has been unable to act in the wake of that crisis, he says .
 As such leadership is a facet of hegemony, the crisis also had geopolitical implications . The crisis also has geopolitical implications, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 Most significantly, it weakened the economic power of the U.S. while improving the relative global position of Ghina . Most importantly, the United States weakened its economic power while improving its position in Syria .
 The post-crisis recession in the United States increased Ghina’s prominence as the largest holder of U.S. debt securities . Ghina's share of the total United States debt increased almost 50 percent from 2008 .
 Doubts about U.S. leadership also raised questions about the continued role of the dollar as the world’s leading currency . The dollar is still the world's leading currency, despite doubts about leadership .
 The dollar is still the dominant currency in the global financial system . The dollar still dominates the world's financial system, according to experts .
 At the end of 2013, 62 percent of all foreign exchange reserves were in dollars . According to the IMF, 62 per cent of the country's foreign currency reserves are in dollars.
 This implies that countries place a great deal of trust in the dollar, in that they use it as a store of value . The dollar is used by many countries in the world, including Russia and China .
 The value of the dollar on the world market has been stable . Some of the leading economies in the world, most notably Ghina, have suggested that the dollar ultimately be replaced .
 While the euro, or even the SDR used by the IMF, have been suggested as possibilities, neither is presently a practical alternative . The euro or the IMF's SDR is not currently an alternative .
 Eventually, China’s rise to economic power may translate into the increasing influence of their currency . Eventually, the rise in economic power will translate into increasing influence on the currency . China's rise to power could translate into increased currency influence .
 In terms of economic fundamentals, China is poised to dominate the global economy . China's market size and growth, trade volumes, and its status as a leading creditor state, are key factors .
 The renminbi could become the most common reserve currency in the world . Along these lines, they could potentially emerge as a hegemon, say experts .
 Despite potential changes in the economic balance of power, the dominance of the dollar is unlikely to wane anytime soon . Despite these potential changes, the dollar remains the dominant currency in the world .
 Paradoxically, to a large extent the financial crisis served to increase support for the dollar . The financial crisis led to an increase in the dollar's value .
 Emerging economies saw their foreign exchange reserves depleted as a result of the crisis . Emerging economies, including Brazil, Taiwan, India, and particularly China, saw their forex reserves depleted .
 A key lesson of the collapse was that investments formerly thought of as “safe” were anything but . Many mortgage-backed securities were given the highest credit ratings . At the same time, a key lesson was that many investments formerly considered safe were anything less .
 The dollar is seen as a way to replenish reserves while avoiding risk . Thus, the dollar was seen as an option for the U.S. to avoid risk .
 Investors are unhappy with the extremely low interest earned on United States bonds . Investors are also unhappy with low interest rates on U.S. bonds .
 Two main reasons the dollar will likely continue to be the leading reserve currency . Yet there are two main reasons why the U.S. dollar is likely to remain the top reserve currency in the world .
 Given the sheer size of U.S. debt held by these countries, they have a vested interest in making sure that their investment remains safe . First, given the size of the United States debt held .
 The dollar is ultimately more desirable than the euro and more accessible than the renminbi . Although the low interest rate and worries about the U.S. economy are concerns, the dollar is more accessible .
 The open exchanges of currencies and free movement of capital are viewed as foundational to liberal economics . But the financial crisis has undercut basic beliefs regarding the efficacy of the marketplace .
 The countries that fared better were the ones that were less integrated into the financial system . Though globalization is generally related to positive outcomes such as economic growth and development , in this instance the countries that performed well were the countries less integrated .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rigl reserve currency is needed . Currency held in large amounts by governments for the purpose of setting international debts and supporting the value of their national currency .
 Moldova, a very small country with a rather primitive “cash-only system” of finance, was ranked by a leading financial journal as the fifth most stable economy in the world the year after the crisis .
 In the wake of the crisis, Roger Altman, a former U.S. Treasury Department official, remarked, “the long movement towards market liberalization has stopped,” and “globalization itself is reversing” Altman said .
 Foundational to this perspective is the efficacy of free markets, with minimal intervention from the state . Free markets provide minimal intervention—either regulatory or economic—from the state, says Julian Zelizer .
 The crisis served to undermine both the inherent trust in the market as well as the purported benefits of minimal state intervention . Regarding neoliberal policies, the crisis also undermined the benefits of state intervention, the author says .
 One of the factors that led to the crisis was a lack of adequate regulatory structures over the financial institutions, as well as their neglect of the new investment instruments that had emerged . The crisis was the result of the lack of proper regulatory structures and the neglect of investment instruments .
 State responses to the crisis, specifically the prevalence of austerity measures, also called into question the utility of a minimal state . A state that is less willing to use its fiscal and monetary tools to directly invest in the global economy, it said .
 The general idea is that reducing state spending will allow for increased private investment for two reasons . Businesses will be heartened by the smaller budget deficits that accompany reductions in government spending . The smaller amount of state spending won't ‘crowd out’ private investment, he says .
 The end product is an improved business environment as well as balanced budgets . The end result is a better business environment and balance budgets .
 In the wake of the crisis, several European countries, including Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, Spain, and to a lesser extent the United Kingdom, implemented these policies . In hopes of reducing their budget deficits and thus spurring economic growth, these policies were implemented .
 Most analysts argue that these policies were counterproductive . However, most analysts argue they are counterproductive .
 Greece's budget cuts are unpopular and failed to reduce budget deficits . Greece's austerity measures have been called "fiscal waterboarding"
 As economist Martin Wolf bluntly concluded “Austerity has failed’s austerity has failed,’ he said . ‘Austerity is not a solution to the problem of austerity,' he said. ‘It is a failure’, says Wolf .
 Problems with austerity demonstrate the dangers of applying a common policy solution to financial situations that may be different as well as the dilemmas inherent in balancing fiscal and monetary policy tools .
 More broadly, they also demonstrate the difficult nature of determining how active a state should be in its economy, the authors say .
 States find themselves in a double bind as they balance the somewhat contradictory needs to “unleash creative capitalism and ... intervene directly to make certain markets work optimally” to attain broader societal goals . States are balancing the contradictory needs of ‘unleashing creative capitalism’
 Many are arguing that we are currently witnessing the emergence of a ‘new heterogeneity’ as policy makers look to multiple ways to manage their economies . Overall, the widespread support of neoliberal policies has certainly become more qualified .
 Ferchen is generally portrayed as a more developmental and pragmatic approach in which the state plays a much heavier role in the marketplace and is particularly mindful of the distributional effects of its policies .
 The crisis and its aftermath revealed strengths in perspectives critical of commercial liberalism . Regarding alternate theories of world politics, the crisis revealed strengths of alternative theories of the past .
 Marxists have long noted the inherent instability of capitalism, its susceptibility to speculative panics, and the need for strong state intervention in the financial system . Marxists say capitalism is unstable and needs state intervention .
 Feminist scholars note the gendered nature of the crisis, specifically that males are primarily responsible for the crisis . The predominantly male culture in finance is an impediment to meaningful reform, they say .
 The banking sector of the economy remains driven by males . Risk taking, aggression, and hypercompetitiveness were driving factors behind the speculative surges that helped create the financial crisis .
 Some argue that an artifact of this culture has been the “capture” of regulators by the banks that they are supposed to regulate . The culture of regulators and banks has been a constant source of tension between them .
 Christine Lagarde, a former French minister of finance, is the first woman to serve as managing director of the IMF . Lagarde is also the first French woman to hold the IMF post .
 Despite the widespread impacts of their failures, little has changed since the 2008 financial crisis, the banks' behavior hasn't changed, authors say . Banks' behavior of the banks has not changed, they say .
 There were decidedly gendered elements in the responses of the bank leaders, who were exclusively male, to female investigators . The bank leaders' responses to the questions of female investigators were also gendered .
 Warren: "It was not an accident" that none of the major banks were led by women . Warren says it's not a surprise that no major banks have been led by female CEOs .
 “The finance guys argue that if you’re never in the club, you can’t understand it, but 1 think they have it backward.” She says she has expertise in the finance industry .
 In the next section, we assess how states and the extant financial institutions handled the crisis . We also consider some of the major suggestions made for reforming the global financial architecture .
 Major economies were, at the least, able to avoid another Great Depression . Yet, ultimately, the major economies were able to . avoid another . Depression .
 Drezner argues that the system worked, as global trade did not implode . Capital markets were able to provide liquidity to counteract the immediate effects of the crisis .
 At the same time, the reaction to the crisis was somewhat ad hoc, and to a large extent represented a series of individual state responses rather than a coordinated effort at recovery . The reaction to this kind of crisis was less coordinated than any other state response to the disaster .
 The increased prominence of the G-20 was noteworthy for its incorporation of emerging economies . The most important function of the group was as a common forum for discussion . The G-7 was a much more inclusive group of states than G-8 .
 Despite the revolutionary nature of the crisis itself, the reaction to the crisis was quite conventional . Thus, despite the . revolutionary nature . of the . crisis itself , the reaction was quite . conventional, the . reaction was conventional .
 Viewed in light of the response, the “crisis was a strangely conservative event” that threatened, though ultimately did not change, the status quo . Viewed by the response to the crisis, the crisis was a ‘ strangely conservative” event, the author says
 The systemic factors that allowed the crisis to occur are still in existence . Indeed, the systemic factors still exist, the crisis is still being blamed for it .
 Various suggestions have been made for reforming the international financial architecture . Given these potential problems, various suggestions were made for reform .
 Some argue that the banking system itself is fundamentally flawed, and that much higher global standards for capital should be required . The banking system is flawed, some argue .
 IMF criticized for underrepresentation of emerging economies, internal practices . IMF underrepresented in emerging economies . IMF has been criticized for its policies and internal practices, including policies .
 IMF is aware of the widespread criticism of its policies and practices, and it has made substantial efforts at reform in the aftermath of the crisis . For its part, the IMF has been criticized for its lack of transparency and practices .
 IMF also increased emerging country representation on its board, and moved that all board members should be elected . IMF also moved to increase emerging countries representation .
 Although most analysts view these changes with optimism , there is still much to do . There are still much more work to be done, analysts say .
 IMF and the other financial institutions are ultimately constrained by the willingness of their members to act . Flowever, as is often the case with international law, the IMF is ultimately constrained in its decision .
 Many economists and IMF leadership recommend regulation of banks and investment instruments . The more expansive powers that many economists—and the IMF leadership—recommend, can only happen if member states exert political will .
 The politics surrounding the IMF reforms demonstrate the problems with such willingness to reform the IMF . IMF reforms are needed to make the world's largest economies more competitive .
 The IMF board of directors approved the reforms in 2010, but the U.S. Congress has still not approved the funding levels for the new IMF quota .
 Regional development banks have started to emerge as alternatives to existing international institutions . Given the frustrations with the existing institutions, as well as the changing balance of economic power, regional development banks are becoming alternatives .
 In 2014 the BRIGS countries launched the New Development Bank . The bank pledged $50 billion in startup capital to be devoted to “sustainable development” projects in the BRAGS countries .
 The United States has tried to dissuade other major countries from joining the AIIB . The U.S. has argued that it may undercut environmental standards and will compete against the World Bank .
 The founding of the NDB and AIIB was driven in no small part by frustration with the existing system, particularly at the perceived underrepresentation of the emerging economies .
 Chinese leadership in both these ventures is also significant, as it evidences its increased power and assertiveness in the global financial order . China's leadership in these ventures also shows it's increased power .
 Political motivations aside, there are potential advantages to regional banks . Regional banks could benefit from regional banks in the U.S.
 They could function as a “lender of last resort” that could be “better placed to coordinate economic actions” given their proximity to the country in need of relief . Ideally, they could work alongside the IMF or the World Bank to resolve problems .
 Regional body could be better suited to help troubled countries maintain credit ratings . Regional body may be better situated to use informal pressure, rather than strict conditionality measures, to encourage countries to service their debts .
 Indonesian President Suharto signs an agreement for a $43 billion assistance and reform package . IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus looks on in the picture .
 The IMF helped to foster a regional identity to foster regional identity . It was also an economic and public relations disaster for the IMF . It helped solidify negative opinions of the IMF within the developing world . The IMF and World Bank have been criticized for their policies .
 Efforts have also been made to develop regional funds in Latin America, Africa, and the Middle East . Efforts also have been made in the region .
 Regional banks represent a “challenge to the existing global economic order’s ‘challenge’ of the IMF and the World Bank . Regional banks could potentially supplement the efforts of IMF and World Bank in seeking financial stability and economic growth .
 Many of the factors underlying the instability of the global financial system persist persist . Though such organizations may prove useful in helping countries to respond to financial difficulties, many factors remain .
 Though the system passed the “stress test” of the 2008 crisis, it was hardly a bloodless victory . Many countries are still struggling with the aftermath of the crisis .
 The debate over currency and monetary policies will remain as intense as ever, while global finance becomes increasingly complex and interconnected . The debate will continue to be intense as global finance become increasingly complex, interconnected .
 Further adding to this turbulence is the related, and contentious, arena of international trade . The world's largest economies, the U.S. has been hit by a series of high-profile international disputes .
 A blog by the Council on Foreign Relations features graphs regarding geo-economic issues . The blog is based on graphs from the Council of Foreign Relations' website .
 Globalization Creates Systemic Risks, and What to Do About It . Globalization creates systemic risks, and what to do about it? Globalization can be a problem for the future, experts say .
 Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap . Key Term Videos: Globalization, International Monetary System . Additional Videos: The IMF, World Bank, IMF, IMF and World Bank .
 Coca-Cola is one of the most recognizable brands in the world, with over 1. billion servings consumed daily . Over 1 billion servings are consumed daily by the company .
 Shown here are some of its products in China, which is one of its important growth markets .
 The downside of globalized international trade has been brought home, and the quality of your life is declining . The quality of life in the United States is declining, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Scholars also hold competing views about the consequences of the globalization of international trade . You learn that scholars also hold differing views on global trade .
 To construct an objective evaluation of these rival interpretations, consider leading ideas about various trade policies rooted in past thinking . We need to look at past thinking to construct a view of the world's trade policies .
 The best place to start is by identifying emerging trends in the globalization of international trade . The best way to start identifying trends in international trade is to identify emerging trends, experts say .
 Evidence of global trade is as close to you as the clothes you wear and the coffee you drink . Evidence of the global trade as close as you can be to your clothes and coffee .
 Index provides insights into the degree of trade integration in the world economy . The index is a relatively straightforward index of global trade .
 Although the general trend is toward greater integration, countries differ in the degree to which their economies participate in global commerce . Countries differ on the degree of participation in global trade .
 Global trade integration has become most rapid as a result of the increasing participation of the Global South in world trade . This is due to the increase in the participation in the global trade, which, in turn, fuels economic growth in the Global North . Global trade is most rapid in the world
 Global South’s share of global exports grew from 10 percent in 1980 to 44 percent in 2013 . The Global South's share of export growth was fueled by Asia's growth in the share of new export products .
 When the annual percentage change in the volume of world trade grows faster than the annual growth rate of the combined world economy, the growth of trade integration increases . The growth of the world trade in 2007-2016 is based on the percentage growth rate in each year .
 In 2009 world trade declined dramatically, by 12. percent, a casualty of the 2008 global financial crisis . World trade declined by 12 percent in 2009, a result of the global recession .
 The 2010 rebound was just as dramatic, with a 13. percent surge in export volume . The same rebound was in 2010, with an export volume of more than 13 percent .
 The World Bank predicts that developing countries will capture an increasing share of world trade in services . Information technology, the ease with which new business software can be used, and the comparatively lower wage costs in developing economies are among the reasons for the increase .
 Countries with significant numbers of educated, English-speaking citizens, such as India, are already operating call centers and consumer assistance hotlines for Global North companies . India is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Globalization is a multifaceted phenomenon, encompassing a variety of often interrelated actions . However, globalization is a multi-layered phenomenon, with many interrelated effects .
 There is a close relationship between trade and the global financial markets . Exchange rates set the values for traded goods, and capital flows are often necessary to finance these commercial activities .
 Understanding these components of globalization, as well as their relationship with trade, is important to understanding the complex world economy . Understanding globalization is essential to understanding how the global economy works .
 Global interdependence today means that economic disasters in developing countries could create a backlash on developed countries . Selling products to consumers in another country often requires companies to establish a presence abroad, where they can produce goods .
 Traditionally, overseas operations of multinational corporations were “appendages” of a centralized hub . Traditionally the overseas operations were ‘ appendages’ of a central hub . This is a departure from that tradition .
 Production facilities are located around the world . Made feasible by the revolution in communication and transportation, production facilities can be located around world .
 Every Dell computer that's sold is generating trade between nine countries . Dell computers can be sold in nine countries, the company says . Dell computer sales generate trade between countries .
 Trade is no longer viewed as a bilateral interaction but as part of a broader, multicountry chain of production and commerce . Trade is now seen as a wider, multibaried chain of trade and production .
 National account statistics are still gathered using states as the unit of analysis . It once made sense to count trade in terms of flows between countries, but that practice continues .
 Altogether MNCs are responsible for about one-fourth of the world’s production and two-thirds of global exports . Altogether, they are now responsible for one-fifth of the global production and about two-third of exports .
 Thomas Friedman even goes so far as to offer a ""Dell Theory" of conflict prevention, which posits that states that are part of common major supply chains are less likely to go to war .
 Global conglomerates are also integrating national economies into the worldwide market . As they facilitate large commercial flows across national borders, these global conglomerates also integrate national economies .
 In short, foreign direct investment affects global identities as well as global trade . Foreign direct investment is a key part of global identity and global trade, says David Cameron .
 Although the ultimate effects of FDI are controversial, many agree that the globalization of production will only increase . Many agree that FDI will only continue to increase .
 FDI flows—the amount of new investment entering a country in a given year—increased one-hundred-fold from 1970 to 2000, and peaked at over $1.2 trillion in 2007 . FDI flow peaked at $1 trillion in 2006, according to CNN's
 Developing countries are increasingly the recipients of investments from abroad . Developing nations are increasingly receiving investment from abroad, say experts .
 Between 1995 and 2014, net inflows of FDI to developing countries increased almost sevenfold . Net FDI increased from $98 billion to over $681 billion . FDI has increased almost 7fold since 1995 .
 The Global South countries are also investing outside of their own borders . Global South nations are investing outside the borders of their borders .
 Between 1995 and 2007, global foreign direct investment increased roughly sixfold, from about $350 billion to a record $1.98 trillion . Between 1995-2007, global direct investment in global foreign capital rose sixfold to about $1 trillion .
 This was followed by a sharp decline in global FDI in 2008 and 2009, due to the worldwide financial crisis . The decline in FDI is due to a sharp drop in global investment from 2008 to 2009 .
 Shown on the right are the most popular FDI destinations in 2013 and 2014, based on the volume of FDI inflows . The most popular destinations for FDI are shown on the left and the right .
 A particularly controversial strategy is corporate inversion, a form of restructuring in which a multinational corporation purchases a smaller corporation and then declares the smaller one to be their “parent” company . The smaller one is declared to be the ‘parent’ of the other, thus moving
 As financial journalist Allan Sloan noted, firms “take advantage of the great things that make America America” including its infrastructure, rule of law, and consumer market, while avoiding paying the taxes that help fund the system .
 The globalization of production is inextricably linked to the globalization of labor . The globalization of production and labor are linked to each other, the economist says .
 The globalization of labor has emerged as a result of related changes in the world economy and global demographics . Globalization of labor emerged as result of global demographics and related changes to the world's economy .
 As evident from the growing volume of global FDI, an increasing amount of productive capital is mobile and can readily change locations according to the firm’s desires as well as the perceived advantages of prospective host countries .
 Businesses are increasingly able to use labor from multiple countries and to switch locations when conditions change . Businesses can use labor in multiple countries, and can use it from multiple locations .
 By 2011, the total global labor force was 3.31 billion people, having increased more than fourfold since 1980 . By 2011 the labor force had grown to more than 3.3 billion people .
 Only a small portion of the overall labor pool actually relocates to another country . Gomparing these two figures reveals that the mobility of labor, although substantial, is far less than capital .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ corporate Inversion occurs . Inversion is the relocation of corporate headquarters to another country, usually for the purpose of reducing tax payments .
 Outsourcing in higher-skill industry areas is also prominent . Information technology, legal research and legal research are also prominent in outsourcing .
 In Gurgaon, India, lawyer Ritu Solanki earns $50 an hour working for a legal-outsourcing company to draft contracts and legal memos .
 A London law firm would likely charge up to $400 an hour for the same type of work . By comparison, a London firm would probably charge $400 per hour for such work .
 Law firms and corporate legal departments are beginning to look to outsourcing as a way to cut costs . Because of this, law firms are looking to outsourcing . The outsourcing process is a way of cutting costs .
 The simple logic of supply and demand oversimplifies the situation by treating labor as a relatively homogeneous and interchangeable good, it oversimplify the situation . Though the simple logic is that increased labor supply serves to lower the ‘price” of labor .
 Such a view ignores a key factor in business decisions—labor productivity . The view is that labor productivity is a key to business decisions . The U.S. economy is in the process of creating a global workforce .
 It would not make sense for a corporation to move to a place where labor is 50 percent less expensive if the productivity of that labor is 75 percent less than the current labor force . Such a move would result in a net increase in operating expenses .
 Outsourcing involves corporate use of gaps in wages across countries to maximize profitability . There is evidence that the practice is becoming less effective, according to experts .
 Some firms are beginning to rediscover the advantages of producing goods close to where they are ultimately sold . High labor costs may be offset by lower inventory requirements, quicker customer service, lower transport costs, and lower risk of supply chain interruptions .
 Similar trends are apparent in service industries, such as the high-tech sector . Similar trends also apparent in the service industry, particularly in high tech .
 Technology firms such as IBM and HP led the outsourcing charge during the 1980s and 1990s . Technology firms moved such services as data management, call centers, and software assistance abroad .
 Service industries have “become keener to the social and political ramifications of outsourcing” , particularly consumer backlash from the practice . Service industries are “keener’s to social, political ramifications” of outsourcing, the study says .
 As a result, outsourcing is on the decline across many industrial sectors . The practice of near-sourcing is also on the rise .
 There is evidence that the gap between labor costs across countries may be lessening . Further supporting these trends, there is also evidence that there is lessening in the labor cost gap .
 Countries that have traditionally been abundant sources of cheap labor have seen sharp increases in labor costs over the past few years . As skill and education levels have increased in the Global South, productivity has also increased .
 Rising wages offer support for the liberal economic perspective that global commerce may lead to development and economic prosperity in the long run . Rising wages connote the expansion of a middle class in the Global South, such trends .
 Globalization is problematic for lowskilled labor, which is more readily interchangeable across countries . That said, empirical studies of this issue indicate that globalization may be problematic for low-skilled labor .
 Some workers may face lower wages, but globalization acts to increase the purchasing power of these workers . Globalization increases purchasing power for some of the world's most successful workers .
 Global commerce enables consumers to purchase a greater selection of goods at lower prices than would be the case without globalization . In concordance with liberal economic theory, global commerce can be found to be cheaper than without it .
 IMF study found that though globalization had lowered the wage levels in some states, the losses were offset by increases in purchasing power . IMF study: Though globalization has lowered wage levels, it offsets increases in their purchasing power.
 A similar dynamic occurs between the globalization of labor and labor rights . The globalization of labor is similar to that of the U.S. labor movement .
 Competition for capital and the increased supply of labor could have an adverse effect on labor rights, including the right to form unions and to legal protections from morally questionable labor practices such as child labor .
 Anecdotal evidence about “sweatshops” and the repression of union rights in the name of profit abound . Unocal, Walt Disney, Nike, and Apple have suffered embarrassment and financial costs for their associations with poor labor practices .
 After decades of communist rule, Vietnam has opened up to the global economy . The country has enjoyed rapid growth since 1990 . Vietnam has struggled to adapt to the world's changing climate .
 Female labor force provides a majority of the labor in light-manufacturing industries . This is particularly the case among the female labor force, which provides a lot of labor .
 Most studies have found globalization of production and the globalization of labor to be positive developments for societies . However, the gains have not been spread equally across or within societies, authors say .
 Fears about globalization persist despite the overall relationship between globalization and social well-being . Yet, fears about the social impact of globalization persist .
 The negative consequences of globalization are quite visible and strike people profoundly . Companies outsourcing their work or using child labor are often visible and striking people profoundly.
 The gains from globalization, such as less expensive products and the gradual diffusion of technologies, are often unnoticed as their benefits are widely dispersed and shared by all . Alternatively, the benefits from globalization are unnoticed as they are often shared by everyone .
 Though globalization may be good for societies as a whole, the losers of globalization attract much more attention than the winners . Thus, though globalization is good for society, it is not always good for everyone .
 Similar dynamics are apparent in many of the controversies surrounding trade policy . As we will see, similar dynamics are also apparent in other controversies surrounding policy .
 Child labors under hazardous conditions and at extremely low wages in Bangladesh . He produces goods that cost less than those made where labor unions protect workers . The child labors in hazardous conditions at low wages .
 Some neoliberal reforms, such as those associated with IMF and World Bank programs, are damaging to labor rights . But other aspects of globalization may be more amenable to labor, authors say .
 International trade is a far-reaching and hotly debated dimension of globalization . The differing sides of the trade debates offer their own set of policy prescriptions . Increased foreign investment has been found to be related to decreased foreign investment .
 The leaders founded the liberal economic order based around convertible currencies and free trade . Over the course of the next three years, the leaders founded a liberal order based on convertible currencies .
 The basic mission of the GATT was to encourage free trade among countries by reducing trade barriers and serving as a common forum for resolving trade disputes . The GATT is based in Washington, D.C.
 Reciprocity calls for the mutual lowering of trade barriers, so countries that lowered their tariffs could expect their trading partners to do the same .
 According to the nondiscrimination principle, all members have the same level of access to the markets of other member states . All members of the European Economic Community have access to other member countries' markets .
 In practice, nondiscrimination had two specific forms, the most-favored nation principle and national treatment . Nondiscrimination was a form of discrimination in the United States .
 National treatment means foreign goods are treated the same as domestic goods . Countries are not able to enact policies to give their domestic products any advantage over foreign products .
 GATT called for transparency in trade policy . Trade regulations and barriers need to be clearly articulated, GATT said .
 In a series of successive meetings, or “rounds,” held from 1947 to 1994, the average tariff levels were lowered from 40 percent to 5 percent .
 Shown here is one example of China's growing consumerism: a view of the huge South China Mall in Dongguan, the world’s biggest shopping center . The world's biggest shopping mall is in South China, China's biggest mall .
 China has now long embraced America's ""shop-'til-you-drop" ethos and is overtaking the United States in many areas of consumer spending . www.cssbooks.net .
 The WTO has settled hundreds of disputes among its members since 1994 . This dispute settlement mechanism gave the WTO the ability to enforce its rules . WTO says it is able to enforce the rules, and the rules have been upheld .
 Not all states consistently support the liberal tenet that governments should not actively manage trade flows . Although liberalization has spread as a policy principle around the world, not all states support it .
 Commercial liberalism is under attack in many states, including some of liberalism’s supposed proponents, which are under domestic pressure to protect industries and employment at home .
 The choices force governments to reconcile the overriding need for state cooperation in liberalizing trade if they are to maximize their wealth . Each state’s natural competitive desire to put its own welfare first .
 Many controversies in the international political economy are ultimately reducible to differences between liberalism and mercantilism . Many of the world's most important issues are related to the role of mercantillism .
 Commercial Liberalism proceeds from the idea that humans are naturally inclined to cooperate . Commercial liberalism is based on the idea of cooperation .
 Progress through mutually beneficial exchanges is possible, both to increase prosperity and to enlarge individual liberty under the law . Progress is possible in order to increase individual liberty and increase prosperity .
 In commercial liberalism, economic activity can contribute to global welfare, says Julian Zelizer . The major problems of capitalism (boomand-bust cycles, trade wars, poverty, and income inequalities) can be managed, he says .
 One of the globe’s ‘great causes’ is to promote free international trade to lift the poor from poverty and expand political liberties . Free international trade is one of the world's "great causes" to promote international trade .
 Adam Smith laid the foundations for commercial liberalism in 1776 when he wrote the nowclassic The Wealth of Nations . Adam Smith's work laid the foundation for modern commercial liberalism .
 An unregulated market, guided by humanity’s natural tendency to “truck, barter, and exchange” in pursuit of private interest, could serve the globe’�s collective, or public, interest by creating efficiency and gains . In it, he argued how
 Liberalism Mercantilism aims to Maximize global welfare and serve the national interest of the U.S. States 1 Goal of Economic Activity vs. 1 goal of economic activity is Maximizing global welfare . Priority of Economics vs. Prior Prior Priorit of Economics is the Priorit
 The key concept Smith fostered was the idea of absolute advantage, the belief that countries should produce goods in which their cost of production is lowest in comparison with other countries . Smith's concept was that countries produce goods that are produced in which they have the lowest costs .
 David Ricardo, an eighteenth-century political economist, addressed this issue with his concept of comparative advantage . Ricardo's concept was created by Ricardo in the 17th century . Ricardo was a political economist and economist of the same time .
 A country should focus on the production of goods that it produces comparatively cheaply, rather than other goods that could conceivably produce but only at a relatively higher cost . In other words, a country should be focused on producing goods that can be produced comparatively cheaply .
 This was a profound concept with important implications for liberal theory as well as the discipline of economics . This was an important concept of liberal theory and economics . It is important for liberal theorists to consider the concept of free speech .
 For our purposes, comparative advantage shows that trade benefits all parties that partake in it . For example, trade in the U.S. can be seen as a trade advantage .
 Commercial liberalism says free trade will enable all countries to achieve economic progress together . This principle is the basis for commercial liberalism’s claim that free trade can help all countries achieve prosperity together .
 China workers are more productive at producing textiles and automobiles than American workers . Clearly, China has an absolute advantage in both products, as its workers are productive .
 The “cost” of China producing each additional automobile is three units of textiles . Viewing the first column in terms of opportunity cost, the ‘cost’ of each additional car is 3 units of textile production .
 China can produce three more units of textiles than one automobile . Alternatively, by producing one less automobile, China can make three more textiles . China can also produce one less car than one more automobile .
 The United States only gains two units of textiles by producing one less automobile . However, it only “costs’s the United States two units for each additional automobile . The U.S. only gains the two units per automobile .
 The United States is at a disadvantage in the production of both goods, but its disadvantage is comparatively less in automobiles . Put another way, though the U.S. is at an advantage in production, it's less in production of cars than in production .
 Trade can benefit each country by enabling it to further specialize in producing the good in which it has a comparative advantage . The remaining scenarios show how trade can benefit the country by helping it further specialize .
 Fourth column shows how both countries can then benefit from trade . The fourth column shows that trade can be beneficial to both countries .
 If we permit trade between the two countries, then eighty units of textiles are sold or exported to the United States . Thirty U.S. automobiles are exported to China, and thirty United States cars are exported there .
 By shifting Chinese resources into textiles, U.S. resources into automobiles, and allowing trade, the same total allocations will cause both textile and automobile output to increase by ten units each .
 Resources are now being used more efficiently and both countries benefit . China ends up with more textiles than before specialization and trade, and with the same number of automobiles .
 The United States finds itself with more automobiles and the same number of textiles . The U.S. has more cars and textiles than any other country .
 Achieving greater output with the same number of workers means that both countries enjoy higher living standards . Both countries have higher output and living standards thanks to more workers .
 The assumption implicit in liberalism is that markets succeed according to their own logic . The assumption is that the market succeeds according to its own logic, according to the liberal view .
 For liberals, minimal state regulation of the national economy will maximize growth and prosperity . For liberals it will be best for the economy to be regulated by minimal government regulation .
 The best government is one that stays out of business, and politics should be separate from the economic market . Politics should be kept separate from economic market, the author says . The government should not be involved in business, he says .
 liberal theory promises that the ‘invisible hand’ will maximize efficiency so that everyone will gain . But liberal theory does not promise that everyone gains equally . Liberal theory promises to maximize efficiency but not everyone gains .
 The gains from international trade are distributed unequally, even if the states are acting in accordance with comparative advantage . The gains are distributed quite unequally in international trade, writes David Cameron .
 Mercantilism is essentially an economic extension of realist thinking . Mercantillism is an extension of the realist approach to economic policy .
 Classic mercantilists viewed gold and silver accumulation as the route to state power and wealth . They advocated imperialism as a means to that end .
 What we now call mercantilism emerged largely as a response to the rise of liberalism . It emerged in the early nineteenth century as a reaction to the rising tide of liberalism in Europe . Mercantilistism is now a form of modern capitalism .
 One of the leading mercantilist works, Friedrich List’s National System of Political Economy, can be seen as a direct critique of The Wealth of Nations . Friedrich List also wrote a critique of Smith's work on the economy . List's system of political economy is a direct
 Economic nationalists draw from some of the core ideas of liberalism, such as the importance of productivity and the benefits of specialization . They draw a different set of political conclusions, they say .
 Such industrialization would increase the ‘diversity of talents” in the country, he says . Industrial capabilities would more readily convert to military might, he writes .
 States can encourage the development of certain industries by subsidizing them and “protecting” them from foreign competition . Since some specializations are superior to others, states can encourage them to develop .
 Commercial liberals emphasize the mutual benefits of cooperative economic agreements . Mercantilists focus on zero-sum competition and are more concerned that gains realized by one party in a trade exchange will come at the expense of the other trade partner .
 They view free trade as an acceptable practice for a powerful country, in that it often serves to solidify that country’s power . Free trade is a common practice for the U.S. to be seen as acceptable practice .
 In many instances, practicing liberal trade can undermine national security and long-term economic development, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 As mercantilists point out, powerful countries who profess liberal ideals, most notably the United States and the United Kingdom, were quite protectionist when their industries were developing . The U.S. and the U.K. have a history of protectionist tendencies .
 President Abraham Lincoln was an ardent protectionist who doubted the benefits of international trade . Lincoln viewed tariffs as a way to protect the United States industrial base .
 He succinctly noted that his “politics are short and sweet, like the old woman’s dance.” He said his politics are “short and sweet”
 I am in favor of a national bank... and a high protective tariff” In short, ‘hile American industry was developing, the country had no time for laissez-faire’
 If there is no accountability for paying the costs of maintaining or providing the good, it may cease to exist . Public goods, such as clean air or sunlight, whose use is nonexclusive and nonrival in nature .
 At the systemic level, one of the most influential theories of global trade is hegemonic stability theory . The theory is based on the theory of hegemon stability in global trade .
 Hegemonic stability theory is based on the proposition that free trade and international peace depend upon a single predominant great power, or hegemon, that is willing and able to use its economic and military might to enforce rules for international interaction . The theory is also used in theories of global
 A hegemon is much more than a powerful state, it refers to an instance in which a single state has a preponderance of economic and military power, a dominant ideology shared by the world, and the willingness to exert its power and influence .
 The underlying assumption of hegemonic stability theory is that a stable and prosperous global economy approximates a collective or public good in that it provides shared benefits from which no one can be excluded . The underlying assumptions of stability theory are that the global economy is a collective good .
 This is due to the problematic nature of providing public goods, or the collective action dilemma . This is because of the problem of public goods providing public services, or collective action .
 Although a public good generates benefits, there are certain costs associated with providing or maintaining it . The cost of maintaining a good public good is also a cost of providing or providing it .
 If the benefit has a large group of potential recipients, it is not possible to hold any single party accountable for paying its portion of the cost to provide this good . If the benefits have a large number of people, it would not be held accountable .
 If we assume that the actors are rational, then they would seek to enjoy the good as free riders that reap the benefits without paying any of the cost . If they were rational, they would want to be free riders of the good .
 Some may try to come and enjoy the benefits of the park without pitching in . The park will be open to the public for the first time this year .
 If enough people realize that they can get away with this, they can enjoy a beautiful park without helping to maintain it, it will not be long before the once beautiful park looks shabby . The once beautiful parks will soon look shabby.
 If even this basic form of cooperation is hard to sustain, imagine the difficulties in perpetuating cooperation in the international system . The U.S. should be able to work together in the world's most complex and complex systems .
 The same logic applies to the collective good of the liberal international economy . The EU is a major part of the world's economic success, writes David Cameron .
 Many states enjoy the collective good of an orderly, open, free-market economy . There are often free riders in the free market, but there are also free riders .
 A hegemon, however, may tolerate free riders, partly because of the benefits that the hegeman provides, such as a stable global currency, encourage other states to accept the hegemons dictates . A free rider is a free rider, but the benefits of a heg
 Hegemon may view maintaining the system as worthwhile, even if it bears a disproportionate share of the cost . Moreover, the hegemon might view maintaining such a system worthwhile .
 If the costs of leadership begin to multiply, however, a hegemon tends to become less tolerant of free riders . "If you want to be a leader, don't be afraid of being a leader," he says .
 In such a situation, cooperation is increasingly seen as one-sided, or zerosum . Most of the benefits come at the expense of the hegemon, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The open global economy could crumble amid a competitive race for individual gain at others’ expense . The open world economy could then crumble amid an individual gain, it is feared .
 The theory is quite parsimonious in that it explains very broad political and economic trends on the basis of one condition—hegemonic leadership . The theory explains broad political, economic trends based on one condition: hegemon leadership .
 The U.S. is the most recent case of hegemony in the United States during the post-World War II period . Theory theorists disagree about how many instances of hegemony have existed throughout history .
 In 1949 Chiang Kai-shek and his party, the Kuomintang, lost the Chinese Civil War . They retreated from Mainland China to Taiwan with one to two million followers .
 Taiwan exercises de facto, if not de jure, sovereignty in international affairs . Taiwan has exercised de facto sovereignty in the past . Since then, it has exercised its sovereignty in world affairs .
 Taiwan lost its status as a recognized member of the United Nations in 1971 . Taiwan has long sought broad international recognition as a sovereign state .
 For its part, China views Taiwan as a “breakaway province” that is rightfully a part of China . For its own part, Taiwan is viewed as a "breakaway" province .
 The Chinese adhere to the “One China"" principle—that there is only one Chinese nation, of which Taiwan is a part . Taiwan is part of the "One China" principle, which includes Taiwan .
 Any formal declaration of Taiwanese independence is viewed as an act of war . As such, any declaration of independence is seen as a declaration of war against Taiwan .
 In 2005 China passed an Anti-Secession Law, which formalized this long-standing commitment to use “nonpeaceful means” if Taiwan declares formal independence . China has long been committed to using non-peaceful methods to prevent Taiwan from becoming independent .
 Relations between China and Taiwan have been tarnished with suspicion and hostility . Given these fundamental political differences, relations between the two countries are tarnished by suspicion . “Cross-Strait’s relations, or ‘Cross-strait” relations, have been strained by
 In 1958, China bombarded several offshore islands that are part of Taiwan, which nearly brought the U.S. into war with China . The islands were part of the islands, which are now part of China .
 Before Taiwan’s first democratic elections in 1996, China test-fired missiles near two major Taiwanese ports, again risking military hostilities with both Taiwan and the U.S. China tested missiles before the elections .
 President Clinton responded by deploying aircraft carrier battle groups in the area . President Clinton deployed aircraft carriers in the region in the 1990s .
 The economies of China and Taiwan have become ever-more closely integrated . Yet at the same time, the economies of the two countries have become increasingly integrated . Taiwan is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world .
 China is currently Taiwan's largest trading partner, responsible for 21. percent of Taiwan's total trade volume . Taiwan ranks as China’s fifth largest trade partner, with China's biggest trading partner .
 China and Taiwan signed an agreement liberalizing the services trade in 2013 . It is still waiting ratification by the Taiwanese parliament to be ratified .
 From the theoretical viewpoint of liberalism, we would expect that economic interdependence may be reducing the probability of military conflict between the two countries . Theoretically, this may reduce the likelihood of a military conflict, according to the theory of liberalism .
 Any military conflict would be very costly to both countries, as it would damage large portions of both economies . Given the close integration between both sides, any military conflict between them would be costly .
 Economic ties serve to empower business interests that have a vested concern in maintaining peaceful relations between the two countries . Moreover, economic ties also serve to assist business interests in maintaining peace .
 Finaily, economic interdependence provides each country with a means to engage in “costly signaling,’’ That is, a way to have conflicts through economic rather than poiitical means, she says .
 There is some evidence that relations have improved between the two countries . There is also some evidence of improved relations between the countries .
 Key political issues remain unresolved, even in the face of economic integration . Thus, key political issues are unresolved, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Rising tensions about territorial claims in the South China Sea may embroil Taiwan and China in conflict . Furthermore, rising tensions in the region could embroil China and Taiwan in conflict.
 States still have many reasons to try to increase their own domestic standard of living through trade protectionism . Trade protectionism pays off small payoffs, but states still need to increase domestic standards .
 Some states feel free trade is neither free nor fair because it does not benefit everyone equally . Free trade is not a free or fair trade because it doesn't benefit all equally, states say .
 Although the overall trend is toward increased liberalization, many states remain unwilling to open their domestic markets to foreign competition because they are also unwilling to reform their home markets .
 Although governments may face political pressure to close off their economies, such policies frequently have negative consequences . Such policies have often led to negative consequences for the economy .
 Economically closed countries tend to be the poorest and the most corrupt . The world's most economically closed countries are poorer and more corrupt than any other .
 Economic liberals and mercantilists portray two different visions of international economics . One in which the market has virtually free reign, the other in which state actively intervenes to regulate and manipulate market forces .
 Map depicts economic freedom as measured by the 2015 Index of Economic Freedom . The index is based on the 2015 index of economic freedom in the US .
 Economic Freedom Index assesses the extent to which countries promote competition, individual empowerment, and nondiscrimination . Index uses measures across ten economic areas, including government policies on trade, labor, investment, and property rights .
 The future preservation of a global free-trade regime may be compromised in the absence of increasing numbers of free governments and free economies . These patterns underscore the influence of a state’s internal conditions on its international policies .
 Trade can function as a foreign policy tool for states, and it is readily used as both a “carrot” and a ‘stick” in interstate relations . Trade can also function as foreign policy tools for states .
 Trade ties are commonly established with developing countries as a way to help them compete in the global market and thereby achieve economic growth . Trade ties, and granting of preferential access to markets, are common .
 The WTO’s Generalized System of Preferences exempts developing countries from some of the nondiscrimination and reciprocity principles of the organization . The Lome Convention gives seventy-one developing countries preferential access to the EU markets . The African Growth and Opportunities Act gives sub-Saharan
 Trade is the most common way that trade can be used as a “stick” for coercive diplomacy . Economic sanctions are deliberate actions against a target country to deprive it of the benefits of economic relations . Trade is a key part of coercive diplomacy, says Julian Zelizer .
 Sanctions are used frequently and proliferated rapidly since the end of the Cold War . Sanctions have proliferated since then-Cold War and are proliferating rapidly .
 Politically, sanctions are an expedient tool because they are relatively easy to enact and are viewed as largely “cost free” by the sender country . Sanctions are a relatively easy way to enact, and are largely "cost free" by the sending country .
 A considerable amount of research has been devoted to sanctions, and most scholars are skeptical of their utility as a strategic tool . Most of the research has focused on sanctions in the United States .
 Sanctions “are seldom effective in impairing the military potential” of their targets, the authors say . Sanctions are rarely successful as a substitute for warfare, they say . The authors say sanctions are rarely effective as substitutes for warfare .
 Sanctions have little effect on the regimes of targeted countries . Sanctions can impose significant costs on their citizens . Although sanctions have little impact on targeted countries, they can impose costs on citizens .
 To minimize humanitarian concerns, policy makers have started to use more narrowly targeted sanctions . They try to focus more closely on specific elements of the target country, such as freezing assets or stopping strategically significant commerce .
 Research does point out some complexities on the potential use of sanctions as a policy tool . Although the overall verdict on sanctions is quite negative, the research does point to some complexities .
 By focusing only on strategically motivated sanctions that are enacted, the number of cases examined is limited . This could lead to results that understate the actual effectiveness of sanctions, authors say .
 Policy makers have a variety of tools at their disposal, all of which have costs and benefits . Policy makers need to use the tools to make sure they are aware of the costs and risks of using them .
 Policy goals such as territorial concessions or regime change may be too costly to carry out . Stated policy goals, particularly strategic goals like territorial concessions, may not be carried out, experts say .
 Sanctions may be used as a symbol that a given country is “doing something,” even if it is not likely to achieve its goal . In such cases, sanctions may be a symbol of a country's "doing something" even though it is unlikely to achieve it .
 Leaders of the G-7 states discuss sanctions imposed against Russia for its 2014 intervention in Ukraine . Russia's intervention in the country has been blamed for Russia's actions in the Ukraine .
 Though the sanctions have damaged the Russian economy, their impact on Russian policy is hard to ascertain . The impact of the sanctions on Russia's economy is still unclear .
 Arguments for protectionism still resonate, feeding in part off societal feelings of insecurity about the global economy . Yet arguments for protection still resonate in part .
 Such arguments are particularly tempting in times of economic downturn, as foreign trade makes a ready target for blame for blame . Such arguments can be especially tempting when the economy is in a slump .
 Even in many economically open countries, there is skepticism regarding trade liberalization efforts . There is skepticism about trade liberalizing efforts .
 Before assessing current issues facing the world trading order, it is helpful to develop an understanding of the “trade tricks” countries can use to influence trade flows . Thus, before assessing current . issues facing . the world . order, the world trade order, will be affected by the
 Free trade is politically less attractive than mercantilism because of the nature of the costs and benefits that accompany free trade . However, free trade is less attractive as mercantillism because it is more costly than free trade, says David Cameron .
 These benefits, particularly the consumer gains from imports, are spread throughout an entire society and often not noticed . Yet these benefits are spread across the society and are often noticed .
 You are probably unaware that imports are the reason behind your savings . For example, although foreign trade may enable you to save $10 on a sweatshirt, you are likely unaware .
 If you discovered that the price of sweatshirts had risen by $10, you probably would not take the time to organize “pro-import” protest marches . There is thus little incentive to politically organize in the interests of imports .
 It is quite common, for example, to hear about plants closing and people losing jobs due to competition with cheaper imports . It is also common to hear of plants closing or jobs losing because of competition .
 This section explains some of these policy tools, all of which fall under the broad rubric oi protectionism . Policy tools are designed to “protect” domestic industries from foreign competition .
 Average tariff levels have greatly decreased due to WTO agreements and intervention . However, they are still occasionally employed .
 President George W Bush imposed tariffs ranging from 8 percent to 30 percent on steel imports in 2002 .
 The government, rather than the marketplace, determined the amount and source of imports . Hence the government, instead of the market, determines the amount of imports.
 Exporting countries are willing to accept such restrictions in exchange for concessions from the would-be importing countries . Exporting nations have to accept restrictions in return for concessions, such as concessions .
 The U.S. formalized voluntary export restrictions with Japan and Hong Kong to protect domestic producers from cheap cotton imports in the 1960s . It originated in the early 1960s, when the U.K. formallyized voluntary restrictions .
 These cover a wide range of creative government regulations designed to shelter particular domestic industries from foreign competition . These include health and safety regulations, government purchasing procedures, and subsidies .
 Antidumping duties counter competitors’ sale of products below their cost of production . Antisisolation duties are countermeasures against competitors' sales below their production costs . Antsounding duties counter competition ’s sale of goods below their costs .
 In March 2015, Indonesia filed a suit with the WTO over countervailing duties on paper products imposed by the United States . The U.S. argued these were in response to Indonesian dumping of these products .
 Airbus, a European company that builds wide-bodied airplanes, has a wide-body strategy . Airbus is a notable example of this strategy in the world of airplanes .
 The company was founded in large part by France, Germany, and the United Kingdom . It has been heavily subsidized during much of its existence .
 Realist theory helps account for the state’s impulse to pursue mercantilist policies . The realist theory is based on free trade, but free trade is not free trade . Realist theories help explain the state's impulse to adopt mercantillist policies, the author
 Given the political advantages of mercantilism, states often have a hard time resisting the calls of domestic industries and interest groups for protection . The Uneasy Coexistence of Liberalism and Mercantilistism is an uneasy coexistence, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Government support for particular domestic industries to help them gain competitive advantages over foreign producers . They do so even if, according to liberalism, relations with their trade partners will deteriorate . Trade partners retaliate with the many clever and innovative counter-protectionist strategies .
 Such a paradoxical approach to trade policy reflects the state’s determination to reap the benefits of interdependence while minimizing costs . The state is determined to reap benefits from interinterdependence and minimize costs .
 The absence of a world government encourages each state to be more concerned with how it fares as compared to other states, rather than with its absolute gains . Each state is more concerned about its relative gains than its absolute gain .
 America’s trade competitors have long noted that the U.S. has often failed to live up to its own rhetoric . America has been the principal advocate of free trade in the post-World War II era .
 There are various ways in which the U.S. uses its foreign economic tools to intervene in global trade markets and subsidize its own economy . The United States subsidizes its own domestic trade markets .
 The specific ways in which aid may be tied are complex and may vary with the type of aid, and the political power of the industry that dispenses the aid . It may vary depending on how much aid is given to the recipient .
 75 percent of U.S. food aid has to be shipped on United States vessels, of which 75 percent are United States citizens . According to United States law, 75 per cent of United States food aid must be shipped in the United States . The United States has a law that requires
 A sizeable portion of food aid is simply “monetized”; that is, the government buys the food directly from farmers, sells it to other countries . The government then donates the proceeds to international charities .
 Such processes reveal a mercantilist nature, as they turn foreign aid into a de facto subsidy for domestic corporations . Foreign aid is often turned into de facto subsidies to domestic corporations, writes David Frum .
 Security goals also figure into United States trade liberalization efforts . U.S. President Barack Obama has been criticized for his policies on the economy .
 The African Growth and Opportunities Act has been particularly contentious in this regard . The legislation was passed by the African parliament in 2007 .
 A key assumption of liberalism is that the state should step aside and let the ""invisible hand” of the marketplace operate as freely as possible . The state is supposed to step aside to let the ‘invisible’ hand of the market operate freely, says Julian Zelizer
 The economic reality is much more ""hands on"" because states take an active role in supporting many industries . Yet the reality is more "hands on" because states are more active in supporting industries .
 Boeing officials as well as two United States senators in a ""ground-breaking" ceremony at a new Boeing factory in Everett, Washington . Shown here are several Boeing officials .
 The state of Washington gave Boeing $8.7 billion in tax breaks to encourage the company to locate there . Boeing received $8 billion in incentives from the state to lure it to the state .
 Overall tariff levels in the United States are lower than those in the developing world . However, the U.S. still protects several key sectors, most notably agriculture . The United States, like the rest of the developed countries, protects agriculture .
 Such mercantilist tactics are damaging to the liberal trade regime, given U.S. rhetoric and its stature as the globe’s leading economic superpower . The United States is leading the world's leading economic power .
 This is particularly troubling for developing countries, as they often have very powerful agricultural sectors as well . Developed countries often have a very powerful agriculture sector as well as the agricultural sector .
 The gap between the ideals and the actions of the Global North also brings back vestiges of colonialism and past hypocrisy on the part of the rich countries . The gap is the result of a gap between ideals and actions of North .
 To free-trade liberals, as well as Marxists, the trade game is rigged by “rent-seeking’s” in which governments impose handicaps on competitors . To free trade liberals, it's a trade game rigged by the routine and lucrative corruption known as �
 We next examine the progression of the liberal trade order, as well as the current issues it faces . To better assess this key issue, we next examine how the trade order has evolved .
 The Development of the WTO is difficult to maintain a liberal trade regime, but it has a better developed architecture than the global financial system . The WTO has more problems with the global trading system than the world financial system, says David Cameron .
 It does not set broad-based, enforceable rules and practices for global financial flows, it says . The World Bank has not set a broad set of rules for financial flows .
 The GATT/WTO has had a rather tumultuous and uneven history and has been criticized for its lack of progress throughout its existence . It has had an uneven and rocky history .
 Rumors of the institution’s death have been “greatly exaggerated,” and the WTO soldiers on . Yet to paraphrase Mark Twain, rumors of its demise have been exaggerated . The WTO is a global body of trade and finance .
 During Bretton Woods era, successive meetings of GATT were very successful in cutting tariffs . GATT was successful in reducing tariffs during the Bretton-Wood era .
 Geneva Round of negotiations in 1947 reduced tariffs by 35 percent . Previous rounds of negotiations virtually eliminated tariffs on manufactured goods in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s .
 The Doha Round, which officially began in 2002, has a very ambitious agenda for trade liberalization . Doha aims to address many of the remaining nontariff barriers as well as other trade-related items .
 When the GAH began in 1949, it had 23 members . The GAH is the largest trade organiser in the world .
 As of July 2015,161 countries were members of the World Trade Organization . 161 countries were part of the world trade organization .
 WTO played a pivotal role in forcing the U.S. to rescind its 2002 steel tariffs . For example, the WTO helped force the United States to rescind the 2002 steel tariff .
 When the GATT was formed, it contained twenty-three members and was charged with one central goal—reducing tariffs . The GATT is now the world's largest trade group of nations .
 As tariffs have declined as a policy tool across most industrial sectors, the WTO has turned its attention to industries that previous rounds had left largely untouched . WTO has begun to address a broad variety of nontariff barriers that impede foreign trade .
 Expansion into each of these areas has proven politically difficult, albeit for somewhat different reasons . Expansion into these areas is politically difficult for the government .
 Despite the economic advantages of liberal trade, it is often politically advantageous to protect industries through mercantilist policies . Despite the advantages of free trade, protection policies are still politically advantageous .
 Many states subsidize their agricultural producers and enact measures to protect them from foreign competition . Such is the case with agriculture, which has long been “the most distorted sector of the world economy”
 Global liberalization of agriculture could double agricultural exports from both the Global North and the Global South . States are unwilling to pay the political costs of removing subsidies and other barriers to agricultural trade .
 The so-called “cotton wars” between the United States and Brazil illustrate the competing pressures highlighted by liberalism and mercantilism . The U.S. and Brazil have been involved in the cotton wars .
 The United States has long subsidized cotton production, and Brazil has filed disputes with the WTO . The U.S. has long sought access to the United States market, and has won many times .
 The U.S. removed cotton subsidies or started a “trade war’s” with Brazil, Brazil . The United States found a rather innovative solution to the problem .
 In exchange for Brazil dropping its trade dispute, it agreed to make payments to both the U.S. and Brazilian cotton farmers . In exchange, the United States and Brazil dropped their dispute .
 WTO has found itself addressing issues that go beyond the traditional dichotomy of free trade versus protectionism . WTO has begun to focus on nontariff barriers to trade, it says .
 A “new politics” of international trade has emerged. Destler posits (Destler, 2005, 253), a ‘new politics' of international politics has emerged . Destler: A new politics’ has emerged in international trade .
 Traditionally GATT/WTO negotiations followed a “club model” in which a small group of trade officials—typically the United States, European Union, and Japan—set up their own policy .
 Rounds were largely private affairs, with the public paying little or no attention to them . Rounds were much private affairs . Rounds are now considered private affairs in the United States .
 The conclusion of the Tokyo Round in 1979, which was widely heralded by experts as a sweeping victory for trade liberalization, was reported on page 18 of the Washington Post —hardly prime placement for news .
 As evidenced by the massive protests that have become ubiquitous at every meeting, WTO rounds now attract a great deal of public attention . The WTO rounds are now attracting great attention .
 At the same time, the power structure in the organization has become much more multipolar . The power structure has also become more diverse in the United States .
 The liberalization of agriculture has been one of the most intractable items on the WTO agenda . It often triggers visceral responses to any potential ""threat"" to the status quo .
 Photo taken at 2003 WTO Ministerial Conference in Cancun, Mexico, shows South Korean rice farmer Lee Kyung Hae protesting rice liberalization .
 Shortly after this picture was taken, Lee, a longtime advocate for rice farmers, publicly stabbed himself in the heart as a dramatic display of his opposition to trade liberalization . Lee died shortly thereafter .
 Critics charge that globalization leads to a “race to the bottom” in environmental standards . Countries are encouraged to enhance their competitiveness by lessening environmental regulations .
 At the root of fhe trade-environment controversy is a substantial gap in global governance . At the heart of the controversy is the lack of global governance in the world, experts say .
 The WTO has no explicit set of environmental rules to guide its decisions . Beyond this vague mandate, the WTO has a vague mandate to govern the environment .
 The principle of nafional treatmenf implies that goods are to be treated equally for frade purposes, no matter how they were made .
 To discriminate against a country's product because of the way it is manufactured constitutes protectionism . Thus, to discriminate against such a product is protectionism, it is protected from discrimination .
 WTO ruled that United States labeling of ‘dolphin safe’ tuna unfairly discriminated against Mexican tuna, which did not use dolphin-safe nets . U.S. labeling of "dolphin . safe” tuna unfairly discriminates against Mexican .
 The WTO also ruled against other U.S. environmental laws, such as provisions for “furtle-safe” shrimp harvesting methods and gasoline standards . The panel also ruled that the laws were being enforced in a manner that unfairly targeted certain countries .
 States have a right to maintain environmental standards and practices, yet there is wide variance in how states choose to do this . States have to maintain standards, but there are wide variances on how they do this, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The WTO has largely succeeded in its goal of lowering tariffs, and has attracted almost every state into the organization . It is now tasked with getting an increasing number of states to agree on a large number of difficult and contentious issues .
 The most recent round of WTO negotiations, the Doha Round, was begun only after seven years of pre-negotiations and has been ongoing since 2002 . The WTO negotiations have been ongoing for seven years .
 The Bali Agreement concluded in December 2013 is very narrow in scope, covering trade facilitation measures, such as streamlining customs requirements . Thus far the only accord reached is a very narrow, narrow-reaching agreement .
 These institutional struggles have taken place in a particularly challenging economic environment . The challenges have come in a difficult economic environment for the government .
 We next turn to how the WTO, and the world trading system as a whole, dealt with challenges .
 In assessing global trade, it is important to keep the global context in mind, as recent issues and struggles have occurred in the aftermath of the largest financial crisis since the Great Depression . World Trade and the Global Financial Crisis are discussed .
 World trade fell 9 percent in 2008, the first time annual world trade had decreased since 1982 . World trade declined an additional 12. percent in 2009, according to the World Trade Council .
 Examining the effects of the 2008 global financial crisis on world trade can provide an understanding of how facets of economic globalization, particularly trade and finance, interact . Examine the impact of the financial crisis in 2008 can help explain how global finance and trade have changed .
 It also demonstrates the resilience of liberal trade norms even in times of economic crisis . It also provides the context to assess future prospects for the global trading order .
 The 2008 global financial crisis caused a historic drop in world trade levels due to three primary factors . World trade levels were due to a drop in the wake of the financial crisis in 2008 .
 There was less of a market for foreign goods, as well as products in general, in general . There was also less of an international market for goods in the United States .
 For example, for each unit decrease in the sales of Dell computers in the U.S. in the United States, trade between nine countries is reduced .
 Global supply chains mean that trade reduction has a “multiplier effect,” says John Defterios . Pain of trade contractions is shared among a large group of companies and states .
 International trade often requires short-to-medium-term credit that is no longer readily available . Trade finance dried up with the collapse in credit markets, trade finance drying up . The collapse in the credit markets has left international trade with short-term trade finance no longer available .
 The Great Depression pushed the United States to enact the Smoot-HawIeyAct of 1932 . The act increased U.S. tariffs by 50 percent and contributed to a collapse in world trade . It contributed to the Great Depression .
 This refers to more subtle NTBs that may not be direct violations of WTO laws but are, rather, “abuses of legitimate discretion” on behalf of policy makers that serve to reduce trade . The WTO refers to ‘nTBs’ that are ‘
 Such “murky’s measures are often hard to detect because they may be very narrow in purpose . States are not required to report these measures to the WTO as they may not formally be “trade” measures . As implied by the name, such ‘mur
 Calls placed from a government official to a company to “encourage” them to use more domestic products can easily fall beneath the radar . New port laws that slow down the importing process while paperwork is processed can also fall under the radar.
 Tariffs and quotas may not be as immediately apparent as is the case with broadly sweeping acts such as tariffs and quotas . Moreover, their particular impact on trade may be less immediately apparent than those of other acts of trade .
 The U.S. “bailout’s domestic automobile industries with $30 billion in subsidies . One of the more notable examples was the United States ‘bail-out” of its domestic automobile industry .
 Foreign governments quickly pounced on the bailouts as a violation of free-trade principles . Many foreign governments, whose economies were also suffering and whose industries were also requesting assistance, also pounced . The bailouts have been criticized as violating free trade principles .
 World trade rebounded rapidly in 2010, but a rush toward broader protectionism never occurred . The U.S. trade deficit in 2010 was a low point, but it was much lower than in 2009 .
 There are several reasons global trade did not fall prey to protectionism and collapse . There were several reasons for global trade not to fall preyed by protectionism .
 At the peak of the crisis, the various protectionist measures only affected 2 percent of world imports . Although some protectionist policies were enacted, they were narrowly focused .
 Although trade wars were averted in the aftermath of the crisis, there are nonetheless mixed prospects for the future of the global trade order . The future of trade order is still unclear, but there are mixed prospects .
 The number of protectionist measures has decreased since the 2008 crisis . Trade-restrictive measures are still more common than trade-promotion policies .
 Many restrictive policies fall into the broad category of murky protectionism . Since the 2008 crisis more than 2000 such initiatives have been implemented .
 WTO study: Overall response to 2008 crisis has been more muted than expected when compared with previous crises . WTO study concluded “the overall response to the 2008 crisis was more muted” than expected .
 An increasing portion of world trade, particularly in emerging economies such as BRIGS countries, is within supply chains . Moreover, a growing number of emerging economies are within supply chain .
 Production processes are increasingly split across different countries . Participation in global trade becomes less a matter of shipping finished products and more one of participating in global supply chain networks .
 Regional or even unilateral measures are now the key to joining these chains as they develop . Within this context, liberalization -- through regional or even . even unilateral . measures -- is now .
 FDI as well as its relation to global trade becomes increasingly important to potential host countries . Multinational corporations control many of these chains, hence FDI .
 For the WTO, this underscores the need to change its emphasis from ‘20th century trade issues” such as tariffs and agriculture to areas more directly related to the formation of supply chains, including FDI policies as well as trade facilitation . The WTO is changing emphasis from tariffs
 The only real progress that the WTO has made, the 2013 Bali Agreement, was in this area . The WTO has only made real progress in the past year, the WTO says .
 State policies reflect a mixture of mercantilism and liberalism, as they enact a variety of measures to either encourage or impede trade . State policies include measures to encourage or discourage trade .
 The graph shows the relative prominence of each type of policy since the 2008 global financial crisis .
 It shows the ratio of traderestrictive to trade-liberalizing measures implemented since the beginning of 2009 . The ratio is based on the number of countries implementing trade liberalization measures .
 The very high initial levels indicate the widespread interventions to assist failing industries in the wake of the crisis . Initial levels indicate widespread interventions in the following days .
 The prevalence of trade-restrictive measures decreased in the wake of the crisis . States terminated earlier restrictions, or passed additional measures to encourage or facilitate trade .
 Many question whether the completion of another comprehensive round is even viable . Yet many question whether it is even possible to complete a comprehensive round .
 Given the size of the organization and growing power of many of its members, overly broad and ambitious rounds may no longer be possible . "Overbroad" rounds may not be possible now, says the president .
 Trade liberalization efforts continue despite difficulties the global economy has faced, trade is expanding . Despite the difficulties, trade has been expanding in recent years . Trade liberalizing efforts continue to take place in the world .
 In assessing the WTO, it can be argued that its “success does not only depend on how well it promotes trade talks but also on how . well it prevents trade wars . WTO's success depends on its ability to prevent trade wars, says Andrew Hammond .
 The WTO is the “kickstand” that keeps the bicycle of global trade from falling . The ‘pedals’ of negotiation may have stopped, but the ‘kickstands’ is the kickstand that keeps global trade falling .
 The key role of the WTO connotes that international governance of global trade is necessary . At the same time, the key role is that the WTO is necessary for global trade to be governed .
 Given the size of the WTO, it may be the case that alternate governance structures may be more viable vehicles for advancing trade liberalization . Alternative governance structures, regional, plurilateral, or bilateral, may be a more viable vehicle for liberalization, authors say .
 regional trade agreements are the most prevalent trade institutions . Treaties that integrate the economies of members through the reduction of trade barriers .
 The EU was the earliest and most successful example of regional integration . Similar, albeit less successful, initiatives occurred in the Global South during the 1960s and 1970s .
 Regional trade agreements and bilateral trade agreements did not begin in earnest until the early 1990s . However, the rapid proliferation of regional trade agreements began in earnest in the early 90s .
 According to the WTO, the number of trade agreements in force has increased more than tenfold since 1990 . Trade agreements have increased tenfold in the past decade, the WTO says .
 RTAs have proliferated since the 1990s, and they have emerged worldwide as a means of expanding trade ties between groups of states . RTAs are often used to expand trade ties with groups of countries .
 As shown here, many states, particularly in the Global South, join multiple RTAs . The Global South is one of the largest RTAs in the world .
 In the Global North, many of the ED countries belong to more than thirty RTAs . The ED countries have more than 30 RTAs in the global North .
 Most of the RTAs to which the United States belongs are within the Western Hemisphere . Membership often falls along geographic lines; for example, the U.S. belongs to the RTA .
 The Lome Convention joins EU members and the wide variety of states that were formerly colonial holdings . They may also codify groups of countries that have traditionally had trade relations .
 Many RTAs are consistent with WTO principles and viewed as catalysts to trade . They encourage trade liberalization, albeit among smaller groups of states, says WTO .
 Political leaders assume that there is no natural conflict between bilateralism, regionalism, and multilateralism . Political leaders often assume that this conflict is not a natural conflict .
 Robert Zoellick, a former president of the World Bank, argued that through a process of “competitive liberalization,” the formation of bilateral and regional trade deals could pressure countries into strengthening multilateral institutions .
 Countries may see RTAs as a means to assert economic power within their geographic area . The Eurasian Union has joined Russia with four of its former Soviet-era republics .
 The significance of this RTA, which went into effect in January 2015, is not so much its economic size as its geopolitical implications . The significance is the economic size of the RTA as well as the geopolitical implications, the author says .
 Other potential RTAs, the so-called mega-regionalals, are important due to their sheer economic size . They involve major economic powers and can encompass large swaths of the global economy . The mega-regionals are important because they involve major economies .
 The TPP, which will include twelve countries that border the Pacific Ocean, is currently progressing toward fruition . The twelve countries will include the United States, Japan, Chile, Australia, and Singapore .
 Economically, this grouping would be more than twice the size of the TPP, but it is much further from completion . The grouping would have more than doubled the number of countries involved .
 Some who support a multilateral trading order are less sanguine about these agreements . Some of those who support multilateral trade deals say they're not sure about the rules .
 WTO has specific legal provisions for RTAs, they violate the core principle of nondiscrimination and MEN, as they give some WTO members advantages over others . RTAs are not WTO's legal provisions, but they violate its core principle, the WTO says .
 The European Union, which started the pandemic, applied its MEN tariff to only six countries . Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Japan, Taiwan, and the United States .
 Plurilateral negotiations are open to all WTO members . Participation is voluntary and only those who specifically sign onto the agreement are subject to enforcement . Only those who sign up to the agreement will have to do so .
 It brings together countries that share at least some agreement over a given issue . It also brings together nations that share some agreement on issues .
 Unlike PTAs, plurilateral agreements are negotiated within the context of the WTO, thus reducing the chance of potential contradictions between these agreements and broader WTO statutes . Unlike PTA, these deals are negotiated in context of WTO, so reducing the chances of contradictions .
 The WTO encounters difficulties expanding its power and legitimacy within a more multipolar system . Alternative structures of governing world trade are proliferating . Overall, the liberal commercial order has proven robust, the WTO says .
 Countries will focus on their domestic interests when threats arise, be they economic or political . Such problems provide some corroboration to the realist viewpoint that there are definite limits to the strength of international organizations, as countries focus on domestic interests .
 At the same time, a liberal case can be made—for the WTO to maintain legitimacy during such tumultuous times does attest to its underlying strength and utility within the global economy . The WTO has been criticized by some for its lack of transparency .
 The perennial battle between mercantilism and liberalism will continue, and countries will continue to grapple with how to balance trade interests with noneconomic concerns such as human rights and the environment .
 This chapter, as well as the previous one, has shown that globalization is a ‘double-edged sword”—the same processes and ties that help our economies grow also ensure that crises have a diffuse effect .
 Global Policy Forum blog features links for different aspects of the global economy . Blog is a weekly look at the global economic and political issues .
 A blog hosted by the International Trade Administration discusses the effects of trade agreements . The blog is hosted by a blog on trade agreements.
 Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap . Key Term Videos: Globalization of Labor * Economic Sanctions • Protectionism . Additional Videos: Steward, Devin T, and Ian Bremmer.
 The squatter communities surround Caracas, a city of more than 3.million people in Venezuela, surround it .
 The provision of better housing, social services, and education is a major challenge to improving human security and realizing benefits from urbanization, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 Underneath the skin, beneath the skin every human being is essentially similar . As you probably have . imagined, beneath . one time or another imagined, under the skin all human beings are essentially similar to each other .
 We all tend to respond to the same experiences that almost everyone feels at one time or another . Almost everyone feels love, fear, alienation, or a sense of a common community and destiny . We all respond to these experiences with the same feelings we all feel .
 Globalization is bringing all humanity together as never before in bonds of interdependence . One explanation is that growing numbers of people throughout the world are pursuing these human goals .
 You will be asked to consider whether global trends might transform the world, and the world politics that condition this .
 Population changes are part of the globalization of world politics, says Victoria Safford, Unitarian minister lTi . Population change is a human dimension of globalization and world politics . LTi: It is impossible to live compliant and complacent anymore in the world as it is .
 Others claim that controls on family size are necessary because an unregulated population will ‘parent’ a crowded and unlivable future world without the resources necessary to sustain life for all people .
 To understand why the globalization of population has become such a controversial issue, it is helpful to trace the global trends in population growth that have made this topic so problematic .
 The Grand Vizier, the principal adviser to the King, had invented a new game . He had invented the game .
 81 million new people (nearly equivalent to the population of Egypt or Germany) will be added each year . It has since dropped to about 1.1 percent and is expected to drop slightly more to 1 percent between now and 2020 .
 The planet is certain to have many people by the mid-twenty-first century, well beyond the roughly 7. billion in 2015 . Plainly, the planet is likely to have a large population by the end of the 20th century .
 The size of the global population is shaped by worldwide fertility rates . Global population cannot stabilize until it falls below replacement-level fertility levels .
 Total fertility rate, the worldwide average number of children born to a woman, falls to 2.1 . That will happen after the world's total fertility rate falls to about 2.5 percent .
 World population is projected to continue to surge because of ‘population momentum’ resulting from a large number of women now entering their childbearing years . World population will continue to rise because of "population momentum" resulting from ‘momentous’
 Population growth simply cannot be halted even with an immediate, full application of the brakes . Like the inertia of a descending airliner when it first touches down on the runway, population growth cannot be stopped .
 It took until the early 1800s for world population to reach 1 billion people, and today another billion people are added every twelve to fourteen years . World population is added every 12 to 14 years .
 World population is expected to reach 9. billion in 2050 and continue to rise to 10. billion by 2100 . World population expected to continue to grow to 10 billion in 2100 .
 The distribution of world population is also anticipated to change significantly . World population is expected to grow significantly in the future .
 Africa expected to account for over a third of global population by 2100 . Europe is expected to continue to decline from almost 22 percent in 1950 to less than 7 percent in 2100 .
 Improvements in general health conditions have led to declines in mortality . Global population has grown as people have lived longer lives, and the global population has also grown .
 World population will reach 8. billion by 2030 and 9 billion by 2050, experts say . World population is expected to stabilize at the end of the century .
 Population is expected to decline in Europe by almost 1 percent by 2030 . Europe's population expected to fall by almost a percent by the end of the century .
 Consider the demographic divide between the Global South and the Global North as a whole . Consider the demographics of the North and the South . Consider a demographic divide in the U.S. and the rest of Europe .
 Fertility rates in the Global South are, on average, almost a full 1 percent higher than the Global North . The Global South has the lowest fertility rate in the world, according to experts .
 Continued population growth in the Global South reflects the progress that has been made to combat infectious and childhood disease in developing countries around the world . Continued growth reflects progress made in the fight against infectious diseases in developing nations .
 In the Global North, population is stabilizing or declining, despite increasingly longer life spans . Population stabilizing, declining in the North, despite longer life span .
 Sub-Saharan Africa and Western Europe illustrate the force of two different pictures of population momentum . Sub-Sahara Africa is one of the fastest growing economies in the world .
 Africa’s demographic profde is one of rapid population growth . Each new age group contains more people than the one before it . Africa's population is growing rapidly, with each age group containing more people .
 World population growth Is anticipated to decelerate in the latter half of the twenty-first century . It is expected to reach 10. billion by 2100 .
 UN prediction of growth rates based on expectations of replacement-level fertility and declining mortality across most regions of the globe . UN prediction is based on expectation of replacement level fertility and decline in mortality . UN predicts growth rates will be based on replacement levels of fertility and mortality .
 Total fertility remains highest in Africa throughout most of this century . The graph shows that total fertility continues to rise in Africa .
 The world would instead see a global population of almost 27 billion by 2100 if fertility rates remain at 2010 rates .
 The highest national fertility rates are concentrated in Africa . Fifteen of the countries with fertility rates of five or more children per woman are located in Africa.
 Europe’s population is growing slowly because recent generations have been smaller than preceding ones . Europe's population has been growing slowly due to recent generations smaller than previous ones . In contrast, Europe's growth is slowing because of population decline in recent generations .
 Europe is best described as an aging society . Low birthrates and aging populations have caused alarm that the number of European newborns will not be sufficient to renew populations or bear the financial burden of supporting an aged society .
 Some countries are experiencing a youth bulge and others an aging population . The demographic divide is also reflected in age distribution in some countries .
 As global population grows, so too does the number of youth . The number of babies in the world has increased in the past decade .
 In 2015 there were 1. billion young people aged 15 to 24 years; by 2030, the number is expected to increase by 7 percent to reach almost 1 billion . By 2030 the number of young people in the United States will reach 1.1 billion .
 The rate of growth varies across regions, as shown in the graph above . Yet, the rates of growth vary across regions .
 Youth populations are expected to stabilize in Europe, North America, Latin America, and Oceania over the coming decades . Youth populations expected to stabilise in Europe and North America over the years .
 In Europe and North America, the proportion of people sixty years of age or older is advancing the fastest due to changes in fertility and mortality rates . In North America and Europe, the number of people over 60 is advancing fastest .
 A burgeoning youth population poses challenges for economic growth and political stability . For countries that struggle to educate and employ their young people, there are challenges for growth .
 An enlarged youth population in the Global South faces poor economic conditions and a lack of resources to provide for a family . Many are turning to religious fundamentalism to counter their frustration and despair .
 This is creating an increasingly aged world population, and changing the contours of the global community, says Dr. Andrew Keen . The world's population is changing, he says .
 Global aging is occurring at rates never before seen, experts say . Some physicians now distinguish between chronological and biological aging .
 There are concerns that, due to its rapidly aging populations, the Global North will be especially burdened by rising old-age dependency . The Global North faces an array of economic, budgetary, and social challenges .
 Although the effects are expected to vary among developed countries, these could include a decrease in labor supply and a decline in economic growth and per capita income . Increased demand for public expenditures on health care, long-term care, and pensions .
 As falling fertility is met with rising life expectancy, the world moves toward a major demographic transformation . Global aging is where in elderly people constitute an increasing percentage of state's population .
 As the map shows, this transformation is already well underway in the Global North . The map shows that this transformation has already been well underway .
 French families with at least three children benefit from tax breaks and discounts such as reduced train fares . French families are eligible for tax breaks, discounts and tax breaks .
 Russia has begun a sustained effort to encourage marriage and childbearing by offering financial incentives to women who have multiple children . Russia's population declined for two decades, and population has declined for 20 years .
 To boost the country’s fertility rate, the government has created a number of policies, including the promotion of speed-dating events . Speed dating events are being promoted by the government .
 It will also hinge on reforming age-related public expenditures in the Global North . Health care, long-term care, and government-supported retirement pensions will also be key .
 An aging population raises challenges for our societies and economies, culturally, organizationally and from an economic point of view . Aging population is a challenge for society and economies .
 Policy makers worry about how living standards will be affected as each worker has to provide for the consumption needs of a growing number of elderly dependents . Policy makers are concerned about the impact of living standards on living standards .
 Markets worry about fiscal sustainability and the ability of policy makers to address timely and sufficiently these challenges in several Member States . Markets worry over fiscal sustainability .
 The seriousness of the challenge depends on how our economies and societies respond and adapt to these changing demographic conditions . We need to adapt to the changing demographics of our population, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Policy makers need to ensure long-term fiscal sustainability in the face of large but predictable challenges, as well as significant uncertainty . Looking ahead, policy makers must focus on fiscal sustainability, says IMF chief .
 Policy makers are offering married couples incentives to procreate in Russia . Russia is facing a demographic crisis in response to Russia's demographic crisis .
 The governor of the Ulyanovsk region coined it the ""Day of Conception"" and offered prizes to couples that give birth nine months later on June 12, Russia's independence Day . September 12 has been declared Family Contact Day in Russia .
 Bench of Reconciliation in Moscow park is curved to promote physical contact and help couples work out their differences .
 It is easy to see how this facet of globalization is not making people in the world more alike . It's easy to understand how globalization does not make people more alike.
 Variation in the geographical distribution of population is increasing the differences in the quality of life experienced around the planet . This demographic diversity is the result of different changes in the key determinants of population growth and structure—fertility and mortality .
 Let us now consider how the movement of people, both across and within countries, shapes global population structures . Let us consider how people are moving across and across countries, both in and out .
 The United States, Saudi Arabia, Germany, the Russian Federation, and the United Arab Emirates are the top five migrant destinations . Saudi Arabia is the top destination for migrants .
 The MexicoUnited States corridor is the most frequent migrant path, accounting for 13 million migrants in 2013 . The Mexico-U.S. corridor is most frequent route to the United States .
 The second largest migration corridor is Russia-Ukraine, followed by Bangladesh-India . The Russian-Ukrainian corridor is the largest in the world .
 The migration of people between countries has raised a host of moral issues, such as the ethnic balance inside host countries, the distribution of income, labor supply, xenophobia, the impact of multiculturalism, and protection of human rights and prevention of exploitation .
 The governments of sovereign states have difficulty regulating the movement of foreigners inside their borders . No multilateral IGOs for meaningful global governance exist to deal with the consequences of the escalating migration of people .
 Porous borders create ambiguous ethics about mass migration movements . One consequence is clear, there are both winners and losers through the globalization of migration .
 People most commonly migrate in search of better jobs . A Quest for Sustenance and Freedom is a quest for freedom and freedom .
 Remittances sent home by migrants from the Global South are projected to be at least $479 billion in 2017 . Global remittances for both developing and developed countries will reach $636 billion . Remittance for both developed and developing countries is projected to reach $479billion .
 Construction continues in the U.S. to extend the line of barrier fences along the border with Mexico .
 In 2009, the European Parliament implemented controversial immigration rules that allow illegal immigrants to be detained for up to eighteen months and then expelled . The rules were implemented in 2009 .
 Italy and France called for changes to tighten Europe’s Schengen open-border treaty in 2011 in response to the more than 25,000 migrants who entered Italy from North Africa . Many of those migrants also crossed into other European countries .
 Another trend in our ‘age of migration’ is the flight of people not in search of economic opportunity but out of fear of persecution . The flight of migrants is not economic opportunity, it is out of persecution of persecution, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 There are about 3 million stateless people worldwide refugees . People who flee for safety to another country because of a well-founded fear of political persecution, environmental degradation or famine .
 More than 1.11 million refugees in Somalia are seeking shelter from ongoing violence in their country . Somali women and their children are among more than 1,000 refugees .
 Angelina Jolie met with women in refugee camps in the Democratic Republic of Congo in March 2013 .
 Jolie is a Special Envoy for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees . She attracts global attention to the fight against rape as a tool of warfare .
 Turkey became the largest refugee-hosting country, followed by Pakistan and Lebanon . For the first time, Turkey became tbe largest refugee host country, after Pakistan .
 A large proportion of the world’s refugees and displaced people flee their own homelands . Ethnic and religious conflicts erupt in fragile states where governments fail to preserve law and order .
 With a weakening global economy, people are ever-more resistant to foreigners competing for domestic jobs and resources . People are ever more resistant to foreign competition in the United States .
 Security concerns since 9/11 have escalated worldwide . The linkage drawn between refugees and the probability of terrorism has tightened immigration controls .
 At the start of 2015, there were 59. million forcibly displaced people worldwide, with the vast majority fleeing dangerous conditions in Africa and the Middle East . The vast majority of those forcibly displaced are in Africa or the Middle Eastern region .
 Evidence indicates that the majority of refugees flee to neighboring countries in the Global South .
 Italy's frustration is that the EU is unwilling to share the illegal immigration burden . The EU has been reluctant to share its burden of illegal immigration with Italy .
 Italy’s request that the EU apply an emergency rule that would relocate refugees across the various EU member states was blocked . Italy's request for an emergency order to relocate refugees was blocked by the EU .
 Italy repatriated some of the migrants to their home country . Italy is trying to address its immigration crisis by sending them back home .
 North Africans allowed to remain in Italy, but also allowed to travel within Europe's border-free Schengen area to other countries . This allowed them to stay in Italy and travel within the region, but it also enabled them to travel to other European countries .
 Thousands of migrants traveled from Italy in the hopes of joining relatives in France . This latter action angered France, as thousands of migrants travel from Italy to France .
 The leaders of the two countries at the time called for reform of the open-border Schengen treaty . The treaty allowed legal residents of most EU countries to travel across borders with only minimal border checks .
 Both parties wished to see the treaty persist, but argued that it was necessary to allow temporary controls to be enacted .
 EU leaders seek commitment to a ‘principle of solidarity’ among the EU member states . They also sought assurances that other EU countries would assist the southern states along the Mediterranean in dealing with immigration .
 The challenges posed by migration to the EU have only increased as record numbers of people continue to seek refuge from conflict, persecution, and poverty in Africa, the Middle East .
 In 2014, more than 140,000 refugees landed in Italy . Many were victims of human trafficking, and others died at sea from the horrible conditions . Many of the refugees were human trafficking victims .
 In the face of the desperate need for compassion and care, Lampedusa’s deputy mayor, Damiano Sferlazzo, stated in frustration, “We have an economic union in Europe, not a political one.” Lampedus’ deputy mayor
 The highest level ever recorded, this represented a 54 percent increase from the previous year in the number of people seeking sanctuary, after a 16 percent increase the prior year . This represented the highest level of immigration ever recorded .
 Russian Federation was the world’s largest recipient of individual asylum applications in 2014 . 99 percent of the applicants fled conflict in eastern Ukraine, according to the Russian Federation .
 The welfare and survival of everyday people are endangered, and the need for their protection is increasing . Flow will human security be reconciled with national security, says President Obama .
 When considering migration patterns and interpreting demographic projections, it is also important to examine the geographic concentration of people within countries . Urbanization is a key factor in determining migration patterns .
 Known zs population density is a measure of how close together people are living in a given place .
 More than half the world lives in cities, and urbanization of the world is accelerating and spreading . More than 50 percent of the population now lives in urban areas .
 Already 80 percent of the populations in the Global North live in big cities that are getting bigger . But cities are growing fastest in the developing Global South countries .
 Three of the world’s ten most global cities are located in Asia and the Pacific . This is particularly evident in Asian and Pacific, where three of the top ten cities are in Asia .
 The Demographic and Cultural Dimensions of Globalization . The CSS Point is a point of reference to the globalization of the world .
 Within the top twenty-five in 2015, eight are in the Asia Pacific region, seven are in Europe and nine in the Americas . Nine of the world's most successful musicians are in North America and seven in Europe .
 As the percentage of world population residing in dense urban agglomerations increases worldwide, the “dualism” between city dwellers and those living in the rural and poor periphery will make the urbanized core cities more similar to each other in outlooks, values, and
 People in megacities are already communicating and computing with one another more frequently than they do with people living in the countryside within their own states . People in mega cities already communicate and computing more often than people in rural areas .
 The world is witnessing a surge in urbanization, where capital flows, supply chains, and telecommunications link global cities and denationalize international relations . The world's cities are becoming more and more connected to each other, according to experts .
 The power and influence of cities, however, is not unique to the contemporary period . The power of cities is not always unique to modern times, but it is still a part of history .
 Nations and empires did not restrain cities but instead served as filters for their global ambitions . Sociologist Saskia Sassen points out that, in ages past, nations and empires didn't restrain cities as much as possible .
 Urbanization and the growth of megacities can pose challenges for national governance . However, urbanization and urbanization will pose challenges to national governance, experts say . Urbanization is a major challenge for national security, says the expert .
 The advent of global hubs and megacities forces us to rethink whether state sovereignty or economic might is the new prerequisite for participating in global diplomacy . Taken together, we need to rethink if state sovereignty is a prerequisite for participation in diplomacy .
 Though cities can serve as engines for growth and development, they can pose risks to human security . Cities can also pose risks for human security, experts say .
 Millions of urban squatters pour into megacities each year . Economic inequality and urban blight is rampant in major metropolitan areas . The squatters are often squatters in major cities .
 Migrants live in slums in destitution and squalor next to stunning high rises and private gated communities in cities such as Sao Paulo, Shanghai, and Istanbul .
 In fragile cities, the social contract between municipal governments and their people has deteriorated, and urban violence is rampant . The social contract in fragile cities has deteriorated in recent years, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A key factor connected to insecurity and violence in cities appears to be turbo-urbanization, a key factor . Turbo-Urbanization is characterized by extremely rapid urbanization and unregulated growth .
 Large numbers of young people, particularly males, are undereducated and unemployed . Another factor is the presence of a youth bulge that leaves many young people undersucated .
 Karachi has expanded from a half million people in 1947 to 21 million today . Karachi has a population of 21 million people . Karachi is a fragile city, having expanded from half million in 1947 .
 Global urbanization is likely to aggravate health and environmental problems, straining supplies of clean water, shelter, and sanitation . The impact of global urbanization will also likely be aggravating health and environment .
 If urbanization continues at its current pace, which is almost certain, this trend will lead to still another kind of transformation in the world . Urbanization throughout the global community continues at the current pace .
 Threats such as the outbreak of a widespread and deadly disease could produce population implosion . Threats, such as an outbreak of disease, could also produce population collapse . The world's population is at risk of being wiped out .
 A rapid reduction of population that reverses a previous trend toward progressively larger populations; a severe reduction in the world’s population . Cities in a state of violent crisis, with the municipal government incapable or unwilling to govern and provide public services. population implosion .
 Kokata, India, is a city of 16 million people . It is one of the world's most populous cities .
 Infant and child mortality rates remain discouragingly high in many developing countries . Infants and children in developing countries are decreasing . Infant mortality rates are decreasing in many countries .
 Rising longevity could reverse if globally transmittable diseases cut into life spans . Improvements in health care, nutrition, water quality, and public sanitation have led to rising longevity .
 Globally, almost 25 percent of deaths are due to communicable, maternal, neonatal, and nutrition conditions collectively . The death toll from these conditions is 25 percent, collectively .
 A death divide is apparent between the Global North and the Global South . Yet a death divide seems apparent between North and South, says CNN.com .
 Low income countries most affected by risks associated with poverty such as undernutrition, poor sanitation, and unsafe water and are highly vulnerable to communicable disease . Shown on the right, low income countries are most affected .
 In the Global North, people face health risks due to physical inactivity and diet-related factors . People die from noncommunicable conditions such as cardiovascular disease and cancer .
 Some third party content may be suppresse . Adapted from the World Health Organization .
 Today, nearly 10 percent of people worldwide between the ages of fifteen and forty-nine have HIV . Some regions of the world suffer more from the disease than others . HIV is an HIV-positive virus .
 Sadly, many diseases pose significant threats to human well-being and remind us of the permeability of our national borders . Sadly, these diseases are still a threat to the human well being, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 TB is the second leading cause of death from a single infectious agent . Since 1993, the World Health Organization has led efforts to improve TB care and control .
 Tuberculosis is an airborne infectious disease that, though preventable and curable, claims the lives of millions of people . The disease is preventable, curable and preventable .
 An estimated 9 million new cases of TB, with 1. million deaths, were reported in 2013 . The world's largest TB cases are estimated to be at least 9 million deaths .
 Almost 40 percent of the cases worldwide occur in India and China . The disease is most prevalent in Asia and Africa .
 The world's largest tuberculosis epidemic has been hit by a global epidemic . However, considerable progress has been made toward halting and reversing the global tuberculosis epidemic .
 This is tragic because the disease, which is transmitted by mosquitoes to human beings, is largely preventable and treatable . The disease is transmitted to humans by mosquitoes, transmitted by human beings .
 Efforts to combat the spread of the disease include distributing millions of insecticide-treated bed nets . Efforts are also being made to distribute millions of bednets .
 In May 2015, the World Health Assembly adopted a new global strategy for malaria . The new strategy emphasizes universal access to malaria prevention, treatment, and diagnosis .
 The member states set an ambitious target of reducing global malaria incidence and mortality rates by 90 percent by 2030 . The aim is to reduce global malaria mortality rates and incidence of malaria by 90% by 2050 .
 Over the past decade, deadly outbreaks of influenza have also generated global concern . Over the last decade, influenza has generated global concerns .
 Another recent deadly strain, known as HlNl, or swine flu, crossed the species barrier between pigs and people . Another deadly strain of HnNl is known as 'swine flu' The strain is known for spreading to pigs and humans .
 A number of countries, particularly China and Russia, took vigorous quarantine measures against people who had traveled to countries with high numbers of infected people .
 In 2014, the World Health Organization declared the Ebola outbreak in West Africa to pose a global public health emergency . Ebola outbreak was declared a global health emergency by the WHO .
 A viral disease with a high fatality rate, it is transmitted from wild animals to people and spreads through human-to-human transmission . It is transmitted by wild animals from people .
 The latest outbreak of the disease began in Guinea and also claimed lives in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, South Sudan, Cote d’Ivoire, Uganda, Uganda and Republic of the Congo .
 The toll of the disease was initially projected to be far worse, and governments around the world engaged in a committed effort to contain the outbreak . The death toll has been far higher than initially thought .
 Despite positive steps made to control Ebola, many feel that the epidemic brought to light how woefully unprepared governments and international organizations are to combat global health crises . Many feel that despite the positive steps, governments and organizations are still unprepared to deal with the Ebola crisis .
 A nine-year-old girl in Liberia is ushered away by health care workers after showing signs of being infected with Ebola .
 Most of the health care facilities in the region are underfunded and have limited resources . Most of these facilities are in need of funding and resources .
 The spread and control of infectious diseases such as AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, malaria and cholera have established themselves on the radar screen of policy makers throughout the world . Ebola, lymphatic filariasis, avian flu, mad cow disease, and swine flu are among the
 These diseases will not vanish from sight anytime soon and are a stark reminder of transnational threats that remain ever-present in our borderless world . Global cooperation and coordination is needed to prevent transnational diseases from disappearing .
 A relationship exists between the health of individuals within a state and that state’s national seeurity . The health of people in a state can be traced back to their national health .
 A population's health is of utmost importanee to the state’s ability to survive, says Jeremy Youde . Pessimists predict that one result of globalization will be competition between states .
 Liberal theory anticipates a globalization of cultures that transcends geopolitical boundaries and erodes the meaning of national identity and sovereignty . In a more optimistic scenario, liberal theory predicts a global citizens who assign loyalty to the common interests of all peoples .
 Trends in the cultural dimension of globalization are generating changes in how people construct their identities . Trends in cultural dimensions of globalization generate changes in people's identities .
 "No area of the world and no arena of politics, economics, society, or culture are immune from the pervasive influence of communication technology," says author of the book .
 More than 78 percent of citizens in the Global North are Internet users, as are 29. percent of people In the Global South . Internet usage continues to grow in the global South .
 Personal computers and the “wireless world” of mobile phones have facilitated communication between people in areas as diverse as rural communities in the Global South and technology-intensive countries in the global North .
 The result of this expanding worldwide use of the Internet is the creation of cyberspace, a global information superhighway . People everywhere are able to communicate freely as they surf the Web, exchange emails, and join social networking sites .
 The increasing number of Internet users is promoting a cultural revolution by giving most of the world access to unfdtered information for the first time . Internet users are promoting a culture revolution .
 Shelves and pill bottles connected to the Internet can alert a forgetful patient when to take a pill . The Internet can also alert a pharmacist to make a refill, and a doctor when a dose is missed .
 In the process it will transform how people communicate as well as which countries lead and which follow . It will make today’s methods of communicating look ancient in a few years, it says .
 Enthusiasts believe that the advantages of the global communications revolution are a blessing for humanity . Enthusiasm for communications revolution is a blessing to humanity .
 When people and things around the world are connected through the revolution in digital communications, the shared information propels human development and productivity . Shared information is a key to the success of the digital revolution .
 In 2011, through the use of information technology such as Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube, Egyptians were able to organize protest demonstrations, document to the world images of repression .
 These actions ultimately toppled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak from power . Mubarak was toppled from power in 2011 .
 The world’s most repressive regimes and violent transnational groups are effectively using technology to bring on new recruits, terrify local populations, and threaten democratic institutions . In such a world, one can conceal one's true identity, which threatens to make the activities of organized crime and terrorist
 Mexican drug cartels spread graphic videos showing decapitations of those who cooperate with law enforcement . Al Qaeda and its affiliates have created viral videos showing the killings of foreigners held hostage in Iraq . virtuality created by computer technology produces an imaginary picture of actual things, people, and experiences .
 Online social networks, such as Facebook, encourage users to share information . Facebook has a global membership that would place it as the world’s most populous country .
 Hightech surveillance program in China can identify dissent and allow the government to address it before it turns into a mass movement . One example is the "Golden Shield" in China .
 The United States’ extensive surveillance of Internet communications, which became the focus of considerable international criticism in 2013, is another example . The U.S. government has been criticized for its surveillance of the Internet .
 The United States National Security Agency secretly collected millions of records from U.S. telecommunications and technology firms . The U.N. and FBI secretly collected thousands of records .
 Senator Mark Udall of the Senate Intelligence Committee summarized these concerns . “You have a law that’s been interpreted secretly by a secret court that then issues secret orders to generate a secret program.”
 This regime ended government and private telecommunications monopolies in many states, and the resulting cuts in phone costs were widely seen as a catalyst of the world economy’s expansion .
 Advances in information technology and the expansive scope of global media have augmented this development . Advances also have augmented the development of information technology in the world .
 The type of power that media wields over international affairs is arguably limited . Yet, contrary to conventional wisdom that the media has the ability to drive a country’s foreign policy, the power is less powerful .
 Scholarship shows that the media influence what people think about mort than what they think . Scholarship shows media influence people more often than they think, study shows .
 A remarkably large portion of the available information is controlled by a cartel of huge multinational media corporations . Moreover, though ours is often described as the information age, we often describe ourselves as the 'information age' of the past .
 Industry leaders are merging to combine their resources and, in the process, are expanding their global reach . Headquartered mostly in the rich Global North, these industry leaders have merged .
 The creation of a world without boundaries, where everybody will know everything about anybody’s activities, will not necessarily be a better world . Because globalized communications and information may be used as tools for terrorism and revolution as well as for community and peace, the creation of such a world
 People from all over the world will draw knowledge and inspiration from the same teehnology plaform, but different eultures will flourish on it . People from across the globe will use it to draw inspiration from different cultures .
 The next phase of globalization is going to be more gloealization . More and more loeal eontent is made global, Friedman says .
 Expect the controversies about globalization’s alleged virtues and vices to heighten as finance, trade, population, labor, communications, and cultures continue to converge globally .
 Although globalization has narrowed the distance between the world’s people, some have gained and others have lost ground . Some have gained some of the world's most significant differences in their lives .
 The debate about globalization’s problematic impact is intensifying, but without resolution, as contenders are hardening their positions without listening to the counterarguments . The debate continues to grow, but it will not be resolved by the next few years .
 You have now taken into account a number of the dimensions of globalization, including economics, demography, global communication, and the potential spread of universal values for the entire world .
 Hanoi is a predominantly Buddhist city still subscribing to communist principles that emphasize the greed of market capitalism and the class divisions it creates . Shown here is one image that fuels that point of view .
 Since the 1970s, there has been an upward trend in all three dimensions of globalization . There has been a strong increase after the end of the Cold War .
 The latest global economic and financial crisis has slowed the pace of the economic globalization process . But social and political globalization continue to rise, uniting all of humanity . These values and understandings might unify all people on Earth .
 This could conceivably prepare the way for a global civil society, even with the eventual emergence of supranational institutions to govern all of humanity .
 Many people experience cognitive dissonance when they confront a frightening vision that challenges their customary way of thinking about world affairs . Yet this worldview and set of predictions strike fear into the hearts of many people, many people .
 These people strenuously reject the idea that the traditional system of independent sovereign states can or should be replaced by a global community with strong supranational regulatory institutions that enhance global governance .
 To many students of international relations, globalization has two faces, one positive and one negative . To students, globalization is a positive and negative aspect of globalization . To many, it's a positive aspect of global relations, but it's also negative .
 To those whose perceptions focus on globalization’s benefits, globalization helps to break down traditional divisions of humanity . That divide is barriers to peace, prosperity, and justice, says the author .
 The gap between people’s income in the richest and poorest countries has never been wider . More than one billion people are either unemployed, underemployed, or working poor .
 An alternative exercise would be to make an ethical assessment about the morality of globalizafion . An ethical assessment would be made about globalizing .
 Peter Singer applied the utilitarian principle that it is a moral duty to maximize the happiness and welfare of all human beings and even animal welfare . This is what Singer did in applying as a criterion . Singer: It is a duty to maximise the happiness of all humans and even animals .
 Singer sees great benefit from the erosion of state sovereignty . Singer sees the idea that the entire world should be the unit of ethical analysis . Singer says the world is the unit for ethical analysis and should be a unit of analysis .
 As the pace of globalization has become a recognized force in world politics, it also has been a topic of heated debate .
 Globalization has hit a political speed bump, provoking intense critical evaluation of globalization’s causes, characteristics, and consequences . Globalization is inspiring fresh ethical examination of the elevated interdependence of countries and human beings, writes David Frum .
 The uncertain wisdom and morality of globalization may be the most discussed issue on todays global agenda, receiving even more attention than poverty, disease, urbanization, or the preservation of identity .
 In the next chapter of World Politics, we consider the circumstances of the more than 7 billion human beings striving to sustain themselves, improve the human condition, and protect their rights .
 How Our Greatest Invention Makes Us Richer, Smarter, Greener, Healthier and Happier . How We're Richer: How Invention Makes us Richer .
 Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap . Key Term Videos: Demography, Fertility Rate, Xenophobia and Xenophobia . Additional Videos: Grewal, David Singh .
 Worid Cup in Qatar in 2022 has come under intense controversy due to allegations of bribery and human rights abuses . The Worid World Cup will be held in 2022 in Qatar . Qatar will host the World Cup in 2022 .
 Qatar is hosting the world sporting event in Qatar . Many oppose Qatar's hosting of the event . Many of the world's biggest sporting events have been held in recent years .
 From living in conditions of squalor and poverty to suffering from the raping and pillaging of paramilitary forces, you would be stunned and sickened at the trials and tribulations that many less fortunate people must endure .
 The prospects of the ‘have-nots’ are not improving in the Global North . They experience slower rates of development and less human security than in the global North .
 Given the serious deprivations facing so many people, there are many reasons for concern . There are also many reasons to be concerned about the situation .
 The denial of the inalienable rights to which all humans are presumably entitled—the “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness” of which the U.S. Declaration of Independence speaks—attests to the extent that fundamental human security is not being met .
 Every human life is preeious... it is not just about our eriminaljustiee system, it is about the type ofsoeiety that we want to build . —Laurence Lien, member of Parliament of Singapore 13 1 | PUTting people into the
 The past theoretical legacy pictured the mass of humanity as marginalized victims or left them invisible by painting their fates as controlled by forces over which hapless people have little influence . The past has been criticized for painting people as powerless and powerless .
 When thinking about world affairs, the average person has long been relegated to a mere “subject” for rulers . rulers were traditionally permitted to manipulate to advance their states’ interests . The average person is a mere "subject" for rulers to manipulate .
 Many observers embrace the traditional realist assumption that vast global forces render people powerless . That consensus notwithstanding, many observers say people are powerless in the world . Many observers say global forces make people powerless.
 Realists recognize that people participate politically but claim they have no real power . Realists say an invisible set of powerful forces gives most human beings only superficial involvement without granting real influence . The system is described as the "system"
 Denying the importance and influence of individual human agency seems increasingly strange . Classic thinking about the world has long been concentrated on people and the essential characteristics of human nature . Denying human agency is increasingly strange, says author .
 This requires a humanistic interpretation that gives people status and value . This requires the humanist interpretation of people's status, value, to be considered .
 For the most part, classical realism focuses solely upon the state and its ruler’s sovereign freedom . It ignores the role of leaders and nongovernmental organizations that people form .
 Fiberals attach more importance to humans, following the ethical precept of Immanuel Kant that people should be treated as ends and not means . Human rights and human dignity should be safeguarded, says Kant .
 The five countries with the greatest number of executions in 2014 were China, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Iraq and the United States . China refused to divulge official figures, though it is known that thousands of executions took place .
 Others argue that social and environmental protection must be seen as a global priority . Others challenge this conception and place primacy on the security of individual people .
 In considering this question, remember the traditional realist view that national security is essentially the freedom from fear of attack by another country or nonstate terrorists . National security is the freedom not to fear attacks by other countries or terrorists, realist says .
 Realists maintain that armed aggression is the paramount security threat . Preparing for war to prevent war overrides all other security concerns . Realists believe that preparing for war for war is the most important security issue .
 “Security” is defined primarily in terms of each country’s capacity to resist armed threats . Therefore, “security” can be defined as a country's ability to resist an armed threat . ‘Security’ is defined by how strong each country can resist
 “Human security’s rise as a concept that focuses on protecting individuals from threat . In contrast, “human security” has risen as a . concept that . focuses on . protecting individuals .
 All proponents of human security agree that the primary goal is protection of individuals . The primary goal of security is to protect individuals, not individual groups .
 There Is a lack of consensus regarding the specific threats against which individuals need to be protected . Some see a synergy between the security of individuals and security of the state . Some believe individuals should be protected from specific threats .
 Rousseau: “Man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains,” bemoaned political philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau in his famous 1762 book . Rousseau was born free in 1762, and Rousseau died in 1883 .
 Rousseau's characterization of the human condition remains accurate . Times have since changed, but in many respects Rousseau’s characterization remains accurate, he says .
 The inequalities and disparities evident in people’s standards of living cannot help but to evoke sympathy for the difficult conditions many people face, especially in the less developed Global South countries .
 One American graduate student confronted this reality during his field research in South America .
 When I left for Colombia [South America], I fully expected Bogota to be like any large U.S. city, only with citizens who spoke Spanish . Bogota is one of the largest cities in the United States, with many Spanish citizens .
 Politicians are so full of abstract solutions or personal greed that they forget that it is real people they are dealing with . It means politicians across the ideological spectrum are full of . abstract solutions and personal greed . Politicians across the . ideological spectrum .
 This is a dramatic improvement since 1990, when 43. percent of the world’s people lived on no more than $1.25 a day . This is an improvement since the 1990s when 43 percent lived on just $1 .25 per day .
 Consumption patterns show that the division between the rich and the poor is growing . The division between rich and poor has been growing in the past decade .
 One-fifth of the globe’s wealthiest people consume two-thirds to nine-tenths of its resources . About one- fifth of the world's richest people consume up to 9th to 2/3 of the resources .
 The extreme suffering of people in many parts of the world, especially in the low-income countries of the Global South, manifests itself in many areas . Extreme suffering in many countries manifests itself as a result .
 For example, life expectancy in the Global South averages sixty-nine years, whereas in the North it is seventy-nine . Life expectancy in Global North averages seventy-seven years, according to CNN.com .
 In the Global South, the number of infant deaths per 1000 live births is fifty, as compared to an infant mortality rate of six in the Global North . The Global South has the lowest infant mortality rates in the world, the lowest in the global North .
 On average, people in developing countries are healthier, better educated, and less impoverished . They are more likely to live in a multiparty democracy . People in developing nations are healthier and better educated .
 Since 1990 life expectancy in developing countries has increased by six years, from sixtythree to sixty-nine . In developing countries, life expectancy has increased six years in six years .
 Primary school completion rates increased to 92 percent from 78 percent in the same period, according to the report .
 These human development gains should not be underestimated, nor should they be exaggerated . Human development gains must be not underestimated, and not exaggerated, says President Obama .
 World Bank President Jim Yong Kim acknowledged the pervasive threat of continued global poverty . Kim: To meet the goal of eradicating extreme poverty by 2030 “it’s going to take more than business as usual”
 Human Development Index uses life expectancy, literacy, average number of years of schooling, and income to assess a country's performance in providing for its people’s welfare and security . The index is based on the life expectancy of people living in a country .
 An index accounts for the impact of inequality on the human development of people in a country . Inequalityadjusted Human Development Index is based on inequality in the United States .
 Some leaders in the Global South attribute persistent poverty to the exploitation of the less developed countries with the wealthy Global North . This theory is popular among some leaders in some countries .
 Advocates of the basic human needs perspective sought new ways to measure development beyond economic indicators such as the average income for each person in each country . Advocates sought to find new ways of measuring development beyond those focusing exclusively on economic indicators .
 The Human Development Index measures states’ comparative ability to provide for their citizens’ well-being . The index is based on a state’s ability to improve its citizens' welfare . It also measures the ability of states to provide a better life to their citizens .
 The HDI, as the United Nations Development Programme most recently defines it, seeks to capture as many aspects of human development as possible in one simple composite index .
 No multiple-indicator index can perfectly monitor the progress of human development, the HDI comes close as an estimating procedure .
 The HDI provides a more complete picture of human life than does income alone . It is based on aspects of human welfare beyond average income for each person .
 The evidence provides a basic profde of the extent to which humanitarian aspirations are succeeding or failing . By this measure, the evidence provides an example of the effectiveness of humanitarian aspirations .
 HDI value for a country shows the distance that it has already traveled toward the maximum possible value of 1 . The HDI ranges from 0 to I and allows for comparison with other countries . HDI values range from 1 to 1 .
 The difference between the value achieved by a country and the maximum possible value shows how far it has to go . The challenge for every country is to find ways to improve, and the challenge is to improve .
 The Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index was added to take into account the effect of inequality in the distribution of health, education, and income upon human development within a society .
 In a country with perfect equality, the HDI score and the IHDI score are equivalent . But in a country where there is significant inequality, the score is lower than that of HDI scores . The haves and have-nots live in very different conditions .
 In Latin America, there is up to a 36. percent regional drop in human development due to inequality in income . The drop in development is due to a rise in income inequality in the region .
 Differences in life expectancy across sub-Saharan Africa are linked to a 36. percent decrease in human development for those with the lowest expected length of life . Those with lowest expected life expectancy are at the lowest level of development .
 Using the Human Development Index to measure the human welfare and development of people within various populations, notice how countries can rank somewhat differently than when using an aggregate measure such as gross national income per capita .
 The inequality-adjusted Human Development Index takes into account the effect of variation in the human condition within a country upon human development . The index is based on the inequality in a country's human condition .
 Generally, countries that have lower levels of human development suffer from higher levels of multidimensional inequality . Countries that have higher human development rates suffer from high levels of inequality, say experts .
 Countries in the Global North experience the least inequality in human development . Conversely, countries in the global north experience the most inequality .
 The Bahamas and New Zealand have similar levels of income per person, but life expectancy and expected years of schooling differ greatly between the two countries . New Zealand has a much higher FIDI value than the Bahamas .
 Despite its strengths as an indicator of human well-being around the world, there are many important aspects of human security and human rights that it does not assess . Thus, despite its strengths, the U.S. should not assess human security or human rights, it says .
 Globalization, Democratization, and Economic Prosperity is integrating the world’s economies . Globalization will provide a cure for the chronic poverty faced by the majority of humanity . The rapid transfer of global capital and investment across borders has led some to speculate that globalization will provide the cure
 Critics of globalization complain that it is the culprit—that globalization actually causes relative deprivation rather than cures it . However, critics of globalization say that globalization is the cause of relative deprivation .
 A more global economy increases inequality in some countries, particularly in the Global South . In their constructed image of the consequences of globalization, some say it's a result of globalization .
 Some Global South countries have made big gains in the past quarter-century . But a gap in quality of life and in their levels of human development is apparent . The gap between the Global North and the Global South parallels, to some degree .
 In autocratic governments not ruled by the will of the people, human development fails to occur . Human rights are frequently denied in autocratic countries, says Amnesty International .
 The exceptions demonstrate the general rule that a country’s regime type, and its protection of the civil and political liberties of its population, make a crucial difference in achieving levels of human development . But the exceptions .
 Some question the “trickle-down” hypothesis (that if the rich first get richer, eventually the benefits will trickle down to help the poor) while accepting the evidence that meeting basic human needs ultimately promotes long-term economic growth .
 Others maintain that redistributive policies aimed at enhancing human welfare and growth-oriented policies focusing on “trickle-down” benefits function at cross-purposes because the latter can only be attained at the expense of the former benefits .
 Many now recommend fostering human development through a strategy that combines the efficiency of a free-enterprise capitalistic market with the compassion of governmental economic planning and regulation .
 The 1648 Treaty of Westphalia recognized limited religious rights for select Christian minorities . The treaty marked the end of the Thirty Years’ War .
 International campaigns in the mid-1800s against slavery were a form of human rights advocacy . Following World War I, labor rights and minority rights were addressed by the International Labor Organization and the League of Nations .
 These rights have since been codified and extended in a series of treaties, most notably the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights . These rights were codified in the IICI and the IECI .
 Multilateral treaties enumerating these rights are legally binding on the states ratifying them . But many have either not ratified them or have done so only with significant caveats .
 When states specify caveats, they are expressing agreement with the broad declarations of principle contained in these treaties . When states say they object to certain specific provisions and elect not to be bound by them, they say .
 Countries that agree with the general principle that all human beings possess certain rights that cannot be withheld may disagree on the scope of these rights . Countries that disagree with the principle may still disagree .
 Stipulated in Islam's holy book, the Quran, caning is practiced in some Muslim countries . Caning is a form of punishment in Islam, but not in Islam .
 Indigenous peoples are representative of one type of ethnic and cultural group that were once native to a geographic location . The Precarious Life of Indigenous Peoples is Chapter 6 .
 The Turkish mass killing of Armenians, Hiker’s slaughter of Jews (and other groups), the Khmer Rouge slaughter of Cambodians, and the Hutu slaughter of the Tutsi of Rwanda all exemplify the atrocities committed during the twentieth century .
 Polish jurist Raphael Lemkin coined the word genocide from the Greek word genos and the Latin caedere . Lemkin called for it to be singled out as the most grievous violation of human rights . The international community would be morally responsible for punishing the crime .
 Over 5000 skirts were hung in a football stadium in Pristina, Kosovo, in June 2015 to honor the victims of sexual violence .
 The intent of this project is to increase awareness of these war crimes . The intent is to raise awareness of the crimes committed in Afghanistan .
 Native peoples are now fighting back against injustice they believe states have perpetrated against them . Various native peoples are fighting back across the globe against the injustice they think states are perpetuating .
 The members of these nonstate nations, however, are often outnumbered and divided about their objectives . The nonstate nation is often outnumbered or divided about its objectives .
 Most indigenous movements only seek a greater voice in redirecting the policies and allocation of resources within existing states . They are eliciting the support of NGOs and intergovernmental organizations .
 Substantial numbers of indigenous movements in the last decade have successfully negotiated settlements resulting in devolution . The granting of regional political power that increases local self-governance is a key part of the process .
 Examples include the Miskitos in Nicaragua, the Gagauz in Moldova, and the most regional separatists in Ethiopia as well as in India’s Assam region .
 The goal expressed in the UN Charter of promoting “universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms” is very challenging for many nationally diverse countries . The UN Charter is very difficult for many national diverse countries to achieve it .
 The belief that one’s nationality is superior to all others undermines human rights, says the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Some analysts predict that conflict within and between ethnically divided states will become a major axis on which twenty-first-century world politics will revolve . Some analysts say conflict within or between ethnic divisions will become an axis of politics .
 The policy proposals crafted to address these questions may involve controversial trade-offs . The proposals point to the difficulties in appropriately responding to the global refugee crisis in particular .
 A global consensus has emerged that the status of women needs to improve if human rights and development are to progress . Women's status has emerged as a global consensus that needs to be improved . The status of a woman in the world must improve if it is to progress in development, experts say
 Women’s status in society, and especially their education, profoundly influences human development . The treatment of women is a global rights issue that affects everyone, says the BBC .
 Gender inequality —difference in living standards between men and women —erodes human development and human rights . It is reflected in differences found in female mortality and fertility rates, political power and educational attainment, and participation in the workforce .
 Gender inequality varies enormously around the world, and is especially prevalent in three Global South regions: South Asia, the Middle East, and sub-Saharan Africa . Step It Up for Gender Equality is a major campaign launched by the United Nations .
 Women continue to be responsible for the bulk of family labor and care work . Women are underrepresented in positions of power in business, academia, media, and law .
 Women continue to be vastly underrepresented in decision-making positions in government, even in democracies and developed countries . Today, women are still underrepresented at government positions in many countries .
 Gender differences in parliaments around the world are highly skewed in favor of men . Gender differences are skewed in favour of men in the world's world's parliament .
 In most societies, women are often ignored or pushed aside in an effort to gain or consolidate power, Hillary Clinton said . In most countries, women's rights are not protected under the age of 21 .
 Where women are disempowered and dehumanized, you are more likely to see extremism that leads to security challenges, she said . She added that where women are depowered, it could lead to extremism in Syria .
 Women continue to be the primary victims of sex trafficking and sexual violence . Not until 2001 did the International Criminal Court confirm “sexual enslavement” as a war crime .
 For many in liberal Western countries that focus on social, political, and economic equality of the sexes, these traditions are difficult to understand . For many Westerners, these practices are hard to understand, especially women .
 Micronesia, Palau, Qatar, Vanuatu, and Yemen are the 5 countries with none of the world's most populous nations . The list of countries with no one country with no country with none is 13 .
 There are now more women in government than ever before before . There are more women than ever in government .
 The proportion of women in national parliaments grew by only 1 percent between 1975 and 1995, compared to 8 percent between 1998 and 2008 . Women in the national parliament grew by 1 percent in 1975 to 1995, and 8 percent in 2008 .
 There is only one woman for every four males in legislatures around the world . In mid-2015 only twenty-eight heads of state were female, according to the UN .
 The U.N. says countries with 'first past the post' electoral systems will not reach the 40 percent threshold of women in public office until near to the end of this century .
 Once the concept of empowerment gained acceptance as a lens through which to construct a view of the core issues on the global agenda, gender issues became a central concern . Gender issues are a key concern for the world's leaders .
 Dilma Rousseff was inaugurated as Brazil's first female president on January 1, 2011 . Rousseff is the country's first woman president . She is currently the world's second most powerful female president .
 Major General Maggie Woodward became the first woman in U.S. history to command a military air campaign in Libya in 2011 . Woodward was the first female commander in the air campaign to command in Libya .
 "I hope I'm an inspiring figure to lots of little boys and girls" says the singer . She says she hopes her transformation is under way .
 Legislation has prohibited discriminatory practices, guaranteed equal pay, provided for maternity and paternity leave, and put in place protection against sexual harassment in the workplace .
 Governments have turned their back on the idea that violence against women is a private affair . Laws in every region now outlawing this scourge in its many manifestations .
 Roughly 80,000 Africans were brought to the New World each year during the peak of the slave trade in the 1780s . Rough around 80,00 Africans brought to New World every year .
 Contemporary slavery involves women and children being forced into servitude through violence and deprivation . Contemporary slavery typically involves women being forced to live in servitude by violence .
 Leading form of human trafficking is sexual exploitation, the U.N. says . Sexual exploitation accounts for 79 percent of trafficking of women and 53 percent of the slave trade overall .
 Male trafficking accounts for 83 percent of male trafficking victims and 40 percent of the slave trade as a whole . This form of human trafficking is on the rise and accounts for 43 percent of slave trade .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent righ gendercide occurs . Systematic killing of members of a specific gender. and/or e-chapters. and e-versions .
 Almost every country in the world is affected by the slave trade . Almost all of the world's slave trade has been involved in slavery . The slave trade is believed to be the biggest source of human trafficking .
 The two largest forms of exploitation of trafficking victims throughout each region are sexual exploitation and forced labor/servitude . Trafficking victims are sexually exploited, forced labor and sexual exploitation .
 Children are one of the most dependent and vulnerable groups in society, and their human rights are frequently violated . Children and Human Rights is frequently violated by children .
 They face horrific neglect and abuse, as evident in their suffering from unmitigated hunger and illness . They face slavery for labor or sexual exploitation, and conscription as child soldiers . The children are being conscripted as soldiers .
 Because children are “easy targets,” they are sometimes threatened, beaten or raped in order to punish family members who are not so accessible . Children are ‘easy targets’ because they are threatened or beaten, beaten .
 Akhtar Mohammed traded his ten-year-old son Sher to a wealthy farmer in exchange for a monthly supply of wheat . The starving farmer in Afghanistan traded his son to a rich farmer for monthly wheat supply .
 Child mortality has declined in every region of the world since I960 . Almost 7 million children every year still do not live to see their fifth birthday .
 Progress is being made toward improving conditions for children . Underfive mortality rate is declining faster than at any other time during the past two decades . Many regions halve the number of children that die young .
 Children are often orphaned or separated from their families without food or care, but many are also direct participants in war . Not only are orphans or separated, many are direct participants of war .
 U.N. estimates 300,000 boys and girls between the ages of seven and eighteen were recruited and used as child soldiers in over fifty countries in violation of international law . The United Nations estimates that 300,00 children and girls were recruited, used and recruited by child soldiers between the
 The absence of clear front lines and identifiable opponents, the increasing use of terror tactics by some armed groups and certain methods used by security forces have made children more vulnerable . Children are more vulnerable due to the lack of a front line and identifiable enemies .
 Children are being used as suicide bombers and human shields . Schools continue to be attacked, affecting girls’ education in particular, and to be used for military purposes .
 Children are being held in security detention for alleged association with armed groups . In addition to children being held, children are also being held for alleged associations with armed forces .
 To confront these consequences of armed conflict, it is essential that political leaders be committed to the welfare of children . Political leaders are committed to children's welfare, says the UN .
 In June 2015, the UN Security Council reaffirmed its commitment to the protection of children affected by armed conflict by adopting a resolution that denounced attacks or abuse against children .
 Convention on the Rights of the Child embraced these sentiments, which were adopted on November 20, 1989 . U.N. adopted the Convention on November 19, 1989.
 Amnesty International: "Here for the first time was a treaty that sought to address the particular human rights of children" The treaty sought to set minimum standards for the protection of their rights, Amnesty International says .
 In March 2015, UNICEF estimated that of those fleeing the violence in Syria, 2 million of the refugees seeking shelter in Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey were children . It is the only international treaty to guarantee civil and political rights in Syria .
 Reports of the Syrian government intentionally targeting civilians have been met with international condemnation . In what has become a major civil war, reports of the death and torture of innocent children and women have emerged .
 Syria presents a grim example of the fate of many children who suffer physical and emotional trauma from violence and displacement . Syria presents an example of Syria's children's fate of suffering from violence, displacement .
 Children suffer from sfarvafion, lack of education, life-threatening illness, physical abuse, forced labor, and sexual slavery . Tragically, this story is repeated frequently in other countries throughout the world .
 Save the Children urges “this indiscriminate killing must stop now.” Executive Director Justin Forsyth of fhe NGO Save The Children urged ‘this indiscriminate killing must stop now’
 Specific protecfion measures for children, provision of nutritional supplies, and support for education programs are needed . Specific protecion measures are needed for children's protection .
 Statists or legalists reject protecting human rights in other states . They say it represents an unwarranted intrusion into the domestic affairs of others and an infringement upon state sovereignty .
 The most common manifestations of this phenomenon are the expanding laws that regulate the practices that sovereign states may use . The laws that govern the practices of sovereign states are often expanding .
 The human rights revolution has advanced moral progress by breaking states’ monopoly on international affairs and over citizens, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Human rights revolution breaks states' monopoly over international affairs .
 Bibi Aisha was punished for running away from her abusive in-laws . Her husband cut off her nose and ears as punishment for running from her in-law .
 Emma Watson was appointed by the U.N. as a Goodwill Ambassador in July 2014 . Emma Watson has been appointed as an ambassador to the United Nations since then . The actress was appointed as a goodwill ambassador by the UN .
 International law has fundamentally revised the traditional realist conception of the state by redefining the relationship of states to humans, says Julian Zelizer .
 As former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan notes, “States are now widely understood to be instruments at the service of their people, and not vice versa.” states are widely understood as instruments in service to their people .
 Multilateral treaties have proliferated as part of a global effort to construct a consensus on the rights of all humanity and put an end to human rights violations . Multilateral agreements are part of an effort to build a global consensus .
 Numerous conventions have been enacted that have increasingly recognized individual rights . They assert that people must be treated as worthy of the freedom and dignity traditionally granted by international law .
 A state is obligated to respect the human rights of its own citizens as well as those of another country, according to international law . The international community has the prerogative to challenge any state that does not respect these rights .
 There are hundreds of widely accepted legal instruments and political declarations across a broad array of human rights issues, including human rights .
 The International Labor Organization and regional organizations have established human rights protections . The African Union, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, and the European Court of Human Rights have established protections .
 Some countries endorse human rights treaties merely as a superficial symbolic commitment and continue to repress human rights . In addition to some countries endorsing human rights, some countries still use human rights as a symbolic commitment .
 The principles that guide humanitarian intervention continue to be a matter of heated debate . The principles of humanitarian intervention are subject to heated debate in the world .
 The issue is not whether there exists a compelling need and moral obligation to express concerns about populations at risk of slaughter, starvation, or persecution . Instead, the issue is about how to craft a just response, when any response will comprise interference in the domestic affairs of a sovereign state .
 Humanitarian intervention is controversial because it pits the legal principle of territorial sovereignty against what some see as a moral responsibility to protect vulnerable populations from egregious violations of human rights . Some see the moral responsibility of protecting vulnerable populations .
 The construction of global human rights norms has made great strides over the past sixty years, but enforcement of these laws has lagged . The enforcement of human rights laws has also lagged in the past 60 years, says Amnesty International .
 The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights is responsible for implementing international human rights agreements, overseeing major human rights programs, and providing global leadership in promoting and protecting human rights .
 CSS Point making recommendations about the best course of action . A5Z The Promotion of Human Development and Human Rights . The CSS Point makes recommendations .
 In June 2008, the United States relinquished its observer status and disengaged from the HRC, much to the dismay of human rights advocates . Human rights advocates felt that this greatly diminished the role of the ICO .
 In response to these limitations, NGOs have assumed an important role in promoting human rights . NGOs are taking on the challenge of human rights in the United States .
 Because of their reputation for accuracy, their findings are relied on by the news media, many governments, and most intergovernmental institutions . The findings are based on their accuracy and reliability of their findings .
 Their efforts account, in part, for the establishment of UN tribunals that review gross human rights abuse, as in the cases of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda . The International Criminal Court was established in 1998 .
 Some individuals remain skeptical of claims that we all have transcendent moral obligations to humanity as a whole . Others believe that every person, by virtue of being human, has certain inherent and inalienable rights .
 Human rights have gained stature under international law and are being monitored more closely by IGOs and NGOs . We can expect human rights to receive continuing attention, as long as people are caught in emergency situations such as genocide or the threat of famine . Human rights will continue to receive attention as
 In the next chapter of World Politics, you have an opportunity to look at another major issue that entails rights and responsibility to humanity . The next chapter will be a chance to examine the role of humanity in the world .
 Women protest in Kabul, Afghanistan, to demand the repeal of a law authorizing a range of extreme human rights violations, including marital rape . Women are protesting in Kabul to demand a repeal of the law .
 Amnesty International documenting global human rights issues . Human Development Index human needs human rights index human rights . Human development index human development index .
 UNICEF blog consists of articles regarding international human rights . Blog includes articles about human rights in the U.N. database .
 A collection of blog posts by the World Bank regarding poverty and human development . The World Bank blog posts are a collection of posts from the bank .
 Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos . Human Rights * Gender Inequality • Human Development Index • Human Humanitarian Intervention Additional Videos: Human Rights .
 On May 12, the country suffered a second earthquake measuring 7.3 . Just three weeks later, it was reported to have suffered a 7.4 magnitude quake .
 Members of the international community including India, China, the United States, and Israel provided relief-and-rescue assistance . The United States and India are among the countries providing aid to the region .
 Most scientists are pessimistic and are now certain that the threat of global warming is real . Most scientists say they are pessimistic about global warming .
 Optimists are alarmed by optimists who fail to face the ‘clear and present danger’ of environmental threats . They are themselves alarmed by . failing to face . the “clear and . present danger of . environmental threats and undertake the reforms necessary to stem the tide of global
 The ecological threats have led many to advocate immediate and sweeping changes by governments, before it is too late to save the human race from doom .
 In this chapter, you have the opportunity to sharpen your own thinking by weighing the available evidence about prevailing global trends that affect the environment that we all share .
 Take a look at various dimensions of the planet’s ecology now in transformation . Base your stand on these global issues on information that can better ground your existing opinions .
 Consider the extent of humanity's role in preserving our global environment . Consider also the extent to which humanity is responsible for preserving the global environment. Consider also how important it is to protect the environment.
 A concept recognizing that environmental threats to global life systems are as dangerous as the threat of armed conflicts . Earth provides enough to satisfy every man's needs, but not every man’s greed, says Gandhi .
 The environment is linked to other priorities, such as security, economic prosperity, and social well-being . The environment can be linked to security and economic prosperity in the world, experts say .
 Security has been conventionally equated with national security . The struggle for state power is central to realist theory and its emphasis on armed conflict .
 These problems are just as much of a threat to humanity as to the environment, say experts . The problems are as much as a threat as to humanity, they say . The world is at risk of climate change, scientists say .
 liberalism informs current thinking about how states can cooperate with international organizations and nongovernmental organizations to preserve the global environment . Because environmental degradation undercuts economic well-being and quality of life, liberalism informs thinking .
 The liberal epistemic community has redefined ‘security’ in order to move beyond realism’s conventional state-centric and militaristic portrayal of international politics . The liberal eposciption community redefined “security” in a new way of thinking
 Experts urge people and governments to construct a broader definition of what really constitutes security, much like what the U.S. Department of Defense did in April 2007 when it warned that global warming should be a threat to American national security .
 Liberal theory says security should be defined as capacity to protect quality of life . This shift is compatible with liberal theory, which emphasizes that security is not security, it says .
 Out of conditions of global poverty and want emerge the so-called of scarcity, which anticipates that future conflict will likely be caused by resource scarcities rather than by overt military challenges . Future international conflict likely will likely involve restricted access to food, oil, and water, for example
 The ability and political will to address environmental challenges are limited in the Global South, writes David Frum . "Inadequate or polluted resources will depress the living conditions of all of the people on the Earth," he says .
 These global environmental issues engage the competing perspectives of optimistic cornucopians and pessimistic neo-Malthusians . These global issues engage a competing perspective on the global environment .
 Gornucopians adhere to the belief that if free markets and free trade prevail, ecological imbalances that threaten humanity will eventually be corrected . They believe that free markets will eventually correct the ecological imbalance .
 Prices are the key adjustment mechanism that ultimately produces the greatest good for the greatest number of people . For them, prices are the main adjustment mechanism . Prices are key adjustment mechanisms that ultimately produce greater good for many .
 Neo-Malthusians argue that free markets fail to prevent excessive resource exploitation and that, accordingly, intervention by governing institutions is necessary . Neo-economic mercantilists argue that intervention by governments is necessary to prevent resource exploitation .
 This latter perspective rejects the belief that the free market will always maximize social welfare . The free market is not always always maximizing social welfare, it's maximizing the welfare of others .
 Neo-Malthusian pessimists sounding the alarm about signs of ecological deterioration . Cornucopian optimists extolling the virtues of free markets and technological innovation in saving the planet .
 How we frame our understanding of environmental challenges will affect our policy prescriptions, says John Defterios . He says it will affect policy prescriptions for the future .
 It will also influence the political will and capacity of the world community to cope with ecological problems and expand the possibilities for human security, it says . The world community will also decide whether to tackle ecological problems, it adds .
 The planet's carrying capacity —the Earth’s ability to support and sustain life —is at the center of this discussion . The planet’S carrying capacity is at the . center of the discussion .
 Tonight there will be 219,000 people at the dinner table who were not there last night, many of them with empty plates . Many of them will be empty plates.
 Relentless population growth is putting excessive pressure on local land and water resources in many countries, making it difficult if not impossible for farmers to keep pace . The tragedy of the commons is a metaphor used to explain the impact of human behavior on ecological systems .
 "No single cause is by itself responsible for the alarming trends in the global environment. No single cause by itself is responsible for these alarming trends," says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Many causes interact with each other to produce the dangers that are damaging the world’s life systems upon which human existence depends . The dangers are not only to be caused by individual causes, but they are also the causes that are causing the world to suffer .
 First articulated in 1833 by William Foster Lloyd, the concept was later popularized and extended to contemporary global environmental problems by human ecologist Garrett Hardin . Hardin's famous 1968 article published in the journal Science .
 Many of the world's waterways face serious pollution threats, from sources such as industrial wastewater, raw sewage, garbage, and oil spills . This approach PRESERVESIVES a life-sustaining resource, scientists say .
 Although it stresses the importance of individual action and personal motivations, it also ascribes those motives to collectivities or groups such as corporations and entire countries . The book is published in the U.S.
 Lloyd, and later Hardin, asked observers to consider what happened in medieval English villages . The village green was typically considered common property on which all villagers could let their cattle graze . Lloyd: "Villagers' green was common property, on which cattle could graze"
 Sharing the common grazing area worked well as long as individuals didn’t reduce the land’s usefulness to everyone else . Sharing common grazing areas worked well, says author .
 The herders had incentive to increase their stock as much as possible . However, assuming that villagers were driven by the profit motive and that no laws existed to restrain their greed, herders were motivated by greed .
 If pushed, individual herders might concede that the collective interest of all would be served if each contained the size of his herd rather than increasing it, so that the commons could be preserved .
 Self-restraint, voluntary reduction of cattle to relieve the pressure on the village commons, was not popular . Self restraint was voluntary, but not popular, the author says .
 This is especially true because there was no guarantee that others would do the same. This was especially true true because of the fact that many others would not follow suit . This was not the first time people had taken action against the government .
 Adding more animals to the village green would produce a personal gain whose costs would have to be borne by everyone . By contrast, adding more animals would produce personal gain which would be shared by all .
 In accordance with economic rational choice, the individual pursuit of wealth encouraged all to increase indiscriminately the size of their herds, and it discouraged selfsacrifice for the common welfare .
 The tragedy of the commons has become a standard concept in ecological analysis . It aptly illuminates the sources of environmental degradation as well as many other global problems and predicaments .
 The oceans and atmosphere are used by some as a sink for environmental pollutants whose costs are borne by all . Overuse of common property is also highlighted, as when some use the oceans as sink for pollutants .
 Experts disagree about the moral and ethical implications of Hardin’s interpretation of the Bible . Hardin's interpretation is controversial and ethical .
 The logical conclusion is that reforms are necessary if we are to save planet Earth . Note that the logical conclusion was that reforms were necessary .
 The needed changes will require self-restraint on people’s freedom of choice as well as a modicum of regulation to control the ruinous consequences of an unmanaged global commons .
 Theorists adhering to realism and free-market mercantilism resolutely defend freedom of economic choice without regulation as the best path to realizing the greatest good for the greatest number . Free-market Mercantilistism is the best way to realize the greater good for
 Madagascar has lost over 80 percent of its forest due mostly to slash-and-burn rice farming that also exhausts the soil and destroys the habitats of countless species . Profit will benefit all in the long run, producing more income and technological innovation than would otherwise occur under supervisory regulation of
 They say minimal interference in the pursuit of personal gain is helpful to the preservation of the Earth’s environment . They also feel that minimal interference is beneficial to the environment .
 According to their reasoning, the pursuit of private gain with little restraint is a virtue, not a vice . According to the reasoning, it's a virtue not to be a vice, but a virtue of restraint, they say .
 Almost all religious moral traditions question this realist and mercantilist conclusion . Almost all religions question this conclusion .
 The predictable outcome of selfishness and blind dedication to personal financial gain over other values such as altruistic love and compassion for humankind is a path to certain ruin and sin .
 These ethical questions bear directly on the debate about what is causing the degradation of the planetary commons and what should be done to counter it, and at what cost .
 The next step is for you to characterize and estimate the nature and magnitude of environmental threats and challenges . "Next step is to identify and assess the nature of these threats," she says .
 The clusters illustrate some of the obstacles to the preservation of common properties and renewable resources . The clusters were created to highlight the challenges of preserving common properties .
 Scores of government negotiators and nongovernmental representatives converged in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 . They came in the wake of the hottest decade on record .
 For years, scientists had warned that global warming would cause destructive changes in world climate patterns . Rising sea levels, melting glaciers, and freak storms would provoke widespread changes in global political and economic relationships .
 Global warming fears have spread with the continuing rise in planetary temperatures and extreme weather events . Attention to the pollutants blamed for global warming has also risen .
 Most climate scientists are convinced that the rise in the Earth’s temperature is caused by an increase in human-made gases . The invention of powerdriven machinery produced the Industrial Revolution .
 The molecules form the equivalent of a greenhouse roof by trapping heat emitted from Earth that would otherwise escape into outer space . The molecules, primarily carbon dioxide and chlorofluorocarbons, form the same greenhouse roof .
 The changing temperatures are expected to have a profound effect on animal and plant life across the world . Temperatures are set to rise in the coming years .
 The phenomenon producing planetary warming when gases released by burning fossil fuels act as a blanket in the atmosphere, thereby increasing temperatures . Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content from this article .
 NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies monitors average global surface temperatures around the world . The Goddard Institute monitors global average global temperatures .
 Since 2000, 13 of the fifteen warmest years since 1880 have occurred, according to NOAA . The agency's records show the warmest year since 1880 has occurred since 2000 .
 Scientists predict that long-term temperatures will continue to increase . Carbon dioxide levels and greenhouse gas emissions are on the rise .
 The map on the bottom projects the globe's most intense hot spots in 2090 . The map also projects the most intense hotspots in the world's history .
 The United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration makes a similar forecast, anticipating that temperature may increase by 2 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit within that same time span .
 Although CO^ is the principal greenhouse gas, concentrations of methane in the atmosphere are growing even more rapidly . Methane is the main greenhouse gas .
 The largest concentrations of methane are not in the atmosphere but are locked in ice, permafrost, and coastal marine sediments . To the alarm of many scientists, many scientists say the methane is in the form of ice .
 This means that as the global temperature increases, more methane will be released into the atmosphere . This would then increase global temperatures because of methane’s strong warming potential . This means more methane is being released to the atmosphere, increasing global temperatures .
 Sea levels will rise, mostly because of melting glaciers and the expansion of water as it warms up . The effects of continued rising temperatures around the globe will be both dramatic and devastating . ■ Sea levels are due to melting glaciers .
 This will produce massive flooding in vast areas of low-lying coastal lands, especially in Asia and the U.S. Atlantic coast . Flooding will be caused by a massive earthquake .
 As ocean temperatures continue to rise, hurricanes, which draw their energy from warm oceans, will become stronger and more frequent, scientists say .
 A hotter Earth will drive some plant life to higher latitudes and greater elevations . The Earth is expected to be hotter than ever .
 Many see the increase in extreme weather events such as these as evidence of global climate change . Many see it as a sign of global warming .
 Some scientists insist the rise in global temperature is only part of a cyclical change the world has experienced for thousands of years . Some scientists say the world is experiencing cyclical changes in climate change .
 IPCC first stated in 1995 its belief that global climate trends are “unlikely to be entirely due to natural causes” that humans are to blame for at least part of the problem . The consequences are likely to be very harmful and costly .
 Asian dynamos Ghina and India have rapidly increased their emissions as their economies have grown and generated increasing demands for fossil-fuel energy . Ghina has rapidly increased her emissions as her economies grow and generate increasing demands .
 The figure on the right identifies the distribution of carbon-equivalent greenhouse gas emissions by region from 2001 and projected through the year 2025 . The entire industrialized world is projected to see an increase in emissions from industrialized countries .
 Compare existing and new industrial giants’ consumption of energy and production of greenhouse gases with those of the low-income Global South countries . Low-income global South countries have the lowest greenhouse gas emissions in the world .
 Their appetite for fossil fuel energy sources is on the rise . They, too, are growing rapidly . They are also growing rapidly in the United States .
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences suggests rich people, rather than rich countries, need to change .
 The proposal highlights how the lower level of carbon emissions in the Global South masks the variation within states where the wealthy contribute at a far higher rate to environmental degradation than the poor . Although far too difficult to implement, the proposal highlights the difference between rich and poor .
 The politics of global warming are dramatically illustrated by the tensions between the countries trying to carve up the Arctic in order to reap economic payoffs from exploiting the resources beneath the polar ice cap .
 A ‘frozen conflict’ is being waged in the melting north for what amounts to one-eighth of the globe’s untapped oil and perhaps as much as 25 percent of its gas reserves . The U.S. Geological Survey says the region has one-
 The disappearing ice also offers new sea routes, at least for part of the year, which significantly reduces the time it takes for ships to travel from Europe to Asia .
 In the summer of 2014, seventy-one cargo ships travelled the north-east passage, an increase from forty-six in 2012 . The increase in cargo ships is due to increase in the number of ships passing the passage from 2012 .
 As global warming melts the Arctic ice, countries are laying claims to portions of the territory . Countries are trying to claim parts of the Arctic Ocean .
 Global warming has made competition for control of this geostrategic arena possible . None of this international friction would have materialized had global warming not made it possible . Global warming is the result of global warming .
 The story of climate change is similar to states’ efforts to cope with the depletion of the atmosphere’s protective ozone layer . Ozone Depletion and Protection is a key part of the story .
 An international regime has emerged, progressively strengthened by mounting scientific evidence that environmental damage is directly caused by human activity . In this case, however, the international regime of environmental damage has emerged .
 IPCC concluded that evidence of the Earth’s rising temperatures is ""unequivocal"" and that global warming is more than 90 percent likely to be the product of human activity . Ozone is a pollutant in the lower atmosphere, but in the upper atmosphere it provides the Earth
 Satellite maps show that on July 8, 2012, about 40 percent of the ice sheet's surface had melted . By July 12, 97 percent of ice sheet had turned to slush, and 97 percent turned to ice .
 Scientists began to link halons and CFCs to ozone depletion in the early 1970s . Halons began to be linked to the depletion of ozone in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Production of CFCs in the Global North declined sharply in the 1990s as the largest producers of these ozone-damaging products began to phase them out . However, the ozone hole over Antarctica continues to expand, and depletion of the protective ozone shield is expected to continue before it begins
 Developed countries agreed to provide aid to help developing countries adopt CFC alternatives . But they have failed to provide all of the promised resources, says UNICEF .
 The Ecopolitics of Biodiversity, Deforestation, and Water Shortages . Success at containing ozone depletion has raised hopes that other environmental threats can be given priority .
 Forests and water resources are critical in preserving the Earth’s biodiversity and protecting the atmosphere and land resources . Forests are critical to preserving the planet's biodiversity and preserving the atmosphere .
 For these reasons, they have become a rising ecological issue on the global agenda . They have become an issue of concern for the future of the species .
 Issues concerning the preservation of forests and the supply of water resources have proven much more difficult to address . Some rules have emerged to guide international behavior in the protection of biodiversity .
 Until recently, public attention has focused on preserving species diversity by protecting ecosystems, including old forests, tail-grass prairies, wetlands, coastal habitats, and coral reefs .
 Scientists believe that the global habitat contains between 8 and 10 million species . Scientists believe there are between 8-10 million species in the world .
 The variety of plant and animal species living in the Earth's diverse ecosystems . Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content from its e-book .
 Of the nearly 300,000 plant species surveyed by the World Conservation Union, more than 8000 are threatened with extinction . More than 8000 plant species are threatened by clearing land for housing, roads, and industries .
 Extinction risks will accelerate with a rise in future global temperatures . One in six species is expected to be threatened by one in six in the world .
 Much of the Earth’s biological heritage is concentrated in the tropics . The Global South also has a growing concern about protecting its interests in the face of efforts by MNCs to reap profits from the sale of biological products .
 MNCs in the Global North are major players in the so-called enclosure movement . The enclosure movement is geared to privatize and commercialize products derived from plant and animal genes .
 Concern in the Global South is centered on the idea that the genetic character of the many species of plants and animals should be considered a part of the global commons and therefore available for commercial use .
 Biogenetic engineering threatens to escalate the erosion of global diversity . Biogenetics engineering could be a step further in the future of diversity .
 Map 14. shows and Polynesia 3,334 tropical rain forest, arid ecosystem, tropical dry forest and grassland areas . Map shows Polynesia's tropical rain forests and tropical dry forests . Map 14 shows and shows Polynesnesian islands .
 They are located in primarily tropical wilderness territories laden with plant and animal species yet covering only 2 percent of the land . They're located in mainly tropical territories .
 International law defines species as collective goods, a resource for all humanity from which everyone benefits . It also shows the location of “biodiversity hot spots,” where human activity threatens to disturb and potentially destroy many species that international law defines .
 According to the UN, about 50,000 plant and animal species become extinct each year . The UN says about half of the species are becoming extinct in the world .
 Trends since the 1980s show considerable deforestation throughout much of the world . Shrinking Forests and Dust Bowls are the result of climate change .
 This has led to deforestation and desertification, which turns an increasing portion of the Earth’s landmass into deserts that are useless for agricultural productivity or wildlife habitats . The desertification has left an increasing amount of the landmass in a useless desert .
 soil degradation has stripped billions of acres of the Earth’s surface from productive farming . Millions of acres have been stripped of productive farming since 2000 .
 In the Global North, reforestation has begun to alleviate some of the danger . The Global North has been plagued by deforestation .
 The creation of deserts due to soii erosion, overfarming, and deforestation, which converts cropiand to nonproductive, arid sand . Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content from this e-book .
 This map displays the extent to which human activity, as opposed to natural environmental factors alone, is likely to lead to further desertification or degraded dry lands in regions across the glohe . The map was created by the University of Oxford in Oxfordshire .
 Critics point out that ethanol destroys forests, contributes to global warming and inflates food prices . Biofuels such as ethanol are often touted as being eco-friendly, but critics point out they destroy forests and inflate food .
 From the viewpoint of climate change, green plants remove CO^ from the atmosphere during photo-synthesis . Green plants remove carbon from the sky during photoynthesis .
 The natural processes that remove greenhouse gases are also being destroyed when forests are cut down . As forests decay or are burned, the amount of CO^ released into the atmosphere .
 The Amazon continues to be cleared at an alarming pace amid heated national debate over whether to ease Brazil’s Forest Code . The code has required 80 percent of a landholding in the Amazon to remain forest .
 Supporters of the current law fear that change will lead to greater destruction of the Amazon rain forest . Those who seek to reduce the restrictions argue that the law presently inhibits economic development . Supporters say the law currently inhibits development .
 Most of the population growth over the next twenty-five years—an additional 1. billion people—are expected to live in water-stressed areas . The population growth is expected to reach 1.2 billion in the next 25 years .
 In arid and semi-arid regions, major aquifers are being dangerously over pumped . Poor irrigation practices are depleting limited groundwater reservoirs . Waterfall reservoirs are being over pumped in arid regions .
 Almost 2 billion people use water that is critically polluted with human waste . Water is critical for water in the United States and the rest of the world .
 In India, the Yamuna River is the primary source of water for people in the capital territory of Delhi, which has a metropolitan population of around 16. million .
 At the 2015 World Economic Forum held in Davos, Switzerland, business and political leaders identified water crises as having the largest potential impact as a source of risk facing the world . Water crises are identified as having a potential impact on the world's water supply .
 This was a dramatic change from five years prior, when water ranked low on the list of global concerns . Water is now a major concern in the United States .
 Despite increased awareness of the interconnection between environmental stressors, conflict, inhibited economic growth, and human security, there is pessimism about the potential for water problems to be solved .
 In 2014, drought in Central America had reduced maize output by around 9 percent . 400,000 families in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras need food assistance .
 Farmers from Pakistan to Kansas pump groundwater for crops without paying for it, often without limit or even keeping track of how much they use . Farmers often don't even keep track of their use .
 It’s seen almost as an entitlement; charging farmers for water or insisting on better irrigation technology inspires outrage and resistance . It's seen as almost as a entitlement, charging farmers with water inspires outrage .
 Americans end up using twice the amount of water per person as Europeans do . Leisurely daily showers and lush lawns explain how Americans use water more than Europeans .
 Adopted by the United Nations in 1993, this annual observation draws global attention to the critical role of water in sustaining human life and well-being . The U.N. has adopted the observation since 1993 .
 Nearly one out of every five people in the world lacks access to safe drinking water . Nearly one in five people lack access to drinking water, according to the UN .
 World Health Organization estimates millions of people die every year from diseases caused by poor water quality, inadequate sanitation, or poor hygiene . Millions of people are killed every year by water quality and poor sanitation .
 As the world’s population has risen, the demand for water has also increased . Water demand has increased as the world has increased .
 With the simultaneous growth in urbanization, demand has exceeded the capacity of the already insufficient water supply and sanitation infrastructure in many cities throughout the Global South .
 As countries across the world become wealthier, their populations tend to shift from vegetarian to meaty diets . Meaty diets include foods that require more water to produce, such as meaty foods .
 Jean Chretien, former Canadian prime minister and co-chair of the InterAction Council, warns that the “future political impact of water scarcity may be devastating” Former Canadian Prime Minister: Future political impact on water scarcity could be 'devastating'
 Throughout the twentieth century, the demand for and consumption of oil—the primary fossil fuel supplying energy—spiraled upward . The demand for oil, the main fossil fuel supply of energy, has been on the rise .
 An abundant supply of cheap oil facilitated the recovery of Western Europe and Japan after World War II . Cheap oil encouraged consumers to use energy-intensive technologies such as the private automobile .
 The International Energy Agency predicts that the world will use 50 percent more oil in 2030 than it does now . Even taking into account gains in efficiency, the IEA predicts that, even taking account for efficiency, it will use more oil .
 Following the severe deflation of oil prices in the 1990s, mergers took place between many of the large oil companies in an effort to improve the scale of production .
 There are now six “supermajors” in the oil industry, collectively called ‘Big Oil’ in reference to their substantial economic power and political influence . Six ‘supermjors’ have substantial economic and political power and influence .
 Other dominant players in the oil industry include state-owned oil companies such as Pemex in Mexico, Saudi Aramco, Petroleos de Venezuela, and China National Petroleum . Saudi Arabia is the largest oil company in the world .
 State ownership of oil companies enables governments to maintain control over energy reserves and production sites . Governments retain the revenue generated by the production process within the national economy . State ownership allows governments to retain control of energy reserves .
 The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is an intergovernmental organization of twelve oil-exporting developing countries . The organization coordinates the petroleum policies of its members, and remains important as well .
 OPEC has set production targets for its members in order to manage the price of oil on the global market for both economic and political purposes . Although its influence has decreased in recent years, historically OPEC has managed the global oil market for political and economic purposes .
 The global oil industry has been characterized by periods of boom and bust, as seen within the past decade . Oil prices have risen sharply in recent years, but the global market has been on the decline .
 Between 2009 and 2015, proI duction in the U.S. almost doubled, due to growth in American shale-oil firms . American shale oil firms have almost doubled in recent years .
 The Russians continued to be among the world’s leading oil suppliers . At the same time, Iraqi and Canadian oil production and exports increased annually .
 OPEC members have had difficulty agreeing to production quotas in recent years . OPEC has also had difficulties agreeing to quotas for production .
 Venezuela, Iran, and Algeria pressed the cartel to slow production in order to push prices up . But the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia refused to do so . Saudi Arabia and the UAE did not slow production .
 Another challenge facing the world is how to balance the demand for oil against the environmental, economic, and health risks posed by drilling . Another challenge is balancing the need for oil with the health and environmental risks posed .
 This dilemma is starkly illustrated by the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 . This dilemma was starkly demonstrated by the 2010 Gulf oil spill .
 The controversy over fracking is another example, with critics lamenting the environment cost associated with the large amounts of water needed for the technique . The potentially dangerous chemicals that may escape and contaminate the water may escape .
 There are three very different projections regarding world oil prices between now and 2030 . The UPS and DOWNS of the price for oil are based on three different scenarios .
 Most analysts expect that oil demand will grow as the world economy recovers . Oil demand is expected to grow in the next few years, analysts say .
 The Global North may be on the verge of a potentially historic juncture that would overturn the pivotal place of oil in the global political economy . In response to the threat of future shortages and the risk of heavy dependence on oil, the Global North is on the brink .
 Ban Ki-moon: Future prosperity and stability means rethinking how we exploit the planet's natural assets . People want to live in a clean and green environment and seek to avoid ones that are polluted, unhealthy, and prone to floods, hurricanes, tornadoes and typhoons .
 Environmental activists argue that the Earth is at a critical point and even more attention to environmental preservation is needed . Activists argue that more attention is needed to protect the environment .
 Environmental decay seems to recognize few borders; it is a worldwide problem, for both poor and rich countries . Environmental decay is a global problem for both rich and poor countries . The Quest for Sustainable Development is based on the idea of sustainable development .
 Recommended changes to protect and preserve planet Earth’s ecology may be expensive, but it is important to try . Recommended changes may be costly, but they’re needed to try to protect planet Earth from extinction .
 The commission concluded that the world cannot sustain the growth required to meet the needs and aspirations of the world’s growing population . It said the world must adopt radically different approaches to issues of economic expansion, equity, resource management, and energy efficiency .
 Before the Earth Summit, the environment and economic development had been treated separately . Economic growth frequently imperils and degrades the environment . The summit was often regarded as being at odds with each other .
 All politics, even global politics, are local, as what happens any place ultimately affects conditions every place . The protection of Earth’s environment is a primary international security issue, the UN says .
 At the UN Climate Conference in Paris in December 2015, members gathered to discuss an agreement that would reduce global emissions by at least 60 percent below 2010 levels by 2050 .
 UN climate chief Christiana Figueres: "Whatever gets done over the next 10 to 15 years, whatever gets invested particularly in the energy system ... is going to determine the energy matrix that we will have for 50 years"
 Many scholars and policy makers are convinced that threats to the preservation of the global commons likewise threaten our basic welfare and security . Many scholars believe the threat to the world commons is similar to threats to our basic security .
 Sustainable development is crucial to striking a responsible balance for preserving the global environment and providing the resources needed to sustain human life and prosperity . Sustainable development must also be a balance between preserving the environment and sustaining human life .
 Government and nonstate actors’ acceptance of the concept continues to inspire creative, environmentally sensitive responses . The goal of sustainable development remains distant and frustrations about lost opportunities are mounting, says the author .
 Growing population means growing demand for energy, food, and other resources . In a political world of scarcity, politics of scarcity becomes central to the politics .
 Food prices have created civil unrest and a wave of humanitarian crises in the developing world . Globally, increased food prices have led to civil unrest in some countries .
 Fears of food scarcity spread, panic buying ensued, and governments responded by enacting export bans and price controls . Governments responded to the crisis with emergency price controls on food .
 Extreme weather events destroy agricultural crops and lead to disruptions in the market . Droughts in Ghina, Russia, and Argentina and flooding in Ganada, Pakistan, and the U.S. lead to droughts .
 Growth in population and the explosion of megacities in the Global South have created changes in diet . Changes in diet occur due to increased wealth and urbanization .
 The rising cost of agricultural commodities has led to food price inflation in many countries throughout the world . Food price inflation has been blamed for the rise in food prices in recent years .
 Despite a sharp drop in 2008, three food prices spikes have occurred since the turn of the century . The graph shows that, despite a sharp decline, three spikes in food prices have occurred .
 There is more than enough food produced per capita to feed all of the people in the world today . Twenty-two countries in the Global South met the Millennium Development Goal of reducing the proportion of hungry people by 50 percent by 2015 .
 Those who live in poverty have the highest levels of food insecurity, and are hit the hardest by rising food prices . Those in poverty are hit hardest by food insecurity .
 According to the United Nations, it is likely that global food prices could nearly double by 2050 . The U.N. says it's likely that food prices will nearly double in the next century .
 Droughts in China cut its wheat production by almost a third, and flooding in Ecuador played a key role in the recent rise of banana prices . Flooding in Ecuador is also a key factor in the price rise of bananas .
 These bans serve to decrease the world supply of these goods, which raises prices . These bans also reduce the amount of food and energy produced in the world, raising prices .
 Government encouragement of biofuel production has had an impact on food prices . Government encouragement has had a negative impact on the cost of food, say experts .
 Agriculture relies heavily on petroleum for many aspects of production as well as transport . The sector has thus been hit hard by increases in energy prices . Agriculture relies on oil for many of its production and transport .
 In particular, these countries have greatly increased their consumption of meat and dairy products . This is due to increase in meat consumption and dairy consumption .
 Food insecurity is garnering more attention and rising on the political agenda . Food insecurity has been on the rise in recent years and is becoming more prevalent .
 Many international organizations have begun to articulate some type of response to the crisis . Many organizations have started to articulate a response .
 Some of the suggested solutions, such as genetic engineering and transgenic crops and livestock, are quite controversial and not supported by many countries and NGOs .
 Reform of national practices and policies is an intrinsic aspect of efforts to prevent and respond to food insecurity and promote sustainable development . Reforms of national policies and practices are an intrinsic part of efforts in response to food security and sustainable development.
 How countries meet their growing demand for energy directly influences the evolution and preservation of the global commons . Converting to Renewable Sources of Energy is a key part of the climate change process .
 A new and less destructive source of energy could soon emerge because of the advent of revolutionary new technologies that derive energy from the sun, wind, and other abundant and renewable sources of energy such as hydrogen .
 Together, fluctuating oil prices and public alarm about global warming are pushing the world, however haltingly, toward cleaner and cheaper energy systems .
 The supply of fossil fuels will not run out anytime soon, but the externalities or consequences of environmental and health threats make burning fossil fuels excessively dangerous . Burning fossil fuels is excessively dangerous, according to the author .
 The combustion of oil and coal is traced to lung cancer and many other health hazards . It is a health hazard that can be traced to many health conditions .
 Safety and financial costs may limit the surge toward nuclear power . These problems have led some countries to reduce their nuclear programs . Some countries have already reduced their nuclear program .
 Research geared to discover seeds for new types of plant and human life for sale and use as substitutes for those produced naturally . transgenic crops combine genes from species that would not naturally Interbreed . acid rain Precipitation made acidic through contact with sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides .
 Global North 1 consumes, on average, four and a half times more energy per > capita than the Global South . The Global North consumes 4.5% of energy per capita . Global South consumes 4% more energy than the global North 1 .
 No less than five major accidents between 1995 and 1999 at Japan’s fifty-two nuclear power plants —dramatized the potential dangers of nuclear power . The demand for energy 2 from nonrenewable resources remains high . The development of I renewable sources to meet the world
 On March 11, 2011, a 9.11 earthquake and tsunami devastated Japan and caused extensive damage at its nuclear power stations . Then, on March 25, a tsunami devastated the country's nuclear power plants .
 Some 70,000 people were forced to evacuate from a twelve-mile radius of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant due to leaking radioactive materials . Some of the radioactive materials were leaking from the plant .
 Safety fears concerning nuclear power have spread around the world . Since then, safety fears have spread across the globe .
 On June 26,1954, a nuclear power plant In Obninsk, Russia, became the first in the world to generate electricity for commercial use . The plant was built in 1953 .
 The United States approved its first new nuclear project since the 1980s . The U.S. provided $8.7 billion in federal loan guarantees to construct two nuclear reactors . The project is the first new project to be approved by the United States .
 There are no safe procedures for handling the 52,000 tons of toxic radioactive nuclear waste . Some of the waste will remain dangerous for hundreds of thousands of years .
 Most nuclear energy generating facilities continue to produce weapons-grade material . Most nuclear power generating facilities still produce weapons grade material .
 Other efforts to develop potential alternate fuel sources have also begun in hopes of breaking our dependence on fossil fuels . Other efforts are also underway to develop alternative fuel sources .
 Countries clinging to fossil fuels will see their security and prosperity decline as compared to those that pioneer renewable energy technologies . Thomas L Friedman echoed this sentiment, arguing that countries clinging to fossils fuel will see a decline in their security .
 Shown here is the town of Pripyat, Ukraine, abandoned after the Chernobyl nuclear accident . Seaweed and algae fields are touted as a way to reduce the cost of nuclear power plants .
 Indonesia and Philippines are looking to harness volcanic power as a source of geothermal power . Indonesia and the Philippines are located within the “Pacific Ring of Fire’s”
 Honda Motor has begun producing the world’s first hydrogen-powered fuel-cell car . The car is currently too expensive for most people, but Honda has begun production .
 A separate treaty set forth a comprehensive agreement for preserving biodiversity throughout the world . From it, a separate agreement was set forth to preserve biodiversity . The treaty also set out a comprehensive deal to protect biodiversity .
 The Biodiversity Treaty was followed by other international efforts to deal with environmental problems through global agreements . The treaty led to other efforts to address environmental problems .
 The Global North committed to providing the Global South a total of $100 billion by 2020 to combat problems caused by climate change . The Kyoto Protocol is a successor to the Kyoto Protocol . In anticipation of the impending 2012 deadline for negotiating a successor, the Global North pledged to provide the South a
 As of May 2015, only 32 countries had ratified the Doha Amendment agreeing to a second commitment period . However, the countries failed to reach a long-term binding agreement on global climate change . Only 32 countries have ratified the amendment, and only 32 have signed it .
 The need to address environment challenges to the planet continues to be an issue of significant global concern . Yet the need for addressing environmental challenges to be a global concern continues to rise . The need for the environment continues to grow as a result of climate change .
 Of the UN’s thirty-one major global environmental agreements, the U.S. has ratified only one-third of them . The United States has ratified less than a third of the agreements .
 Multinational corporations are also key players in the ecopolitics game that has the potential to determine the Earth’s fate . Multinational companies are key players to the game that could determine the world's fate .
 Trade links politics, economics, ecology, societies, societies in webs of ever-tightening interdependencies . The question is especially pertinent in a rapidly globalizing world in which trade increasingly links politics .
 Environmentalists differ on the wisdom of using trade to promote environmental standards . Liberals and liberal economists differ in their assessments of the benefits of trade .
 Children play in the shadow of the former Union Carbide factory in Bhopal, India, the site of one of the worst industrial accidents in history . Elowever, another interpretation holds that trade PLAYING IN THE ""POISON POND""
 The ""pond" in which they are playing was a sludge pit containing chemical by-products from a former pesticide plant . The ""Pond"" in which the band is playing was the former pesticide facility .
 According to some ecologists, trade magnifies the damaging ecological effects of production and consumption by expanding the market for commodities beyond state borders . Some ecologists argue that trade expands the market beyond borders to make commodities more available .
 A trend is under way in the corporate global finance culture that bodes well for the potential for global corporations to recognize that their profits will improve with investment in and development of ‘green” products .
 The possibility that the international political economy will provide economic incentives for producing products that can contribute to global environment sustainability has inspired hope that the environmental dangers may be contained . The possibility of an economic incentive to produce products that contribute to the environment is inspiring hope .
 Hope is rising because some governments, corporations, and individuals are seeking local solutions to environmental sustainability . That hope is rising as some governments seek local solutions .
 A huge concern is that some very powerful states, advantageously positioned in the global hierarchy, are selfishly resisting painful and costly adjustments now . The world's most powerful states should be forced to make changes now, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Top Ten Green Corporations in the World, 2015 2015 Rank Company Country Sector GREEN SCORE Principal Actions 1 Biogen United States Health Care 89 . Biogen is one of the top ten green companies in the world .
 One facility has a 100,000 gallon cistern to collect rainwater for irrigation . Two others condensate water and reuse it in its cooling towers .
 Since 2010, Shire has reduced its paper usage by 22 percent and its landfill waste by 20 percent . The company has increased its wastediversion rate by 43 percent since 2010 .
 In 2014, Shire attained carbon neutrality at all its North American facilities .
 Allergan reduces water usage by 12 percent between 2000 and 2014 . The company's water-use data from its facilities has been analyzed by the company . It is the first company to analyze water use data from facilities .
 Reckitt Benckiser’s environmental risk-reduction targets for 2020 include zero waste-to-landfill and cutting water use by 35 percent . Water use will be cut by 35 per cent by 2020 .
 Adobe has reduced its electricity usage by 50 percent, natural gas usage by 30 percent, water usage by 79 percent, and irrigation usage by 71 percent . Adobe has also reduced its natural gas, electricity usage and water usage .
 The company has achieved carbon neutrality at all of its North American facilities . It has also achieved carbon neutral at all its North America facilities .
 Swisscom, one of Switzerland’s ten largest purchasers of power, has set goals to reduce energy use and greenhouse gasses . Swisscom has also set targets to reduce paper consumption and recycle old cell phones .
 Swisscom plans to improve energy efficiency by 35 percent from 2016 to 2020 . Swisscom says it plans to increase energy efficiency to 35 percent by 2020 .
 Unilever set the goal to decrease its environmental footprint by 50 percent . It also started the brightFuture program in partnership with Global Citizen and Live Earth to recruit one billion people to commit to a better environment .
 Broadcom committed to increasing energy efficiency and reducing natural resource usage . Broadcom has committed to increase energy efficiency . BroadCOM committed to reducing energy use and reducing resource usage in the future .
 Broadcom is using 17 million gallons of reclaimed water for landscape irrigation . Broadcom has shown its commitment to using reclaimed water in landscaping .
 Roche Holding reduced its energy consumption per employee by 10 percent in five years . Roche Holding is now striving for a 20 percent reduction by 2020 . Roche is aiming to reduce energy consumption by 20 percent by 2020.
 Roche Holding runs an “ECOmpetition’s” for employees every year to increase awareness of how individuals can contribute to sustainability . Roche Holding also runs a “EECOMPetition” every year .
 BT has reduced its energy use by 4. percent in the last fiscal year . The company has also reduced the amount of waste sent to landfills by 34 percent .
 The company is in the process of helping its customers reduce carbon emissions by three tons . The company has already reached half of that goal .
 Based on Newsweek Green Rankings 2015 of Global Companies. of their own existing environmental protection policies. of . their own . policies. Based on . of their . own existing . environmental policies .
 Numerous countries have managed to balance the risk of shortterm economic loss against the expectation of long-term economic growth by investing in costly renewable energy programs .
 Some countries more so so see environmental sustainability as a priority that protects their interests . Clearly, some countries more than others see environmental .
 Measures of environmental protection performance suggest some countries are doing much more than many others to protect their environments . Measures include measures of national commitment to environmental protection .
 The 2014 EPI ratings of selected countries illustrate these differences . The 2014 ratings are based on the EPI's 2014 ratings of various countries .
 A collection of environment-related blogs put together by the Guardian . The Guardian blog is a collection of environmental blogs from around the world .
 What makes prediction so difficult is the sheer complexity and uncertainty surrounding world politics . Some trends intersect, whereas others diverge over time; and some trends are catalysts of others, whereas still different global trends impede others .
 Beijing suffers heavy smog caused by small particulate pollution . People wearing masks in Beijing, China, to protect themselves from the smog .
 In response to deteriorating environmental conditions, the government is looking at new ways to protect the environment and the health of its people . The government is also looking at ways of protecting the environment .
 There remains a tension between environmental protection and economic development . Both conditions are products of prevailing trends In world politics . Yet, there remains an economic and environmental tension .
 Humanity faces many dilemmas in a globalized world . Against a landscape of trend and transformation, humanity faces many challenges . The world's future is in the midst of a globalizing world .
 As former United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton observed, "The challenges of change are always hard," she said . The challenges are "always hard"
 If we want to be practical, we must focus our attention on the trends and ideas that are shaping the future . Therefore, if we want a practical solution to our problems, we need to focus on trends that will shape the future.
 M any, sometimes conflicting, global trends are unfolding . What will these changes mean for you, your family, your career, your community and your investments?"" —Tim Mack, futurist M. Mack .
 Some point toward integration, others toward fragmentation . The world looks like it's coming together and at the same time it is coming apart . Some point to integration and fragmentation .
 Seismic shifts that challenge the wisdom of old beliefs and traditions are under way . Seismis is under way in the world of the Middle East .
 Both turmoil and turbulence describe contemporary international affairs, they require us to ask unconventional questions about conventional ideas . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a Pulitzer Prize winner .
 CNN's John Sutter writes about the pressures being brought to bear on the countries of the world . He says they push us to think about the political, military, economic, demographic, and environmental pressures . Sutter: "These pressures are very powerful and very powerful"
 Questions are rising to the top of the global agenda throughout the world . To do so, you must consider a number of unusual and controversial questions . CNN.com will feature some of the world's most interesting questions .
 The rival conclusions boldly advanced by would-be prophets are not likely to be very definitive, and often diverge wildly . However, the rival conclusions are likely not to be definitive .
 Many problems and challenges are expected to confront humanity in the twenty-first century . PUTTING YOURSELF IN the PICTURE is a challenge for humanity .
 As recognized by former UN Secretary-General Kofl Annan , “We face a world of extraordinary challenges—and of extraordinary interconnectedness.”
 To construct your own images of the future of world affairs, begin by thinking about the key questions that likely to dominate international relations in the coming decades .
 Imagine yourself at the end of a semester preparing to take the final exam in your course about international relations . Armed with an understanding of how ideas about foreign relations are formed and retained, rejected, or replaced, imagine yourself .
 Your entire grade, your instructor tells you, will be determined by only one question . "Your entire grade," the instructor says, "will be determined"
 There are really no right or wrong questions about international relations, CNN.com's John Sutter says . Sutter: 'There are no wrong questions. There are no right questions. It's just a question of international relations'
 There is little agreement about the trends and issues that are the most important in international affairs . No scholarly consensus exists about the questions that deserve the greatest attention today, he says .
 Make a preliminary list of what you believe will be the crucial questions about the future of the world . To stimulate your thinking, make a list of the questions you think will be crucial for the future .
 It concludes now by identifying a series of questions about the future that are high on the global agenda . The future of the world is on the agenda for the first time .
 As a further catalyst for framing your own thinking, look critically at these questions . Consider these questions as a catalyst to framing your thinking .
 How they are answered is widely expected to give shape to world politics throughout the remainder of the twenty-first century . The answers to these questions are expected to shape the world's political landscape .
 World Politics has argued that international relations are subject to recurring patterns . World Politics is concerned about the future of the world's most powerful nations . The U.S. has been in touch with the world for decades .
 It is governed by regular propensities, and this makes it possible to uncover ‘laws’ or generalized action-and-reaction patterns . It is possible to find out “laws” or ‘generalities’ of action and reaction patterns in the world
 It can be assumed that certain types of transnational actors respond in similar ways to the same types of stimuli . Under certain conditions, it can't assume that certain transnational . actors respond to similar . ways to same stimuli .
 Social scientists cannot draw on a body of uniform, deterministic laws to precisely predict the global future . Despite regularities in world politics, social scientists can't predict the future, they say .
 The role of happenstance in world politics is difficult to predict the future, says David Cameron . He says it's impossible to predict what will happen in the future .
 Recall from Ghapter 4 that one of the proximate causes of the war was Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand’s assassination in Sarajevo on June 28, 1914 .
 Earlier that day, several would-be assassins had failed to find an opportunity to kill the archduke and had apparently given up in frustration .
 Ferdinand’s motorcade made a wrong turn enroute to visit patients in a city hospital . It stopped briefly in front of a cafe where Gavrilo Princip, one of the frustrated assassins, had gone to get food .
 We can narrow the range of possibilities by forecasting how current trends will likely develop and what steps may be taken to channel the course of events toward a global future we prefer . We cannot predict with certainty which one will materialize .
 The following six questions are designed to help you think about the future of world politics . The questions include six questions about how the world is changing .
 Roosevelt: It is today we must create the world of the future . Roosevelt: We must create a new world of tomorrow and create it .
 Globalization is creating sweeping governance crises in a new age of increasing interdependent complexity . One answer has to do with “globalization,” a widely accepted socially constructed word understood as a transforming force .
 Globalization captures the idea that everything on the planet is now more closely connected than ever before . But only within an unsteady institutional foundation that is largely unprepared for the future . Globalization captured the idea of the future only within a fragile institutional foundation .
 The integration of the globe in this transformed, interconnected, borderless world and common cosmopolitan culture has reduced old feelings of independence, identity, and autonomy . Many states have surrendered some of their sovereignty in order to benefit from collaborative participation in a competitive global marketplace .
 Optimists, aware of the common destiny of all, will energize efforts to put aside interstate competition . Optimists say the declining ability of many sovereign states to cope with global problems through unilateral self-help approaches is to blame .
 According to this reasoning, conflict will recede as humanity begins to better recognize that national borders and oceans provide little protection against the multitude of challenges that arise from the global revolution in travel, communications, and trade .
 These shared problems can only be managed through collective, multilateral cooperation, says the U.N. agency . The world's shared problems must be managed by collective cooperation, it says .
 globalization makes cooperation crucial to the well-being of everyone . The continued tightening of interstate linkages should be welcomed. Gonsequently, because globalization makes . cooperation crucial, it should be welcome .
 What is especially important about globalization is that when everyone depends on everyone else, all must work together . What is important is that globalization is when everyone needs to work together, he says .
 Global interdependence makes it imperative for states to renounce aggressive competition . States increasingly have a shared interest in cooperation and fewer and fewer incentives to fight . States must renounce aggression because they increasingly have shared interests in cooperation .
 Despite the successes of globalization, it is often difficult to maintain the necessary political will to support global initiatives . International organizations only imperfectly fill this gap, says Julian Zelizer .
 Horse-drawn carriages in Egypt reflect a blending of cultures and economies, traditionalism and modernity . Shown here in Egypt are horse drawn carriages parked in front of a McDonald's .
 Although globalization certainly presents many challenges, it also provides opportunities to learn, prosper, and enjoy a world of great diversity and possibility . The world of globalization is full of opportunities for people to learn and prosper .
 Another issue with globalization concerns the distribution of its benefits . Another issue is how the benefits of globalization are distributed to the public .
 Critics of globalization say it favors advantaged states but constrains the prospects of weak states . It produces new inequalities as the gap between the wealthy and the poor widens, they say . Critics say globalization favors the rich and poor .
 globalization may generate conflict between winners and losers . Because its benefits may not be distributed equally, globalization may create conflict . Globalization may not always be shared equally, experts say .
 The temptation to seek isolation from globalization’s assault on national autonomy by creating barriers to trade and other transactions may be irresistible . Under conditions of fierce competition, scarcity, and resurgent nationalism .
 The temptation to achieve political benefits by military force will persist, says President Obama . The temptation will persist as well as the temptation to use military force .
 The tightening web of globalization has the potential to lead to either danger or opportunity . Thus, the tightening web could lead to both danger or to opportunity, says David Cameron .
 From their perspective, with patience, technological solutions will eventually be found that will ease the most serious problems facing the world today, they say . With patience, they believe technological solutions to the world's most serious issues will be found .
 Malnutrition and disease may still exist, but as a result of technological advances in agriculture and medicine, many people are alive today who might have perished otherwise . Malnutrition, disease and disease, they note as an example, may still still exist .
 Technology is also profoundly important for the future of energy . Technology is important to identify alternative sources and to more efficiently use existing resources .
 As advanced technology becomes cheaper and more accessible, it is likely to have a broader impact on society . The technology will have a wider impact on the economy .
 Perhaps such developments will reduce the need for states to compete over scarce energy resources, and thus lessen a potential source of global conflict . Perhaps this will lessen the potential conflict between states over scarce resources .
 Some remain concerned that proposed technological solutions will only serve to compound current problems . In contrast to those who envision technological innovation as a way to increase economic growth and alleviate social welfare problems, some remain concerned .
 Genetic modified crops are seen by optimists as a way to reduce famine . But pessimists worry about the public health consequences of the crops .
 At first, larger ships and improved maritime technology resulted in increases in the amount of fish harvested from the world’s oceans . The increase in fish harvest has led to an increase in the number of fish being harvested .
 Technology has enabled governments to engage in widespread surveillance and targeted killings from afar . Critics decry the manner in which governments engage in such surveillance .
 From proliferation of drones to clandestine electronic surveillance programs, an urgent need arises for greater transparency and global discussion about what constitutes the legitimate use of such technology . What is an unacceptable infringement upon state sovereignty, individual rights and due process?
 When you look at new technologies (stem cells, nanotechnology, human genomes, etc. imagine how things might turn out if new technologies had not been invented or how new ones might influence life on planet Earth .
 interstate wars have almost disappeared in modern history . Trends point to the possibility that this may also happen for interstate wars . Interstate wars have also disappeared in recent history .
 This achievement is raising expectations that large-scale warfare between countries will disappear . Armed conflict between countries may become obsolete, experts say . The achievement raises expectations that armed conflict will become obsolete .
 The usefulness of traditional weapons of warfare against emergent threats is questionable . That said, the usefulness of the traditional weapons is questionable, it's questionable .
 The old forms of military power still used by states today may be becoming impotent . No level of military might can guarantee a state’s safety, says author .
 “third-generation” military thinking has influenced most countries since World War II . Threat of being attacked today by the military forces of another country has diminished, particularly in the Global North .
 irregular forces using unconventional tactics focus on their adversary’s will . They use patience, ingenuity, and gruesome acts of violence to compel their opponent to face the mounting costs of continuing a long, drawn-out struggle .
 Both state and nonstate actors are turning to information technology and the Internet as unconventional weapons of war . The Internet and information technology is also being used in unconventional warfare .
 The ability of high-tech weapons to rapidly attack and disable thousands of targets introduces the possibility of highly volatile crises . The ability to target thousands of people could create a highly volatile crisis, experts say .
 The United States government blamed North Korea for a cyberattack on Sony Pictures Entertainment in relation to a satiric movie about a plot to assassinate Kim Jong-un . The U.S. government blamed the U.K. government in December 2014 .
 Many civilians are subject to widespread oppression and violence by governments created to preserve law and order . Many civilians have been subject to violence by dictatorships .
 Of great concern is whether the moral outrage of the global community will be sufficient to spur concerted peacekeeping and peacemaking interventions to end human rights abuses in those countries where acceptable standards in international law have been disregarded .
 Atrocities in many failed states each year expel tens of millions of refugees and displaced people from their homes . The world's most recent refugee crisis is in the form of civil war in Iraq and Syria .
 Human rights law provides unprecedented protection for people everywhere to live in freedom without fear . In principle, human rights law now provides . protection for . people everywhere .
 The traditional rule of state sovereignty and its corollary, the nonintervention norm against external interference in the internal affairs of states, have been revised . The traditional legal rule of the state sovereignty has been revised. The new rule is based on state sovereignty .
 There is growing support within the international community for a global responsibility to protect those who suffer from mass abuse at the hands of state governments .
 Principle is one thing; the reality of preventing human suffering is another . Principle is a thing: The reality is another. Principle prevents human suffering from being prevented from happening .
 Contention over whether the international community should intervene to stop human suffering in Syria intensified following the alleged use of chemical weapons in 2013 . Syria has been accused of using chemical weapons .
 ISIS/ISIL and associated armed groups have committed gross human rights abuses, a U.N. report says . The United Nations report says the group has violated international law and committed gross violations of international law .
 Islamic State militants appear to be carrying out an execution of Ethiopian Christians in Libya . Shown here, they appear to have been carrying out the execution of an Ethiopian Christians .
 As former French President Francois Mitterand once urged, “together we must urgently find the solutions to the real problems at hand—especially unemployment and underdevelopment,” he said .
 These rhetorical positions reflect the problems and self-interests leaders face at home and abroad . President Barack Obama has been accused of being a hypocrite .
 Flumankind may self-destruct, not because it lacks opportunities, but because of its collective inability to see and to seize them . Flum humankind may consequently self destruct, writes David Frum .
 They provide the vocabulary of diplomacy and inform theoretical discussion of governance and statecraft . However, they also provide a vocabulary for diplomacy .
 The century that began full of self-confidence in the ultimate triumph of Western liberal democracy at its close to be returning full circle to where it started . ... But the century is returning to the unabashed victory of economic and political liberalism .
 Free governments practicing free trade, liberalism contends, can best create a sound world order . Free governments practice free trade best to create a world order, liberalism says .
 A less reassuring possibility is that history has not “ended” and that the battle between totalitarian and democratic governance is not truly over . The battle may not be over, but it may be over for some .
 There are signals that the march of democracy’s spread is stalling, and many countries are democracies in name only . Many countries are ruled by one-party despots who, although elected, disregard constitutional limits on their power .
 Although many countries are starting to regain their financial footing, the consensus on the virtues of commercial liberalism has been shattered . The consensus on commercial liberalism is shattered, says David Cameron .
 The free market economies most exposed to the global economy bore the brunt of the financial damage . Countries that were relatively less open—ranging from India and China to Moldova—were less affected by the downturn .
 The paradox of contemporary world politics is that a world no longer haunted by the paralyzing fear of an all-out war between great powers now faces a series of challenges every bit as threatening and potentially unmanageable . The paradox is that the world is now facing challenges every more threatening and
 Globalization has simultaneously enlarged the responsibilities and expanded the issues to be confronted by the world's most powerful institutions . Globalization also has expanded the responsibilities of the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 The changes in recent years have spawned transnational threats to world order, including resurgent nationalism, ethnic conflict, fragile states, and separatist revolts . The changes have spawned threats to the world order .
 These include contagious diseases, human and drug trafficking, climate change, gender inequality, energy and food scarcities, desertification and deforestation, youth bulging and aging populations, and financial crises and collapsing economies .
 Hfc i potential impact of these additional threats is formi■ ""S dable, as emerging trends suggest that nonmilitary dangers will multiply alongside the continuing threat of arms and armed aggression in civil wars, as well as interstate wars in particular regions .
 It has identified the most important changes under way that are leading to potential transformations in world politics . The changes are under way in the shape of the world's future .
 Many trends are unfolding at the same time, and their combined impact can move the world along an unexpected trajectory . CNN.com's John Sutter says the world is moving along a new wave of trends .
 In addition, trends can reverse themselves, and each trend advances at its own rate, experts say . In addition to trends, each trend can reverse itself, they can also advance at their own rate .
 Some trends move very slowly in an evolutionary process that can only result in dramatic transformations over many centuries . Others exhibit short bursts of rapid change, interrupted by long periods without much change, say experts .
 It is helpful to construct your images both by using memories of the past and by being inspired by visions of the future . To appreciate the diverse ways trends may combine to affect each other, it is helpful .
 Patrick Henry underscored the importance of history, stating that there was “but one lamp by which my feet are guided, and that is the lamp of experience” Patrick Henry .
 We must avoid temptation to see ourselves and our own country as we wish to see them, without taking into account how differently others might view us and our state . All of us need both perspectives, and a keen awareness that our images of history and the future must be considered .
 India and China are joining the United States, Russia, Europe, and Japan as major players in space exploration . The U.S. and Russia are among the countries leading the space exploration efforts .
 Liu Yang is the first female Chinese astronaut, Liu Yang, during a departure ceremony on June 16, 2012 . Liu Yang was the first woman to enter the space shuttle program .
 Her accomplishments show that they have now soared past it . www.cssbooks.net /ededed .
 The stable is the enduring rituals, existing rules, established institutions, and entrenched customs that resist the pull of the momentous recent changes in world politics . Yet, juxtaposed against the revolutionary is the stable .
 Advances in science and technology far outpace the ability to resolve the social and political problems they generate . Advances have far outpaced the ability of resolving the social, political problems associated with them .
 Sophistication demands that we see the world as a whole, as well as its individual parts . It does not permit picturing others according to our self-images, or projecting onto others our own values .
 The future of world politics also rests on the outcome of a race between states’ ability to cooperate and their historic tendency to compete and fight, writes David Frum .
 Rather than fear the future, we should welcome its opportunities as we strive to build a more peaceful and just world . We should welcome the opportunities, rather than fear it, we must welcome the future .
 If our image of the future were different, the decisions of today would be different . The future of the U.S. will be different if we had a vision for the future, say experts .
 A blog by the Center for Global Politics at Freie Universitat Berlin that focuses on an array of important global issues . The blog focuses on issues of global politics .
 The GATT, the WTO and some Democratic Rights,” International Studies Quarterly 55 : 379^08.08.
 “How to Cute the Pentagon’s Budget While Improving Its Performance,” Foreign Affairs 90 : 139-152 .
 In Walter Carlsnaes, Thomas Risse, and Beth A Simmons, Handbook of International Relations . Handbook of international relations . For more information on international relations, visit www.cnn.org .
 A Weakened WTO, Mega FTAs and Murky Protectionism,’s Swiss Political Science Review 19 : 550—557 .
 Filling the Gap between 21st Century Trade and 20th Century Trade Rules. Filling up the gap between the 21st century trade and the 20th century trade rules.
 Human Rights Shaming and Foreign Direct Investment, International Studies Quarterly, is published in International Studies .
 Foreign Policy Analysis 4 Quly: Analogy, Foreign Policy Decision Making, and the Rwandan Genocide, is a model for Rwanda .
 Journal of Conflict Resolution 53 : 363—389. Personal Exposure to Terrorism, Psychological Distress, and Exclusionist Political AxxmxAcsf . Personal exposure to terrorism, psychological distress, and political exclusionist political prejudice .
 A Constructivist Perspective,” International Journal of Peace Studies 10 (Spring/ Summer); 69—86. “A Constructivist perspective” is a constructivist perspective . “I’m a Constructivist. I’ve been in the U.S.
 Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience . May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in p; Editorial review is deemed necessary .
 Understanding the Gabeikovo-Nagymaros Dam Conflict,” Foreign Policy Analysis 5 : 37—56.
 The Nexus of Human Rights, Democracy, and YDtvAo'pmentJ Journal of Peace Research 46 : 181—198. Journal of peace Research 46 .
 European Journal of International Relations 2Q : 1124—1147. Why a Procedural Account alone is Insufficient is insufficient .
 Foreign Affairs : 54-64. What Population Growth—and Decline—Means for the Global Economy,” Foreign Affairs .
 The World’s Top Currency Faces Competition,” Foreign Affairs 88 : 53—68 .
 The study was published in the International Studies Review 10 : 239-265 .
 Center for Economic Policy, vvww.org/sites/ default/files/GTAl 6.pdf . The report was compiled by the Global Trade Alert Network .
 The study was published in International Studies Review 4 : 49-72. “Portrait of a Research Program’s . Portrait of the Research Program,” International Studies .
 “Why Being a Unipole Isn’t All It’s Cracked Up to Be,” World Politics 61: 58-85 .
 Assessing China’s Potential for Territorial Expansion,” International Studies Review 12 : 505—532. “Assessing China's Potential for territorial Expansion”
 “St. Benedict’s Quest to Bring Christians Back Together,” Foreign Ajfairs ^2 : 117—128.
 If You really Want to Fight Poverty, Fuel Growth and Combat Extremism, Try Girl Power,” Time : 64. If you really want to fight poverty, fuel growth and combat extremism, try Girl Power .
 Foreign Affairs 89 : 31—43. The Four Megatrends That Will Change the World,” Foreign Affairs, is Foreign Affairs .
 International Studies Review 16 : 522—539. Dispositions in International Communications, Dialogue, and Persuasion .
 Crisis, Masculinity, and Responsibility” Men and Masculinities 16 : 9—34.34.
 A Realist Structural Theory of International Relations,” International Studies Review 14 : 499—521.
 Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience . May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in whole .
 “How a Zombie Simulation Can Contribute to Teaching International Relations” International Studies Perspectives: 1-15 .
 Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . Contribution of Working Group I to the IPCC's Fifth Assessment .
 In Karen A Mingst and Jack L Snyder , Essential Readings in World Politics, 3rd ed., 2.2. 2.3.5.
 The Power of Principle in a Pluralistic World,” Ethics & International Affairs 6: 21-42. “The Power of principle in a pluralistic world” 6:21-42 .
 International Politics A\ : 37-49. Policy Problems and Normative Perils,” International Politics, is published on October 1 .
 American Political Science Review 103: 113-133. Why States Provide Sensitive Nuclear Assistance?
 The Destabilizing Consequences of Private Military Companies,” Journal of Peace Research 42 : 605—622 .
 International Organizations and Foreign Aid in the Punishing of Human Rights YioXditoTsJ Journal of Peace Research 46 : 79—97 .
 Countering Radicalisation and Violent Extremism among Youth to Prevent Terrorism . Countering radicalisation and violent extremism among youth to prevent terrorism . The U.S. has been in the forefront of the fight against terrorism in recent years .
 Joy Gordon’s book, “Joy Gordon: A Response to Joy Gordon,” Ethics & International Affairs 26 : 135—145 . Gordon: “I am not the only person to respond to this question’
 A Plea and Manifesto for Pluralism,” Review of International Studies 35; 195—218. ‘Pluralism’ is an attempt at a formative democracy .
 “Pathways to Changing the Gender Division of Labor,” Perspectives on Politics 12 : 81-99 .
 Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Discourse is published in the Feminist Review 30 : 61-88 .
 Using Events Data to Assess the Impact of Human Rights INGOs,” International Studies Quarterly 56 : 1—16.16.
 Just War in Classical Greek Political Thought and Practice,” International Studies Quarterly 59 : 1—10.10.
 The Public Effect of Economic Sanctions,” Foreign Policy Analysis, 1 : 237-251. “The public effect of economic sanctions is that of the sanctions," the author says .
 International Studies Quarterly 51: 359-384. Toward a Constructivist Methodology,” International Studies .
 The Logic of Two-Level Games,” International Organization 42 : 427-460. “The logic of two-level games is that two levels are two levels .” “Two-level Games” is a form of form of a game .
 “Failing to Complete the Green Revolution could bring the Next Famine,” Foreign Affairs 89 : 8—14 .
 Foreign Affairs: Connectivity and the Diffusion of Power . Foreign Affairs (November/ December): 75-85.
 The Role of Leadership in Russian Foreign Policy,” International Politics AS\ 482-497,’s International Politics, is published in the journal International Politics .
 A Normative Account hyL^rry May,” Ethics & International Affairs 2A : 433—435. May . May is May Day .
 In Robert L Rothstein , The Evolution of Theory in International Relations . Rothstein: Theory of International Relations is a theory of international relations . In Robert Rothstein’s book, Theory of Theory and International Relations.
 How the WTO Boosts Economies and Opens Societies,” Foreign Affairs 87 : 125-136.
 From Her Base in Germany, Major General Maggie Woodward Ruled the Skies over Libya . Major General Woodward ruled the skies over Libya from her German base .
 States, Leaders, and the Microfoundations of Behavioral International Relations . States, leaders, and leaders, are responsible for the nation's relationship with the world .
 Richard W Mansbach and Edward Rhodes . Global Politics in a Changing World, 3.3.5.2.3 .
 China, Emerging Donors and the Silent Revolution in Development Assistance,” International Affairs 1205-1221. China, emerging Donors, and the silent revolution in development assistance, will be discussed .
 International Studies Perspectives 12 : 94-118. Thinking about Greater Interdisciplinarity .
 International Cooperation, State Contributions, and the Role of the Global Political Economy,” International Studies Review 12 : 316-319. “The role of the global political economy’s role is to be played in international cooperation, state contributions, and role of state contributions .
 Russia in Cold War, 98—104 in rivalry for world leadership, 86 in World War II, 93,96 space . See also Russia in Russia in the Cold War and in space .
 World Politics aims to help you become an informed global citizen and establish a foundation for life-long learning about international affairs . In essence, World Politics strives to help people become informed global citizens . World Politics is a weekly weekly feature on CNN iReport .
 Log in using your Cengage Learning single sign-on user name and password . Create a new instructor account by clicking on “New Faculty User’s” and following the instructions .
 This Instructor Companion Website is an all-in-one multimedia online resource for class preparation, presentation, and testing . Instructor Companion website for World Politics, 2016-2017 Edition—for instructors only .
 Cengage Learning Testing Testing Powered by Cognero is a flexible, online system that allows you to author, edit, and manage Test Bank content from multiple CEngage Learning solutions . The test bank can deliver tests from your LMS, your classroom, or wherever you want
 Many people have contributed to the development of this leading textbook in international relations . Eugene R Wittkopf, who served as a coauthor of the first six editions, is among those who have contributed .
 Easter is Easter Sunday in Brazil, Brazil, Ghana, Peru, Brazil and Brazil . Easter Sunday is Sunday, April 24 .
 Anchorage, wm 4o°w, is the largest city in Canada . The city is located in the province of New Brunswick .
 P ' Tijuana 'Mexicali St. St. San Jose • Fresno . Las Vegas • Los Angeles • San Diego • L.A.
 Monterrey •Culiacan MEXICO San Luis Potosf Aguascalientes* * *^ Qn Guadalajara. Monterreal . San Luis Pintof Aguacientes .
 VINCENT BARBADOS / ® Managua GRENADA Panama . Panama ,^TRINIDAD & COSTARICA “y Caracas® TOBAGO GUYANA ..rur-n.n.y .
 Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience . Due to editorial review, we have deemed that suppression of content is not materially affecting the overall experience .
 Sultan bin Salman Al-Saud: “The first day or so we alt pointed to our countries.” The first day of space shuttle travel was “the first day’s mission to the U.S. A world without borders.
 A historic deal was reached between Iran and other major world powers after nearly ten years of diplomacy . The deal commits Iran to curbing its nuclear program in return for sanctions relief .
 As you ride home from the airport, you hear a radio broadcast about economic conditions around the world . The world's economic conditions are being broadcast on the airwaves .
 There are concerns about the slide in total trade and the Chinese stock market . China’s economic growth is slowing, and there are concerns over the slide . There are also concerns about China's stock market and trade .
 A popular cruise company is looking at providing trips to the island nation . You also hear that in light of the warming of relations between the U.S. and Cuba, a popular cruise line is also looking at Cuba .
 The whole purpose of education is to turn mirrors into windows, says Sydney J Harris . To best understand the political convulsions that confront the globe’s more than 7 billion people, it is critical that we perceive our times accurately .
 Both sides demonize the image of their adversaries while perceiving themselves as virtuous . For example, in rivalries such as Christianity’s with Islam during the Crusades in the Middle Ages and the United States’ with A1 Qaeda today, the U.S. says .
 In July 2014 the European Court of Human Rights upheld the French law banning such clothing . The French government argued that such laws do not prevent the free exercise of religion in a place of worship .
 A native Pakistani woman challenged the Canadian prohibition against wearing clothing that obscures the face during citizenship ceremonies . A federal court ruled in favor of the woman in February 2015 . The Canadian prohibition prohibits clothing obscuring the face .
 The finding supports her argument that wearing a full-facial veil is an expression of her Muslim faith and cultural values . Touching off a firestorm of debate within that country, the finding supported her argument . The finding has sparked a debate within the Muslim community .
 Al Khansa, an all-female policing unit of the Islamic State, poured acid on the faces of 15 Iraqi women because they were not properly covered . The Islamic State has a history of violence against women in Iraq .
 All of these groups combine people and their choices in various collectivities and thereby aggregate the power of each group . All of the groups are groups that combine people, their choices, and their power, together .
 Amnesty International, the World Wildlife Federation, and Doctors Without Borders are all NGOs that work to bring about change in the world and influence international decision making .
 The factors the phenomenon we are trying to explain explain are the factors we try to explain . Foreign policy and international relations are major factors in shaping foreign policy .
 World Wars I and II and the Cold War caused fundamental breaks with the past and set in motion major transformations, providing countries with incentives to rethink the premises underlying their interests, purposes, and priorities . World War II and Cold War provided incentives for countries to rethink their interests .
 The perpetuation of international anarch , in the absence of institutions to govern the globe, and continuing national insecurity still encourage preparations for war and use of force without international mandate .
 World Politics will examine the values, interests, and capabilities of individual actors affected by these global trends . From this analytic point of departure, World Politics looks at the ways these actors interact in their individual and collective efforts to modify existing global circumstances .
 A rising China may pose a new challenge that will displace 9/11 as a transformative phenomenon in world politics . Alternatively, a rising China could pose a challenge to displace World War II as a major global event .
 How Superpowers, Poptdations, and Globalization Will Change the Way You Live and Work. How Superpower, Poptech will Change the way you live and work. How the future of the world is changing .
 Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap Key Term Videos . Kupchan, Charles. Charles. "Kupchan" is the creator of a series of YouTube videos .
 A political movement in the U.S. calling for the use of military and economic power in foreign policy to bring freedom and democracy to other countries . The movement is called "Neocommervative"
 Discussions of ‘power politics’ abound in the Artbashastra, an Indian treatise on statecraft written during the fourth century BCE, and in works written by Han Fei and Shang Yang .
 In an effort to counter what they saw as a utopian, legalistic approach to foreign affairs, Reinhold Niebuhr and Hans J Morgenthau painted a pessimistic view of human nature . The realists painted a pessimism in an attempt to counter the utopian approach .
 Diplomatic diplomacy is not dependent upon the use of force and seeks a cooperative solution . zero-sum is an exchange in a conflictual relationship in which what is gained by one competitor is lost by the other .
 Immanuel Kant helped to redefine modern liberal theory by advocating global citizenship, free trade, and free trade as a means to peace . Immanuel was influenced by David Hume and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, in Perpetual Peace .
 The Frankfurt School of Critical Social Theory is a theory of critical social theory . It was founded by the Frankfurt School in the early 1900s . It has its roots in the development of critical theory by Alexander Wendt .
 Constructivism merits careful consideration because awareness of how our understandings of the world are individually and socially constructed, enables us to see international relations in a new and critical light .
 A paradigm based on the premise that world politics is a function of the ways that states construct and then accept images of reality and later respond to the meanings given to power politics . As consensual definitions change, it is possible for either conflictual or cooperative practices to evolve .
 Liberal institutionalism sees a zombie outbreak as a problem that transcends national borders and threatens the global community writ large . As a strand of liberalism, liberal institutionalism is concerned about a global outbreak of zombies .
 Although realism, liberalism, and constructivism dominate thinking about international relations in today's academic and policy communities, these schools of thought have been challenged . FEMINIST AND MARXIST CRITIQUES .
 Liberal feminism sees men and women as equal in skills and capabilities . Unlike some other variants of feminist theory, liberal feminism calls for greater participation of women within the existing structures and does not think that inclusion of women in positions of .
 Socialism envisions society as optimally characterized by public ownership and control of property and resources, to the benefit of individuals living in concert with one another .
 This is in contrast to capitalism, premised on the private ownership of the means of production . The free market allows individual choice through a free market to determine the distribution of goods and services .
 Fie, along with his coauthor Friedrich Engels, argued that socialism emerges through the clash of social classes as opposed to the establishment of harmonious communities . Fie and Engels believed that socialism emerged from the clash between social classes .
 U.S. relations with Israel are at their lowest point in thirty-five years, ambassador says . Israeli ambassador to the United States Michael Oren says relations with the U.K. have suffered a “tectonic rift”
 In our theoretical exploration of world politics, we must critically assess the accuracy of our impressions, avoiding the temptation to embrace one worldview and abandon another without any assurance that their relative worth is permanently fixed . We must avoid the temptation of embracing one worldviews and abandoning another without a guarantee that their
 If you tell people the world is complicated, you’re not doing your job as a social scientist, says social scientist . "You’ve got to tell people that it’s complicated. You’m not doing that," says author .
 Use a level-of-analysis approach to identify the major influences on foreign policy making . Use the level of analysis to identify major influences in foreign policy decision making .
 World Politics provides a framework for analyzing and explaining the processes by which foreign policies are made . To stimulate your thinking about international decision making by all types of transnational actors, World Politics offers a framework .
 Flow these group actors are governed, and the processes and procedures they follow to reach foreign policy decisions, are forces of their own that structure and determine the decisions that are reached . Flow of these groups actors is how they are governed .
 Foreign policy outcomes have consequences for the input factors themselves at a later time . They exert “feedback” on these causal factors as the foreign policy decisions alter the conditions that influence subsequent decisions .
 This reaction, in turn, later transformed global conditions as well as attitudes within U.S. society, which began to galvanize revisions . This reaction was galvanized into revisions {t + 4) of the original policy decision . The reaction, which turned global conditions and attitudes within American
 Decision Making as Rational Choice Realism assumes that foreign policy making consists primarily of an international actor adjusting to the pressures of an anarchical global system . The essential properties of the global system do not vary .
 Like beauty, rationality often lies in the eye of the beholder, but rationality lies in eye of eye, mind . People can disagree about the facts and wisdom of foreign policy goals, but reasonable people can disagree .
 This debate demonstrated that although rationality is a decision-making goal to which all transnational actors aspire, it is difficult to determine when the criteria for rational choice have been met or what those rational choices look like .
 The concept that decision maker’s capacity to choose the best option is often constrained by many human and organizational obstacles . There may be many interpretations of what is right, what is possible, and what is in the national interest .
 A concept referring to the growing need for national policy makers to make decisions that will meet both domestic and foreign goals . At the international level, national governments seek to maximize their own ability .
 A socialpsychological theory explaining decision making under conditions of uncertainty and risk . Theory looks at relationship between individual risk propensity and perceived prospects for avoiding losses and realizing big gains .
 Leaders as Movers of World History as a model of policy decision making . World leaders as people who create global changes . Leaders as movers of world history as a history-making individuals .
 Extraversion N: Assertiveness . Gregariousness . Excitement-Seeking • Warmth • Optimism • Optimistic . Optimism . Altruism •Altruism . Trustfulness . Self-Discipline . Deliberation . Competence . Sense of Duty Amb
 Zeitgeist is the “spirit of the times, “ or the dominant cultural norms assumed to influence the behavior of people living in particular periods . It is the most recent example of a person living in a period of time .
 "Any given decision you make you’ll wind up with a 30 to 40 percent chance that it isn’t going to work. Any given decision . You’ve got to be patient patient and patient,’s coach says. ‘I’m
 The Limits of Bureaucratic Organization . What emerges from our description of ureaucracy is another idealized picture of the policy-making process .
 Graham Allison’s well-known book on the missile crisis, Essence of Decision (1971), advanced what is widely known as the bureaucratic politics model . Allison and Zelikow, 1999, are the authors of the book .
 Kissinger fought often with James Schlesinger and Donald Rumsfeld over strategy regarding Vietnam War . Zbigniew Brzezinski engaged in conflicts with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance over Iran hostage crisis . Under Ronald Reagan, Caspar Weinberger at Defense and George Shultz at State were
 Libyan leader Muammar al-Qaddafi repeatedly provoked the U.S. through anti-American and anti-Israeli rhetoric . In the 1980s, he used the rhetoric to provoke the United States, author says .
 Qaddafi was doubtlessly more highly constrained by the outside world than were the leaders in the more militarily capable countries toward whom he directed his anger . However, Qaddafi's anger was more limited than those of the countries he directed anger at .
 Leaders today sometimes make foreign policy decisions for domestic political purposes . Sometimes bold or aggressive acts abroad are intended to divert public attention from economic woes . Democracy allows people, through their elected representatives, to exercise power and influence policies .
 The hypothesis that leaders sometimes initiate conflict abroad as a way of increasing national cohesion at home by diverting public attention away from controversial domestic issues and internal problems .
 democracies may be seen as comparatively “weak” in that they rely on public support and their political power is less centralized . Along those lines, democracies may see as comparatively "weak" in that .
 Small state members of each alliance will feel compelled to conform to the dictates of the alliance’s leader . Flowever, when alliances are tight military blocs, the small state members will be compelled to comply with the leader of the leader .
 Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap . Key Term Videos: Roles, Externalities and Externalities • Political Efficacy • Policy Agenda . Additional Videos: Dallek, Robert.
 People, like states and international organizations, are transnational actors . People like states, like nations, can be transnational agents . People should be aware of their role in the world's most powerful institutions .
 Mobilized publics often use demonstrations to express their dissent and draw global attention to their cause . Mobilization is a form of protest in the United States .
 Good leadership in this century may or may not be transformational, but it will most certainly require a careful understanding of the context of change . Rivalry between great powers has long characterized world politics .
 A theory that focuses on the rise and fall of the leading global power as the central political process of the modern world system . Long-cycle theory elaborates on this understanding of world politics .
 Each global war has led to the emergence of a jegemon . Over the past five centuries, each global war led to an emergence of the jegememon .
 Pakistanis burn a United States flag in an anti-American rally in protest of drone attacks in Pakistan's tribal regions . Shown here is one example of resistance to U.S. global preeminence .
 By the time the first major European war of the twentieth century had ended, nearly 10 million people had died . Three empires had crumbled, three states had been born, seven decades of communist rule in Russia had begun . The world geopolitical map had been redrawn in ways that paved the
 Structuralism postulates that the changing distribution of power within the anarchical global system is the primary factor that determines state behavior . Structuralists postulate that changing power distribution in an anarchical system is a primary factor in state behavior.
 Germany thus supported Austria-Flungary’s unrestrained assault on Serbia . Austria-Frenzburg supported the attack on Serbia, which was ruled out of Serbia .
 A victorious war would bolster Austria-Flungary and hamper Russian influence, it turned out to be a serious miscalculation . The logic behind Germany’s calculation was clear, but it was a mistake .
 European military alignments had become polarized, pitting the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Flungary and the Ottoman Empire against the Triple Entente of Britain, France, and Russia .
 A mindset glorifying a particular state and the nationality group living in it sees the state’s interest as a supreme value . The rational www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net nationalism .
 In its wake, three multiethnic empires— the Austrian-Elungarian, Russian, and Ottoman —collapsed . The independent states of Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia emerged in their place . The Ottoman Empire collapsed in its wake .
 Based on Strategic Atlas, Comparative Geopolitics of the World's Powers, revised edition, by Gerard Chaliand and Jean Pierre .
 Hitler urged Germany to recover territories taken by the Treaty of Versailles, absorb Germans living in neighboring lands, and colonize Eastern Europe . In his 1924 book Mein Kampf^Mj Struggle’s ‘I will never be able to live in Europe’
 The following year, the goals originally outlined in Mein Kampf climbed to the top of Hitler’s foreign policy agenda . Hitler's foreign policy goals became the most important foreign policy document in the world .
 Hitler, British prime minister Neville Chamberlain, and leaders of France and Italy all attended . Hitler and Neville Chamberlain attended the event .
 Japan’s invasions of Manchuria in 1931 and further forays into China in 1937 were paralleled by Italy's absorption of Abyssinia in 1935 and Albania in 1939 . Italy’�s absorption of Ethiopia in 1935 was also paralleled .
 Nazi troops launched a surprise attack on the Soviet Union, Hitler’s supposed ally, in June 1941 . Instead of invading Britain, however, the Nazi troops attacked Britain in 1941 .
 Japan launched a surprise assault on the United States at Pearl Flarbor on December 7th of that same year . Deciding that the eviction of the U.S. from the Pacific was critical to its national interest, Japan attacked .
 Senior Nazi Hermann Goering reflected on the Nazi propaganda success during the Nuremberg Trials after World War II .
 Domestically, German nationalism inflamed latent irredentism and rationalized the expansion of German borders . Germany expanded borders to regain provinces previously lost in wars to others and to absorb Germans living in Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Poland .
 The rise of c ascism —the Nazi regimes ideology championing the flag, the fatherland, nationalism, imperialism, and anti-Semitism—animated this renewed imperialistic push and preached an extreme version of realism that stressed power politics .
 The Soviet Union absorbed nearly 600,000 square kilometers of territory from the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania . Poland, a victim of Soviet expansionism, was compensated with land taken from Germany .
 Soviet Occupation Zones | 1>M British occupation zones E~T~| Iron Curtain I o Cl. V urk,y Sea Tunisia Tunisia Cyprus | | | USSR before the war 1 1 ri *™ ' H U.S. occupation zones . U.
 The "BigThree" leaders met at the Yalta Conference in 1945 to design a new world order . Winston Churchill, Franklin Roosevelt, Joseph Stalin and Joseph Stalin met in February 1945 . The “BigThree’s” leaders met in 1945 .
 Cold War and its lessons still cast dark shadows over today’s geostrategic landscape . As the third and last hegemonic struggle of the twentieth century, the Cold War still casts dark shadows . The Cold War was the third hegemon struggle of 20th century .
 The lomino theory suggested that communism was inherently driven to knock over one country after another, Soviet communism was expansionistic . The theory was based on the theory of Soviet communism, which was inherently expansionistic, according to the theory .
 Soviet planners did not believe that this historical outcome was guaranteed . Elowever, Soviet planners believed that this would be guaranteed .
 President Truman made Kennan’s assessment the cornerstone of American postwar foreign policy . Soon thereafter, President Harry S Truman made the assessment the centerpiece of American foreign policy.
 Khrushchev pursued a policy of peaceful coexistence with capitalism . The Soviet Union remained strategically inferior to the U.S. because of its inferior status .
 The period following Stalin’s death saw many Cold War confrontations . Hungary, Cuba, Egypt, and Berlin served as flash points during the Cold War .
 The U.S. linkage strategy was to shape superpower relations and lessen incentives for war through the continuation of mutually rewarding exchanges . Along these lines, the objective of the United States linkage strategy is to shape superpowers .
 He sought to settle differences with the capitalist West in order to halt the deterioration of his country’s economic and international position . The Soviet Union sought to end differences with capitalist West .
 Gorbachev embarked on domestic reforms to promote democratization and the transition to the market economy . Embracing these principles, Gorbachachev proclaimed his desire to end the Cold War contest .
 The Soviet Union agreed to end its aid to and support of the Castro regime in Cuba, withdrew from Afghanistan, and announced unilateral reductions in military spending . The USSR also agreed to cut back on aid to Cuba and withdraws from Afghanistan .
 “Militarism, in harness with communism, destroyed the Soviet economy and thus hastened the self-destruction of the Soviet empire” “It was man who ended the Cold War in case you didn’t notice.”—Fred Charles Ikle
 Hegemons repeatedly have defined their security interests more broadly than other states, only to slip from the pinnacle of power by reaching beyond their grasp . Selective engagement is a great power grand strategy using economic and military power .
 Imperial overstretch is a tendency for hegemons to sap their own strength through costly imperial pursuits and military spending . It weakens their economies by weakening their economies in relation to their rivals .
 The world's major power and its leading challenger are economically interdependent to an unprecedented degree . As Harvard law professor Noah Feldman notes, “The world’s major power . and its . leading challenger . are economically . interdependent, Feldman says .
 Tensions also erupted over the Arab Spring, the overthrow of Libya’s dictator Muammar al-Qaddafi . The United States saw as the nondemocratic election that returned Vladimir Putin to the presidency . The U.S. also saw what the U.N. saw
 Legatum Prosperity Index™ is based on data from Legatum Institute . The index is a measure of economic activity in the United States .
 Russia is strongly asserting itself across Eurasia, as seen in the invasion of Ukraine, challenges to U.S. goals in Syria, and Iran’s nuclear program . These efforts are seen an attempt to dominate the region and threaten the reigning world order, says Julian Zelizer .
 The liberal international framework that was shaped following World War II continues to underlie the global economy and mechanisms for addressing global problems . United States power far surpasses that of Russia, says U.S. President Obama .
 In 2014, China overtook the United States to become the leading economy in terms of gross domestic product . GDP is based on mrchasing power parity (PP1 I) which removes differences in countries' price levels .
 Current and projected growth indicates that there are significant shifts taking place in the global balance of geopolitical and economic power, 2014-2050 . The world's economic and political power is changing in the balance of power .
 By 2050, the top five ranked countries may include the U.S. plus emerging market economies of China, India, Indonesia, and Brazil . The top five nations could include the United States, Indonesia and Brazil, according to the study .
 The Chinese military’s outreach for international approaches to managing shared security cooperation is not intended to impair the international system, but to become a problems through player and builder of the system . The benefit of security can be truly shared by all, the Chinese military says .
 Hu Jintao: Challenge and opportunity always come together . Under certain conditions one could be transformed into the other . Of course, we have no way of knowing what the future holds .
 Carnegie Council Videos via MindTap . Key Term Videos: Hegemon, Bipolarity, Structuralism, Cold War, Nationalism, Truman Doctrine, Multipolarity .
 The division in power and wealth characterizing the global North and iobal South pose both moral and security problems . North and South pose moral and economic problems, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A term used to refer to the world’s wealthy, industrialized countries located primarily in the Northern Hemisphere . The Global North is the name of countries located in the northern hemisphere .
 The relatively wealthy industrialized countries share a commitment to varying forms of democratic political institutions and developed market economies . The United States, Japan, the European Union, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand .
 During the Cold War, the term Third Worlc was used to distinguish the growing number of newly independent but economically less developed states on either side of the divide that shared a colonial past . The term was used in the 1950s and 1960s to distinguish between the two countries .
 The “Third World” was soon used to refer to those countries that had failed to grow economically in a way that was comparable to countries of the First World . The "Third World" refers to those that had not grown economically comparable to the industrialized great powers such as Europe,
 Indonesia and Timor-Leste are both archipelago nations with more than 17,500 islands scattered across an oceanic expanse larger than the U.S. Their ranks include both Indonesia, Timor, an island state roughly the same size as Connecticut .
 According to Transparency International, he embezzled more than $5 billion from his country . He is ranked as the most corrupt African leader over the past two decades .
 The economic strategy underlying the relationship between colonies and colonizers during this era of ‘classical imperialism’ is known as mercantilism . A government trade strategy for accumulating state wealth and power by . encouraging exports and . discouraging imports .
 With the Industrial Revolution, capitalism grew—emphasizing the free market, private ownership of the means . laissez-faire economics is based on Adam Smith’s ideas about the forces of supply and demand in the marketplace .
 Hobson argued, jockeying for power and prestige between competitive empires had always characterized the great powers’ behavior in the European balance-of-power system .
 The theoretical outlook prescribing that countries should increase their power and wealth in order to compete with and dominate other countries . selfdetermination The liberal doctrine that people should be able to determine the government that will rule them . War eventually erupted between these newly independent states as www.thecsspoint.com
 As the old order crumbled, leaders in the newly emancipated territories discovered that freedom did not translate automatically into autonomy . The conflict between the rich Global North and the emerging states of the Global South began .
 The situation is much more favorable in the developed countries of the Global North than it is in the Southern Hemisphere . Quality of life is relatively advantageous in developed countries . Nearly all the Global South countries are located in the South .
 A measure of the production of goods and services within a given time period is used to delimit the geographic scope of production . The World Bank identifies lowincome Global South countries with an annual GNI per capita at or below $1,045 .
 The Global South appears to be increasing its dependence for arms purchases on the very same rich states whose military and economic domination they historically have most feared and resented . The Global North and the Global South in the proportion of Internet users and hosts .
 The techniques for storing, retrieving, and disseminating, through computerization and the Internet recorded data and research knowledge . Information technology is a form of information technology .
 Information and communication technology has spread rapidly in recent years . The Internet has been a huge part of the world's history of information technology .
 Group of 77 sponsored the 1963 Joint Declaration of Developing Countries calling for reform to allow greater equality in North-South trade . Today, disputes about the appropriate intersection between global governance and national sovereignty persist .
 The BRICS countries also agreed to establish a New Development Bank . The bank is expected to be operational by 2016 . BRICS nations also agree to establish an international development bank .
 The rising economic strength of the BRICS countries has outpaced increases in their voice at the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund . Economic cooperation within the Global South has greatly expanded, says the IMF .
 Dissatisfaction with these Bretton-Woods institutions has led the BRICS countries to develop an alternative to global development finance . The BRICS nations have developed alternative to the Bretton Woods institutions .
 The billions of dollars that migrant workers send home each year are vital to developing countries . Migrant workers send millions of dollars back to developing nations .
 World Bank data from the World Bank; estimates based on the International Monetary Fund's Balance of Payments Statistics Database .
 Developing countries have long pleaded for ‘trade, not aid’ to improve their global position . Access to the Global North’s markets is critical to Global South economic growth, says NIC .
 Central America-Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement aims to emulate NAFTA . The deal includes the United States, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, and Costa Rica .
 Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation is an informal forum created in 1989 . The forum is committed to free trade and regional economic integration .
 Members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations agreed to set up a free-trade area . The free trade area was first established in 1967 by Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand .
 The Trans-Pacific partnership deepens trade and investment for a far-flung group that has an annual GDP of almost $28 trillion . The group has one-third of the world's GDP .
 Tata Nano is the world's cheapest car and is the innovation of an emerging multinational in Mumbai, India . Launched in March 2009, the Tata Nano was the first car to be launched by Tata Nano .
 Private equity, portfolio investment, and FDI experienced great volatility between 2007 and 2009 . Remittances and ODA were more stable than in 2007 and 2008 .
 A new era of North-South-East cooperation could begin, dedicated to finding solutions to common problems . North and South-East could find common problems ranging from commercial to environmental to environmental and security concerns .
 In 1982, the U.S. placed Cuba on its list of state sponsors of terrorism because of Cuba’s support for armed revolution and leftist guerrilla groups . Cuba aligned with the Soviet Union, the United States severed diplomatic ties and made concerted efforts to overthrow and assassinate Castro .
 In 2015, Cuba and the United States moved toward normalization of relations . The transition has momentous implications for Cuba and could usher in a future of wealth and welfare .
 Rendered based on data for states from the Correlates of War . Data on IGOs and NGOs are from the Yearbook of International Organizations .
 These conflicts show the extent of the organization reflects the relationships of the five great powers that created it and govern it through veto authority .
 CSS Point the realist belief that countries should put their own national interest above concern for the global community guide their admissions decision making . The CSS Point is based on the belief that the country should put its own national interests ahead of the international community . CSS Point: The CSS point is the
 The UN became paralyzed by the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union in the post-Cold War era . The UN was freed from paralysis and returned to its original mission .
 They have supported a stronger role for the UN in addressing the violent conflict in Syria . They have also supported a strong role for UN in dealing with the conflict .
 Many supporters see UN intervention as supported by the UN Charter, which envisions the protection of human rights as the responsibility of global society . Many supporters say UN intervention is supported by UN Charter .
 Responsibility to Protect doctrine also calls for intervention by the international community if a state fails to protect its citizens from war crimes, ethnic cleansing, genocide, and crimes against humanity . Unanimously adopted by UN members in 2005, the doctrine was also adopted by the UN .
 Critics of intervention argue that action motivated by nonhumanitarian reasons is in contradiction to the UN Charter . UN Charter rests on principle of sovereignty and prohibits forceful intervention that violates the political independence and territorial integrity of any state . Flowever, critics argue that .
 It highlights the tension between a state’s sovereign authority over its territory, its responsibility to protect and provide for the compelling needs of its own people, and the grounds for intervention by the international community .
 While negotiations for the anticipated ITO are underway, negotiations for an ITO have been ongoing .
 Charges of bribery, kickbacks, and embezzlement have been leveled against World Bank projects . The last three bank presidents have insisted on anticorruption reforms as well .
 In the recent past, protesters targeted the high-profile meetings of two powerful IGOs . Protesters targeted the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund . The World Bank is one of the world's most powerful institutions .
 Their reform program sought the political integration of Europe via a new supranational institution that transcended individual European states . To bring about nothing less than the transformation of international relations, they sought to transform international relations .
 European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, the European Atomic Energy Community in 1957 . The European Economic Community was formed in 1957, and the European Coal, Steel and Steel Communities in 1951 .
 Other countries in the western Balkans are lobbying for future membership . Albania, Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Bosnia and fferzegovina also lobbying for membership .
 Iceland applied for membership with a targeted date of 2011 for acceptance into the Artie block . Accession talks stalled due to dispute over mackerel fishing and the sensitive issue of financial reform .
 EU expansion has allowed the European Union “to exercise its normative power, and to organize the continent in its own image,” says Christophe ffellion .
 Council of Ministers represents the governments of the EU’s member states and retains final authority over policy-making decisions . EU's central administrative unit, the Council of . Ministers, represents governments of . member states .
 Commissioners are nominated by EU member governments, in consultation with the president of the European Commission, and must be approved by the European Parliament . Commissioners must be nominated by member governments in consultation .
 The elected deputies pass laws with the council, approve the EU’s budget, and oversee the European Commission . The European Parliament can overturn some of the Commission's decisions, which the parliament can overturn .
 The European Court of Justice in Luxembourg has grown to prominence as European integration has developed . The court of justice has also grown in prominence and power in recent years .
 Debate continues over how far and how fast such a process toward pooled sovereignty should proceed . Several efforts to further integrate the countries of Europe have met with resistance . The Danes rejected the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, the Irish rejected the Nice Treaty in 2001 .
 APEC held its meeting of trade ministers and economic leaders in Boracay, Philippines, in May 2015 . APEC aims to promote regional economic integration, achieve shared development and common prosperity .
 The security IGO has expanded its membership to twenty-eight countries and broadened its mission to promote democratization and to police civil wars and terrorism outside its traditional territory within Europe . The security organization has expanded membership to over twenty-28 countries .
 The near monopoly of power once enjoyed by sovereign entities is being eroded . National or ethnic groups are struggling to obtain power and/or statehood . Non-state nations are among the most powerful non-state organizations .
 The Chinese, however, see him as a “splittist,” after the spiritual leader fled Tibet in 1959 following a failed armed uprising against Chinese . Indigenous groups have frequently seen their rights and welfare fail victim to a larger national interest in progress and development as determined by the
 Indigenous communities demonstrate in Sao Paulo, Brazil, against the construction of the Beio Monte dam at the Xingu River in the Amazon .
 Samuel Huntington’s thesis that in the twenty-first century the globe’�s major civilizations will conflict with one another, leading to anarchy and warfare similar to that resulting from conflicts between states over the past 500years . Transnational Religious Movements clash of civilizations .
 Ideally, religion would seem a natural worldwide force for global unity and harmony . Religion seems to be a natural global force for world unity .
 MAJOR RELIGIONS Eastern Orthodox | Protestant | Roman Catholic | Other Christian ■ Jewish | Shia Muslim | Sunni Muslim | Hindu | Lamaistic Buddhist [B| Theravada Buddhist | J Buddhist and Shintoist □ Mahayana Buddhist, Confucianist, Conf
 Religious roots of terrorism and opposition to democracy in the Global South have received much attention, as have religious bodies acting as NGO global actors . As a result, the religious roots of terrorist acts have been much attention .
 Flowever, in an age of religious conflict and political violence, the role of religious NGOs in international affairs is controversial . Flowever: In a age of political violence and religious conflict, religious NGOs should not be allowed to be involved .
 In an effort to believe in unshakable doctrines, believers reject the attempt to separate what they wish to be true from what they or other religions think to be false .
 Religious movements often practice intolerance—disrespect for diversity and disregard for the right to freely embrace another religion’s beliefs . In a word, religious movements practice intolerance .
 Most religious bodies have historically coexisted peacefully for centuries . Meanwhile, many religions ably perform the mission of peacemaking (Gaetan, 2013)
 A religious or ethnic minority's efforts, often by violent means, to gain independent statehood by separating territory from an established sovereign state . diasporas The migration of religious or . ethnic groups to foreign lands despite their continuation of affiliation with the land and customs of their origin .
 MNCs comprise almost 23 percent of the top seventy economic entities in the world . Altogether, they are almost half of the world's top 70 economic entities . MNCS are the largest companies in North America .
 MNCs actively lobby their governments for more liberal trade and investment policies to enhance the profitability of their businesses . In some instances this concern has extended to the domestic politics of their home countries .
 Angelina Jolie is a special envoy of the United Nations and focuses on humanitarian and refugee issues . In 2015 she delivered an impassioned plea to the UN Security Council to intervene in the Syrian civil war and help millions of Syrian refugees .
 Global stage has risen to unprecedented levels in recent years . President Obama spoke with people in a remote Sudan village in southern Sudan .
 Sean Penn founded J/P Haitian Relief Organization to provide temporary housing and medical care . Alicia Keys cofounded Keep a Child Alive to provide medical support for AIDS orphans in Africa . Don Cheadle, George Clooney, Matt Damon, Brad Pitt, and Brad Pitt created Not on Our
 Some place the beginnings of terrorism in the first century BCE with the Sicarii Zealots, who violently targeted Jewish high priests . They saw them as collaborating with the Romans in violation of Jewish religious law . Some place it to the earliest start of terrorism .
 Others, most notably A1 Qaeda, Boko Haram, and ISIS/ISIL, are driven by religious convictions and have more sweeping goals . Others, including A1 al-Qaeda and Boko Haram have religious convictions .
 Leadership offers ideological inspiration to small, disparate cells scattered around the world . Leaders do not directly plan and execute most of the attacks undertaken in A1 Qaeda’s name . A1 Al Qaeda leader does not direct and execute attacks .
 A1 Qaeda and ISIS/ISIL terrorists are more lethal than previous terrorists . Their religious fanaticism allows them to envision acts of terror on two levels, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 It is therefore critical that the international community better understand the way that transnational crime relates to broader social changes . mafia mafia. mafia mafia . mafia is a global problem that has been linked to social change in the past . mafia .
 In Chapter 7, you have an opportunity to examine the global character and consequences of violent threats to security . Chapter 7: The global character of security threats is examined in Chapter 7 .
 In Chapters 8 and 9, we weigh the rival ideas presented by the realist road to security and the liberal path to peace . We weigh the two paths to peace in this chapter of our book .
 For many people, world politics is about arms, alliances, and the exercise of military force over rivals and other actors on the global stage . For many, it is also about arms and alliances, with other actors .
 "Je Suis Charlie" became a rallying call of ordinary people around the world for the preservation of civil society in the face of terrorist threats . In the wake of the incident, the slogan became an international rallying call .
 The 9/11 attack and the U.S.-led military struggle in Iraq; the 2006 Israeli-Hezbollah War in Lebanon; and a wave of civil wars dashed all prior hopes for sustained peace . Terrorist attacks elsewhere around the world, such as in Madrid in 2004, London
 Only the dead have seen the end of war. War is a condition arising within states (civil war) or between states (interstate war) when actors use violent means to destroy their opponents or coerce them into submission. Conflict is often arising in international relations over perceived incompatibilities
 To realists, pacifism is counterproductive because it is contrary to basic human nature, they see as aggressive, greedy, and power-seeking . Realists see pacifism as counterproductive because they see human nature as aggressive and greedy .
 To feminists www.thecsspoint.com | www.cssbooks.net civil wars . Wars between opposing groups within the same country or by rebels against the government. To feminists.com: To feminists .
 The relationship between poverty and armed conflict is all the more pronounced in countries where there is a youth bulge . A large portion of the population is young and cannot secure jobs, provide for families, and achieve economic security .
 A burgeoning youth population thought to make countries more prone to civil conflicts . Relative deprivation inequality between wealth and status of individuals and groups . youth bulge thought to have made countries more vulnerable to civil conflict .
 An economic theory advocating free markets and the removal of barriers to the flow of trade and capital as a locomotive for prosperity . This controversy was at the heart of the ideological debate between the East and the West during the Cold War .
 Madison pictured an ‘empire of liberty’ (as Madison pictured a growing community of liberal democracies) as one freed of the curse of war . The entire past pattern of belligerent international relations would be replaced by a new pacific pattern, he says .
 The impact of government type on propen| sity for armed conflict has taken on great signif| icance following the rapid conversion of many | dictatorships to democratic rule . I
 According to Freedom House, almost two-thirds of the world’s countries are now fully or partially democratic . The most democratic country in the world is in the process of becoming a democracy .
 Since the early 1990s, the number of electoral democracies has plateaued . Whether the long-term democratic transformation will produce peace is being tested by the world .
 World War II was an outgrowth of World War I, the United States attack of Iraq in 2003 was an extension of the 1990 Persian Gulf War . The successive waves of violent protest and brutal state retaliation in the Middle East that began in 2011 were seen by many as a domino effect
 The theory that war is likely when a dominant great power is threatened by the rapid growth of a rival’s capabilities, which reduces the difference in their relative power . According to the power transition theory, periods in which rivals’ military capabilities are nearly balanced create “the necessary
 Armed conflict in 2015 in Syria, Sudan, South Sudan, Yemen, and elsewhere cast a dark shadow . The tension surrounding the South China Sea dispute also cast a shadow .
 In the past, when people thought about armed conflicts, they thought about them, they ec a> FIGURE 7. Figure 7.
 Measuring the frequency of armed conflicts each year since 1946, the figure depicts a gradual increase in frequency of conflicts until the peak in 1992, after which a decline transpired that lasted roughly a decade before, in 2003, began to rise again .
 Incompetence has led to an epidemic of mgile states throughout the globe . This incompetence has lead to an 'emphile state' state .
 Often civil wars are connected, often civil war is connected to internal rivalry . Internal rivalry is often the source of violent conflicts within a state .
 Death from civil violence has always been very high, and casualties from civil wars since World War II have increased at alarming rates . Children have been both innocent victims and major participants in civil wars .
 The historical north-south conflict began to move toward resolution, and eventually a peace agreement was signed in 2005 that called for sharing wealth and power .
 From Gestapo in Nazi Germany to the ‘death squads’ in various countries, violence perpetrated by the establishment attempts to defend the prevailing political order by eliminating opposition leaders .
 President George W Bush described the threat as a network of terrorist groups as well as rogue states that harbored them in 2001 .
 Without agreement on the character and causes of global terrorism, there is no consensus on the best response to terrorism . Elowever, disagreement about the character of terrorism remains pronounced, and without agreement on these basic characteristics .
 In this chapter, you also have the opportunity to examine the many leading causes of armed conflict that theorists have constructed to explain why political violence erupts .
 It is the alternative potential paths to peace, security, and world order that we next consider . It is not only to consider the alternative path to peace and security, it is to consider other potential paths .
 An Introduction to Theories of Interthe Twenty-First Century , 7 th ed., 7th ed. An Introduction . of the Theory of Inter the Twenty-Second Century . The Theory of the World's First Century is published in 1998 .
 A country’s psychological freedom from fears that the state will be unable to resist threats to its survival and national values emanating from abroad or at home . They are armed because they are in conflict and have not yet learned peaceful ways to resolve their conflicting interests." —Richard M Nixon,
 I magine yourself someday becoming the next secretary-general of the U.N. I wish you could be the next president of the United Nations .
 Nearly all states continue to believe that the anarchical global system requires them to rely on self-help and depend only on themselves for security . Our interests are eternal and perpetual and those interests it is our duty to follow .
 World military spending rose to $1.78 trillion in 2014, a 56 percent increase since 2000 . Military power is central in leaders’ concepts of national security . The end of the Cold War reduced tensions and therefore the need for military preparations .
 The world is spending $3,378,995 each minute for military preparations . The world spends each minute on military preparations each minute .
 Share of resources used for military purposes has increased steadily since 2000 . Military burden now corresponds to 2. percent of world GDP . Militaryindustrial complex is a lobbying coalition to pressure governments to appropriate large expenditures .
 Some comparadvely wealthy states bear a heavy burden . Other states that provide a high average income for their citizens (Japan, Austria, and Luxembourg) have a low defense burden .
 A growing trend since the beginning of the Iraq War has been the increased use of private military services, which enhances a state’s military capabilities by allowing the government to conduct operations with fewer troops than would otherwise be needed .
 In the post-9/11 global war on terrorism, the U.S. increased its worldwide supply of weapons to countries that agreed to be partners in the “coalition www.thecsspoint.com . Outsourcing activities of a military-specific nature to private companies .
 Supporters of private military services point out that private contractors like Blackwater and Triple Canopy are not of the same iliquity as al-Qaddafi .
 Military contractors from reputable companies tend to be professional, efficient, and effective . Military contractors are often more efficient, efficient and effective than contractors .
 In 1982 Great Britain found itself shipping military equipment to Argentina just eight days before Argentina’s attack on the British-controlled Falkland Islands . In 1998 U.S. military technology sold to China was exported to Pakistan, making its nuclear weapons test possible .
 The proliferation of arms is a serious global concern . The so-called <lth country problem (the addition of new nuclear states) is expected to become increasingly probable .
 Many countries such as Iran and North Korea regard the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as hypocritical . The treaty provides a seal of approval to the United States, Russia, China, Britain, and France for possessing nuclear weapons while denying it to all others .
 Former U.S. Ambassador to South Korea Donald Gregg says Kim Jong-un's move is a way of demonstrating to the people of North Korea he is in charge and his country is capable of high tech things .
 A major development in the conduct of warfare has been the widespread use of unmanned aerial vehicles . Unexplained aerial vehicles are commonly referred to as drones . The use of drones is a major part of the development of warfare .
 U.S. soldiers with land mine detectors in Qiqay, Afghanistan, use robots to check for mines, traps, and other weapons that may have been hidden by Taliban or A1 Qaeda fugitives .
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles practiced linkmanship during Eisenhower administration . He deliberately threatened U.S. adversaries with nuclear destruction so that, on the brink of war, they would concede to United States demands . This posture was especially evident during the Eisenhower administration, when .
 The goal of llistic missile defense is to make nuclear weapons “impotent and obsolete” and to shift nuclear strategy away from mutual assured destruction . President Reagan’s words, in U.S. President Reagan said, “Nuclear weapons are ‘impotent
 From that threat has emerged the preemptive warfare strategy, which calls for striking a potential enemy before it undertakes armed aggression . The strategy has emerged from that threat .
 Intervention can be practiced in various ways—physically through direct entry of military forces into another country, indirectly by broadcasting propaganda to the target’s population, or through overt operations . Intervention can take place physically physically or indirectly through propaganda .
 Alliances in world politics require agreements between parties in order for them to cooperate . Warfare is not a question of brute strength, but rather of winning and losing friends . —Count Diego Sarmiento Gondomar .
 States sitting on the sidelines, free riders, cannot as rational actors risk nonalignment . States sitting out of the sidelines risk non-alignment, the U.S. cannot sit on sidelines, the president says .
 A foreign policy posture in which states do not participate in military alliances with an alliance bloc for fear it will lead to involvement in an unnecessary war . Under a balanceof-power system, an influential global or regional great power throws support in decisive fashion to a defensive coalition .
 France's decision to sell Mistral-class assault ships to Russia provides another example . Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Lithuania are among the Baltic countries to oppose the move .
 On July 9 and 10, 2015, the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) held their seventh annual summit in Ufa, Russia . The BRICS summit was held in Russia .
 The BRICS New Development Bank is a product of the growing desire to have greater influence in shaping the global economy and the political order . Seen as a balancing maneuver, this is a result of a desire to be able to influence the global economic order .
 Link liberal ideas to the development of peaceful norms, laws, and institutions . Ob ves 9-1 Link liberal and constructivist ideas to peaceful norms and laws . Obes 9: 1-1 .
 Many experts see international law and collective security regimes mirroring changes in the most popular constructions of images about the ways in which states are habitually acting or should act toward one another in any particular period of history . For this reason, and consistent with constructivist theory, many experts see
 For example, Sir John Frederick Maurice wrote in his memoirs, “I went into the British Army believing that if you want peace you must prepare for war.” “If you want to want peace,” he said .
 The buildup of weapons and armed forces by two or more states that threaten each other . The competition is driven by the conviction that gaining a lead is necessary for security . Although realists are reluctant to view arms control as arms control .
 Most nuclear powers have not increased their stockpile of nuclear-warhead stockpile, in thousands . Russia's first CUBAN MISSILE FALL OF NEW ATOMIC TEST CRISIS .
 Despite initially signing the treaty, North Korea violated the NPT with its secret development of nuclear weapons . Likewise, despite initially signing, the North Korean violated the treaty .
 Iran test-fired missiles capable of striking Israel, Europe, and U.S. bases in the Persian Gulf in September 2009 . In September 2009, Iran tested a missile that could strike Israel and Europe .
 The United Nations subsequently adopted new sanctions against Iran . The sanctions include a prohibition on Iranian investment in uranium mining and ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons .
 Iran’s announced testfiring of a land-to-sea ballistic missile in April 2013 . Further speculation about Iranian military capabilities was raised by Iran's announced test firing of a missile .
 In an anarchic international system, each country must ensure its own survival . This demands that countries strive to become more powerful than their potential opponents . Recall that in an . anarchic . system, this demands that nations strive to be more powerful .
 This enhancement of military capabilities for defensive purposes tends to result in escalating arms races that diminish security of all . Yet, as described by the imagery of the spiral model, this enhancement of capabilities tends to lead to escalating arms wars .
 President Obama challenged the world to renew its commitment to confronting nuclear proliferation . The ability and will to stem further nuclear proliferation remains in doubt, says Obama .
 Critics complain that agreements often regulate only obsolete armaments or ones that the parties to the agreement have little incentive to continue developing in the first place .
 Most countries are reluctant to limit their armaments because of international system . Self-help international system requires each state to protect itself . However, most countries are hesitant to limit armaments .
 Twelve-year-old victim is being treated for the loss of his right leg and other serious wounds . He was picking strawberries in southern Kosovo when he was injured .
 The optimal strategy for both prisoners would be to tacitly cooperate with each other and keep quiet . But the suspects face incentives in this situation that incline each to turn on the other and provide incriminating evidence to the district attorney .
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it . Prisoner A cooperate defect defect 2,2 win-win 4,1 lose more-win more and 1,4 win more-lose more .
 As indicated in the timeline, nuclear testing has declined dramatically since the 1960s . Nuclear testing has decreased dramatically since that time .
 North Korea conducted an underground nuclear test on February 12,2013 . North Korea has shown no sign of abandoning its nuclear ambitions .
 It was not endorsed by the United States, the very power that had most championed it in the waning months of World War I . Its members disagreed over how to define “aggression,” as well as how to share the costs and risks of mounting an organized response .
 I960 Secretary-General Dag fdammarskjold sought to manage security through what he termed Preventive diplomacy by attempting to resolve conflicts before they became a crisis, in contrast to ending wars once they erupted . In I960 he attempted to resolve crises before they become a crisis .
 U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar pursued peacemaking initiatives in 1989 . He was frustrated with superpowers’ prevention of the United Nations from playing “as effective and decisive a role as the charter certainly envisaged for it”
 These programs were designed to end fighting so that the UN Security Council could establish operations to keep the peace . These programs ended fighting in order to end the fighting so the UN could then establish operations . UN security Council was then established to keep peace .
 UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan concentrated the UN’s efforts on peace building by creating conditions that would make renewed war unlikely . Annan worked on peacemaking (ending fighting already under way) and managing the UN's peace operations to police those conflicts .
 The end of the Cold War removed many of the impediments to the UN’s ability to act to preserve peace . Ffowowever, the end . of the . Cold War . removed many impediments .
 If governments consider the effectiveness of the U.N. an urgent priority, this would be the first problem they would have to tackle .
 The total number of peacekeepers involved in peacekeeping missions has increased sevenfold since 1999 . Peacekeepers are often referred to as ""Blue Helmets" because of their blue helmets or berets .
 Regional organizations with broader political mandates beyond defense include the Organization of American States, the League of Arab States and the Nordic Council, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Gulf Cooperation Council .
 In the years since the end of the Cold War, the ambiguous European security setting has been marked by ethnic and religious conflicts that NATO was not originally designed to handle . NATO was designed to deal with the problem of ethnic conflicts .
 Until 1995, NATO took charge of all military operations in BosniaHerzegovina from the United Nations . It was uncertain whether NATO could adapt to the new security environment .
 Russia is still far from reconciled to NATO’s presence in countries that it regards as being within its ‘sphere of privileged interests’ The tension between Russia and NATO over the military escalation in Crimea and Russia's military action against Ukraine is evidenced by the tension .
 Eminent legal scholar Hans Kelsen says states ought to behave as they have customarily behaved . Kelsen: When a type of behavior occurs frequently, it becomes legal . He says states should be expected to behave like they have done so .
 This ambivalence makes it possible for states to exploit international law to get what they can and justify what they have obtained . This is the case of states exploiting international law for the benefit of international law, writes Andrew Hammond .
 A theory that stresses states’ customs and habitual ways of behaving as the most important source of law . Although law cannot prevent war, legal procedures often make recourse to violence unnecessary .
 The United States’ opposition to the ICC is also due to the conviction that its citizens would be treated unfairly by the court . Acts performed during war that the international community defines as crimes against humanity, including atrocities committed against an enemy’s prisoners of war, civilians, or the
 Special tribunals established by the U.N. to prosecute those responsible for wartime atrocities and genocide . They are intended to bring justice to victims, and deter such crimes in the future .
 Current members of ICC I | Not Members of ICC be vulnerable targets of political retribution against the United States government for its influence and intervention in other countries around the world . Not members of the ICC can be targeted by political retribution for their influence .
 There are references to just war principles in classical Greek political thought, as reflected in Aristotle’s reference to “war that is by nature just” and Ciceros’ writings on bellum justum . The modern just war doctrine was heavily influenced by early Christian doctrine
 Insurgent terrorists and now the armies fighting them are increasingly relying on IEDs planted on animal carcasses, mobile cell phones, or human cadavers . The IED is planted on animals, cell phones or human bodies, according to the author .
 Today’s IEDs are cheap and easy-to-make gadgets such as garage-door openers used to detonate bombs . They are now available on the global black market, first invented by the U.S.
 Chinese former foreign minister Zhou Enlai said “all diplomacy is the continuation of war by other means” A tit-for-tat strategy is a bargaining approach that consistently reciprocates in kind the offers or threats made by the other party in a negotiation .
 Liberals prefer negotiation when trying to facilitate international peace . Liberals prefer to negotiate when dealing with international peace, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Negotiating is a good way to get around the world .
 Chapter 14 considers threats to the global environment that pose a serious challenge to the planet and humanity’s continued survival . Chapter 14: Threats to the environment pose serious challenges to humanity's survival .
 Financial markets are like the mirror of mankind, revealing every hour of each working day the way we value ourselves and the resources of the world around us . When changes occur in the world, they force people to think about and interpret world politics in fresh ways .
 This map depicts the extent of globalization across the globe . It is rendered from the 2015 Index of Globalization released by the K0F Swiss Economic Institute .
 The process through which money is exchanged between countries does not have strong supranational regulatory institutions . However, the process of money exchanging between countries is not very secure . The money exchange process is not a subject subject to strong regulatory oversight .
 In an early form of globalization, a network of financial centers flourished along the Baltic and North seas, and city-states such as Liibeck, Hamburg, and Bergen dominated finance and trading .
 The Associated Press account was hacked in April 2013 . It reported two explosions had just occurred at the United States White fdouse and that President Obama had been hurt .
 The rate at which one state's currency is exchanged for another state’s currency in the global marketplace . When those engaged in international economic transactions change their expectations about a www.thecsspoint.com exchange rate .
 Flowever, the creation of money, does serve to stimulate the economy, Flowever says . Flowever: "Creating money, whether through increasing the money supply or lowering interest rates, is a good thing"
 In Switzerland, the same burger costs $7.54.54 . Inflation also affects the cost of goods and services . A general increase in the level of prices means that each unit of currency purchases less .
 Conflicting Goals in Financial Policy Trade-Off Policy Tools Dilemma: Inflation vs. unemployment . Monetary policy (interest rates and money supply) Stimulative policies may create inflation . Stimulative polices may also create inflation.
 Liberal International Economic Order was created after World War II . The set of regimes was designed to promote monetary stability and reduce barriers to the free flow of trade .
 Massive sales of a country’s currency, caused by the anticipation of a future decline in its value, are caused by anticipation of future declines in value . Fixed exchange rates are a system in which a government sets the value of its currency in relation to another country's currency .
 Protests and riots can sometimes even contribute to overturning a government . In the case of Indonesia in 1998, such protests and riots helped overturn the government . Indonesia's government was overthrown in 1998 .
 The political and economic results of these measures have been subject to a great deal of criticism . Although this “playbook” is in line with basic macroeconomic principles for reducing deficits, it has been criticized .
 Studies have begun to systematically examine the impact of SAPs on recipient states . SAPs are often used to provide financial assistance to the recipient states of SAP countries .
 Bretton Woods system gave way to a system based on looting exchange rates . With the price of gold no longer fixed and dollar convertibility no longer guaranteed, the Bretton-Woods system was abolished .
 Market forces hold governments accountable for their policies and actions, writes Andrew Hammond . He says flexible exchange rates give governments autonomy to conduct their own fiscal and monetary policies .
 This map shows the global distribution and frequency of systemic banking crises . It is a type of financial crisis marked by significant financial distress in the banking system such as bank runs and liquidations .
 Myriad economic and political factors caused the global financial crisis, and the particulars of the crash are incredibly complex . As the global economy is to a large extent still recovering from the crisis, the remainder of the chapter assesses the aftermath of the crisis .
 Although Germany and Canada remained strong, the United States entered a multiyear recession . The U.S. entered a recession in 2008, the U.K. suffered a double recession .
 Most significantly, it weakened the economic power of the U.S. while improving the relative global position of China . China's economic position has also been weakened by the Obama administration's actions .
 The post-crisis recession in the United States also increased Chinas prominence as the largest holder of U.S. debt securities . Chinas share of the total United States debt increased almost 50 percent from 2008 to 2009 .
 The value of the dollar on the world market has been stable, some of the leading economies in the world have suggested that the dollar ultimately be replaced—or at least supplanted—as the major currency of the global marketplace .
 Among the larger economies of the world, India and China, arguably the two major countries most insulated from the global financial order, fared well .
 “The finance guys argue that if you’re never in the club, you can’t understand it,” she said . “I think they have it backward.” She said of her expertise in the finance industry .
 In 2014 the BRICS countries launched the New Development Bank, pledging $50 billion in startup capital to be devoted to “sustainable development” projects in BRICS . The bank is based in Brazil and Russia .
 First, they could function as a “lender of last resort” that could be “better placed to coordinate economic actions” given their proximity to the country in need of relief . Second, they would be ‘better placed’ to coordinate “economic actions
 Ideally, they could work alongside the IMF or the World Bank to resolve problems .
 Developing and transition economies make up five of the top ten host countries for FDI . FDI reflects a growing interest for investing in developing and transitioning economies . Developing countries are the most attractive investment opportunities in developing countries .
 The mobility of labor, although substantial, is far less than the mobility of capital, as only a small portion of the overall labor pool actually relocates to another country .
 When the Uruguay Round was concluded in 1994, the GATT became the World Trade Organization . The Uruguay Round of 1994 was concluded . reciprocity Mutual or reciprocal lowering of trade barriers is a key principle .
 China's growing consumerism is one of the world's biggest shopping centers . The South China Mail in Dongguan, China's largest shopping mall, is one example of China's consumerism .
 We review the philosophical beliefs that undergird trade policy . We assess some of the specific policy tools that states use in international trade . With regard to free trade, the principle that barriers to trade must be visible and thus easy to target is key .
 During the early years of the United States, Treasury Secretary Alexander Flamilton recommended that the U.S. specialize in manufacturing instead of agriculture, as it would better serve United States national interests .
 In short, ‘hile American industry was developing, the country had no time for laissez-faire.’ The country had ‘no time’ for ‘laissezfaire,’ the author says .
 The underlying assumption of hegemonic stability theory is that a stable and prosperous global economy approximates a collective or public goot in that it provides shared benefits from which no one can be excluded . The assumption is that the global economy provides a shared benefit from which everyone can benefit .
 Any military conflict would be very costly to both countries, as it would damage large portions of both economies . Given the close integration between both sides, any military conflict between both countries would be costly to them .
 Economic interdependence provides each country with a means to engage in “costly signaling,” that is, a way to have conflicts through economic rather than political means . The U.S. and other countries have a way of engaging in ‘costly signalling’
 Global trade continues to proliferate, and protectionism is at a historically low level . As U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry noted, the sanctions have “obviously had a profound impact, but not sufficient that President Putin has decided that he isn't going to pursue his
 This section explains some of these policy tools, all of which fall under the broad rubric of protectionism . These policies are designed to “protect” domestic industries from foreign competition .
 OPDP is formal agreements through which a country accepts limiting the export of products that might impair workers in the importing country, often under specific rules designed to monitor . The OECD says orderly market arrangements are formal agreements that limit exports of certain products .
 Export restrictions through government-to-gomnment agreements to follow specific trading rules . Import quotas Numerical limit on the quantity of particular products that can be imported . Export quotas Barriers to free trade agreed to by two trading states .
 By 2020 “the benefits of globalization won’t be global_Gaps will widen between those countries benefiting from globalization economically... and those underdeveloped nations or products within nations left behind” The world economy is projected to be about 80 percent larger in 2020 than it was in
 When the GATT began in 1949, it had 23 members . The World Trade Organization is now the world's largest trade organization .
 The United States continually appealed these rulings and refused to remove the subsidies . Elowever, the U.S. continually appealed the rulings .
 Critics say free trade leads to a “race to the bottom” in environmental standards . Countries are encouraged to enhance their competitiveness by lessening environmental regulations .
 At the root of the trade-environment controversy is a substantial gap in global governance . At the bottom of the global governance gap is a lack of transparency in the global economy .
 The principle of national treatment implies that goods are to be treated equally for trade purposes, no matter how they were made . Rather than being treated equally, national treatment means trade is treated equally in the country .
 The WTO also ruled against other U.S. environmental laws, such as provisions for “turtle-safe” shrimp harvesting methods and gasoline standards . The panel also ruled that they were being enforced in a manner that unfairly targeted certain countries .
 The Great Depression pushed the United States to enact the Smoot-Hawley Act of 1932 . The act increased United States tariffs by 50 percent and contributed to a collapse in world trade .
 An increasing portion of world trade, particularly in emerging economies such as BRICS countries, is within supply chains . Moreover, a growing portion of the world trade is in supply chains, especially within emerging economies .
 The effectiveness and future prospects of the multilateral trade system do provide some cause for concern . Yet the effectiveness of the system is still some concern, says David Cameron .
 We next consider these alternative governance structures, paying particular attention to regional trade agreements as the most prevalent trade institutions .
 In the Global North, many of the EU countries belong to more than thirty RTAs . Many of the European countries have more than 30 RTAs. In the global North, the RTAs are more common than other countries .
 The WTO has specific legal provisions for RTAs, but they violate the core principle of nondiscrimination and MFN . RTAs give some WTO members advantages over others, says WTO .
 The European Union applied its MFN tariff to only six countries, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Japan, Taiwan, and the United States . All other nations enjoy more favorable tariffs .
 12-1 POPULATION CHANGE AS A GLOBAL CHALLENGE demography demography . The study of population changes, their sources, and their impact .
 Changes in world population are a part of the globalization of world politics . To formulate your interpretation of this human dimension of globalization and world politics, it is instructive to first look at how changes in population are part of globalization .
 To understand why the globalization of population has become such a controversial issue, it is helpful to trace the global trends in population growth that have made this topic so problematic . A popular cosmopolitan perspective describing the growth of awareness that all people share a common fate .
 Africa expected to account for over a third of global population by 2100 . Europe expected to continue to decline from almost 22 percent in 1950 to less than 7 percent in 2100 . At birth at birth is expected to reach 79 years .
 World population growth is anticipated to decelerate in the latter half of the twenty-first century . It is expected to reach 10. billion by 2100 . The world population will reach 10 billion by 2050 .
 Turkey becomes largest refugee-hosting country, followed by Pakistan and Lebanon . For the first time, Turkey became the largest refugee host country . Pakistan, Lebanon and Turkey are also hosting refugees .
 As security concerns since 9/11 have escalated worldwide, the linkage drawn between refugees and the probability of terrorism has tightened immigration controls . Brutal and savage acts against targeted citizen groups or prisoners of war, defined as illegal under international law, define as illegal .
 Evidence indicates that the majority flee to neighboring countries in the Global South . It is commonly assumed that states in the North admit the most refugees .
 "The welfare and survival of everyday people are endangered, and the need for their protection is increasing," says President Obama . The welfare of ordinary people is endangered, says the president .
 Copulation density is a measure of how close together people live . Known as copulation density, it measures how close people live together .
 Globalization values calculated on a 0-100 scale . Seoul Brussels Toronto Moscow Sydney Madrid Berlin Vienna Vienna . Melbourne Buenos Aires Shanghai San Francisco Boston Montreal Amsterdam .
 As the percentage of world population residing in dense urban agglomerations increases worldwide, the “dualism” between city dwellers and those living in the rural and poor periphery will make the urbanized core cities more similar to each other in outlooks, values, and
 Next we look at examples of life-threatening diseases that are sweeping a globe without borders . Cities in a state of violent crisis, with the municipal government incapable or unwilling to govern and provide public services . population implosion A rapid reduction of population that reverses a previous trend toward progressively larger
 Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it . lealth Organization. leaks .
 Another recent deadly strain, known as H1N1, or swine flu, crossed the species barrier between pigs and people . The strain is a recent strain that has been linked to pigs and humans .
 A populations health is of utmost importance to the state’s ability to survive . An outlook that values viewing the cosmos or entire world as the best polity for political governance and personal identity .
 Pessimists predict that one result of globalization will be competition between states as they seek to preserve their sovereign independence .
 The increasing number of Internet users is promoting a cultural revolution by giving most of the world access to unfiltered information for the first time . Internet users are promoting a culture revolution .
 The world’s most repressive regimes and violent transnational groups are using technology to bring on new recruits, terrify local populations, and threaten democratic institutions . From al Qaeda and Mexican drug cartels to the Mafia and the Taliban, these groups are effectively using technology .
 A remarkably large portion of the available information is controlled by a carte of huge multinational media corporations . Moreover, though ours is often described as the information age, a remarkably large part of the information .
 An alternative exercise would be to make an ethical assessment about the morality of globalization . An ethical assessment would be an assessment of globalization's morality, he says .
 The World Cup in Qatar in 2022 has come under intense controversy due to allegations of bribery and human rights abuses . The 2022 World Cup will be held in 2022 in Qatar, Qatar .
 Ob ves 13-1 Describe the role of individual rights in the global system . Describe an individual's role in the world's global system as a matter of principle .
 Every human life is precious... it is not just about our criminal justice system, it is about the type of society that we want to build . It is a society that values every person, and one that doesn't give up on its people . Until relatively recently in the theoretical study of
 Rousseau: “Man is bom free, and everywhere he is in chains,” bemoaned political philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau in his famous 1762 book, Social Contract . Rousseau's Social Contract was published in 1762 .
 When I left for Colombia [South America], 1 fully expected Bogota to be like any large U.S. city, only with citizens who spoke Spanish . Bogota is one of the largest cities in the United States, with many Spanish speaking citizens .
 The evidence provides a basic profile of the extent to which humanitarian aspirations are succeeding or failing . By this measure, the evidence provides an example of the failure of humanitarian aspirations .
 The Bahamas and New Zealand have similar levels of income per person, but life expectancy and expected years of schooling differ greatly between the two countries . For example, New Zealand has a much higher HDI value than the Bahamas .
 The Turkish mass killing of Armenians, Hilter’s slaughter of Jews (and other groups), the Khmer Rouge slaughter of Cambodians, and the Hutu slaughter of the Tutsi of Rwanda all exemplify the atrocities committed during the twentieth century .
 Rwanda 64% Bolivia Andorra 53% 50% Cuba 49% Kuwait 1.5% . And 5 Countries With None: Micronesia, Palau, Qatar, Vanuatu, and Yemen .
 Others are sold as child brides or camel jockeys . Systematic killing of members of a specific gender . Some are sold to children .
 Children suffer starvation, lack of education, life-threatening illness, physical abuse, forced labor, and sexual slavery . Tragically, this story is one that is repeated frequently in other countries throughout the world .
 Executive Director Justin Forsyth of the NGO Save the Children urges “this indiscriminate killing must stop now.” He calls for action from the global community to stop the killing .
 Specific protection measures for children, provision of nutritional supplies, and support for education programs are needed . Specific protection is needed, according to the UN .
 Created by the UN General Assembly on March 15, 2006, the HRC is a relatively new intergovernmental organization designed to evaluate allegations of human rights abuse . The use of peacekeeping troops by foreign states or international organizations is to protect endangered people .
 In June 2008, the United States relinquished its observer status and disengaged from the HRC, much to the dismay of human rights advocates . Human rights advocates felt that this greatly diminished the role of the IGO .
 The total cost of repairs is estimated at more than $6 billion, which is equal to about 30 percent of Nepal's annual economic output . Nepal's total economic output is about 30 per cent of its annual GDP .
 Cornucopians adhere to the belief that if free markets and free trade prevail, ecological imbalances that threaten humanity will eventually be corrected . They believe that free markets will eventually correct the ecological imbalance .
 Relentless population growth is putting excessive pressure on local land and water resources in many countries, making it difficult if not impossible for farmers to keep pace . The tragedy of the commons is a metaphor used to explain the impact of human behavior on ecological systems .
 There is wide consensus that the 2 degrees Fahrenheit of global warming of the last century is behind the rise in sea levels, more intense hurricanes, more heat waves, and more droughts and deluges . The phenomenon producing planetary warming when gases released by burning fossil fuels act as a
 China and India have rapidly increased their emissions as their economies have grown and generated increasing demands for fossil-fuel energy . However, Asian dynamos China and . India have . rapidly increased emissions .
 IPCC concluded that evidence of the Earth's rising temperatures is ""unequivocal” and that global warming is more than 90 percent likely to be the product of human activity . Ozone is a pollutant in the lower atmosphere, but in the upper atmosphere it provides the Earth with
 Production of CFCs in the Global North declined sharply in the 1990s as the largest producers of these ozone-damaging products began to phase them out . Production of these products in the global North fell sharply in 1990s .
 Destruction of tropical forests threatens to destroy much of the world’s undiscovered biological diversity and genetic heritage . Two-thirds to three-fourths of all species are believed to live in tropical forests .
 South American forests, most notably the Amazon, are generally burned for industrial-scale soybean farming or cattle grazing . Desertification is the creation of deserts due to soil erosion, overfarming and deforestation .
 This map displays the extent to which human activity, as opposed to natural environmental factors alone, is likely to lead to further desertification or degraded dry lands in regions across the globe . It also shows the extent of human activity in the region as well as natural factors alone .
 In 2014, drought in Central America had reduced maize output by around 9 percent . 400,000 families in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras need food assistance .
 Between 2009 and 2015, pro| duction in the U.S. almost doubled, due to growth in American shale-oil firms . The pro-ecovery industry has almost doubled in recent years .
 The movement began in earnest in 1972, when the UN General Assembly convened the first UN Conference of the Eluman Environment in Stockholm in Stockholm .
 Extreme weather events destroy agricultural crops and lead to disruptions in the market . Droughts in China, Russia, and Argentina and flooding in Canada, Pakistan, and the U.S. lead to droughts and floods .
 No less than five major accidents between 1995 and 1999 at Japan’s fifty-two nuclear power plants —dramatized the potential dangers of nuclear power . The demand for energy from nonrenewable resources remains high .
 Based on Newsweek Green Rankings 2015 of Global Companies of . of rheir own existing environmental protection policies . of . the companies . of the companies based on their own environmental policies .
 If necessity really is the mother of invention, there is hope . Pictured are the 2014 EPI ratings of selected countries that illustrate differences .
 World Politics puts itself to the same test. Rather than leave you in the lurch, World Politics will put it to the test. World Politics is the first of its kind .
 globalization makes cooperation crucial to the well-being of everyone, says David Cameron . The continued tightening of interstate linkages should be welcomed, he says .
 Horse-drawn carriages parked in front of a McDonald's in Egypt reflect a biending of cultures and economies, traditionalism and modernity . Shown here in Egypt are horse drawn carriages .
 Vinton Cerf: The Internet of Things "holds the promise for reinventing almost every industry" He says trillions of devices will be connected to the Internet in the next few years .
 Emerging trends suggest that nonmilitary dangers will multiply alongside the continuing threat of arms and armed aggression in civil wars, as well as interstate wars in particular regions and terrorism in almost any place and at any time in the world . The potential impact of these additional threats is formidable, as emerging trends
 “Further Geopolitical Consequences of the Financial Crisis,” Foreign Affairs 88 : 2—16 .
 A Simple Guide for Bringing the Undead into Your Classroom . International Studies Perspectives : 1—13. A simple guide for bringing the undead into your classroom .
 Some Experimental Findings from an International Negotiation Simulation . International Studies Quarterly 53 : 23—47 .
 “Foreign Policy Analysis A : 301—320. Analogy, Foreign Policy Decision Making, and the Rwandan Genocide,” is a Foreign Policy Analysis Analysis A: 301-320.
 International Studies Quarterly 51 : 79-97 . Foreign Economic Liberalization and Internal War was discussed .
 Journal of Conflict Resolution 53 : 363-389. Personal Exposure to Terrorism, Psychological Distress, and Exclusionist Political Attitudes,’s study .
 Weighing the Evidence and Cautious Inference,” International Studies Quarterly 57 : 201—214 .
 Understanding the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Dam conflict,” Foreign Policy Analysis 5 : 37—56.
 A New Framework for the Study of Civil War,” Journal of Peace Research 45 : 55-74. “A New Framework” for the study of civil war .
 The Nexus of Human Rights, Democracy, and Development,” Journal of Peace Research 46 : 181-198 .
 The European Journal of International Relations 20 : 1124—1147 .
 Joel Krieger , The Oxford Companion to Politics of the World, 2nd ed., 3.3.5.6.7.5 . In Joel's book, "The Power of The World" is published in the Oxford Companion of Politics, 2.2.7 .
 Benedict’s Quest to Bring Christians Back Together,” Foreign Affairs 92 : 117-128. “The Benedictists’ quest to bring Christians back together”
 In Charles W Kegley Jr. , Controversies in International Relations Theory , 1.1.1 . Controversy in international relations theory is a result of controversy .
 Working Group LI to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . Contribution of Working Group L to the IPCC's Fifth Assessment .
 International Politics: International Politics 41 : 37-49. Policy Problems and Normative Perils .
 Richard A Falk, Samuel S Kim, and Saul H Mendlovitz , The United Nations and a Just World Order, 1. 1. 2. 3. 5. 4. 5 . 5. 5th. 6th. 7th. 4th . 5th . 4th
 International Organizations and Foreign Aid in the Punishing of Human Rights Violators,” Journal of Peace Research 46 : 79-97 .
 In Jacob Bercovitch and Scott Sigmund Gartner , International Conflict Mediation, 2.2.3.2 . International Mediation is a form of mediation .
 Conventional Forces and the Future of Deterrence. In Gary L Guertner, Robert Haffa Jr. and George Quester . Conventional forces and the future of deterrence. The Future of the Deterrence .
 In Charles W Kegley Jr. and Eugene Wittkopf , The Global Agenda , 6th ed., 2.2.3.5. The Global agenda is based on the findings of the World Economic Forum .
 In Sarah Owen Vandersluis and Paris Yeros , Poverty in World Politics, 2.2.2 . Poverty in the World Politics is a study of poverty in the U.S.
 A Normative Account by Larry May,” Ethics & International Affairs 24 : 433-435. May, author of the book “Larry May’s ‘Normative Account’, is a member of the Council of Standards of Standards and Ethics .
 Richardson, ‘Frontiers,’ and Wars in the 1945—1965 era,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 22 : 441—467 . Richardson, a historian, was a major contributor to the book, "Frontiers" Richardson .
 Liberal IR Theory in the New World Order . International Studies Perspectives 16 : 40-49 .
 The Effect of Interstate Relations on Civil War was published in Journal of Conflict Resolution 30 : 937—961 .
 “Pioneers in Science and Practice 1: 89—113. Its Environmental Impact,” Springer Briefs of Pioneers .