 America will continue to lead the effort to prevent the spread of the world’s most dangerous weapons, President Obama said . The U.S. will continue the effort .
 The regime in North Korea must know that they will only achieve security by meeting international obligations, writes Kim Jong-won . The regime must know they must meet their international obligations .
 Provocations of the sort we saw last night will only isolate them further, as we stand by our allies, strengthen our own missile defense, and lead the world in taking firm action .
 A coalition stands united in demanding that Iran meet its obligations, and we will do what is necessary to prevent them from getting a nuclear weapon . Likewise, the leaders of Iran must recognize that now is the time for a diplomatic solution, the coalition says .
 "We will engage Russia to seek further reductions in our nuclear arsenals, and continue leading the global effort to secure nuclear materials that could fall into the wrong hands," says President Obama .
 Wall Street Journal pundit Bret Stephens interviewed Viktor Esin, former head of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces . Esin was head of Soviet Union's Strategic Rocket Force .
 Esin: China is developing at least five new nuclear ballistic missile models . Esin says one model can launch three Multiple Independently-targetable Re-entry Vehicle warheads . The missile could launch three different warheads, Esin said .
 Such missiles can strike multiple targets at once, and greatly amplify the power of an attack force . Such missiles are capable of striking multiple targets, and can amplify the impact of a strike force .
 It is between a world of fewer U.S. nuclear weapons and more nuclear states, or the opposite . It's between the United States and the opposite, or fewer .
 In his idealism, the president is setting the stage for a more nuclearized world . President Obama's idealism is set to set stage for more nuclearization, he says .
 It is foolish for American analysts to focus on the ChinaU.S. balance alone . It is so foolish for U.S., analysts say, to focus solely on China .
 1976 panel concluded that Soviet buildup eclipsed U.S. intelligence estimates by a large margin . Panel concluded that the Soviet buildup had eclipsed United States intelligence estimates . The 1976 panel was led by the Soviet Union .
 To grasp the dangers clearly, it is vital to learn the lessons of Cuba in 1962, and the 1973 nuclear confrontation that took place between the U.S. and the Soviet Union during the Yom Kippur War .
 Cuban dictator Fidel Castro wanted the Soviets to launch a nuclear first strike, to prevent America from dethroning him and liberating his island paradise from his iron grip . Castro wanted a first strike to prevent the U.S. from taking over Cuba .
 Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev had no nuclear plan when Egypt and Syria invaded Israel . Egypt had no plan to attack Israel when it invaded Israel in 1967 .
 Russia and U.S. navies had come close to blows in the Mediterranean . Moscow eventually retreated, but not before the two superpower navies came to blows . Russia and the United States eventually retreated from the region .
 Brezhnev played the power projection card to play the role of the Soviet Union . The power projection was a key factor in the decision to play it, according to a report .
 Moscow would be able to impose its will upon the rest of the world, writes Vladimir Putin . Putin would then impose his will on Russia, Putin says .
 First, perception that America is declining can tempt rival powers to behave more aggressively . Second, a perception that U.S. is declining will tempt rival nations to behave aggressively, he says .
 Second, changes in the nuclear balance, and the overall balance itself, matter if one or more parties to a crisis think the balance matters and acts accordingly . The balance matters if parties to the crisis think it matters and act accordingly, writes CNN.
 At minimum, a nuclear balance shift changes the risk calculus during a crisis, as happened in 1973 . At least, a shift in nuclear balance shifts would have changed the risk of a nuclear war .
 It is a practical inquiry aimed at divining intentions of real-world actors . It is the first of its kind in the world .
 The United States began reducing the size of its nuclear arsenal in 1967 . The U.S. placed a freeze on its qualitative modernization of its remaining arsenal in 1992 . The freeze on modernization of the remaining arsenal was put in place in 1993 .
 Pakistan deploying 60-kilometer range single-warhead nuclear ballistic missile carrying a maneuverable nuclear warhead . The missile will be deployed with maneuverable nuke warheads .
 "This shows a very high degree of sophistication in miniaturized warhead design and single-warhead guidance technology," the U.S. State Department says .
 Pyongyang’s third nuclear test design was apparently lighter and more compact than the earlier ones . Sign of work towards building a small but powerful warhead that can be placed atop a ballistic missile .
 The North is still years away from fielding an operational missile that can carry a bomb across the Pacific Ocean and hit a major urban target in the continental U.S. The North still has a long way to go before an operational launch of a long-range ballistic missile .
 Aiming at closer targets reduces the payload weight penalty and increases warhead accuracy, as well as shrinking the warning time for the target population to take cover . Aiming . at closer . targets reduces payload . weight penalty .
 Those who respond positively to constructive behavior are either those whom you have no reason to fear, or those who decide they can no longer sustain the challenge . The sad reality is that those who respond positive to positive behavior are those who can't cope .
 They view our nuclear reductions as inducements to increase their arsenals . They view their reductions as inducing them to increase theirs . They say their arsenal becomes more valuable as our own decreases .
 The fundamental geopolitical trend of the nuclear age in the 21st century is that smaller, more dangerous powers are at the forefront of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and their associated technologies . Smaller nations are at forefront of proliferating nuclear weapons, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Unstable smaller nuclear powers are a greater risk to global stability, experts say . Superpower rivalry could arise between China and the U.S. but unstable smaller nuclear power is a risk to stability .
 Proponents of nuclear zero aim to end the nuclear nightmare; instead, they may well bring it on . Proponents say they want to use nuclear weapons to end nuclear nightmare . They also want to make it easier to get rid of nuclear weapons .
 John C Wohlstetter is author of Sleepwalking With the Bomb, and founder of the issues blog Letter From the Capitol . He is also author of the book Sleepwalking with the Bomb .