 The civil rights movement picked up momentum during the 1960's . The 1960's was the first time civil rights activists were allowed to enter the U.S.
 In 1896, the Supreme Court had ruled that there should be ""separate but equal" facilities for black and white Americans . The court ruled that the facilities should be separate but equal .
 The ruling dictated that everything from maternity wards to morgues be segregated . The ruling was the first time maternity wards had been segregated .
 Though separate, segregated facilities, particularly schools, were seldom, if ever, equal . Separate facilities, such schools, often, were often, if never, equal.
 White schools were usually new and well-maintained while black schools were single room shacks . White schools tended to be new, well maintained, while black ones were single rooms shacks.
 Reverend Oliver Brown tried to enroll his daughter, Linda, in all-white Sumner Elementary School in Topeka, Kansas, in 1951 . In 1951, the Reverend Brown was trying to enroll Linda Brown's daughter in an all-black elementary school .
 Brown sued the Board of Education, and the case was argued before the Supreme Court in 1953 . Brown was denied the right to challenge the board of education .
 The civil rights movement began in earnest after Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat to a white person on a Montgomery, Alabama bus . Brown the Board of Education ended segregation in public schools in both the North and South .
 The black community of Montgomery selected the minister of her church, Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., to lead the protest against her arrest . Rev. King led the protest in Montgomery, Alabama .
 King put his philosophy of non-violent civil disobedience into action by organizing a boycott of Montgomery's buses . King organized a Montgomery bus boycott in order to get people to take part in the civil disobedience .
 In November 1956, the Supreme Court ordered Montgomery to desegregate its buses . Montgomery buses were desegregated by the court .
 His televised ""I have a dream" speech confronted white America with the justice of the civil rights movement . His televised speech confronted whites with the Justice of the Civil Rights movement .
 In June 1964, the Civil Rights Act was passed, and in October, King won the Nobel Peace Prize . In 1965, King's nonviolence was being increasingly met with violence and death .
 President Kennedy and Mississippi NAACP leader Medgar Evars were both killed in 1963 . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 in Mississippi . Mississippi NAACP had both been killed .
 In 1964, a Birmingham, Alabama church was bombed, killing four little girls, and three civil rights workers were slain in Mississippi . Three Mississippi civil rights activists were killed in Mississippi in 1964 .
 Malcolm X was one-time spokesman for the Nation of Islam and leader of the Organization for Afro-American Unity . He was murdered in 1965 .
 Watts erupted in six days of riots on August 11, 1965 . Watts was a predominately black section of Los Angeles called Watts . The majority of Watts was predominantly black .
 A white policeman had arrested a black motorist for drunk driving, and the gathering crowd's frustration erupted into violence . A white motorist had been arrested by a white police officer . The gathering crowd was angered by the arrest of the black man .
 The summer of 1965 was the first of several summers that left cities smoldering with unrest . The worst rioting happened in Newark and Detroit in 1967, when riots erupted in Newark .
 Presidential commissions studying the riots determined the cause was economic . Presidential commissions studied the cause of the riots were economic .
 At one point during the speech, Khrushchev took off his shoe and banged it on the table . The former Soviet leader also banged his shoe off the table during his speech .
 His United Nations address awakened Western fears that he planned to aid Communist revolutionary movements around the world . His U.N. address awoke Western fears of his plans to aid revolutionary movements .
 After his United Nations speech, Fidel Castro, leader of the recent revolution in Cuba, visited Khrushchev in his hotel room . On April 12, 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin was the first human in space .
 Central Intelligence Agency -backed invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs failed . The entire trip from blastoff to landing lasted one hour and 48 minutes .
 President Kennedy approved the CIA's plan to invade Cuba shortly after taking office . The plan was inherited from the Eisenhower administration, inherited from Eisenhower administration .
 The United States launched the invasion three months into Kennedy's administration . The U.S. launched the attack in 1961 .
 Over 1,400 Cuban exiles, trained and equipped by the CIA, landed on Cuba's coast without air cover . They landed on the coast of Cuba without any air cover.
 The success of the invasion depended on a large uprising against Fidel Castro, the president of Cuba said . The success depended on the success of an uprising against Castro, he said .
 CIA underestimated Castro's military strength and popular support . However, the CIA had underestimated his popularity and military strength .
 All of the exiles were captured or killed by the Cuban armed forces within three days . The Berlin Wall was erected between West and East Berlin .
 During the summer of 1961, a substantial number of East Germans had fled to the West through East Berlin . The East Berlin area was home to a large number of refugees fleeing the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy advised Americans to build fallout shelters . Kennedy requested more intercontinental ballistic missiles, more nuclear submarines, and more funds for civil defense . Kennedy also requested more funds to bolster civil defense efforts .
 Khrushchev had assured President Kennedy in June 1961 that the Soviet Union wouldn't test nuclear devices if the U.S. didn't . The Soviet Union had voluntarily stopped testing nuclear devices three years before .
 The United States blockades Cuba for 13 days until the Soviet Union agrees to remove its missiles . The U.S. blocks Cuba from Cuba until the Soviets agree to remove their missiles from Cuba .
 The United States and the Soviet Union set up a hot line between the White House and the Kremlin in 1963 . The U.S. also agrees to remove its missiles from Turkey . June 1963 .
 On August 5, 1963, the United States and the Soviet Union signed the Limited Test Ban Treaty . The two superpowers signed an agreement on June 20, 1963 to set up the hot line .
 The treaty does not ban underground nuclear tests, which limit the radiation released into the environment . The treaty also does not outlaw underground nuclear testing, which limits radiation .
 Satellites in high orbits monitor the treaty by watching for the characteristic flash of a nuclear explosion . The treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1994 .
 The large number of utility orders for nuclear power reactors made nuclear power a commercial reality in the United States . First United States combat troops are sent to Vietnam . Limited Test Ban Treaty signed in 1965 .
 Before 1966, electric utilities had ordered less than ten reactors .
 After declining slightly slightly in 1969, nuclear power reactor orders peaked in 1972-73 . Nuclear power reactor sales peaked in 1973-1974 .
 The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty was signed in July 1968 . It was called for halting the international spread of nuclear weapons capabilities .
 Non-nuclear nations signed the NPT in the 1970s . They pledged never to make or acquire nuclear weapons . The NPT was signed by non-nuclear countries that had not developed nukes .
 Nuclear nations pledged not to assist other countries in making or acquiring nuclear weapons . They also pledged to curb the growth of their own arsenals . The pledge was made in 2007 .
 Apollo 11 astronauts Armstrong and Aldrin touched down on the moon near the Sea of Tranquility on July 20, 1969 .