 James McCartney is a former Washington correspondent for Knight Ridder Newspapers . He is also a former White House correspondent for CNN .
 Jack Kennedy courageously faced down Nikita Khrushchev in the Cuban missile crisis, thus saving the world from nuclear war . The myth was created by self-serving political partisans and nourished by an eager, lapdog media, he says .
 Historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. Jr., Kennedy's hired biographer, set the pace . Kennedy's biographer: Kennedy's life will be remembered for his work on Kennedy's legacy .
 Robert Kennedy's brother, Robert, and his White House speechwriter, Theodore Sorensen, contributed similar starry-eyed judgments . Robert's brother and Theodore's speechwriter also contributed to the judgment .
 For more than 20 years their version of the Cuban missile crisis was accepted wisdom, taught in classrooms, the stuff of legend . The story of the missile crisis in Cuba was accepted in classrooms for decades .
 Historians and scholars have pieced together quite another story, far less complimentary . Historians, scholars are piecing together the remains together .
 Newly released documents and information from recent meetings between ex-Soviet and Kennedy administration officials have found that many aspects of the legend are simply not true .
 Revisionists have drawn a picture of a misguided Kennedy, caught in a political trap of his own making . Though there is certainly no absolute consensus, revisionists say he made an unnecessary crisis .
 The late Dean Acheson, Harry Truman's revered secretary of state, privately called Kennedy's strategy a "reckless gamble" The late Harry Truman Secretary of State Harry Truman called the strategy a 'reckless gambler'
 In the Cuban missile crisis, as in most foreign policy crises, the U.S. press abandoned its role as a forum for debate . The American press became part of the propaganda machine the administration artfully created . The crisis was similar to that of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 The record shows that something similar has happened in virtually every foreign policy crisis since . The record is similar to what happened in the 1980s and 1990s, says President Obama .
 The press consistently has supported whatever policy the White House tried to sell – from the Vietnam War to the Persian Gulf War . The fact is that in such situations the press has joined in supporting whatever policy, misguided though it may be .
 For the most part, in foreign policy crises the critical faculties of the news media shut down . This is a time for the media to be critical of the U.S. foreign policy .
 It provides a case study of how an administration can manipulate a pliant press for its own political advantage, a capsulization of how it is done, and where and how the press failed .
 The story contains many lessons for the press today in preparing itself for coverage of future crises, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The presence of components of medium-range ballistic missiles was first reported to President Kennedy by his national security adviser, McGeorge Bundy, on October 16, 1962 .
 Kennedy called an 11:45m. meeting with his high-level advisers, ExComm . ExComm was a secret committee of foreign policy elders that later became known as ExComm – the Executive Committee of the National Security Council .
 The startling discovery was not disclosed to the public until a week later when Kennedy addressed the nation in a televised speech . Kennedy said the discovery was made public in a week after the discovery .
 Kennedy's version of the threat in that speech was overdramatized for political effect, a point now conceded by surviving top Kennedy administration advisers, including Theodore Sorensen and McGeorge Bundy .
 Kennedy also failed to disclose a secret American program, called ""Operation Mongoose,"" that he had originated to topple the Cuban government and possibly invade the island . The program was meant to topple Cuba's government, possibly invade it .
 Kennedy deliberately avoided mention of comparable U.S. missiles on the Soviet border in Turkey . Kennedy also deliberately avoided mentioning of comparable United States missiles in the Soviet-Turkish border .
 The Soviet motivation for installing the missiles was a motivation for the missile program, he says . He was dead wrong on perhaps the most crucial question of all in the crisis, the Soviet motivation .
 Kennedy led the public to believe that the Soviets were threatening a nuclear strike . Kennedy believed that the threat was a threat to strike .
 We know now that the Soviets had no such intention, and in fact were fearful of an American attack on Cuba – for good reason . The Soviets were worried about an attack on the U.S. in Cuba .
 We know that the world came closer to nuclear war than was known at the time . The world came close to a nuclear war in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The record shows that we were probably within 48 hours of a U.S. attack on Cuba . That would almost inevitably have led to a Soviet nuclear counterattack on the United States. The United States attacked Cuba in the 1950s .
 Kennedy's language in his televised speech on October 22 was uncompromising . Kennedy's body language is uncompromising, he said in a speech .
 Washington, D.C., Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico City or any other city in the southeastern part of the United States, in Central America, or in the Caribbean area – a truly frightening picture .
 He demanded that the missiles be withdrawn and announced a naval quarantine to stop further shipments . He also demanded that they be withdrawn from Syria .
 The record shows that the press did not challenge any of those highly questionable propositions in the days that followed . The press continued to refuse to challenge the claims .
 The story of the Cuban missile crisis did not really begin when the missiles were discovered on October 16 . The missiles were found in Cuba on that date .
 It began during Kennedy's 1960 election campaign against Richard Nixon . The campaign began during the 1960 election against Nixon .
 On Labor Day Kennedy began a savage attack on Nixon – from the right . Kennedy found himself several points behind in the polls and began attacking Nixon on Labor Day .
 On October 6, he accused the Eisenhower administration, including Vice President Nixon, of creating ""communism's first Caribbean base" in Cuba . He accused the Nixon administration of creating the "communism" in the Caribbean .
 President Obama was pressured by Republicans to stand up to Castro in Cuba . He did in the failed effort to depose the Cuban leader with the failed Bay of Pigs invasion .
 The notes of the first secret meeting of ExComm – now on the public record – provide an insight into the political problem Kennedy had created .
 President Kennedy said it was politically unacceptable for us to leave those missile sites alone . In 1987, McNamara said, "You have to remember that, right from the beginning, it was President Kennedy who said that it was . politically unacceptable"
 He had campaigned so strongly for a tougher policy toward Cuba that he was caught in a political trap of his own making . President Obama had campaigned for tougher policies toward Cuba .
 Kennedy made clear in his televised speech that he believed the motivation was self-evident . Kennedy said he believes the motivation for the attack on Kennedy's son was obvious . Kennedy: "I believe that the motivation is selfevident"
 Nikita Khrushchev had no such intention. Yet the record shows quite convincingly that he had no intention . The record shows that he did not intend to kill anyone .
 Their action was intended to strengthen the defensive stability of Cuba . The Cuban government is seeking to strengthen its defensive stability .
 This, of course, was the official Soviet position – including Khrushchev's and Gromyko's – at the time . But it was treated with derision and skepticism by the Kennedy administration and the press .
 The press generally treated the notion that the missiles might be defensive as ""a Soviet lie,"" William LeoGrande says . The press often treated the idea as a Soviet lie .
 There is now a consensus among scholars that Khrushchev's primary motivation was the defense of Cuba . But there is also a consensus that he was primarily motivated by his desire for Cuba .
 A strong secondary factor, they believe, was his justified perception of Soviet nuclear inferiority . They also believe he was justified in his view of the Soviet Union's nuclear superiority .
 Khrushchev knew that the U.S. had established overwhelming nuclear superiority by 1962 and was still building up . He knew the United States had already established overwhelming superiority .
 He wanted to redress the perception of imbalance by establishing a more threatening military posture, he said . He said he wanted to establish a 'more threatening posture'
 Sergo Mikoyan was intimately involved as the crisis unfolded . He was a key witness to Soviet motivation in the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan .
 He was personal secretary to his father, Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas I Mikoyan . He was a close friend and confidante of Khrushchev, a close confidante .
 The Mikoyans and Khrushchevs lived in adjacent houses in Moscow's Lenin Hills . Khrushchev and Mikoyan often took long walks together to discuss government problems .
 Sergo Mikoyan was asked why Khrushchev installed the missiles in Cuba . At a 1987 conference in Cambridge, Massachusetts, former Soviet and U.S. officials discussed the issue .
 A secondary factor, Sergo Mikoyan said, was Soviet strategic inferiority . The Soviet Union did not have a strong economic advantage, he said .
 The Soviets estimated that the U.S. had 17 nuclear weapons for every one they possessed . The Soviets then estimated the Americans had 17 nukes for every weapon they possessed.
 Former Secretary of Defense McNamara asked Mikoyan if Khrushchev "ever thought it would be in his interest ever to launch these missiles" – a key question .
 McNamara acknowledged that Khrushchev had every reason to believe that a U.S. invasion might be in the works . But McNamara doubted that Kennedy would have ever done it .
 McNamara insisted that the United States had no intention of invading Cuba . McNamara said that the Soviet action to install missiles with that as its objective was based on a misconception .
 It was the super-secret ""Operation Mongoose"" that lay at the root of Cuban and Soviet fears – a program the American public knew nothing about . Operation Mongoose was the program the U.S. public knew about .
 Documents obtained through Freedom of Information requests by the National Security Archive paint a different picture . McNamara insisted that there was no intention to invade Cuba .
 The notion that the U.S. might be considering an invasion of Cuba was so outlandish that the question was not addressed . In fact, the press found the idea so outlandish it didn't address the question .
 This failure by the press seems all the more remarkable in light of the fact that in 1962 some prominent Republicans had been openly calling for an invasion . In 1962, prominent Republicans were calling for invasion .
 Homer E Capehart of Indiana, for example, had demanded either a blockade or an invasion of Cuba in his reelection campaign to a point where Kennedy attacked Capehart as irresponsible .
 The minutes of ExComm meetings show that officials were concerned that the public might not see any difference . Officials were concerned about the public not being able to see the difference .
 LeoGrande says the press never questioned the administration's premise . Grande: The press never doubted the premise of the administration .
 The administration didn't want the public to know that it was ready to make a deal on the Turkish missiles . Clearly the administration did not want to make such a deal .
 Robert Kennedy assured Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to the United States, that the missiles in Turkey would be removed when the heat was off . The missiles were in Turkey when the U.S. removed them .
 Kennedy administration took the public position that the Soviets backed down in the crisis while the U.S. gave nothing . It was yet another public relations triumph by the Kennedy administration, which took the position .
 When the missiles in Turkey were withdrawn soon after the crisis, without fanfare, the press paid little attention, perceiving no significant connection . Kennedy characterized the discovery of the missiles as an unacceptable military danger to the U.S.
 Top U.S. officials never believed the balance of power was affected by the Soviet move . Top United States officials believed the move was not affected by it . The Soviet move was seen as a sign of weakness in the United States .
 McNamara: U.S. superiority was about 17 to one in deliverable nuclear weapons – just what the Soviets had believed . In fact, McNamara and a State department expert on the Soviet military at the time, the United States had superiority .
 Garthoff estimates that the Soviets had 44 intercontinental ballistic missiles at the time of the crisis . The U.S. had several thousand nuclear weapons, while the United States had several thousands nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union was estimated to have 44 inter-continental ballistic missile missiles .
 Many historians now believe that top officials of the Kennedy administration concluded that the threat of force worked in dealing with the communists, thus setting the conceptual stage for the Vietnam War . Lyndon Johnson was retained by President Kennedy after his assassination .
 It is also a matter of record now that the Soviets drew another conclusion – that they must build up their nuclear forces . The Soviets drew up their decision to build up nuclear forces in order to protect themselves .
 By the 1980s, more than 50,000 nuclear weapons had been produced on both sides . Nuclear arms race led to uncontrolled nuclear arms race that produced more than half a billion weapons .
 The full story was hidden for so many years by government secrecy . Yet the myth lives on, in part because of the brilliance of the Kennedy administration's public relations machine . The press didn't do its job at the time – and has failed since to reexamine history as the true
 The American press corps substantially supported the Vietnam War through all of its early stages . The U.S. press corps supported the war through the early stages of the war .
 It was not until after the Tet offensive in 1968 that the mainstream press began to ask critical questions about the Vietnam war .
 President Ford tried to rescue the merchant ship Mayaguez off the Cambodian coast in 1975 . The ship was rescued off the coast of Cambodia by the president of Cambodia . President Ford was killed in the rescue attempt .
 The operation was greeted in the press as a great American victory . More U.S. soldiers died than the number of merchant seamen who were saved .
 Years later, President Reagan's 1983 invasion of Grenada was also viewed as a triumph . Reagan invaded Grenada in 1983, but it was seen as a success .
 A careful examination of the role of the press in the Persian Gulf War raises the same kinds of questions . The press played a key role in the Gulf War in the 1980s .
 The military imposed the tightest controls on the press in American history, making accurate reporting on the scene impossible if not impossible . As well known, the military imposed a tightest press controls on American history .
 We still know virtually nothing about why Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait or why the administration overestimated Iraq's military capabilities . We still have no idea why the U.S. underestimated Iraq's capabilities .
 Much of the press in the Persian Gulf was still buying whatever the administration had to say as fact, still failing to probe deeply into the causes of the war . The U.S. government is still buying what the administration says as fact .
 For the press, there are dramatic lessons in the unfolding story of the Cuban missile crisis . For the media, the lessons should be learned from the Cuban crisis, CNN says .
 Another lesson is that the press has grave difficulty in questioning the basic premises of administration decisions to use force . Another lesson: The press has trouble questioning basic premises to question administration decisions .
 The power of the press is to raise issues, to ask questions, to stimulate public discussion and debate, says David Cameron . "The power of this media is to question questions," he says .
 William LeoGrande believes he knows why these questions weren't asked, at least in part . He says he knows he knows the answers to the questions about the death penalty .
 The Cold War was over by the time of the Persian Gulf War and the press still had not produced a declaration of independence . But the Cold War had not been over .