 The United States and Russia have been trying to reset their relationship . The relationship has been severely strained over U.S. plans to position missile defense elements in Poland and the Czech Republic .
 Russia has nothing to gain strategically from basing long-range craft within relatively short range of U.S. shores, independent military analyst says . Independent military analyst Alexander Golts calls the move a retaliatory gesture aimed at hitting back after United States ships patrolled Black Sea waters near Georgia
 Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez has offered a whole island with an airdrome, Russian state news reports . The island could be used as a temporary base for strategic bombers, the Russian minister says .
 Cuba has air bases with four or five runways long enough for bombers, he said . Cuba has long-range planes that could be used to host the planes, he added .
 Kremlin official: "The military is speaking about technical possibilities, that's all" But Alexei Pavlov, a Kremlin official, told The Associated Press that the military is talking .
 "If there will be a development of the situation, then we can comment," he said . "We will comment if there is a development," he added .
 National Security Council spokesman: "We do not comment on hypotheticals" Spokesman for President Barack Obama's national security council says it's too late to comment on hypothetical scenarios .
 Russia resumed long-range bomber patrols in 2007 after a 15-year hiatus . Russia resumed bomber patrols last year after 15 years of hiatus .
 Venezuela hosted two Russian Tu-160 bombers in September for training flights and later joined Russian warships for exercises in the Caribbean . Venezuela hosted Russian warships in September .
 Cuba has never permanently hosted Russian or Soviet aircraft, though Soviet short-range bombers often made stopovers there during the Cold War .
 After a tense week of diplomacy, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev removed the missiles . The missiles were removed from the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 Plans to put elements of a missile defense system in Poland and the Czech Republic particularly irked Russia . The United States insists they are intended to counter potential future threats from Iran .
 Russia welcomes Obama's apparently more cautious approach to the divisive issue . Russia has welcomed Obama's decision to take a cautious approach .
 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton met Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov in Geneva earlier this month to push a symbolic red button . The move is a sign of the desire for a clean slate, Clinton says .
 Cuban authorities made no comment last summer when a Moscow newspaper reported that Russia could send nuclear bombers to the island . Cuban authorities have not commented on the report .
 Fidel Castro at the time praised his brother President Raul Castro for maintaining a \""dignified silence\"" on the report . Fidel Castro said that Cuba was not obligated to offer the United States an explanation .
 Russia may base bombers in Cuba . Russia may also base its military bases in Cuba.
 Venezuela and Cuba, traditionally fierce U.S. foes, have close political and energy relations with Russia . Russia has been working to reassert itself as a military force . Venezuela, Cuba and Cuba have close diplomatic and economic ties with Moscow .
 The bombers are considered strategic because they are capable of reaching an attacking range of the U.S. from Russia without the need for stopovers . He said the bombers can reach the United States without stoppingovers .