 Army War College,Strategic Studies Institute,122 Forbes Avenue,Carlisle,PA,17013-5244 8.30am . Army War War College is located at the Strategic Studies Institute .
 Kennedy Launches Operation MONGOOSE.19 Khrushchev Decides to Put Missiles in Cuba . Kennedy launches Operation MONGEOSE. Kennedy launches the operation in Cuba. Kennedy's first Cuban missile strike was in 1961 .
 36.36 Opposition to U-2 Flights. Aerial Reconnaissance and ""The Photo Cap""". 36 .
 Nikita Khrushchev decided secretly to place offensive missiles in Cuba . He did not believe President John Kennedy would use military action to enforce U.S. policy .
 A failed SNIE on September 19,1962, stated Khrushchev would not place offensive missiles in Cuba . Lacking hard intelligence to the contrary, the U.S. Intelligence Community issued the SNIE . The SNIE was issued in September 1962 .
 Nikita Khrushchev's secret policy decision to place SS-4 medium and SS-5 intermediate range missiles in Cuba was based on an erroneous assessment that once the missiles had secretly been emplaced, President John F Kennedy would accept them .
 When these erroneous assessments were contradicted by intelligence from an intelligence from a highly valuable and reliable espionage agent, it was difficult to believe .
 Colonel Oleg Penkovsky was a Soviet Military Intelligence officer jointly run by the Central Intelligence Agency and British intelligence . This information was not given the credibility it deserved until it was confirmed by our first generation Corona satellite reconnaissance .
 National Security Advisor (McGeorge Bundy) knew about Penkovsky or the importance of his information . National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy knew about the information .
 Dulles's successor, John McCone, continued to keep the President informed of the status of the case after he became DCI in November 1961 . McCone continued to be kept informed of this case after becoming DCI .
 After a show trial in Moscow, Penkovsky's execution was announced on May 17,1963 . Penkovsksky was executed in 1963 . He was sentenced to death in 1964 .
 There is evidence of at least 51 meetings between Kennedy and Bolshakov between May 1961 and December 1962 .
 Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric gave a speech to the Business Council at White Sulfur Springs, West Virginia . The speech was part of a speech by the Defense Department's Deputy Secretary .
 Khrushchev: "We didn't need documentary proof that the Americans were preparing a second invasion; we didn't have documentary proof" Khrushche: "Pm not saying we had any documentary proof of the Americans' intentions."
 He did not return to Washington until after his honeymoon in southern France on September 23 .
 On August 27,1962, Penkovsky exchanged packages with a CIA officer during a reception in the Moscow apartment of an American agricultural attache . The two men exchanged packages in the apartment of the attache in Moscow .
 The next day, Penkovsky appeared at the British Science and Cultural Attache offices for a film showing . He appeared at a British science and cultural Attache office in the UK .
 McCone continued to warn about the possibility that the Soviets would place offensive missiles in Cuba . In a series of cables between McCone in France and acting DCI Lieutenant General Marshall S Carter in Washington, he warned about the threat .
 The U.S. would then move to place offensive missiles in Cuba . Then, depending on the United States reaction, they would move to places in Cuba, experts say .
 The author recalls that no one at the meeting took or supported the DCF position . The author also recalls that the author was not in support of the DCFs .
 The consensus was that there was not enough convincing information or evidence to support the DCF view . The consensus is that there is not enough .
 It failed to spot the ominous indicators of missile emplacement, but over and over again it made fools of ground observers by proving their reports inaccurate or wrong . Not only did it fail to spot signs of emplacements, but also failed to prove ground observers were wrong .
 There were no U-2 flights over western and central Cuba from September 5 until early October . The U.2 aircraft were flying over the Cuban island .
 President Kennedy requested that such information be withheld until after the U.S. elections . The information was withheld from the public .
 An incorrect interpretation of the DCFs instructions delayed the dissemination of human source information pending the receipt of U-2 photography . Although this analytical mind-set was formed by an incorrect interpretation, it did result in delaying the release of information .
 After the crisis, Ray Cline asked both Robert Kennedy and McGeorge Bundy if they would assess "how much that single evaluated piece of photographic evidence [the San Cristobal SS-4 sites] was worth" Each said it fully justified all that the CIA had cost the country in all
 He said that the best course for the President was for him to get a good night's sleep after a strenuous campaign weekend .
 On Tuesday morning, October 16, 1962, President Kennedy was briefed on the discovery . The discovery was the first time President Kennedy had been briefed on it .
 EXCOM met secretly beginning on October 16 to advise him on how to respond to the crisis . The EXCOM also met secretly to discuss how to deal with the situation .
 The President tape recorded meetings without the participants' knowledge, and transcripts are now available . The President taped meetings with the participants without the knowledge of the meetings .
 Others participated in the EXCOM either as experts or in place of their superiors . Others were Latin 54 America Assistant Secretary of State Edwin M Martin, Deputy Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs U Alexis Johnson, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric .
 Vice President Johnson was not present for EXCOM meetings during the first week of the crisis . Although a member of the EXCOM, he was not at least present for meetings during crisis .
 He returned to Washington from a campaign trip to Hawaii on October 21 and was briefed that day by McCone and Lundahl on the discovery of the missiles .
 The author recalls no retreat from that unshakable policy commitment throughout the crisis . The author recalled no retreats from that policy commitment .
 DCI McCone went to Gettysburg to brief former President Eisenhower and get his views on what to do . Also visited Gettysburg on October 17 to brief Eisenhower on what he said about the situation .
 He thought this might be done by airborne divisions, but was not familiar with the size of the Cuban forces in the immediate area or their equipment . He said he was not sure how many Cuban forces would be involved in the operation .
 Kennedy displayed a remarkable calm during the TV and photo coverage of that White House visit, as he listened to the Soviets lie to him 2 days after he received the photos of the MRBM site .
 The President departed Washington on Friday, October 19, for campaign appearances in Chicago . The President left Washington on October 19 for Chicago .
 FROG is NATO designation for the Soviet FUNA Tactical Missile . NATO designation is FROG, which is NATO's version of the Soviet missile .
 Only after U-2 photography confirmed presence of offensive missiles in Cuba, was reporting on the Soviet military build-up from human sources such as espionage agents .
 Another SNIE was written on Saturday, October 20, to assess the major consequences of certain U.S. courses of action with respect to Cuba . This SNIE assesses the major implications of certain United States course of action .
 The estimate also reported 12 Komar cruise missile patrol boats; all were probably operational or nearly so . The estimate said all the boats were likely operational or near so .
 Secretary McNamara expressed his opinion at an EXCOM meeting on October 17 that if nuclear warheads were supplied to the MRBMs, then the Soviets would also supply nuclear bombs for bombers with offensive capability .
 The President returned to Washington that Saturday from a campaign trip to the mid-west feigning a cold . After a telephone call from Robert Kennedy, the President decided to block the passage .
 The President decided to delay the quarantine to permit consultation with our allies . The quarantine was delayed to allow consultation with the President .
 McCone urged the President to indicate publicly the intention to remove the missiles and other weapons by "means and at a time of his own choosing,"" if surveillance proved that the Soviets and Cubans were not removing them .
 On October 21, 1962, the DCI briefed Eisenhower a second time, at McCone's residence . The DCI met with Eisenhower for the second time .
 The Vice President agreed reluctantly to a blockade after learning of Eisenhower's support . However, the Vice President reluctantly agreed to the blockade .
 According to Kent, de Gaulle was both satisfied and supportive of the intelligence briefing and of President Kennedy's decision . Kent: De Gaulle "satisfied and supportive" of the decision .
 President Kennedy made a television address to the nation that Monday evening, October 22, 1962 . Kennedy made the address on a national television broadcast . The address was the first time President Kennedy had made such an address .
 "We were now ready as a government and as a people to unite in confronting this nuclear 65 threat to the security and the existence of our nation," says President Obama .
 The Pentagon placed the entire U.S. military establishment on Defense Condition 3, an increased state of alert . On that same day, the entire United States military establishment was placed on the increased alert .
 The Soviets would intercept these communications and would thus fully understand the scope and seriousness of the growing U.S. military response, the author says .
 The alert lasted 30 days of continuous flight operations . 2,088 sorties in 48,532 continuous hours of flying time . 20,022,000 miles were flown without a fatality .
 Over 70 million gallons of fuel were transferred in flight by the KC-135 tankers . Over 70 millions of gallons were transferred during the flight .
 General Lemay may well have been one of the most important and most under-rated players in the missile crisis . Lemay was a key figure in the crisis in the Soviet Union .
 91 Atlas and 41 Titan liquid-fueled ICBMs were being readied for firing on October 22 . Secretary McNamara received word in the evening of October 22 that the missiles would be ready for firing .
 Matador and MACE tactical cruise missiles in West Germany were brought to combat-alert status . Matador missiles were deployed in the West Germany during the Cold War .
 No racing program was going on at Gulf Stream, troops enjoyed lining up along the rails to watch the thoroughbreds work out during the early morning hours .
 This would add further credibility to the stated U.S. policy of not allowing offensive missiles to be established in Cuba .
 President Kennedy signed the order for the naval quarantine on Tuesday, October 23, 1962 . The quarantine was ordered by the President of the Navy .
 That same day, Secretary of State Rusk obtained unanimous concurrence from the OAS to support the naval quarantine of Cuba . OAS concurred with support from Secretary Rusk .
 Defense Minister Malinovsky placed the Soviet armed forces on a war footing on October 23 . Khrushchev and the Soviet Council of Ministers met to discuss the situation .
 NSA flashed word to CIA watch office that directionfinding efforts indicated that Soviet ships bound for Cuba that were suspected of carrying missiles, had changed course, and were probably on their way back to Russia . NSA: Soviet ships believed to be carrying missiles changed course and headed for Cuba .
 President Kennedy called Secretary McNamara to confirm when our forces would be ready to invade Cuba . McNamara confirmed that the invasion would take place on Wednesday night .
 Official world reaction showed a generally favorable response to the U.S. action . That same day, the official world reaction was generally favorable .
 Existing MRBM and IRBM sites in Cuba were being rapidly completed, as were buildings believed to provide storage for nuclear warheads . But existing IRBM and MRBM sites are also being completed .
 Aerial photography of Cuba on October 24 and 25 clearly showed that work on the missile sites was moving ahead rapidly, even faster than before . Aerial photography showed that the missile work was moving forward rapidly .
 Two IL-28 Beagle bombers had been assembled, three more were in the process, and crates for an additional 20 bombers were at San Julian airfield .
 DCI McCone reported that as of 6 o'clock Thursday morning, October 25, at least 14 of the 22 Soviet ships that were known to be en route to Cuba had turned back .
 This gave the Soviets more time, but simultaneously demonstrated that the U.S. meant business . This gave them more time but simultaneously showed that the United States meant business.
 Aleksandr Semyonovich Feklisov replaced Bolshakov as the conduit between Khrushchev and Kennedy . The KGB resident in Washington, Russia's resident in D.C. Fekisov, was replaced by Bolshkov as the KGB resident .
 Fie asked for a meeting with John Scab of the American Broadcasting Company and asked if the U.S. would accept a deal whereby the USSR withdraws all offensive missiles under UN supervision and the United. States agrees not to invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev sent a long emotional message to Kennedy with the same offer as was conveyed by Feklisov to Scab . Also on October 26, Kennedy sent the same message to the Soviet Union leader .
 Khrushchev sent a second message on Saturday, October 27, broadcast publicly on radio . He added the condition that the United States withdraw Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The message added that the U.S. should withdraw the missiles .
 If the Soviet missiles and offensive weapons were removed from Cuba 71 under UN inspection and verification, the U.S. would agree with the rest of the Western Hemisphere not to invade Cuba .
 Saturday, October 27, 1962, was the darkest day of the crisis . October 27 was the deadliest day in the history of the war .
 A few would probably criticize such military action publicly, but would most likely support it privately . A few of the world's most outspoken critics of the U.S. military might support it .
 The SNIE was another strong indicator that the U.S. was indeed preparing to bomb and invade Cuba . That we had been asked on such short notice to draft this SNIE, it was a strong indicator .
 The next day, Sunday, October 28, Khrushchev announced publicly that he would withdraw the missiles from Cuba . The following day, the Soviet Union announced that it would withdraw missiles from the country .
 On Saturday, five of the six MRBM sites were believed to have a full operational capability . The MRBM site is believed to be one of the world's most active sites .
 Aerial photography from October 25 confirmed the presence of a FROG missile launcher in a vehicle park near Remedios . The missile launcher was spotted by aerial photography on October 25 .
 President's rejection of Khrushchev's Cuba-Turkey proposal has so far only fragmentary mixed reaction . President rejected the proposal .
 Khrushchev agreed on Sunday, October 28, to remove missiles in return for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The missiles were removed from Cuba in exchange for a United States pledge to not invade the country .
 There was implicit promise to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey later . There was an implicit promise that the missiles would be removed from Turkey .
 The Special Group called a halt to the sabotage component of Operation MONGOOSE on October 30 . Operation MONGEOSE is part of the Special Group's anti-terror campaign .
 Two voiceless telephone calls were made in Moscow to a telephone number given by the CIA to Penkovsky for his use . The calls indicated that he had loaded a dead drop .
 Jacob was declared persona non grata and departed from the Soviet Union on November 6 . Jacob left the USSR on that date and was declared a persona non-grata .
 DCI McCone briefed President Kennedy on the ambush of Jacob and Penkovsky . The following day, the president was briefed on the probable arrest of the pair .
 On November 20,1962, the Soviets decided to withdraw the IL-28 bombers, their six nuclear bombs, and the tactical nuclear weapons . The Soviets decided on their own to withdraw their own bombers and nuclear bombs from the USSR .
 The CIA published a memorandum on November 29 concerning the deployment and withdrawal of Soviet missiles and other weapons in Cuba . The memo was published by the CIA .
 The CIA had no evidence of any preparations in Cuba to withdraw these elements, the agency says . The CIA says it had no plans to withdraw elements from Cuba .
 Nuclear warheads were not actually seen in Cuba until the post-crisis review of aerial photography taken during the crisis period .
 Sergei N Khrushchev said that the 20 nuclear warheads in Cuba were never mated to the missiles but easily could have been . The 20 warheads were not mated but could easily have been, he said .
 The Soviets secreted some of the offensive missiles in caves after the crisis, mostly from refugees . Some of the missiles were secreted in caves .
 Such inspections, however, were never agreed to or permitted by Castro . Castro was never allowed to allow inspections by the government .
 On February 6, 1963, Secretary McNamara introduced an unclassified briefing in the State 77 Department auditorium .
 DIA presented a photographic review of the introduction of Soviet military personnel and equipment into Cuba . John Hughes, Special Assistant to the Director of DIA, presented a detailed photographic review .
 The Special Group should have been informed of the delay in overflights and should have had a mechanism to discover automatically such reporting omissions, it has said .
 Bundy sent a copy of the PFIAB report and the DCFs February 28, 1963, memo response to the President to President Kennedy's secretary for filing . Bundy sent the report to the White House on March 7, 1963 .
 "We have no indication the report was changed, and there were no resignations," says CNN.com chief executive . "There was no indication of a change in the report," she says .
 This malfunction diminished the effectiveness of policy advisers, national intelligence estimators, and civilian and military officers having command responsibilities . The malfunction diminished policy advisers' effectiveness, officials say .
 The Board attached 35 examples of such indicators as an annex to its report . The report was published on Thursday .
 Even the President's Intelligence Checklist prepared by the CIA failed to include information from any of the refugee or agent reports on sightings of offensive missiles in Cuba .
 The Board noted that the photographic evidence from the October 14 and subsequent overflights was promptly processed and submitted to the President in time for decisive action before the Soviet MRBM and IRBM systems became fully operational . The Board notes that the evidence was promptly .
 "The course that we ultimately would have taken would have been quite different and filled with far greater risks," says President Obama . "If our deliberations had been publicized, if we had had to make a decision in 24 hours, I believe the course that . would have ... been different,"
 McNamara gives Robert Kennedy much of the credit for this performance . President made no statement attempting to take credit for himself or for the administration . McNamara gave Robert Kennedy a much larger part of the performance .
 This will alway be one of the keys to successful national security leadership, says President Obama . This will always be a key to success, says Obama .
 On October 13, 1964, 2 years after the missile crisis, Khrushchev resigned all of his party and government offices . The crisis was the second time since the crisis broke out in 1964 .
 It was resented as a Soviet humiliation, not as a victory as Khrushchev had earlier proclaimed . The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 was seen as a humiliating defeat .
 The mind-set of U.S. leaders led them to conclude that the Soviets would realize the seriousness of their actions . Conversely, the U.K. leaders concluded that they would believe and heed President Kennedy's warnings about the missiles .
 It was ironic that on the same day President Kennedy made his speech to the nation . President Kennedy's speech was made on the anniversary of his death .
 Schecter and Deriabin, 336; Helms, 216, 216; and the author. Helms is the author of the book .
 Out of Many-A History of the American People. John Mack Earagher, Mari Jo Buhle, Daniel Czitrom, and Susan H Armitage, Out of many-A history of the U.S. People.
 "Our last operational contact with him was August 27, 1962, at a reception in the apartment of the American Agricultural Attache in Moscow," he says .