 The inevitable or necessary fate to which a particular person or thing is destined; one's lot. One's lot is one's fate; a fate is one of many things destined .
 A policy of imperialistic expansion defended as necessary or benevolent . A policy that defends imperialism as necessary, not necessary, is defended by the U.S.
 It was the concept of United States territorial expansion westward to the Pacific Ocean . The concept of U.S. territorial expansion was created by the United States in 1903 .
 The phrase was coined in 1845 by the editor John L O'Sullivan, who described the annexation of Texas and the occupation of the rest of the continent as a divine right .
 The term was used to justify the U.S. annexation of Oregon, New Mexico, and California . The term also used in the United States involvement in Alaska, Hawaii, and the Philippines .
 "I don’t see how you could believe in one without believing in the other," he says . "You can't believe in either of these things without having faith in them," he adds .
 "I believe that those of us who write Patriot Fiction mostly believe in destiny. I believe that . Those of us mostly believe that destiny."
 A predetermined course of events is considered as something beyond human power or control . The outcome of events are considered something beyond the human control of events .
 There were other weapons including the neutron bomb, generally referred to as enhanced radiation devices . The neutron bomb and neutron bomb were among other weapons .
 Before the world stopped making nuclear weapons, it had over 40,000, divided among 8 countries, 7 declared and 1 undeclared . Before the end of the nuclear era, the world had 40,500 nuclear weapons .
 Two more countries were doing their best to build nuclear weapons and one country that had tested them, no longer made them, South Africa . South Africa was one of the last countries to test nuclear weapons .
 That's one ball that you really don't want to get rolling toward the pins, you probably won’t get a gutter shot . That’s one ball you really want to avoid .
 It tends to turn Biblical on you, a beget b, b beget c, until the bombs are all gone . Plus it tends to tend to turn biblical on you. Plus it tend to be a bit more fun to play .
 The good news is there won’t be anyone around to build anymore for a very, very long time . "The good news" is that there won't be any more of this type of building .
 Using up the existing supply really puts the world’s population in a bind, even if they’re not a target . On the other hand, using up the already existing supply is a big problem for the world .
 The majority of the weapons will be detonated in the northern latitudes . Most of the bombs will be placed in the north .
 Like the US, Europe, Russia, India, Pakistan and China and somewhere^) in the Middle East .
 If an author waxed and waned philosophic about nuclear warfare and didn't build a story around it, no one would read more than two pages, although sometimes that’s all they read anyway .
 "There are a lot of very good authors out there who haven’t written themselves into a corner," says the author .
 After the floods of 2008, he found himself selling wheat and oats in addition to corn . He now sells wheat, oats, oats and corn .
 Many of the Midwestern areas didn’t have enough growing season left to replant and grow corn . Many areas didn't have enough of the growing season to grow corn this year . Many of those areas were devastated by the drought .
 The corn that was supposed to be knee high by the 4 th of July wasn’t in the ground .
 Corn needs over 80 days to grow and mature and it has to happen before the first frost . Corn needs more than 80 days of growing and mature before it is ready to be ready for frost .
 He even made a bit more than previous years, partly due to inflation, but he needed to, because of inflation . He said he made a lot more than he did in previous years .
 Midwestern gas prices had managed to stay just below $3 a gallon, but diesel the tractors used was a half dollar higher . The diesel they used was half a dollar higher than gas .
 "I told him I’d have to think about it because we didn’t have a freezer," she says of her freezer .
 The locker plant double wrapped meat in plastic, then Kraft paper . The meat was wrapped in plastic and Kraft paper, the owner says .
 We can order chickens by the case from the grocery store and get turkeys when they have them on sale . We can also buy turkeys from the store and buy them by the end of the year .
 When the farmers harvested their wheat oats and corn, I bought a pickup load at a time and put it in Mylar bags inside of 6-gallon pails . The farmers harvested grain and oats at the time, I put it into Mylar bagged pails and in My
 Sara began to pay more attention to the sales and we added hams, bacon, turkeys, beans and rice . Sara began paying more attention and adding hams and bacon to the menu .
 We also got a supply of Mountain House food, enough for two people for one year .
 After we were into prepping, Sara and Sara found time to visit Preparedness Websites and read Patriot Fiction .
 The stories and the various Forums were full of ideas and there wasn’t total agreement among the various authors or various posters . There wasn't total agreement on the various ideas .
 A Main Battle Rifle, the civilian version of the Ml 4, a Taurus PT1911 .45acp semi-auto pistol and a special purpose shotgun made by Mossberg . One guy believed in a Main Battle . Battle Rifle and a Mossberg shotgun .
 In our County, the Sheriff was pre-disposed to not issue non-professional concealed carry permits . In our county, we have a history of not issuing a concealed carry permit permit .
 The only guy in our area that sold the Springfield Armory rifles was a guy named Smith in Des Moines, Iowa . Smith was the only guy who sold the rifles .
 The MIA was a bit hefty for her, but she did like the Ruger Mini-14 rifle . She did like it, but it was a good buy .
 We had applied for and been issued handgun purchase permits when we went to the Sheriff to see about CCWs . We had applications for and were issued handguns purchase permits at the time .
 "We hadn’t driven all the way to Des Moines to just return home empty handed. We hadn't just returned home emptyhanded. It was a good sign that we weren't just going to drive to the airport .
 When he added up, he added it up, I told him I’d write a check and he could call our bank to verify that we had sufficient funds to cover the check . He added up the amount and wrote a check to the bank .
 "We had substantial savings and I had gone online the day before and transferred more than enough to cover any purchases," says mother-of-one .
 I make money on every bag of seed I sell which is the reason I sell it to begin with. I make profit on each bag I sell .
 Most seed salesmen have a second job because the seed selling season is so short . Seed salesmen often have second jobs because of the short selling season .
 I farmed 80 acres most years but didn’t get in a crop this year and seeded alfalfa . "I farmed about 80 acres this year but didn't get in crops this year"
 A hay crop could always be sold and some of our neighbors would cut and bale it for a portion of the hay . A portion of a hay crop would be sold to some of the neighbors for a share of it .
 "With the very late spring, we only got two cuttings, but it sold very well," said the author .
 Around Thanksgiving, as the freezer began to have more available space, we added several of the small Butterball turkeys .
 We were once a month customers of the Wes Des Moines Costco and when we could, purchased a little extra . We're not always satisfied with the store .
 One more spring would likely see us close to our previous level of savings . Buying the firearms magazines and ammunition cut into that, but the sale of the hay replaced a portion .
 I knew John Brentwood in passing; he was one of the managers at the West Des Moines Costco . Brentwood was a manager at the Costco. He was a member of the staff at Costco.
 More than once we arrived late in the day and I see him going through the checkout lane with cases of Folgers and sometimes with multiple bags of beans or rice . Sometimes he goes to the checkout with bags of coffee, beans, rice and rice .
 One day, by chance, we were in the checkout line when John came up pushing a flatbed of beans and rice . "One of the greatest moments of my life was when he was pushing the flatbed," he says .
 When we got home, I help Sara unload and forgot entirely to look up the Cummins generator . "I'm so proud of my family that I'm not afraid to look at it," she says .
 A small portable generator just large enough to power the freezer and refrigerator or a home standby unit . We talked about it and decided we had two choices, a portable generator and a standby .
 I couldn’t imagine a situation where 1,000-gallons of propane wouldn't be enough . "I couldn't imagine ... a situation ... where I would have to use it," she says . "It's not the first time that propane has been used in
 One of the authors I read a lot of had pointed my way to the MIA and he had strong opinions on how much fuel you needed to have, how long you should plan on a power outage . He also had opinions on what to do to preserve your fuel .
 I believe that maybe John also writes Patriot Fiction, he said something about weaponized Ebola . I believe he also wrote Patriot Fiction .
 After checking, we realized that the RS 12000 was a 3,600rpm generator . After checking it out, we found out that it was actually a generator .
 The RS 15000 was 1,800rpm, put out all the power we could use . It was much more expensive than the RS 12000 and much more powerful .
 Cummins installed the device after it was installed . Cummins notified the power company as Cummins recommends . After installing the device, Cummins contacted the company as recommended .
 We/I didn't install a large propane tank, etc. We didn’t do anything else . We didn't do anything other; we didn”t install a propane .
 "We did go to a range and become very familiar with our new rifles, handguns and shotguns," says CNN.com .
 There were allegations of irregularities in Florida, Ohio and even Illinois, which Obama won by a slim margin .
 It didn’t make it all the way to the Supreme Court, but there was speculation that it could . It didn't make it to the high court .
 In Illinois and California, the suits bought by the NRA have been heard and are awaiting judgment . In Illinois, the NRA bought the suits were heard and were awaiting judgment in California and Illinois .
 The gun lobbys’ suits would no doubt make it all the way and with Obama filling vacancies, the next ruling might go 6-3 or even 7-2 . The gun lobby's suit might make it even further .
 Joel Rosenberg predicted war with Iran would break out in November, 2008 . Rosenberg predicted the war in November 2008. Rosenberg had predicted it would happen in 2008 .
 At the top of the list of pending Iowa Legislation for the coming session was the shall issue bill on CCWs . The bill is one of several pending bills in the Iowa legislature .
 We rounded out our armory with a .22 rifle and a long barrel for one of the special purpose shotguns . We also have a long-barred shotgun .
 I had a very good season selling seed corn, oats, beans and wheat for the 2009 planting season . I had to sell seed corn and oats, oats and wheat in 2009 planting .
 One neighbor planted all 75 tilled acres in corn . The fields were plowed, disked and dragged and one neighbor planted corn .
 Apparently the new canner lacked a seal that could go bad and was bigger . The new seal was bigger and bigger than the previous seal . The canner is now available for $99.99 .
 A spring thunderstorm took out power and it was two days before it could be restored . Power was restored after two days .
 The generator kicked right in and we didn’t miss power for more than a minute or so . The generator kicks right in, and the generator kicked in .
 About the only non-modern thing we had was the old Chevy pickup I’d bought and restored . "About the only modern thing we’ve had is an old Chevy truck," he says .
 I didn't rebuild the engine; I pulled it and the transmission and had them rebuilt . I didn’t rebuild it, I pulled the engine and transmission and rebuilt them . The engine was pulled and replaced with a new transmission and engine .
 I sanded it down, added some body putty and when it was ready, took it in to be repainted . When it's ready, I took it for repainted and sanded down .
 Whatever happened in the future was beyond our control; nature was under God’s control . The future was under the control of the leaders of the countries, the author says .
 It seemed to be that the U.S. government had long since ceased to care about the real political power, that of the people, and lived in a world called Washington, wearing rose tinted glasses .
 I have lots of free time while the corn is growing and I only have to cultivate it a couple of times . I have a lot of time to cultivate the corn while I'm growing .
 If we could get a hole excavated I could form up a slab and lay block walls, I could build a slab of block walls . I'm not sure if we can excavate a hole in the ground, but I'm sure we can get it back .
 It’s not a problem now, but when we get older, it might be nice to have stair steps rather than a ladder . It might be a good thing to have stairs instead of ladder .
 Foster children usually come from broken homes and bring their own problems with them . Foster children are often brought in from a broken home or broken home .
 I wanted something large enough for more than just the two of us, yet no so large we’d end up with a white elephant that put us in the poorhouse . I wanted it large enough to be a home for the two, yet so large that it wouldn’
 I found one and he didn’t care why we wanted the hole; he only wanted to know if we could pay for it . I found a hole in the hole, he said. He didn't care why he wanted it, he just wanted to see if he could pay
 I reassured him that it was the least of our worries and he scheduled the dig for the following week . The dig is scheduled for the next week .
 If he dug out the soil and piled it, he wanted one price; but, if he had to haul it off, it wanted a whole lot more . He wanted to pay one price, but he wanted more .
 "I told him to pile it and I’d spread it on the field with a manure spreader," he said . "I’ve spread it out with a manhole spreader. I told him he’s not allowed to do it. He’
 The wall of the shelter was basically 124’ feet of wall 9’ high with a door and holes for cables and whatever . The wall was basically a wall 9' high with door and hole for cables .
 After the hole was excavated, I put up 2x4s for forms and stopped to reflect on what I was doing . After digging the hole, he stopped to think about what he was doing.
 I wanted to add a shower, sink and toilet plus a kitchen sink and that meant grey/black water . This is the first time I've added a shower and toilet to the kitchen sink .
 We’d need a catch tank and a sewage pump to get the output to our septic system . We'd need to be able to use the catch tank .
 Had I been thinking, I’d have had the excavator dig out a little more, but I hadn’t . I wasn't about to pay extra for a few yards of soil . The excavator dug out a bit of soil, but it was too late to
 I went up to Des Moines and got a tank and the sewage pump plus piping to connect it to the septic system . The tank and sewage pump are connected by piping to the system .
 I had to leave an 9 access to the tank just in case the pump ever failed and it had to be replaced . The tank tank is the largest in the world and has a capacity for a tank tank .
 I was sure that Sara would want to know why we had a manhole cover in one corner of the shelter . Sara would have asked why there was a cover in the shelter, she said .
 "I finally got the concrete poured for the floor and the stairwell. Once the tank was installed, the sewage pump installed, connected to the septic system and plumbing pipes installed, I finally got concrete poured .
 A portion of the stairwell would be covered over before I finished, but for now, it wasn't necessary . The stairwell was covered over by a portion of a stairwell .
 For a few weeks I concentrated on laying the blocks and cultivating the corn . For the next few weeks, I will lay blocks and cultivate the corn.
 I built my own door by layering sheets of road plate and welding it together . The door was built by laying out road plates and welding them together .
 "It was a heavy sucker and I had to tinker with it until I had it perfectly level. It was the heavy sucker," says the author . "I had to have it level," says author of the book .
 We bought a used storage cabinet to use as a gun safe and added the bathroom fixtures . The little 5 in 1 combination kitchen with refrigerator, sink, 4-burner stove, oven and microwave .
 I wasn't done, but had to wait until the corn was harvested and sold to have more money to finish the shelter . I wasn’t done . I had to . wait until . the corn harvest and sell to have . more money .
 Sara and I put up shelves and moved the majority of our food down there . Sara and Sara moved the most of the food down to the basement .
 I could empathize; I was a part time seed corn salesman and part time farmer and lately, a stone mason . I was also a part-time seed corn salesman, farmer and recently a stone builder .
 I used laminated 2x12s to build the overhead and welded the plates together . The overhead was built with laminated steel plates and welds .
 On one of our shopping trips to Costco, I bumped into John and mentioned our new shelter . The shelter is now being cared for by the family .
 LUWA system built in Switzerland especially for fallout shelters . It could be added manual valves to use in case of a tornado .
 I didn't even consider my fuel costs because they wouldn't come into play until I refilled the farm tank . And, I didn’t even consider . My fuel costs would only come to play if I refills the farm .
 This year, doing so would prove to prove to be expensive with gas at $3 a gallon . This year's gas prices are $3 per gallon .
 "Because of the bountiful harvest, I got the excavation contractor back to fill the hole in and compact the soil. Because of the bountyful harvest, he got the excavator back .
 I also contacted Utah Shelter Systems and ordered an AV-150 air filtration system with extra filters . I also ordered a filter filter for extra filters and extra filters for the air .
 I ordered 4 3-bar valves and an overpressure valve to maintain a positive pressure in the shelter . I also needed blast valves for the generator and AV150 so I ordered them .
 We assumed that even compacted, the soil would settle so we left a mound about 2’ high over the shelter . I got some seed off a TV ad that promised to cover 1,000ft 2 for only $19.95 plus shipping and handling .
 Last week and I have it connect to the TV antenna with a signal booster . It connects to the antenna with an antenna booster .
 The only thing that I wished I had was a supply of gold and silver coins . "I wish I had been able to buy a few of these coins," she said .
 We could trade flour if we had a grain mill to mill wheat and corn and corn . We could do it if we could have a mill mill for milling grain and wheat . We have no idea how much flour we can trade in .
 Neither of us had so much as a speeding ticket, so we paid the fee, got fingerprints taken, signed up for the mandatory training course .
 This County offered the course 4 times per year, thus it was 4 months before we actually received our CCWs . The course was offered 4 times a year .
 We were also given a hand out listing all the places we couldn’t carry a concealed weapon .
 My holster was a Bianchi paddle holster and I had a carrier for two extra magazines . I used the Bianchi holster and a paddle holster . I also had a holster for two more magazines .
 We put over forty grand in our saving account after we’d paid for everything else . We put more than 40 grand into our savings account .
 "Our next task was to do an inventory of our food stuffs, ammunition and other supplies" "We're going to do a lot of our next task is to get our supplies back," she says . "We need to get food and ammunition, ammunition, other supplies," she
 I had 5V2 gallons of remaining PRI-G after stabilizing the gas in the new 1,000-gallon farm tank . I had fiveV2 . gallons of . remaining remaining . remaining .
 I added a few odds and ends spare parts for the Chevy pickup and bought a good used used trailer and hitch . I added some spare parts to the pickup pickup and a few spare parts .
 The cheapest source I found for PRI-G was Battery stuff in 12 Grants Pass, Oregon . Battery stuff was found in Grants Pass .
 A bit further south in Medford, Oregon, lived a guy who sold flechette shells for the 12-gauge shotguns . A guy also sold flechettes for shotgun shells .
 The real advantage, if any, was the ability of the rounds to pierce soft body armor, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 When it came time to replace the 7.62x51 mm and the 5.56x45mm ammunition, I got it from Ammoman, some guy in New Jersey .
 Smith sold us 124gr and 200gr Speer Lawman and 2300gr +P Speer Gold Dot, hollow point ammunition . Smith sold the 124gr plus +P ammo . Smith also sold 124gr . and 200Gr Speer . Lawman .
 The one thing that I failed to understand was the prices of the handguns. "The prices of handguns. The prices of handgun handguns are very high," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 With hollow points the handguns are about equally effective, although, the .45 had more stopping power . With hollow point the handguns were equally effective .
 If you believe in destiny or fate, it means that you’re powerless to stop whatever is coming next . If you want to stop fate, you're powerless to do so .
 You can’t place yourself in a position of avoiding the worse of the potential disaster . However, that doesn‘t mean that you’re avoiding the worst of the situation .
 I became aware that it didn't really pay to advertise what you had, lest it attract unwanted attention . I also became aware of it didn’t really pay for advertising what you were .
 Cummins filters are available from Cummins and Valvoline from various outlets . Cummins filter filters can be ordered directly from the manufacturer . The filters can also be ordered from other outlets .
 "We had a brief discussion about the propane tank. So, when we did, Sara and Sara, Sara had a discussion about it," she said .
 I may be a crackpot, but I was beginning to believe that bigger and more should become part of our vocabulary . I was starting to think that bigger, more should be part of the vocabulary .
 I bought a used, propane tank, with a new pressure relief valve, which could hold a desert fill of 10,000 gallons . The tank was bought for $100,000 and could hold 10,500 gallons .
 AmeriGas was willing to install it, for a fee . The fee included the cost of the cradles . Ameri gas was willing .
 About $20,000 later, we had 10,000-gallons of propane and could cook and heat for several years . "We could cook, heat, heat and use propane for years," owner says .
 We could live off the grid for a year provided we were careful with our usage of electricity . More importantly, we could live without electricity for a whole year . We could also live off-grid for a full year if we are careful with electricity usage .
 The new tank was connected to the rented tank, giving us 11,000 gallons of propane . The regular tank was filled by Ferrellgas and the new tank by a rented gas company .
 Dennis Haysbert describes all those bad things that can happen and then asks if you’re in good hands . Dennis says you're in a good place to be in the right place in the world . Dennis Haybert: "I'm not sure if I'm in good
 For what we pay, we should be; but I rather expect some things aren’t covered . I've been reading our policies from time to time, looking for the loopholes, he says . He says he’s been looking at the loopholes.
 Considering how much we’d spent on preparations, our saving balance wasn’t all that bad,’s saving balance was a bit better .
 Sara had joined a quilting circle made up of 13 many of our neighbor ladies and wanted a somewhat fancy sewing machine . Sara joined the circle and wanted to make her own . Sara wanted a sewing machine for the first time and wanted it to be fun .
 Much of the food we ate came from her garden and it saved us untold money that we’d have spent at Costco or somewhere else . She deserved it, she deserved it .
 I had a good rifle and wanted some match ammo; figure about a buck a round . Figure about a Buck a round a round. I'm not afraid to buy a gun .
 I was also thinking about adding a scope to my rifle, maybe a Nightforce variable and a Harris bipod . Plus a muffler if I could come up with one, he says .
 The state of Iowa took a dim view on NFA weapons . That might be difficult; the state of Iowi.
 There were at least a dozen brands available for my MIA, but only one was guaranteed for 30,000 rounds . The price reflected that . Only one brand was guaranteed to be guaranteed for more than 30,00 rounds .
 Keep in mind, that you don’t buy a huge propane tank every year and all the extra propane to fill it the first time . Don't buy a massive tank every time and fill it first time. Don't fill it every year.
 In the thereafter, all you need to do is keep it topped off and you aren’t buying any more propane than you’ve previously purchased . In the rest of the time, it will be topped off with propane .
 Keep in mind that you don’t build and equip a new shelter every year . Also keep up with the fact that there are no new shelters in the world every year.
 If Sara and Sara had children, there would have been no way to afford what we wanted or the time to enjoy them . Finally, if Sara and I had children . There would be no way of affording what we want or enjoying them, he says .
 As mentioned we had a fair amount of savings and there was Christmas to consider . As mentioned, there was a lot of savings to consider, and we were going to use it .
 I quizzed her until she had all the details, like make and model and where she intended to buy it . She said she wanted to buy a model of the same size as the model .
 His military commanders met with him and outlined what they thought was a reasonable drawdown . President Obama met with his military commanders to discuss a possible drawdown on Syria .
 He agreed with them and met with Congressional Leaders to garner support for the plan . He agreed to meet with Congressional leaders .
 Congress was pleased to have a definite drawdown plan, but Obama cautioned that if word leaked out, the deal was off . Obama said he and his commanders would be forced to revisit the situation if word was leaked .
 Obama was careful in that he didn’t meet with the Congressional leaders as a group, but rather individually . Obama met with Congressional leaders individually, not as part of a larger group .
 Each Congressman was given a different day when the drawdown would be complete . The drawdown is expected to be complete by the end of the year .
 If the information appeared in the MSM, he’d know who leaked it to the press . Now, if the information had been leaked to the media, he would know who did it . He’s not sure who leaked the information .
 Obama had given each of them a different date . Almost by chance, they discovered that Obama had chosen a date for each .
 They decided that any statements to the press would be limited to stating that an agreement had been reached and a drawdown would begin soon .
 Obama ended up having two vacancies on the Supreme Court to fill . The opposition party controlled both houses of Congress and both houses were in power .
 The vacancies were justices who had always voted against the people, he said . He aimed to rectify that, and he said he wanted to do so .
 He knew that if he selected two liberals, the Senate would refuse to consent to the nominees, he knew . He knew if he chose two liberals he would have been rejected by the Senate .
 His appointments appeared, for all practical purposes, to be middle of the road, more than he was, both women . Both women were appointed by the president .
 If Congress accepted his appointments, gun lobbies would be concerned when the 2 nd Amendment came up again . The gun lobby is concerned about the possibility of the Second Amendment .
 Congress reviews a judicial nominee in terms of his/her past decisions, among other things . As you know, Congress reviews the nominee's past decisions .
 Obama’s popularity soared when the drawdown was announced although he failed to say when it would be complete . Obama's popularity soared .
 It soared further with his nominees to fill the vacant positions on the court although no one really knew his nominees . No one really knows his nominees.
 Obama was supporting a new program and seemed to think he had the needed votes in Congress because of the economy . Obama was trying to win support for the program .
 A new weapons program would funnel funds to certain Congressional Districts that opposition leaders represented . The program would be funneled through certain Congressional districts .
 Boeing's director of global strike integration, Rich Parke, was first quoted about the ""B-1 R"" bomber in Air Force Magazine . Parke was quoted by Air Force magazine in April .
 Its new top speed of Mach 2.2. would be purchased at the price of a 20% reduction of the B-1 B's combat range . The B1 B would cost less than $1 billion less than the current version .
 Boeing proposes modification of existing external hard points to allow them to carry multiple conventional warheads, dramatically improving overall war load . Boeing proposes modifications to existing hard points for the bomb-truck role .
 For the air-to-air role, both defensive and offensive, they propose to add active electronically-scanned array radar and allow some of the hard points to carry anti-aircraft missiles .
 Even with its reduced range as compared to the original B-1 B, its fuel capacity remains quite large . Even with a reduced range, the fuel capacity is still large .
 This would allow it to escape from unfavorable air-to-air encounters by simply running away . There are few enough aircraft capable of Mach 2+ performance in general . Those that are deployed can maintain these speeds for only very short periods of time .
 In general terms the B-1 R most closely resembles the original F-111 concept, as opposed to a pure bomber role . The B1 R was originally designed to be a fighter bomber .
 Flowever, it would be able to carry out missions at ranges even greater than the F-111 . Flowever would have been able to fly at ranges greater than those of the F111 .
 The B-1 R was essentially a B1 B with greatly enhanced electronics, many of them already used in the F-22s engine . The B1 R had a much greater emphasis on electronics than the B-2s .
 The original B-1 A was dropped by Carter for three reasons, spiraling costs, the MiG-31 and knowledge that the Air Force was working on the F-117A Nighthawk . The original A-1 was dropped for the first time .
 With engines from the F-22s, the B-1 R could support heavy loads of air-to-air missiles . The plane could also be used to deliver heavy-loadloads of air to air missiles . With the engines, the plane would be able to carry air-
 We didn't have to start from scratch, just upgrade our existing airframes . And, we didn’t have to build new airframes from scratch. And, it’s not the first time we’ve had to do so. We’ll have to
 Retired airframes could be modified and replace in service aircraft without reducing the number of active planes . Airframes could also be modified to replace aircraft that are still in service . Retired aircraft could be replaced with new aircraft .
 The administration will continue to confront Iran over its nuclear program . It seemed clear that the administration would continue to pursue Iran .
 The U.S. would not attack Iran because of the threats issued by both Russia and China . It was equally clear that the United States would not be attacked by both countries .
 We heeded the threats; the Israelis assumed that they had nothing to lose . Israel did not want to lose, the Israeli government said . The Israeli government did not have to lose.
 They had made their own threats the year before off the coast of Greece . The group had made its own threats last year . They had also made threats in the same year .
 Ahmadinejad's rhetoric was intended to make him think twice, but instead it caused him to increase his rhetoric . The Iranian president is expected to continue his rhetoric in the coming weeks .
 If Israel or the U.S. made on move to attack Iran, Iran would defeat them and then China and Russia would bomb them back to the Stone Age . China would bomb Iran back to its Stone Age if they were attacked .
 Debkafile: Israel had no choice except to destroy Iran’s nuclear program if they acquired enough material for the bomb . Debkfile: On July 1, the previous year, Israel had . no choice but to destroy . Iran's nuclear program . If they acquired
 Ehud Olmert's visit to Israel’s nuclear reactor at Dimona, in the southern Negev region, on July 1 is a more than gentle hint to Iran of Israel's determination to pre-empt a nuclear-armed Iran . Ehud Omert�
 The Negev Nuclear Research Center is an Israeli nuclear installation . It is located ten kilometers to the south of the city of Dimona, Israel .
 The Dimona reactor went on-line sometime between 1962 and 1964 . The Israel Defense Forces most probably had their first nuclear weapons ready before the Six-Day War .
 The U.S. intelligence community discovered the purpose of Dimona in the early 1960s . It demanded that Israel agree to international inspections . Israel's Dimona is now Israel's largest privately-run nuclear plant .
 Israel agreed, but on a condition that US, rather than IAEA, inspectors were used, and that Israel would receive advance notice of all inspections . Israel agreed to the deal on condition that the US would be used in inspections .
 Some claim that Israel knew the schedule of the inspectors' visits, so it was able to hide the alleged purpose of the site from the inspectors . Others say Israel knew that the inspectors would visit the site before each inspection . Israel has been accused of using false walls and other devices to hide
 The inspectors eventually informed the U.S. government that their inspections were useless, due to Israeli restrictions on what areas they could inspect . The inspectors said they were unable to inspect areas of the facility .
 By 1969, the United States believed that Israel might have a nuclear weapon, and terminated inspections that year . The U.S. terminated inspections of Israel that year after it believed it might have nuclear weapons .
 The Dimona reactor was overflown by unidentified jet aircraft in the days before the SixDay War in 1967 which increased tensions and may have helped spur on the conflict . Unidentified aircraft overflowed the reactor in 1967 .
 Recent documentation released by Russia suggests the jets may have been Soviet in origin, and not Arab as previously thought . The jets were originally thought to be Arab .
 It’s only important if one realizes that history repeats itself; over and over, and over . History repeats itself, says the author of the novel .
 The last time the U.S. had a nuclear confrontation with Russia, Nikita Khrushchev blinked . The last . time the United States had a . nuclear confrontation . The United States and Russia have been at odds for decades .
 Iran didn’t actually have the nuclear material to build the bomb until late 2009, they were seemingly always behind schedule . Iran’s nuclear material was first discovered in 2009 .
 Mossad learned that they possessed the material, they decided to go ahead with their pre-emptive strike . Mossad said it was 'pre-emptively' to attack the material .
 Rather than be the first country to use nuclear weapons since 1945, they made conventional attacks on multiple sites . Instead of using nuclear weapons, the U.S. used conventional weapons .
 They must have practiced a lot because they had the same results as they’d had when they bombed Osiraq. They had to have a lot of practice, they must have had .
 MSM immediately jumped on the fact that his statement failed to disclose any original thinking . MSM jumped on fact that he said he didn't disclose original thinking.
 Israelis were pleased with his statement although they agreed that it lacked originality . Israelis were also pleased with the statement but agreed that the Israeli leader's words were not originality.
 Your best bet to reach our place would be to go south on 1-35 and exit west United States 34 . The best way to get to our place is to go west on US 34 .
 The answer is, we're so close to Omaha and Lincoln, we’re sure to get some radiation . The answer to the question is, “We’ve got some radiation.” It’s sure to be a good thing for the U.S
 I doesn’t matter what speed the wind is blowing, especially if ‘they’re hit both places. ‘They’hit both places,’ says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If it went down in the middle of the night, we might not know anything until the following morning . We might not be able to find out until the next morning .
 NOAA All Hazards Weather Radio is a network of radio stations broadcasting continuous weather information directly from a nearby National Weather Service office . NOAA Weather Radio broadcasts continuous weather updates directly from the National Weather Services office . Weather Radio can be used to help people understand weather conditions .
 NWS is operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration within the United States Department of Commerce . It is a weather agency within the National Weather Service .
 NWR broadcasts National Weather Service warnings, watches, forecasts and other hazard information 24 hours a day . NWR is a weather-related news service that provides weather information 24/7 .
 Federal Communications Commission's Emergency Alert System broadcasts alerts of non-weather emergencies such as national security, natural, environmental, and public safety .
 Russia launched one missile carrying MIRV’D warheads against Israel at 8am Moscow time, 7am Jerusalem time . Russia launched a missile carrying one missile with one of the warheads . The launch was carried out at around 7am in Moscow time .
 Two additional warheads were off course, one striking Gaza and the other striking Beersheba . The final warhead was a dummy . Two more warheads were also off course and one struck Gaza and one was off course .
 Minutes after the weapons struck Israel, the weather radio went off and the EAS issued an Air Defense Emergency Alert . The alert was issued for 18 people in Israel .
 By definition, an Air Defense Emergency could mean either bombers or missiles incoming . By definition it could be either a bomber or missile incoming .
 If I get a choice, I’ll pick bombers because they have more missiles than bombers; and, we could shoot down all of their bombers. We could shoot them down, he says. I'll pick bombers, he adds. If I got a choice I'll choose bombers
 Many of the Russian bombers are equipped with missiles in lieu of bombs . Many of Russia's bombers are armed with missiles, instead of bombs.
 It didn't take that long to get dressed and I went with denims and a work shirt plus my Wally World boots . Actually it didn’t take that much time to get out of the house .
 I had to remember to get my Pioneer Hybrid hat, wouldn’t want my head to get cold . The Pioneer Hybrid is a Pioneer Hybrid .
 Sara was busy loading underwear, socks, shirts and more jeans plus about the same for her into a suitcase . Sara was carrying underwear and socks to her suitcase .
 All of our guns and ammo were in the shelter except for one shotgun and our pistols . All of us were in a shelter except one shotgun, one pistol and two pistols .
 When we got down there, she turned up the heat and I went back for the shotgun, pistols and anything else we might have missed . She turned up heat and went back to the gun range for the gun .
 There wasn't anything that we didn’t already have in the shelter, but on a hunch, I grabbed the laundry detergent and fabric softener sheets .
 "I’d guess that if an attack actually comes, we’ll lose power and that should help to warm this place up," he said . "That’s a good thing for us," he added .
 I'm awake now; I think maybe I’d like a cup of tea before we try to get some sleep . I'm not sure if we're going to go to bed, but I'd like to have tea with us .
 We made the beds; Sara crawled into the lower bunk and was gone in minutes . Sara was quick to get back to sleep in her lower bunk .
 I dimmed the lights, but a short time later, they flicked out and I could hear the generator kicking in . The generator kicked in after a short period of darkness .
 The shelter contained enough cubic feet of air for more than 12 hours . I also turned on the power to the AV-150 although the power was not turned on .
 We could measure both carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide and had scrubbers, if needed, to reduce the carbon dioxide . We could also have scrubbers to reduce carbon dioxide, if necessary, to cut emissions . We are not only able to measure CO2 and CO2 emissions, but
 The generator intake and outlet pipes were both schedule 40 6” steel pipe . Carbon monoxide is a 20 product of combustion and the generator intake is schedule 40 .
 Reading usually makes me sleepy, so I fired up the laptop and opened the file . The book is about to be published in New York City .
 I should point out that I already had the CD V-717 set up to allow me to monitor the radiation level . "I already had to set up a CD to monitor radiation levels," he says .
 On Point II discussed Operation Iraqi Freedom, picking up with the fall of Saddam Hussein and moving to 2005 . The fall of Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein was captured in 2003 .
 I didn't get far into the report before it became boring and I started to nod . I didn’t get far far into it before the report became boring . The report was released on Monday .
 "I checked everything in the shelter, barred the blast door and turned in," says survivor . "I turned in. I checked everything," she says .
 "I awoke to the smell of fresh brewed coffee and Sara was in the shower," she says . "I woke up to the smells of fresh coffee," she writes .
 "I laid out a change of clothes from the suitcase and prepared to get in the shower after Sara finished," she said . "I'm going to get into the shower. I laid out the clothes from my suitcase," she wrote .
 "More than anything, I wanted to just wash the memory of what had happened the night before," says the author . "I just wanted to wash the memories of what happened to me," she says .
 "I tried to soak off the despair I felt, but only succeeded in washing off the dirt. I tried to drown off the sadness I felt," she said . "I felt like I was washing away the dirt."
 I'll put the reading in a spreadsheet I got and we’ll be able to tell how long we have to stay down here. I’m not sure how long it will be down here,’s the author says .
 There is a large paper bag containing a pattern, the material, thread and batting you need to make your first quilt . There is also a pattern and material for the material and batting .
 She put up a good front, although I knew that making a baby quilt bothered her, she said . She said: 'I knew that . making a quilt bothers her'
 She’d have 45 days to work on it and learn the tricks of making quilts that she hadn’t picked up from the quilt circle .
 Most of them had a good storm shelter and some used it as a fruit cellar . Some of them were used as a storm shelter or fruit cellar. Others used it to store fruit .
 We’d lost electricity often enough that nearly ever farm had alternate power, usually generators . We'd lost power often enough to have alternate power . Nearly every farm had generators .
 The warning came after we'd gone to bed we didn't know exactly when we’d been hit . We didn’t know exactly how much of the damage had been caused .
 One might say we had launched on warning, heading to the shelter the moment the Weather radio went off . The Weather radio goes off at the time of the storm .
 I wasn't totally sure we’d taken a strike until the survey meter needle started to rise . I wasn’t totally sure until the . survey meter . needle began to rise.
 The only thing I could say with certainty before that was 22 that we’d lost power. ‘I’ve lost power,’ he says . ‘The only thing that could say was 22,” he says of the situation .
 "It doesn't click, you know; all that happens is the needle starts bumping up and down and continues, rising with time. It doesn’t click," says the author of the book .
 Sara started cutting up blocks for the quilt and I sat back down to watch the survey meter . Sara and Sara are working on a quilt quilt for the first time .
 "I wanted to be sure that we didn’t get a second peak as might happen if they also nuked Lincoln. I wanted to make sure we didn't get another peak," he says .
 Sara really started to get involved with cutting and sewing, slowly assembling the quilt . Sara started to cut and sew, and the project is now almost complete .
 "At the end of the day, we’d eat dinner and put a DVD in the player so we could watch a movie," she says . "We would eat dinner with a DVD and put it in the players," she adds .
 "Other than the fact that we were locked in a bomb shelter, it wasn’t all that much different from we’d done before," she says . "We’ve been in the bomb shelter for a year. Other than that, it’s all
 Usually, she’d turn in after the movie and get on the ham radio to pick up what news I could . She would turn in to the movie, and I would get up with the news .
 At first I only picked up locals but when they mentioned frequencies where they’d talked to others, I wrote them down to try later . At first, I only listened to locals but I started writing them down .
 No one was certain about the measures we’d taken except for one fella near Minot who said he saw those missiles fly . ‘No one is certain about . the measures’s taken except . one man who saw them fly .
 I assumed that if large numbers of nuclear weapons were detonated in the northern latitudes, we’d get the speculated nuclear winter . If it was bad enough, it could spill into the southern latitudes . I assumed .
 I gather everything in a notebook I’d purchased exclusively for the purpose of recording information in case it ever came to this . I gather all the information in the notebook I'd purchased exclusively .
 The pages were filling rapidly and by the end of the 45 days, Sara had the quilt nearly finished . Sara was looking at starting volume 2. The pages filled rapidly .
 With radiation well below 10OmR, I put on the protective suit and the gas mask and ventured forth to see how we stood . With the radiation below 10MR, the radiation was below 10 OmR .
 Nothing looked different except for the sky; it was dark and foreboding . The sky looked like it was looking like a dark cloud .
 Snow was deep and we’d have to mount the blade and loader on the tractor and try to clear the driveway . We’ve been snow-plunded in the past, but it’s never been snowed in this case .
 I dressed more appropriately for the weather and overall lack of radiation . I spent half a day mounting the loader and blade and spent half the day mounting it .
 While we had small implements, we had to hire some things done because we had few large implements . We had to pay for some things to be done because of the size of some of the implements .
 It then took the rest of the day to plow out the driveway and access to the buildings . The snow was so bad that it took the entire day to clear the driveway .
 When we bought the place, it had a corn crib, barn, machine shed and well house in addition to the two story house . It had a well house, corn crib and machine shed, well house and a machine shed .
 There was so much snow; I barely got it cleared away from the buildings. There was a lot of snow, and I barely cleared it away from buildings. It was so big snow, it was impossible to clear it from the building .
 It was nearly two weeks by the time I’d been able to check with our near neighbors . It was almost two weeks before I was able to find out .
 They’d all made it; some because they had weather radios turned on, like we did, and others because they found out about the attack when they got up in the morning and discovered they were running on generator power . Some of them made it because they'd been running on
 A single lane for traffic on U.S. 34 stopped well short of 1-35. Among us, we'd cut a single lane . Among them, we’d cut a one lane .
 We swapped experiences of the night of the attack and information gathered about the aftermath . We also swapped information about the night and aftermath of the incident .
 "We concluded, collectively, that about half of the United States population was gone," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "About half the U.S. population ... was gone"
 "We also concluded that, collectively, we could get through this and, with a little salvaging effort, could cover our bases," said the team .
 Nobody is particularly short on food and our greatest need would be propane, gas and diesel . Nobody was particularly short of food and we need propane and gas .
 More often than not, my neighbor’s armories consisted of a .22 rifle and 12-gauge shotgun . More often, not, a neighbor's armory consisted of .22 rifles and .22 shotguns .
 In time, we’d try to remedy that and add at least a bolt action .30-06 or possibly a semi-auto 7.62x51 mm. mm .
 Smith’s store stocked about a half dozen Ml Asls . If we wanted to drive to Des Moines, Smith's store stocked half a dozen Mls Asls in Iowa .
 From that point on, Sara seemed to have a constant companion . Sara's life changed dramatically after she was diagnosed with cancer .
 It rapidly became apparent that we wouldn’t be going anywhere until the snow melted . The snow melted and we most likely wouldn't be able to plant a crop this coming summer . It's unlikely that we'll be planting a crop again this summer .
 While it should mostly germinate, you couldn’t harvest the seed and use it the following season . You can't use the seed for the next season .
 Pioneer Hi-Bred has heirloom seeds that they use to crossbreed their hybrids . The seeds are cross-breeded to ensure they don't cross-hybridity . Pioneer has a history of cross-breeding seeds .
 It was founded by Henry Wallace, later Truman’s VP, and a group of Des Moines investors . Henry Wallace was later Truman's VP .
 Roswell Garst hosted Nikita Khrushchev on his farm in Coon Rapids, Iowa on September 23, 1959 . Garst grew seed for Pioneer, who grew seed .
 Prior to Pioneer, farmers kept a portion of their harvest and planted it the following year . Pioneer is the first time Pioneer has allowed farmers to keep their harvest from being sold off .
 Pioneer produced, marketed and sold hybrid seed corn in nearly 70 countries worldwide . Before the war, Pioneer produced and marketed hybrid corn in almost 70 countries . Pioneer is now owned by Pioneer International Seed Seed Corporation .
 The company also marketed and sold hybrids or improved varieties of sorghum, sunflower, soybean, alfalfa, canola, rice and wheat . Forage and grain additives were also marketed .
 Pioneer sold products through a variety of organizations, including wholly owned subsidiaries, joint ventures, sales representatives, and independent dealers . Worldwide, Pioneer sales products were sold through a number of different organizations .
 Except for the heavy snow, it was hard to tell that the country had been attacked, she said . She added that, except for the snow, the country was not at risk .
 In addition to her usual homemaker chores, she and the ladies of the quilt circle began to make a quilt for our king bed .
 Ingersoll Boulevard in Des Moines, Iowa, is the location of a certain firearms dealer .
 A bit further, United States 65 north to United States 30 and then east . The United States is located in the U.S. east .
 On the way back, we stopped by two places in Johnston, Johnston, Camp Dodge and Pioneer .
 We only took a few small arms, M9s, Ml 6s and M203s, and an assortment of hand grenades and 40mm grenades .
 A visit to a local lawn and garden store proved to be worth the trip . We came away with heirloom seeds from a local garden store . The store is a great source of inspiration for the best seeds .
 "I have a whole new set of responsibilities. We’ve been through a war and we’re expecting our first child," says President Obama .
 I only bought 5,000rounds of Black Hills ammo because it’s a buck a round . Black Hills is a great place to buy ammunition for your gun .
 The scope is mounted on the MIA, but only sighted in with a laser bore sight . The scope can only be used with the help of a laser-bore sight .
 I haven't had the chance to shoot the McMillan yet, it only came in a week before the balloon went up . I haven’t had the opportunity to shoot it yet .
 "I read the McMillan manual down in the shelter and sighting in that rifle should be a snap," he says . "It's a great place to go for a rifle," he adds .
 With all the people living in large cities, like Des Moines, and just in time delivery, the grocery stores must be empty or close to it .
 Survivors will be looking for food and anything else they might think will benefit them . Survivors will look for food, shelter, shelter and other things they think will help them survive .
 "None of us will allow anyone to come in and take what we have. That said, none of us . That is not the case," says the mayor of Manchester United .
 People who lacked the foresight to prepare will become very aggressive when they’re hungry, he says . "People who lacked foresight" will become aggressive, he adds .
 We have an assortment of grenades ranging from smoke to concussion to fragmentation . We have a range of grenades that can be used in combat .
 The ground was too cold to plant a garden and some of us tried to grow a few plants inside . Some of us grow plants inside.
 We’d seen what fate had been in store for us and my thoughts, naturally, turned to our destiny . We'd seen what Fate had been for us, and I’m not sure what it was for us .
 Fate is so negative, while destiny would be the natural outcome of what we had just experienced, good or bad . Fate would be so negative while destiny is so positive, while fate would be a natural outcome . Fate is negative, but destiny is good or good .
 "Our first task, as a group, was shooting, as in sighting in rifles, learning to dismantle and clean them" "We learned to make them an effective tool. Our first task was to learn how to use them, as well as sighting them"
 "There was no time like the present because we couldn’t plant our fields and our activities were limited," says the president . "There is no time in the present," he says .
 'I had the tools for the job and it just naturally fell to me. Not that I had ever intended to become a marksman or a sniper, but I had the . tools for . the job,' he says .
 When I switched from the Ml A to the McMillan, the range increased to about a mile, 1,800-yards . The range increases to about one mile and one mile .
 The M9 has a maximum effective range of 50 meters; however, we used it to 50 yards . We used the range to test the effectiveness of the M9 to test our range .
 We didn’t assume we’d get any second chances and if a weapon was needed, the situation was desperate . We were desperate, and we were prepared to use it as a weapon . We’re not going to get second chances, but we were going to
 Sara was excluded from being an active participant due to her pregnancy . Sara's pregnancy was not allowed to be part of the event .
 She even had one of the other ladies try to talk her into trading her Browning for the M9 . She cut her off at the pass .
 One of the guys asked if he wanted a suppressor for the Tac-50 and I said I had one . "One of the people asked if I wanted to ... have one," he says. "I had one. I said yes"
 "I wasn’t in bad shape, all things considered, but I tended to walk more and tried to improve my muscle tone," he said . "I was in good shape. I wasn't walking more," he added .
 During 2008, they had increased the length of basic training by a week to improve the fitness of our soldiers . The length of training has been increased by one week .
 Marine Corps training was longer than Army training, so I presumed that the Marines were generally more fit . Marines were trained longer than the Army, but they were more fit than Army . Marine Corps is now a major force in the world .
 One of the men had seen combat, as a Marine, in Vietnam and two others had been in the Army during peacetime . One of them was in Vietnam during the war .
 I was always a civilian although once I got interested in preps; I collected Army and Marine Corps Field Manuals on my laptop . I was also a Marine Corps member .
 Flenry ‘Hank’ Johnson was our combat veteran Marine and more or less took over our little group . He was our first Marine, and he took over us in the Marines Corps .
 He was prodding and gentle, working us into good shape, and he accomplished his task . He was gentle and prodding, and it was a job he accomplished .
 I don't know that I could go 40 miles with a heavy pack but I had my Chevy so I didn’t have to . I’m not sure that I would go with heavy pack, but I didn't have to,’s a Chevy. ‘
 Sara and Sara had Tac Force vests that I’d acquired from Trading Post Supply . Sara had a Tac Force vest that she and Sara used to wear in the military .
 "I ended up becoming the sniper for our small group of survivors. And that’s how I ended up . And that's how I became a sniper," she says .
 Anyone could learn to control his/her breathing and hold a rifle steady . Knowing when to squeeze the trigger is more important because the rifle waives gently while you're holding on the target .
 Some authors described it as a figure eight pattern while I just called it wobbles . Some authors called it a figure 8 pattern while others said it was wobble .
 Speculation was rampant and woulda, coulda and shoulda were having a heyday . Woulda, shoulda and coulda was having a hit in the 1980s .
 I believed in my heart that Obama wasn’t doing that bad of a job and he would have been reelected, she says . She says she believed in her heart that he would be reelected .
 It's mid-2010 and I’m sure many adventures await us getting from here to the point where the question becomes important . However, it’s a good time to ask the question: 'What do you want to do with this?'
 In the coming days, we will have discussion with each states leadership and activate their local National Guard units to assist the citizens of the states .
 President Obama says Heller decision is a result of a Supreme Court ruling . He says he is implementing the measure based on the Supreme Court’s finding in Heller .
 Justice Scalia, writing for the majority, emphasized the right to self-defense while leaving several questions unanswered . Justice Scalia left questions unanswered in the case .
 The most important aspect of the Court’s decision was the recognition of an individual right to keep and bear arms . The decision was made by the Supreme Court in 2008 .
 I am issuing an Executive Order suspending various firearms laws and regulations for the duration of this national emergency . President Obama has issued an executive order suspending some firearms laws .
 The provisions of the National Firearms Act, the Gun Control Act and the Firearms Owners Protection Act are herewith suspended for the duration of the emergency . The provisions are suspended .
 No convicted felon or person found to be mentally defective may possess a firearm . However, no convicted felons or mentally defective persons may be allowed to possess firearms .
 Any state laws failing to conform to the 2 nd Amendment by virtue of the 14 th Amendment shall be subject to the federal government withholding federal aid and grants from the states not in compliance with this directive .
 "It will allow our citizens the ability to use reasonable force and weapons for the protection of themselves and family members. It will allow citizens the . ability to . use reasonable and necessary force and . weapons for . protection of . themselves and . family members .
 Any regional group formed to act collectively to protect a local area shall be recognized as an unorganized militia . Title 10 section 381 provides notice provided to local law enforcement officials of their intent to so act .
 Government is assembling food and medical supplies to distribute on an as needed basis using primarily rail transportation . Food and supplies are being distributed by the government using rail transport .
 No exports of grains or other food supplies have occurred since the war and stockpiles will be made available . stockpiles of grains and other supplies have been made available.
 "Never in our history has this nation suffered such an egregious attack," says President Obama . Never in history has been such an attack on the U.S.
 "We have a significant percentage of our military that was enroute home from Iraq and they will be pressed into service assisting local National Guard units," says President Obama .
 They will not, I repeat, assume the duties of local law enforcement . They won't be allowed to assume the role of local police officers, says the mayor .
 The National Weather Service expects to be severe for the coming winter . The first order of business will be to get through the winter which is expected to be a severe winter .
 "We can gather everyone in the group up and ride to town in a single vehicle," she says . "We're able to do this without the need to worry," she adds .
 Half an hour later we were standing in the Sheriff’s office In Osceola .
 We asked if he’d seen Obama’s address and he said he missed it . But the Sheriff had seen it. We asked him if he had missed it.
 We saw the President’s address and we’re here to notify you of our militia unit . We're here to alert you of the militia unit. The militia unit is a militia unit based in Washington .
 With the phone lines not working and the potential for trouble, I’ll go with it for now . With the phones not working, I'll go on with it, but it's a good idea .
 An Ml6 is essentially an AR15 with extra features and a casual glance wouldn’t disclose the difference . An M203 mounted, an M203 with a M203, is a standard AR15 . An AR15 is essentially a rifle with a built-in-built
 The declaration temporarily made full auto weapons legal again . That might not include weapons belonging to the Iowa National Guard in the hands of civilians .
 In the past when our troops had been shipped to Afghanistan or Iraq, it had been necessary to issue them new weapons . But in the past, it has been necessary for troops to get new weapons, the author says .
 A3s that had seen much less use than the older Als and A2s available . Fortunately, we had been selective, trying to get the few good Ml 6s available and the ones we had were A3 .
 The ammo we found for the rifles was the M855 and we had taken all we had room for . The ammo was found in the rifles and the rifles were found to be empty .
 There were belts of 7.62x51 mm ammo for the M240s and we had taken it intending on delinking it for our MBRs . The belts were intended to be used for the MBRs, but they were not intended for them .
 "We had almost unlimited free time the summer of 2010, allowing us to assume what Hank called, a proper military bearing" "Hank called us, a good military bearing," he says .
 The 7.62 NATO was unlinked and the M62 tracer rounds were set aside with the M80 ball being evenly distributed . The M80s ball was evenly distributed with the 762 NATO being unlinked .
 We practiced, the ladies practiced and the neighbors dogs were taught to guard . The neighbors dogs also taught the dogs to guard. We practice, and the ladies practice .
 With a belly on her that looked like she was carrying a full basketball team, Sara couldn’t shoot prone or kneeling, but she managed to do fairly well offhand . Sara's belly was so big that she could carry a basketball team with her .
 Sara gave birth to Tracy and William at the end of the summer . The couple have a daughter, Tracy, and a son, William .
 They weighed, give or take, around 6 pounds, and had very healthy lungs . They were healthy lungs, and weighed around six pounds . They are now being cared for by a veterinarian .
 We had cotton diapers, courtesy of the neighbor ladies, a pair of high chairs that were old but serviceable, diaper pails, diaper bags and formula, just in case . We had high chairs, diapers, diapers and high-chairs, but not high chairs .
 Sara’s body responded well and the twins weren’t going hungry . Sara and her twin sisters are doing well . Sara says the twins are healthy and happy .
 She didn’t quite regain her figure claiming that she’d put on more weight than she planned .
 A diet would fix that, she said, but it would be slow because she was nursing . She said she would like to have a healthy weight gain .
 With farms stung along U.S. 34, we anticipated more traffic than we got . U.C. 34 is the busiest highway in the country .
 I suppose we thought survivors would boil out of Des Moines and approach small towns or farms looking for food . "We thought we thought that survivors would ... look for food," says Des Moines resident . "I suppose we think survivors would be looking to food," she says .
 A few were lost and looking for directions, others offered to buy food . Only a very few even hinting at being aggressive .
 Few were more likely to comment on the handguns strapped to our waists or the weapons slung over our shoulders . Those few more likely than to comment about the weapons strapped to their waists .
 Even an idiot could figure out a pump shotgun in a few minutes, but they’d probably load no Th shot because it sounded like bigger shot than no 4 .
 I suspect the main problem was the lack of gasoline; people get so used to just pulling up to a pump zipping their card and squeezing the handle . I suspect people get used to using a pump to get gas .
 If you reach twenty dollars before your tank is full, the pump shuts off if you reach that amount . The pump will also shut down if you get more than 20 dollars .
 On the subject of fuel, we needed diesel, gasoline and propane as I said before. We needed diesel and gasoline, and we needed propane and diesel, as well .
 Central Clarke County Militia being formed . We didn’t dare get it in Osceola, not with the local militia being formed. The Militia is being formed in Clarke County .
 Most of the fellas had experience driving large trucks and I assumed I could handle a propane truck . "I assumed I can handle I could . handle a Propane truck," he said. "Most of the guys had experience . Most of them had . experience driving .
 The railroad stored a lot of diesel fuel for their engines, but it was piped in via pipeline . The railroads used it to store diesel fuel .
 "There was more than enough in the storage tanks if we could find tankers," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 It took almost 4 hours to find enough tankers; Iowa doesn't use double bottomed rigs . Iowa doesn’t use those double-bottomed rigs; Iowa does not use that kind of rigs .
 We hauled back 4 loads of 9,000-gallons each, enough for the generators and the tractors . "We hauled back four loads each"
 The following day we knew where the tankers were, we picked up 18,000 gallons of gasoline and 6,000-gallons of propane . The next day we went to pick up gas and propane from tankers in the area .
 After filling our propane tanks the following morning, we went back and loaded up again . After filling up again, we loaded up on the propane and filled up our tanks .
 This time we had some left over and would wait a few weeks before we returned, it was best to top off right before winter . This time, we would wait until we returned to the beach .
 The local stations partially restored forecasts, maybe they just read the Farmer’s Almanac, so we were warned that winter would come early and be severe, again, again . The local weather forecast was partially restored .
 Most of the news was local for the Des Moines area . Osceola, Iowa, was included in the news .
 Central Clarke County Militia has also been formed for Eastern and Western Clarke County . One popular story discussed the formation of the Central and Western County Militia .
 Iowa was a significant part of the nation’s breadbasket; its population was, relatively speaking, small . Aid was slow in coming; although Iowa was part of America's bread-basket, it was a small state .
 At first, there was an increase in people trying to buy food or asking for a hand out . At least one person was trying to get food or ask for a help .
 "We were organized and had spent dozens of hours on the range learning to take full advantage of the MBRs we had," says the author . "We had to be very organized and take advantage of our MBRs," she says .
 "We had Hank trying to turn us into Marines, with only modest success," he says . "He was trying to make us into ... Marines," he adds. "But he didn't have success."
 Like the Future Combat Systems the military dreamed to have, that were highly mobile, we too are highly mobile . Thanks to salvaging fuels from in and around Des Moines, the system was able to get out of the system .
 The final element that led to our success was our secure communications, only the military could intercept them, only if they knew which of the 2,000 or so encryption keys we used . The military could only intercept them only if the military knew which encryption keys they used .
 He had a ham radio preset on 28.250mHz so the subject never came up . However, he had a pre-setter on 28mHz on his ham radio .
 They came from the east; from 1-35 rather than Osceola, would be my guess . They were probably from 1 to 35 rather than the east, would say. They were in the east .
 They flooded into his farmyard, firearms in plain sight, looking to shoot anything that moved . As he later described, they flooded in his farmedard, looking for anything to shoot .
 In due course, Sara was talking to the Sheriffs office requesting assistance while the rest of us were hauling butt east to Hank’s . Sara was able to get back in touch with the sheriff .
 Some of those people actually knew how to use a gun, maybe one per vehicle . Some of the people were armed with guns .
 The MIA rifles were probably courtesy of Smith's store . Strangely, those were the people who had the MIA rifles .
 "We assembled just to the west of Hank's on United States 34 and radioed that we were coming in," says Bob Greene . "It was just a matter of time," says Greene .
 His reply was that they had shot at the house and he was trying to take out the drivers . He replied that they shot at him and he had been trying to kill the drivers. He said he was not sure what happened .
 His suggestion was to encircle them and shoot them like so many fish in a barrel, he said . He suggested encircling them and shooting them in a 'barrere barrel'
 Fish don't have firearms; and, if they did, they don’t have hands to pull the triggers . Fish are more likely to be killed by humans than fish in the wild .
 "They restored to spray and pray because they couldn’t determine our locations," says one survivor . "We were able to get back to safety," she says .
 It is very difficult to display any degree of accuracy when you’re pulling the trigger on an AR15 as fast as you can . It's very difficult for you to show accuracy when pulling a gun on a rifle at a rapid rate .
 "I concentrated on individuals with the MBRs, they were the real danger," says former President Obama . "They were a real danger. I concentrated on them," says Obama .
 "Over a course of maybe 5 minutes, I had them all down without revealing my position," he says . "I had them down without showing my position"
 As we cut them down, their resolution waived and soon, they were throwing down the firearms and raising their hands . The resolution waived, and they were soon throwing down their guns and raising hands .
 To avoid anyone suggesting we simply executed them, none of them were shot in the head with a handgun . None of the men were killed with a gun, but they were not executed .
 I had collected the Ml As and the Garand, a 7.62, and had moved them to Hank’s bam . The Garand is a .62, a .7.62 and a .6 .
 I ignored them and continued with my task, we needed to replace those damned Berettas. "I ignored them," he said . "I didn't hear them. We needed to get rid of them. They needed to be replaced," he added .
 The Sheriff would have to get something out of the deal . Central Clarke County Militia could use the weapons . We left the others weapons lay .
 "We spent the next two hours explaining, as a group and individually, what happened," the group says . "We're not going to let it slide past us," she says .
 Sheriff was concerned that there were no survivors among the attackers to verify our story . The Sheriff was worried there would not be enough survivors to verify the story .
 There weren't any close-up head shots or powder burns around the body shots . However, there weren’t any head shots .
 They collected the bodies, unceremoniously dumped them in the backs of the trucks, collected all firearms and left . The bodies were dumped in the back of the vehicles and left.
 Hank took the Garand as a backup weapon, I took the Super Match and the Super match . The 2 Ml As were distributed by drawing lots . Hank took a Garand and I took a Super Match . The two teams went head-to-head .
 I hadn't recovered all of the MIA magazines because the Calvary arrived too soon . I hadn’t recovered any of the magazines . I’m not sure how long it took to find out what happened .
 Sheriff said it would be easier to give you the magazines than try and get you to give up the rifles . These magazines were among those collected by the Sheriff . Sheriff: "It would be a better option than trying and getting you to hand over the rifles"
 There are some .45 magazines in there too, way too many for the single .45 we found .
 Y’all probably think you’re a bunch of real bad asses, being you won your first battle . Y‘all’s probably think they’ll be real bad ass, but you won’t think you're real badasses .
 "We have the whole town out salvaging what we can to get through the coming winter," says mayor . "We're going to do what we need to do to survive the winter," he says .
 Sara tended to make the sauce separate from the spaghetti noodles and pile it on top of the noodles . Sara tends to make her spaghetti noodles separate and pile them on top .
 I favored breaking the noodles into quarters and adding the sauce after the pasta was done and stirring up the whole mess . The recipe is a classic pasta salad .
 I browned the meat in a pan while I heated the jar of sauce in another pan . I washed up and got the water started and browned it in the pan . The sauce was then heated in a separate pan .
 I also sliced some thick slices of bread, spread them with butter and topped them with garlic powder . I also spread butter over garlic powder over bread slices .
 With the kids burped and down, I finished dinner while Sara set the table . Sara set up the table while the kids ate .
 The sauce is good and the spaghetti is good so I can't honestly say it’s bad. The sauce and spaghetti are good, but I can’t honestly say that,’I’m not sure what I’ve tasted .
 You sometimes ask if I got enough to eat and since I did, I can’t complain about that either . I can't complain about not getting enough food, he says . He says he doesn't have to complain about his health .
 I've thought about it and I believe it’s because they were shooting at me. I’ve thought about . I believe this is because I was shooting at them, he said . He said he believes it was because he was shot at .
 "I was terrified, but had to keep that in check so I could use my firearm," she says . "That’s not to say that I wasn’t frightened; I was terrified," she said .
 There are few class 3 dealers in the state of Iowa . Hank said that you sort of get used to it. o There are a few class . dealers in Iowa .
 A web search would reveal one in Ottumwa and he didn't carry Surefire suppressors . A search for a Surefire suppressionator would have led to a search for one .
 In Iowa, only law enforcement and military may possess class 3 weapons, excluding dealers . Only law enforcement officers and military can have class 3 guns .
 Surefire used to list only the M-25 White Feather as having an available adapter . Surefire now lists only one of the available adapters available .
 He can frequently see their eyes in his scope and everyone he shoots stays with him . Everyone he shoots is with him, including the people he shoots .
 I’ve discussed sniping because it’s the most effective military action for one man or a team of two . Sniping is most effective for one person or two, or for one of them, to be sniping .
 When TSHTF, you’ll need some kind of MBR ala .30 caliber, preferably 7.62x51 mm . They’re highly accurate and the military has the ammo all over the place .
 You’d be surprised how many requests I get for the seven_ten_rule.xls spreadsheet .
 MPs carrying shot38 guns and Ml carbines and large mean-looking German Shepherd’s . Many of the MPs carrying large German Shepherd's .
 Powers decides on his own authority to transmit uncoded messages to SAC commanders . Powers says SAC plans are well prepared and that the alert process is going smoothly . Powers decided to transmit the uncoded message to commanders .
 Fleataxi had a lot of stories and a spreadsheet with a spreadsheet . He bought a CD from Fleataxei that had the spreadsheet and the spreadsheet . The CD is available on iTunes and Amazon.com .
 Sara and I managed to be prepared. Thanks to those many Patriot Fiction authors that I had read, Sara and Sara managed to get prepared .
 We held an after action session to discuss what we could have done differently . We held a discussion about what could have been done better . We also discussed what we had to do to improve our performance .
 We decided we’d done the best we could after we considered our numbers and how spread out we were. We decided to do the best they could after considering how spread they were.
 Both the guns and ammo were heavier; offset by the fact they were much more powerful than the Ml 6s . Both guns and ammunition were heavier .
 We took ammo in the captured rifles out and set it aside, replacing it with newer Lake City production . We took the ammo out and replaced it with new Lake City .
 Aside from needing a thorough cleaning, the rifles were in fine condition . The rifles are in good condition .
 There was a standard model with a walnut stock, a loaded with the black fiberglass stock and a stainless Super Match with the mossy oak camouflage . There was also a Super Match version with a Mossy Oak camouflage camouflage .
 "I considered it best if I used it as an anti-material rifle as opposed to a .personnel rifle," says the author .
 "If the only time I ever had to shoot it was on our range, it would suit me just fine," he says . "I would like it if it were on the range," he adds .
 The problem was that they didn’t have survey meters and came out too soon, the mayor says . The problem is that the survey was conducted without survey meters, he says .
 Most of the others in our group had a storm shelter, a fruit cellar or stayed in their basements . Most of them had storm shelters, fruit cellar, or fruit cellar in their homes .
 You can live 3 minutes without air, 3 hours without shelter, 3 days without water and 3 weeks without food . You can also live without water for 3 days, 3 weeks or 3 weeks .
 We can plant a crop one year to harvest for seed and from then on out, everyone can grow their own seed, like they did back before hybrid seeds . We can also grow a crop for seed one year, harvest one year for seed .
 Operational costs will be paid by Norway and the Global Crop Diversity Trust . Operational cost of the project will be funded by Norway, the Global . Crop diversity Trust and Norway will also pay for the project .
 I told him we had the heirloom seeds from Pioneer but somehow forgot to mention the other seeds we’d picked up at the lawn and garden after we learned Costco had been cleaned out . The seeds were from the lawns and garden .
 "He used to really get my goat, but when he allowed us CCWs and gave tacit approval to our little group, I decided to cut him a little, as in very little, slack," she says .
 "When he made that crack about Sara and me being survivalists, I basically changed the subject and we stopped talking about firearms," he says . "When I made that joke about Sara ... I basically talked about firearms. When he made it that way, we stopped .
 Law enforcement is under no legal obligation to protect you and neither is anyone else . Hard to criticize those folks; on the other hand, law enforcement is not required to protect anyone . Police are not obligated to protect people from harm .
 "That’s your responsibility protecting your wife, kids, family members and yourself," he says . "That's your responsibility," he adds . "You’re responsible for protecting your family and yourself"
 We began to wonder if we had enough food stored to get us past the nuclear winter . We are worried about whether we have enough food to survive a nuclear winter.
 Sara and the twins were asked about their militia or unofficial mutual aid group . The question applied not to Sara and her twins, but to everyone in their militia . Sara says the twins' twins are a good Samaritan, a good friend .
 I wouldn't assert that one family couldn’t make it on its own, it could be possible, however, however there’s security in numbers. There's security in number .
 Clarke County now has three militia groups, not affiliated except through the good offices of the Sheriff . Clarke County had three militias, one not affiliated with each other .
 The Sheriff and the Central Militia was best positioned to respond to problems in either direction . The Sheriff said the militia was best placed to respond in either way to problems .
 It was just short of 20 42 miles from Ottawa to our location and by the time they could arrive, or, we could arrive to help them, the battle would probably be over . The battle would be over if they could help us, or if we could help them .
 With only a single experience under my belt, I sure wasn't a combat veteran . With but a single . experience under his belt, he sure wasn’t a . combat veteran, he says .
 I think a lot and as I thought about that battle, I realized that fifty yards wasn’t very far; and, it was likely that most of our battles, if any, would be fought at a similar range .
 That McMillan that I wanted so badly wouldn’t be of much use at these close ranges . McMillans would be much more useful at close ranges, he says .
 The recoil recoil is negligible compared with the .30-caliber cartridges fired in the Springfield, Ml Garand and Ml 4 rifles . The Springfield rifles were used by U.S. troops from 1903 until 1966 .
 Soldiers have persistently criticized the round for its lack of stopping power . Soldiers have been criticized for the round's lack of stops power .
 The small-diameter bullet travels at high speed, and frequently passes through enemy soldiers without inflicting immediately visible injury . The bullet travels through high speed and travels through enemy troops without inflicting immediate visible injury.
 The M16A1 fired the low velocity, solid lead Ml 93, which can't pass through more than 1 mm of RHA steel . The lead can't be passed through 1mm of steel and can only be fired with a single bullet .
 The Ml 6A2 fires the high velocity M855, which can pass though 6mm of RHA steel . The high-velocity M855 can pass through 6mm steel . M855 is a high velocity weapon capable of hitting 6mm .
 The 5.56mm NATO cartridge may be identified by its appearance, the painting of projectile tips, the stamping of the manufacturer's initials and the year of manufacture on the base of the cartridge case .
 When removed from the original packing container, the cartridge may be identified by its physical characteristics . The cartridge can be found in the original packaging container of the cartridge .
 The Ml 93 and Ml 96 cartridge for the Ml 6 can be fired with the M249, but accuracy is degraded . It should only be used in emergency situations when M855 or M856 ammunition not available .
 There was nearly an unlimited selection of frangible pistol and revolver rounds . There was almost an unlimited range of pistol, revolver rounds available .
 I got my frangible 5.56 from Ammoman, and bought a lot of other stuff from Cheaper Than Dirt, a misnomer, because they weren’t really cheaper than dirt; pretty good selection .
 The frangible rounds were for those situations where l/we might end up inside of a building in a close quarters fight . The rounds were intended for close quarters fighting in a building .
 We weren’t fighting insurgents in Fallujah, but might someday end up in defending a building, from the outside in . We weren't fighting insurgents but might end up defending from the inside in .
 In the second place, a person could be blinded by their desire for vengeance that they might end up getting their butt shot off . In the first place, the person is blinded by the desire to vengeance . The second place is the person who could end up shooting himself .
 Klingon proverb tells us revenge is a dish that is best served cold . I preferred the Klingon proverb that says revenge is the 43 dish that's best served hot .
 A Sicilian proverb first appeared in print in The Godfather by Mario Puzo . The proverb is a Sicilian phrase that first appeared on screen in the book .
 The 2,000 year old expression remained in the hearts and minds of many of the survivors . It is not to say that we/they would be above shooting someone in the back if the situation called for it .
 The proverb suggested that you could take your sweet time and take your revenge when it suited you and you had thought it out . The proverb suggests that you can take your own time to get revenge .
 We don't have phone or internet so there is no way to contact them and order one . We don’t have phone, internet or phone so there’s no way of contacting them and ordering one .
 We won't need a floor, but I think we should put in a foundation for the 2x4s to rest on. We won’t need a ground, but we need a foundation, he says .
 It took 168’ of 1 ’ deep ditch about one spade width wide to dig the hole for the foundation . The site was built in the 1960s .
 While I could frame up a 72’ long wall, I couldn’t lift it into place, get it straight and anchor it all at the same time . I had to ask for help from the others because while I could . I couldn't lift it . into place .
 I offered each of them some space in the greenhouse in exchange for helping me erect it. I offered them space in . The greenhouse was built in the back of a greenhouse in the hope they would help build it .
 The next stop was Des Moines for Plexiglas or Lexan and the proper fasteners . "The next stop is Des Moines," says the inventor .
 "It might not be up to the building code, but I’d built the greenhouse using studs 24” on center," he says . "I’m not sure what’s going on with the greenhouse."
 After we had the Plexiglas, we attached the 4�x8’ sheets on their side, staggering them to provide additional bracing . We attached the sheets to the side of the bed to provide extra bracing.
 We ended up with a 45“pitch to the roof and it took 2 sheets to get near the top . It took two sheets to reach the top of the pitch, and two sheets were needed to reach it .
 "We can grow year around once I get some grow lights installed," says Hank . Besides, Hank, Hank says, we can grow in the winter . Hank: "I'm going to grow year-round if I can get some lights installed."
 Just about anything beats a sharp stick in the eye, so my statement was irrelevant, so I'm irrelevant, says CNN.com editor John Sutter . "I don't think it's a good thing to say," he says. "It's a great thing to hear," he
 I just guessing, but after cleaning out the stores and failing to grow much food on their own, they went looking, probably in all directions . I just guess, but I just . just guessing .
 This group only had two Ml As and assorted hunting arms . Hunting arms ranged from .22 rifles to 20-gauge shotguns . The group was only armed with two Mls As and two shotguns .
 I put on my Tac Force vest with the magazines of Black Hills 175gr BTHP and grabbed the second case that contained both my MIA and 590A1 . I also put on the case containing both my missing MIA and my 590 A1 .
 I only had 8 magazines in the vest, and the grenade pockets now held grenades . "I only had eight magazines in my vest," he says . "The grenade pockets in his vest now hold grenades"
 Last time this happened, five of us surrounded the people attacking Hank’s house; this would be Ralph's turn to be in the middle . This would be the first time Ralph has been in a middle of a fight .
 "The problem with being in the middle of the melee was that you had both the bad guys and the good guys generally shooting in your direction," he says . The problem was that there was both bad and good guys shooting in the direction .
 "For that reason, we practiced and the guy in the middle had a pretty good idea where everyone would locate, just not who would be in any particular position," he said . "We practice and I'm pretty sure where everyone will be," he added .
 When I reached my position, I began to shed my gear, dropping the bandoleer, the chest vest and getting my MIA out of the case . I'm not sure what happened to my MIA, but I'm sure it's a good start to the day . "I'm
 It was far more than a pop, definitely not a bang, but my rifle was far from silent . It was a pop. It was definitely not an explosion, but a rifle was not silent .
 "All hell broke loose. My rifle couldn’t really be heard above the din of the attacker’s weapons, but when Hank and the others opened up, all hell broke free" "My rifle couldn't be heard," says the author .
 17 people required about thirty shots, not counting the no quarter shots . Seventeen people needed about 30 shots; thirty shots .
 The up46 side was that we rescued Ralph, gained two Ml As and about thirty magazines . We rescued Ralph and gained about 30 magazines .
 The Sheriff showed up, code 3.0 code 3, and the sheriff showed up . We also got a couple of .45s and magazines . The sheriff's deputies also showed up to the scene .
 My Sara has the Mini-14 target rifle and because the barrel is 22’s, it has a bit more energy than a regular Ranch Rifle . The barrel has 22” barrel .
 We had replaced the harmonic balancer on her rifle with a flashhider . What I also failed to mention was that we had replaced her harmonic balancing on her .
 Those people who attacked Ralph’s didn’t have a chance, caught as they were between Ralph and us. Those people attacked Ralph's didn't have a . chance, said the mayor of the town .
 "We sat down to discuss our actions and determine if we needed to make changes. And, as always, we sat down and discussed our actions," says CNN.com.com .
 I would be more than happy to give you my Loaded Loaded. Now, if you want a Ml A, I have two and would be willing to give them two . I have a Loaded Loaded .
 Sara and her sister set up a target target for Sara to try her own pistol . Sara says she and Sara have been together for two years .
 The riflescope I used had a bullet drop compensator and I didn’t bother with a Ghillie suit .
 When I gave my Loaded to Sara to use, I switched everything to the Super Match . Sara's Super Match is the latest in a long-running series of matches she has won .
 I had to dismount the suppressor fast attach mount and replace it with the flashhider my rifle came with . That forced me to start all over, I had had to replace the mount with a flash hider .
 It was easier to move the scope and 49 that left the task of sighting it in, plus replacing the flashhider on the Super Match with the FA mount . The Super Match was easier than moving the scope .
 The barrel on a Loaded is a medium weight air gauged barrel while the barrel on the Super Match is a heavy weight air gaugeged barrel . The Super Match barrel is the heaviest weight barrel in the world .
 I took the extra step so I kept the flashhider with the rifle it came on . I took an extra step to keep it in place .
 Our spare rifle was now her Ruger Mini-14 target rifle and her spare handgun the Browning Hi-Power . Our spare handgun was her Browning High Power .
 Sitting at the kitchen table watching her feed the twins made me realize that we were short one rifle, one handgun and two shotguns . We were short of one handgun, two shotguns and two rifles .
 Some of my 12gauge was reduced recoil so I figured when the kids were old enough to shoot the shotguns, they’d need 590A1s . Some of the kids are now old enough for shooting .
 I could start them out with a .223 and 9mm and move them to the 7.62 and .45 when they became accustomed to the initial firearms . I could also start with a 9mm pistol .
 In about 10 years, give or take, assuming I didn’t get my butt shot off. Yeah right, in about 10 . Give or take 10 years .
 While the 9mm wasn’t nearly the cartridge the .45 was, it was all right with the +P Gold Dot . The 9mm is a 9mm pistol .
 The reason I got Lawman and Gold Dot, beyond the savings, was that if the weapon was sighted in with one, it was practically speaking sight in for both . The reason for the savings is that if a weapon is sighted with one it's practically speaking Sighted in
 "I was obviously getting ahead of myself by about 10 years, but a man can dream," he says of his dream .
 Since Sara and Sara had broken the long period of being childless, perhaps we’d end up with our own basketball team . The couple's basketball team would be a basketball team, he says .
 In a world where technology would fail and not be replaced, it meant a whole lot of manual labor, even with only 80 acres . In the world of technology, it means a lot more manual labor .
 Super Match proved to hold a slightly tighter group than the Loaded . The Super Match was held in a slightly smaller group than The Loaded .
 In the two encounters we’d had up to this point it wouldn’t have mattered. In fact, in fact, it wouldn't have mattered . In the past two encounters, we'd had two encounters with each other .
 Practice with the big rifle was limited but only because my supply of A-MAX was limited to the 3,000 rounds I'd gotten when I bought the rifle less what I’d used and not counting the Mk 211 .
 He was quick to say yes and his hunch was that it had something to do with my taking out my fair share and more of the MZBs . He said he was happy to be able to take out his fair share of the ZBs .
 Two references to Tango were found to be references to the dance and the phonetic letter T . If you asked me, they were simply buttholes .
 As I’ve said, they didn’t bother to ask or even beg, they just tried to take . As I've said, it’s not the first time they’re trying to take, it's the second time they've tried to .
 In any discussion I’ve read about the difference between looting and strategic reallocation, we had been attacked by looters twice. We had to defend ourselves, and we had to be reallocated twice,’s leader says .
 A suppressor is a device fixed on the end of a gun's barrel to suppress, hence the name, the sound of a shot going off from the weapon . The device is fixed to the barrel of the gun and is fixed on a gun to suppress .
 In real life, suppressed weapons are generally still semi-loud, but they also bring advantages such as greatly reduced muzzle flash, reduced recoil, and increased accuracy . suppressed weapons can also be reduced to less quiet and more accurate .
 Suppressors are mistakenly called silencers; this is an incorrect term because it is almost impossible to totally silence a weapon and have it be effective . This is a very difficult thing to do to suppress weapons and silencers .
 The expansion chambers reduce the sound of gunfire by allowing the rapidly expanding gases from the firing of the cartridge to be temporarily diverted or trapped in a series of hollow chambers . The chambers are known as expansion chambers and are used to reduce noise of gunfire .
 The trapped gas expands and cools, and its pressure and velocity decrease as it exits the chambers . The trapped gases are released from the chambers as they cool and exit .
 Suppressors can fire super-sonic ammunition but this wears out the suppressor very quickly . This wears out very quickly and is not as quiet as using sub-soulic ammunition . The suppressor can also be used to fire sub-sonics .
 The real advantages lay in the greatly reduced muzzle flash, altered recoil, and increased accuracy . The real advantage lay in . reducing muzzle flash and altered recoil .
 It was nearly a perfect flashhider, the felt recoil was significantly reduced and it added as much as Vi minute of angle improved accuracy . It was almost a nearly perfect flash hider .
 The Super Match, in and of itself, was extremely accurate . Needless to say, the Super Match was the first of its kind .
 Sam and his wife Mary lived on the farm between Hank and Grace and Sara and me. Sam and Mary lived in the house with Hank, Grace, Sara and Sara . Sara and Hank and Sara lived together at the farm .
 Ralph and Ruth lived to the far west and coming towards the east were Howard and Phyllis and Howard . Between them and us, Jack and Shirley, we lived with Shirley and Ralph and Ralph . Shirley and Howard lived together in their early days .
 Mary told Sara that she’d already called the Sheriff but he wouldn’t be there for at least 15 minutes . The Sheriff said he’s not there for 15 minutes. Anyway, the call was another call for help and Mary said it was another .
 This was round three for us and our homestead was close enough to Sam’s that I set up the Tac-50 and started picking off those that I could see . This was the first time we had been able to pick up on the targets .
 This was a smaller group and at this distance, I couldn't really make out their weapons . At this distance I couldn’t really make up their weapons. This is a small group of small groups .
 Ralph and Jack flew by on the way to Sam’s and I presumed that Hank was coming in from the east . Hank was flying by on his way to the east, Ralph said, "I thought that Hank would be coming in"
 This was a smaller group from what I could see and maybe they had some kind of body armor because the Mk211 rounds were occasionally detonating . Maybe they were wearing body armor, says CNN's John Defterios .
 "I finally got a chance to use my big rifle and it was every bit as good as advertised. Well, I finally got to use it and it's every bit of the advertised."
 With his agenda of getting more rifles and pistols for Bill and Tracy, I jumped into my Chevy and arrived about the same time the Deputy did . I jumped in my Chevy to get more guns and ammo for Tracy and Bill .
 Sam winked at me and I had a feeling he may have done some strategic reallocation of his own . However, he winked to me and said 'I'm not surprised'
 We'd just have to wait until they asked their questions, hauled the bodies off and the Deputy left . We’d just wait for them to ask their questions .
 "You hit them at an oblique angle and between the two, those bullets really churned up their insides," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 No man is an Island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the Continent, a part of the main . The point of the quote is that none of us could do this alone; we had security in our number .
 Near as well as I could tell, they had been manufactured by PMI, one of the better manufacturers of aftermarket magazines . Near as far as I can tell, the magazines had been made for PMI .
 I’d never seen a Mini-14 in the parkerized finished finished, but here they were . I'd never seen them before, but they were finished .
 "As long as people kept getting in our face, I intended to continue build my gun collection," he said . "I wanted to continue building my collection. As long as ... people got in our faces," he added .
 "I get invited in for a cup of coffee and always had a chance to learn a new trick or two from our older neighbors," she says . "I've learned a lot of things from my older neighbors"
 Those with livestock composted manure so we had planting material for the greenhouse . The greenhouse was filled with plant material for planting material .
 The greenhouse was doing well, what with the kerosene heater for heat and the fluorescents for sunshine . The greenhouse is doing well .
 The years came and went with the weather gradually returning pretty much back to normal . The weather gradually returned to normal after a decade of rain .
 We were only attacked on one more time and this arrack came against our place. We are only attacked once more time, and this was against us . We were attacked one more once and this came against us. We're not going to be able to get back to the top of
 "They sort caught me flat footed and I ended up with one bullet in my left shoulder and a second in my femur," he says . "I ended up . with one . bullet in left shoulder, one in left . shoulder and one in his left femur. They
 Sara really gave them hell until the others arrived and the Sheriff finally showed up . Sara gave the group hell until they arrived and they finally got to the Sheriff . Sara and the sheriff finally arrived at the scene .
 She got the war trophies this time, one Loaded and one Super Match MIA . She got two genuine Colt Ml911 Tactical pistols .
 "I was a long time healing, maybe because the doc had to rebuild both my femur and shoulder," she says . She says she was a "long time healing" from the injury .
 Our six farms produced seed corn, oats, wheat and soybeans . "I was still the seed man once things began to return to normal. I was still my seed man," says farmer .
 In the early years after the war, fuel was only available if you were able to salvage it . Fuel was not available in the UK until the end of the war .
 The government didn’t get a refinery online for 10 years and the second took another 3 years . The government took 10 years to get the first refinery online .
 We had more crude than we had refining capacity and it was all American crude . We had a lot of American crude, and we had more than refining capacity than we did refining capacity .
 For a few years, we were forced to farm like our grandfathers did, at least until diesel became available . For the first time, we had to rely on diesel instead of electricity .
 The REAs eventually got power restored using coal to generate the stream .
 Most trucking was strictly local delivery, from the railroad station to the stores . Most truckers were strictly local .
 Our rail system was in such a state of disrepair, that they still haven’t gotten high speed trains,’s David Frum says . ‘They still haven't gotten high-speed trains.’ He says .
 "I took my time and trained them starting with the Mini-14s and evolving to Ml As. I took his time," he says . "I'm not going to let them die. I'm going to die," he adds .
 Both men became expert marksmen with every firearm they were taught to use, including the McMillan . Both became experts marksmen after being taught how to shoot .
 Speaking of which, I got one last chance to go to Camp Dodge and get more Mk 211 Mk 211 . I'm not sure if I'll ever get more of the iconic car .
 Sara home schooled the kids until the school system was back up and running . Sara home-schooled her children until school was back in service . Sara says she is proud of her decision to home school her children .
 "We haven’t stopped having storms or having the lights go out. Well, after the lights came back on, I had the generator rebuilt," he says . "I had to rebuild the generator after I had to have it rebuilt."
 As our older neighbors began dying off due to advancing age, I had the funds and bought up their gun collections . I had to have the funds to buy up their guns .
 Sometimes there was no living relative to inherit the farm . As to our neighbors, sometimes there were no living relatives to inherit a farm .
 The surviving children could have cared less, they just wanted to sell the farm off and get on with their lives . In other cases, the surviving children were more interested in selling the farm .
 Sara and Sara thought they were foolish and fortunately, we were able to acquire each of the farms as they came on the market . Sara said she and Sara bought each farm as it came up for sale . Sara: "Sara and Sara were very fortunate to be able to buy each
 We had a strip about a mile deep north of United States 34 running just under five miles wide . The strip was just under 5 miles wide when it was created .
 "It was too much land to buy and just leave fallow and I continued the seed corn business from the growing end," says owner .
 "A salesman at heart, I didn’t want to run the operation and Sara and Sara hired a manager who took care of the operation including equipment, staff, planting to harvesting and bagging" "A manager who takes care of everything, including equipment and staff, took care
 "There’s pretty good money in the operation if you or your employees do the whole thing," he says . "Our children never wanted for any material thing," the father says .
 They also didn’t want for attention, love or a proper church upbringing . They also wanted for attention or love .
 The new President tried to lift the suspension that Obama had done to our firearms laws during the crisis . President Obama had been trying to lift a suspension that had been lifted by Obama .
 The laws were suspended by means of an Executive Order and could be put back in place by simply rescinding the Executive Order . The laws could be restored to the U.S. by rescinding a President's order .
 Never happened, mainly because crime diminished dramatically . Never happened; mainly because of crime .
 After the early years about the only crimes were a rare murder and an occasional robbery . The only crimes that occurred were the occasional murder and a rare robbery .