 Nikita Khrushchev was the leader of Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis . He was leader of the Cuban government during the crisis .
 During this time, the U.S. and the Soviets were engaged in the Cold War . The Cold War was an ongoing series of largely political and economic clashes .
 Nikita Khrushchev reached a secret agreement with Cuban premier Fidel Castro to place Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba to deter U.S. attempts to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba with the Bay of Pigs invasion . The Kennedy administration planned Operation Mongoose .
 “Three Men Go to War” focuses on three central figures in the crisis: President John F Kennedy, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro .
 The hardliners in his government and some of his advisers wanted him to turn back Communism . Hardliners in the government wanted him turn back communism, but he did .
 'This was a dangerous, high risk strategy which could have resulted in nuclear war' 'High risk strategy' could have led to a nuclear war, says David Cameron . 'This is a dangerous and dangerous strategy'
 The paramilitary group that led the invasion took its name from the serial number of a member of one of its members . It took the name from one of the members of the paramilitary group .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower authorized the CIA to recruit Cuban exiles living in Miami and train them for an invasion of Cuba in 1960 . President Eisenhower approved the CIA's plan to recruit exiles in Miami to prepare for invasion .
 On February 15, 1898, a mysterious explosion sank the battleship USS Maine in Havana Harbor, triggering a war between the U.S. and Spain .
 The Maine had come to Cuba to protect American citizens while Cuban revolutionaries were fighting to win independence from Spain . The Maine came to Cuba in order to protect U.S. citizens .
 An air strike by B-26 bombers on Cuba’s main airfields on 15 April failed to destroy all of its air force . Prior to the assault, an air strike on Cuba's main airfield failed to .
 Coral reefs damaged the Cuban exile fleet when it approached Cuba . Then, when the exile fleet approached Cuba, coral reefs damaged boats .
 The russians removed the missiles and we removed missiles from Turkey that were pointed towards the USSR . everyone in the USA had a bomb shelter . The russianians removed . the russies removed the . missiles and the . us removed . them from Turkey . that were . pointed
 Khrushchev agrees to the removal of all missiles on Cuba and their return to the Soviet Union . In a public message to President Kennedy broadcast on Moscow radio, he agrees to remove missiles .