 "Dark Mode" is the name of a new series of episodes of American Horror Horror Horror Films . The series is the first of its kind .
 President John F Kennedy is popularly depicted as a courageous leader who forced the Soviet Union to withdraw nuclear missiles from Cuba pointed at the United States . President Kennedy is often seen as a brave leader who withdrew the missiles .
 Kennedy convinced the Soviet government to remove their nuclear missiles from the Soviet Union . Kennedy did convince the Soviets to remove the missiles .
 America removed its own nuclear missiles, based in Turkey and Italy and pointed at the Soviet Union . But America also removed their own own nuclear missile missiles, which pointed at Russia .
 Kennedy's supposed assertion of American resolve against Communism was in reality a negotiated compromise with the Soviet Union . Kennedy’s supposed assertiveness of the U.S. against Communism in reality was in fact a compromise .
 The Soviet Union removed their missiles in the face of President John F Kennedy’s iron determination without forcing any concessions from the American government . The event is recounted in commonly used American history textbooks .
 Five out of six textbooks the Media Research Center’s Culture and Media Institute examined failed to mention Kennedy's secret compromise .
 Relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union deteriorated prior to the crisis . Crisis and Compromise was a series of international incidents between the two countries .
 The Soviet Union shot down a U.S. U-2 spy-plane making a reconnaissance flight over the USSR in May 1960 . The U.2 was shot down by the Soviet Union during a reconnaissance mission over Russia .
 America supported an army of Cuban exiles in a failed attempt to retake Cuba from a Communist government led by Fidel Castro in April 1961 . America supported a Cuban army of exiles against Castro's government .
 Khrushchev said Kennedy was “too intelligent and too weak,” to effectively oppose an aggressive Soviet posture . Kennedy's 1961 summit meeting in Vienna proved to be disastrous for Khrushchchev .
 East Germany built the Berlin Wall to prevent citizens from fleeing to free West Berlin . Two months later, the Wall was built to stop citizens fleeing to West Berlin from fleeing the city .
 In 1962, Soviet authorities met with Cuban Communist leader Fidel Castro about the possibility of installing nuclear missiles in Cuba . Construction of missile sites began in July .
 On Sept. 1962, the Soviet government declared that an American attack on Cuba or Soviet ships supplying Cuba would be treated as an act of war . The Soviet government said an attack on U.S. ships supplied by the Soviet Union would be considered a war .
 The U.S. government grew increasingly suspicious that the Soviets were placing nuclear missiles in Cuba . On Oct. 1962, a U-2 spyplane obtained photographic proof of the Soviet missile program .
 Kennedy declared his intention to “quarantine” ships to Cuba in October . Kennedy gave a speech announcing those findings to the world, and declared his intentions .
 Any ships bearing offensive weapons, Kennedy warned, would be turned back by the U.S. Navy .
 At the time, Soviet ships, including ships carrying military equipment, were sailing toward the American blockade – raising the possibility of nuclear war . The blockade was the result of a U.S.-led blockade of Soviet ships .
 The Soviet government, led by Nikita Khrushchev, sent two messages to the U.S. government broaching the possibility of removing missiles from Cuba . The messages were sent to the United States government .
 The Soviet government first sent Kennedy a message on October 26, offering to remove their nuclear missiles from Cuba in exchange for a U.S. promise not to invade Cuba . The United States first offered to remove the missiles in return for a United States promise to not invade Cuba.
 The next day, the Soviets sent Kennedy a second message, declaring that they would remove their missiles if the United States removed nuclear missiles pointed at the Soviets based in Turkey and Italy . The U.S. would remove the missiles if they were removed .
 The U.S. agreed to dismantle nuclear missiles pointed at the Soviet Union based in Turkey and Italy . However, in a secret agreement, the United States also agreed to dispose of nuclear missiles . The agreement was made in secret .
 The U.S. won a propaganda victory, and that’s how the history textbooks still treat it, he says .
 According to American history textbooks, Kennedy uncompromisingly stood up to the Soviet Union . The Legend According to Textbooks: Kennedy fought against the Soviets . According to U.S. history textbooks JFK stood up against the Soviet Russia .
 Two textbooks made it seem like the Soviet Union backed down completely, without mentioning any concessions made by the United States . The U.S. made concessions to the Soviets in the war .
 Kennedy ordered the navy to blockade, or close off, Cuba until the Soviets removed the missiles . The blockade was ordered by the president of the United States .
 He threatened to destroy any Soviet ship that tried to break through the blockade and reach the island . The island was occupied by Soviet troops in the early 1950s .
 The United States would respond, he warned, with a nuclear attack against the Soviet Union . The U.S. would respond to the threat, he said .
 As the two superpowers neared the brink of nuclear war, people all over the world watched nervously . People all around the world were watching nervously .
 For the next week, the world nervously awaited the outcome of the Cuban missile crisis . The world was watching as the crisis unfolded .
 Three other textbooks left readers with the impression that the U.S. only promised not to invade Cuba in exchange for the Soviet removal of missiles from Cuba . The United States only promised to avoid invasion Cuba in return for removal of Soviet missiles .
 "He wanted to be prepared for war and show Khrushchev the seriousness of the situation," he said .
 Several Soviet ships carrying missile parts continued towards Cuba . As the world nervously watched and waited, several Soviet ships carried missile parts .
 On October 24, as they neared the United States blockade, they turned back . They turned back from the U.S. blockade . The blockade began October 24 .
 Khrushchev offered to remove missiles if the U.S. pledged to never invade Cuba . Kennedy received a letter from the Soviet leader offering to remove the missiles . Two days later, Kennedy received the letter from Khrush .
 Khrushchev demanded that the U.S. remove its missiles from Turkey . The next day he received a tougher letter from the Soviet leader . The letter was sent to the White House .
 Ex-Committe advised Kennedy to ignore the second letter and accept the offer in the first letter . Kennedy was advised by the Ex Committe to ignore it and accept it in the second .
 The U.S. began to move ballistic missiles and nuclear warheads into nearby Cuba . The Cuban government began moving missiles and nukes into Cuba .
 On October 14, 1962, clear pictures of Soviet missile sites under construction were obtained by one of our U-2 spy planes . The U.S. Air Force captured the images of the missile sites .
 The policy of deterrence seemed to depend upon making the Soviet Union really believe the U.S. would fight if it was pushed too far . The policy was based on deterrence .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended an invasion to seize the missiles and bring down Castro . Joint chiefs of Staff recommend an invasion of Cuba .
 At the very least, they wanted a general air strike – at targets all over the island . The government wanted to strike at targets across the island, including targets in the air .
 Ambassador Adlai Stevenson proved with photographs that the missiles were there . Then, at an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council, our Ambassador . Stevenson proved . that they were there, and the missiles continued to be there, he said .
 On Friday, the Russians began to signal that maybe the question could be negotiated . The Russians say they want to negotiate a deal with the president .
 He decided, on the advice of his brother Robert, to answer the one that held out some hope of peace . He decided to do it on his brother's advice to do so .
 Khrushchev broadcast that he had ordered the missiles to be dismantled and removed from Cuba in return for a U.S. pledge not to invade the island . The missiles were dismantled in exchange for an American pledge to not invade Cuba .
 Pathways to the Present was the only textbook to mention the U.S. removal of missiles from Turkey . “The crisis was not yet over, however, however.” The textbook says .
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a long letter in which he pledged to remove missiles if Kennedy promised that the U.S. would end the quarantine and stay out of Cuba . Kennedy promised to remove the missiles if the United States would end quarantine .
 A second letter demanded that the U.S. remove its missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The letter was delivered to the next day .
 He responded to the second note through secret negotiations and eventually met the demand . The second note was a demand for $1,000 .
 Such a war would have caused unimaginable death and destruction – far more than the atomic bombings of Japan in 1945 . More powerful hydrogen bombs had replaced those early atomic weapons .
 He had stood up to the Soviets and shown that the U.S. would not be pushed around, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "He stood up and showed that the United States would not get pushed around"
 Hagiography of President John F Kennedy is a staple of modern journalism . Media figures effusively praise his presidency, whitewash his flaws, and portray him as uncompromising leader of the free world .
 This lionization of Kennedy appears to be present in American history textbooks, as well as American history books .
 It is disingenuous to assert that Kennedy adamantly forced the Soviet government to withdraw nuclear missiles through sheer force of will . Kennedy was assassinated in September 1968 .
 Kennedy and his Cold War legacy aren’t the only historical subjects the textbooks of today get wrong . Kennedy’s legacy and the legacy of the Cold War are among the topics the textbooks get wrong about .
 CMI previously examined textbooks’ coverage of the Three Mile Island incident and their treatment of Supreme Court appointments .