 This document is protected by copyright law . All rights reserved © © © Centre for Conflict Studies, UNB, 1997 .
 Many aspects of the tense days when the world came closer to the threshold of nuclear holocaust than at any other time in modern history remain controversial . And many aspects of those tense days .
 The Crisis is a frequent target for both revisionism and sombre reflection in the effort to provide better explanations of those complex events . Not surprisingly, the Crisis is often a target for revisionism .
 The recent books by Roger Hillsman and Mark White make interesting companion volumes . They reflect the prevailing dichotomy over the way the Americans handled the crisis in the U.S.
 Hillsman writes from the perspective of one who actually took part in the decision-making process now given the opportunity to talk freely as a result of declassification of much source material . Hillsman: "I'm glad to have been able to speak freely"
 His aim is to provide a better explanation of how decisions were reached under stress and at times without full information on Russian and Cuban actions . He says he hopes to explain the situation in the U.S.
 White challenges the competence of the crisis management process through a reexamination of the White House tapes and from a mass of background material on the key participants . White, on the other hand, challenges the competency of crisis management .
 President Kennedy's respect and commitment for the office of President has never been seriously in doubt . For instance, while there is reason to question many of Kennedy's personal traits, his respect for the job of President was never in doubt.
 White's assertion that Kennedy's early reactions to the Crisis may have been influenced by amphetamines (p. 118) begins to paint a picture that some will not accept . White says Kennedy's reaction to the crisis was influenced by the drug .
 Hillsman is probably one of those who remain faithful to the Kennedy legend, warts and all, but for that to be credible they must be carefully substantiated . White's very negative picture of Kennedy is not .
 Hillsman's portrayal of Kennedy is far kinder, but it acknowledges that tensions existed and that the decision-making process was frustrating . Hillsman: "It's frustrating because of the lack of accurate information, and because opinions were sharply divided"
 Two books take very different perspectives of Kennedy and his key advisors . The two books take different perspectives on Kennedy .
 For someone who has no prior knowledge of the Crisis, the arguments presented by Mark White could seem compelling . For someone without prior knowledge, the argument presented by White may seem compelling.
 White's work is suspect on several counts, including that of Kennedy's Executive Committee . Yet, for anyone with some knowledge of those events, it's suspect . White is accused of not knowing details of the events surrounding the Kennedy crisis .
 The White House tapes are not fully declassified, but some of them are open to the public . President Obama relies heavily on the open parts of the tapes to draw assumptions about the various discussions .
 First, he doesn't adequately explain why his assumptions are better than conventional wisdom . Second, he does not explain why he is better than the conventional wisdom, he says .
 He introduces too much new material without convincing the reader that his views are right and others are very wrong . He simply introduces too many new material to convince the reader of his views .
 White's ""in-your-face"" analysis raises some fascinating questions . On the other hand, White's analysis raises questions .
 There is just too much that challenges the conventional wisdom to accept his interpretation at face value . But without time and resources to examine them fully, there is too much to examine fully, he challenges conventional wisdom .
 There are several instances where White's views can be quickly checked against Hillsman's book . Hillsman has a long history of his views, but there are a few instances where they can be easily checked against each other .
 White casts Keating in an almost noble role, speaking out against a Kennedy conspiracy of silence on the threat posed by Russian re-armament of Cuba . White: Keating spoke out against the Kennedy conspiracy .
 Hillsman dismisses the Senator as a merely political opportunist . Hillsman is very different to the view of Hillsman who dismisses him as a mere opportunist.
 In some respects, one can come to a conclusion that White also has his own agenda in writing the book . White also writes that he has an agenda to write the book, White says .
 He focuses on select issues rather than on the overall decision-making process . For instance, he focuses on selected issues . For example, he focused on select matters rather than overall decisions .
 A blockade of Cuba was never established, it became a quarantine on military equipment . A blockade was not established, and a blockade was a quarantine of military equipment, the author says .
 The serious implications in international law of declaring and/or establishing a blockade were well-known, as well as the vast majority of earlier works on the crisis make clear . Nor does he point out that the serious implications of declaring, or establishing, such a blockade are well known .
 Hillsman discusses the blockade and quarantine in the context of the ExComm's discussions on how best to solve the problem . Hillsman also discusses the quarantine and quarantine as part of the discussion on how to deal with it .
 Hillsman is able to present the case for the option that allowed the Russians a way out . Hillsman's account makes interesting reading, but it is not the only one to make the case .
 Despite strong military calls for an attack on Cuba, there was an equally strong voice against that course of action . As he points out, there were also strong voices against the attack .
 Robert Kennedy did not want to commit the U.S. to an act he saw as comparable to Pearl Harbor . Kennedy wanted to avoid a repeat of Pearl Harbor, authors say .
 Hillsman describes this aspect of the ExComm process in fairly moderate terms . White records the debate as a monumental clash of wills between the main ""protagonists"" where perceived ideological clashes seem more important than finding a solution to the problem . Hillsman says the debate is more important to finding
 It is such stark contrasts that mark the difference between the two books . The book is published by Simon Cowan, a former journalist from New York City .
 Hillsman attempts to provide a better insight into the decision-making process by expanding on what has been written already . Hillsman, albeit still a Kennedy loyalist, attempts to give an insight into what has already been written .
 White attempts to prove that defects in the personalities of both Kennedy and Khrushchev directly led to the 1962 crisis . White says defects in both Kennedy's personalities led to their downfall .
 Author attacks conventional wisdom in a manner that makes his book read more like the script for an Oliver Stone movie than a useful contribution to the literature on the Crisis .