 As an analyst for the CIA, your job is to write a memorandum explaining to President Kennedy why these missiles are a threat . The CIA analyst's job was to write to the president explaining to him why they were a threat, he says .
 "There's too much of a gamble. I will say, my understanding's that let's just say that...they get these in there and then ...they get sufficient capacity so we...don't want to knock 'em out," he says .
 I would say this, Mr President, that if you've made a public statement, you've got to move immediately, or you're going to have a in this country . Mr President. I would . say this .
 ICBMs typically had a range of more than 3,500 miles, so that if launched from the Soviet Union they could reach targets in the United States, and vice versa .
 By the 1960s both the U.S. and the Soviet Union had large numbers of weapons armed with nuclear warheads . Fears that much of the civilized world would be destroyed if war between the two powers ever broke out .
 Ilyushin was a bureau of the Soviet Government responsible for building military aircraft for the Soviet Union . Ilyushin's jet bomber was the first of its kind .
 IL-28 saw widespread use in many conflicts, since the Soviet Union exported large numbers of these to friendly powers around the world . First entering production in 1948, it was first produced in the USSR in the 1950s .
 The Ilyushin aircraft was considered one of the most successful of the Soviet air force models . It remained in service well into the 1980s, and was considered a success model .
 MiG, short for Mikoyan-Gurevich, was the arm of the Soviet Government responsible for producing jet fighter aircraft for the Soviet Union . MiG is the name of the first MiG aircraft produced by the Soviets .
 The MiG-21 represented the state of the art in Soviet aircraft design, and was still being used as late as the 1980s . It was still represented as the state-of-the-art aircraft design in the Soviet Union .
 An acronym for “medium-range ballistic missile,” a weapon designed for use against enemy cities . The missile is a weapon that can be fired at enemy targets .
 An acronym for “surface-to-air missile,” a weapon designed for use against enemy aircraft . The U.S. has launched a number of missile-like missiles in the past .
 The name used by the U.S. and its allies for what the Soviets called the S-75 was the most widely used surface-to-air missile in history . The name was the name used for the S.75, the most commonly used surface to air missile .
 First deployed in 1957, these missiles were exported to virtually every country friendly to the Soviet Union, particularly to East Germany . The missiles were used in East Germany, where they were sold to the Soviets .
 These weapons were capable of striking aircraft at very high altitudes . In 1960, they had been used to bring down a U.S. reconnaissance plane over the Soviet Union .
 The name used by the U.S. and its allies for what the Soviets called the R-12, a medium range ballistic missile that first entered service in 1959 . The name was the name used in the United States and allies for the missile . The missile was a medium-range
 An SS-4 launched from Cuba was capable of reaching targets as far away as Cincinnati, Ohio, and San Antonio, Texas . With an effective range of over 1000 nautical miles, an SS- 4 launched from Havana, Cuba, was able to reach a target as far as Cincinnati
 Five options for responding to Soviet missiles in Cuba are available in the upper left-hand corner of the map . These include responding to the threat of Soviet missiles .
 As names of your advisers appear click on them to see what they have to say about the various options . Click here to find out more about your options and see what advisers say .
 Permission is granted to educators to reproduce this worksheet for classroom use . Click on the tab labeled “Special Intelligence Estimate” to get a report prepared by the CIA on this question .
 After you have read the report, choose one of the five options in the upper left-hand corner . Click here to read the full report by clicking here to see how much it cost .
 Using the following excerpts from that speech, answer the questions below . The questions below are answered by CNN iReporters .
 Our unswerving objective, therefore, must be to prevent the use of these missiles against this or any other country, and to secure their withdrawal or elimination from the Western Hemisphere, says President Obama .
 Permission is granted to educators to reproduce this worksheet for classroom use 7 action which will widen or deepen crisis .
 No one can see precisely what course it will take or what costs or casualties will be incurred . No one knows exactly what will happen or how long it will be .
 Many months of sacrifice and self-discipline lie ahead for the U.S. President, Obama, Hillary Clinton and others .
 The fact of this minimum response should not be taken as a basis, however, for any misjudgment on your part, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 Permission to educators to reproduce this worksheet for classroom use 10 .
 Permission is granted to educators to reproduce this worksheet for classroom use 12 2.2.3.4.5.5 .