 In the past five years, the history of the events of October 1962 has been profoundly revised . Despite continuing resistance by the government to declassify top-secret documents long after the need for confidentiality has passed, declassified documents continue to be released .
 A series of conferences in the United States, Moscow and Havana has brought together historians and former government officials from all three countries to pool their knowledge and recollections . Historians and former officials have gathered in the U.S., Russia and Havana .
 A six-year lawsuit has forced the U.S. government to declassify thousands of relevant documents . Documents include top-secret correspondence between President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev .
 The combination of testimony and documents has altered the conventional wisdom about the crisis . The testimony has altered conventional wisdom on the Iraq War .
 One view of just how close the U.S. and the Soviet Union came to nuclear war was revealed at a conference held in Havana last January .
 Soviet Marshall Anatoly Gribkov claimed that nine nuclear warheads had been shipped to Cuba for Soviet short-range tactical missiles . The Soviet Marshall claimed that, in addition to the recently installed ballistic missiles, 9 nuclear warheads were shipped .
 U.S. manders had authority to fire missiles without further direction from the Kremlin . The U.N. says it has no obligation to fire the missiles without direction from Russia .
 McNamara responded, “No one should believe that United States troops could have been attacked by tactical nuclear warheads without the United States responding with nuclear warheads.”
 New documentation hints at what motivated the Soviets to put missiles in Cuba in the first place . New documentation is also suggestive .
 Recently declassified military histories of the Jupiter missile program in Turkey reveal that U.S. rockets deployed along Soviet frontier became operational in April 1962 .
 Khrushchev proposed that same month the deployment of similar weapons in Cuba . That fact may have prompted the proposal to deploy similar weapons there .
 Khrushchev’s claim that a primary motivation was to deter a U.S. invasion of Cuba . The new information about the missile crisis may also lend credence to the claim that the primary motivation for the crisis was to prevent an invasion of the United States .
 A “basic action plan’s” was drafted in February 1962 by Gen. Gen. George S. Eisenhower . It was drafted by the legendary Gen. Dwight Eisenhower .
 Edward Lansdale called for a series of covert operations inside Cuba that would culminate in an internal uprising in October 1962 . The U.S. invasion was supported by a United States invasion of Cuba . Lansdale's plan would see the Cuban government overthrow .
 Whether President Kennedy intended to launch an invasion to overthrow Castro is beside the point . McNamara and Schlesinger argue forcefully that he had no such intention .
 Knew inai sucn preparations would be perceived by both Cuba and the Soviet Union as threatening . The U.S. had contingency preparations for an invasion .
 With declassification of the KennedyKhrushchev letters, it became clear that the missile crisis lasted more than the “13 days” memorialized in Robert Kennedy’s book . The missile crisis ended more than 13 days .
 Accounts of the missile crisis have traditionally begun with the discovery of the Soviet missile sites on Oct. 31 . Khrushchev's decision to remove the rockets from the Soviet Union site ended the crisis . Accounts traditionally begin with discovery of missile sites and end with removal of rockets .
 The letters, which date from Oct. through Dec., 1962, make clear that tensions did not immediately abate . The new letters date from October through Dec. 1962 .
 The United States issued an additional demand that the Soviets withdraw a number of bomber planes from Cuba . The U.S. also issued a request for the Soviets to withdraw a large number of aircrafts .
 When the Cubans resisted, the Americans continued to prepare for a possible invasion . The U.S. prepared for the invasion of Cuba . When the Cuban government refused to resist, the American invasion began .
 On Oct. 31, the head of the Atlantic. Atlantic. Europe's largest island nation was in the grip of a crisis in Ukraine . The crisis was supposed to have been over, but it was over soon enough .
 Command requested permission to arm the invasion force with tactical nuclear weapons, a request denied by Secretary of Defense McNamara . McNamara denied the request .
 The documents that have made a fuller understanding of October 1962 possible would still be gathering dust in a storage room on the seventh floor of the State Department . The documents still gather dust in storage room at the U.S. State Department.
 The archive avoided a roadblock faced by many FOIA users . The government's claim that the requested documents cannot be located or do not exist does not exist .
 By law, government agencies must respond to requests for documents within 10 working days . But in practice this rarely happens .
 The State Department regularly takes up to several years to declassify documents . The CIA has been known to delay ior yeais .
 State Department took nine more months to release about 2,000 documents . It refused to declassify hundreds more, including many of the historically important ones such as 11 Kennedy-Khrushchev letters . After the archive filed suit in federal court, the State Department sued .
 After 26 years, United States officials maintained that their release would damage national security of the United States . U.S. officials said release would harm national security .
 With pro bono assistance from the law firm Crowell and Moring, the archive continued to press its case in court . The archive continues to press the case .
 In April 1991, the Russian government sent a diplomatic note to the State Department stating that it had no objection to the release of the Kennedy-Khrushchev letters . The Russian government, after learning about the court battle over the documents, sent a letter to the U.S.
 It still took the State Department bureaucracy nine more months to release the letters . The letters were released only because of the pressure of court proceedings .
 In January 1992, the State Department finally complied, releasing the correspondence on the eve of the Havana conference . The State Department complied with the request to release the correspondence .
 The State Department has resisted disclosure every step of the way . Margaret Tutwiler, then a spokesman for the State Department, declared that the U.S. was “pleased to be able to work with the Russian Federation to make the historical record available publicly”