 The Cold War began to thaw as the countries of the former Soviet Khrushchev and Richard M. Nixon superpowers entered an era of cooperation .
 These countries were Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Albania, and East Germany . East Germany was one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 The Soviet Union did not allow them to direct and develop their own economies . The country's economy was not allowed to develop its own own own .
 The Soviet Union insisted that they develop industries to meet Soviet needs . Instead of developing their own industries, they developed industries that meet needs of the Soviet Union .
 More moderate Soviet leaders came to power after Stalin’s death . Soviet Policy in Eastern Europe and China is a study of Soviet policy in Russia .
 U.S. satellite countries allowed more independence as long as they remained allied with the Soviet Union . They allowed the Cold War thaw. They allowed a thaw in the West .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, growing protest I Soviet Policy in movements in Eastern Europe threatened the Soviet grip on the region . Growing protest in movements against the Soviet policy in the 1960s and '60s .
 Increasing tensions with China diverted Soviet attention from Soviet forces . Eastern Europe and China also diverted Soviet forces from Soviet operations .
 After Stalin died in 1953, Nikita B Khrushchev became the dominant Soviet leader . After Stalin's death in 1953 the Soviet Union began to crack down on Stalin's policies .
 Khrushchev denounced Stalin for jailing and killing loyal Soviet citizens . From Brinkmanship Khrushchevitch denounced Stalin's jailings .
 Stalin's to Detente speech signaled the start of a policy called destalinization, or purging the country of Stalin’s memory . Stalin's speech signaled start of the policy, purging Russia of the memory of Stalin .
 Soviet policy did not change life in satellite countries . But this new Soviet outlook did change many of the world's most important countries .
 In 1956, the Hungarian army joined protesters to overthrow Hungary’s Soviet-controlled government . In October 1956, for example, the Hungarians joined protesters against the Soviet-backed government .
 Mobs waved Hungarian flags with the Communist hammer-and-sickle emblem cut out . Storming through the capital, Budapest, mobs waved the Hungarian flags .
 A popular and liberal Hungarian Communist leader named Imre Nagy formed a new government . The new government was formed by Nagy's government in Hungary .
 Thousands of Hungarian freedom fighters armed themselves with pistols and bottles, but were overwhelmed . Thousands armed with pistols, bottles, were overwhelmed by the soldiers .
 Nagy was executed by a pro-Soviet government in Soviet-era Russia . Nagy's execution was followed by the death of the Soviet Union-backed government .
 He was captured by the Soviets and moved rapidly up through its ranks . He was recruited into their army and recruited into the army .
 Dubc ek instituted broad country’s Communist government, but his loyalty remained with peasants . v Nagy held several posts in his the 1960s .
 The Soviet Union reacted because of his independent approach, by sending tanks into Prague to suppress . He fell in and out of favor with the Soviet a feared revolt .
 After the Soviets came to political prominence in 1989, when the put down the uprising, they tried and Communists agreed to share power in a . coalition government .
 Czechoslovakia split into two nations in 1989, after Communists lost control . Nagy was tanks in 1968. Nagy is now a member of Hungary’s government .
 His replacement, Leonid Brezhnev, quickly adopted repressive domestic policies . His successor, Leonininov, adopted a repressive domestic policy .
 The party enforced laws to limit such basic human rights as freedom of speech and worship . Party enforced laws limiting such basic rights as free speech, worship and freedom of worship .
 Khruschev made clear that he would not tolerate dissent in Eastern Europe either . His policy was put to the test in early 1968 when he removed Brezhnev .
 Prague Spring was a period of reform when Czechoslovakia’s capital bloomed with new ideas . Prague Spring is known as Prague Spring, when Prague became a symbol of change .
 On August 20, armed forces from the Warsaw Pact nations invaded Czechoslovakia . The invasion took place in August 1968 .
 Brezhnev justified this invasion by claiming the Soviet Union had the right to prevent its satellites from rejecting communism . The policy was known as the Breznev Doctrine . The Soviet Union invaded its satellites in order to prevent their rejection of communism .
 China was committed to communism in the Soviet-Chinese Split . China was the only country to resist Communist rule . The Soviet Union-China split was the result of the Cold War .
 Mao and Stalin had signed a 30-year treaty of friendship in 1950 . Mao signed the treaty to cement the ties between Communist powers .
 The Soviets assumed the Chinese would follow Soviet leadership in world affairs . They assumed that they would follow them in the world .
 As the Chinese grew more confident, they resented being in Moscow’s shadow . Beijing resents being in the shadow of Moscow .
 In 1959, Khrushchev punished the Chinese by refusing to share nuclear secrets with the Chinese . The Soviet Union refused to share its nuclear secrets to China .
 The Soviet-Chinese split grew so wide that fighting broke out along their common border . The split was so wide it led to fighting between Soviet and Chinese forces .
 After repeated incidents, the two neighbors maintained a fragile peace . The two neighbors were neighbors for decades .
 In the 1970s, the U.S. and the Soviet Union backed away from the aggressive policies of brinkmanship that they had followed during the early postwar years . Détente was the beginning of the Cold War era .
 The brinkmanship policy followed during the presidencies of Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson led to one terrifying crisis after another . Brinkmanship Breaks Down .
 Though crises erupted all over the world, they were united by a common fear . Though these crises erupted across the world . They were united in the form of fear, they united by the fear of terrorism, the terror threat .
 In 1960, the U-2 incident prevented a meeting between the U.S. and the Soviet Union to discuss the buildup of arms on both sides . The incident prevented the United States and the Soviets from meeting .
 The crisis ended when Soviet ships turned back to avoid a confrontation at sea . The crisis in the Soviet Union ended in a standoff at sea with Soviet ships .
 Analyzing Primary: It was certainly possible, and I would say probable, that a Cuban sergeant or Soviet officer in a missile silo, without authority from Moscow, would have launched . Do you think one or more of those intermediate-range missiles, equipped with a nuclear warhead,
 McNamara’s view of the Soviet threat in Cuba was justi. McNamara: “Tensions remained high.” McNamara said .
 President Johnson escalated United States involvement in the war in Vietnam . Committed to stopping the spread of commuism, Johnson escalated U.S. involvement in Vietnam.
 Widespread popular protests wracked the China in 1972, accompanied by United States during the Vietnam War . Nixon visits The United States turns to Détente in 1972 .
 U.S. President Barack Obama met with Chinese President Xi Jinping in Beijing . U.N. President Xi Xi Jinping is expected to make a visit to China on Sunday .
 The United States backed away from Zhou Enlai's policy of direct confrontation with the Soviet Union . As it tried to heal its internal wounds, the U.S. backed away .
 Détente is a French policy of lessening Cold War tensions . It replaced word meaning “a loosening.” brinkmanship under Richard M Nixon . The French policy replaced word ‘détente.’ which means ‘loan’
 President Nixon’s move toward détente grew out of a philosophy known as realpolitik . Nixon's move toward a denteente relationship with the U.S. grew from a philosophy that was known as 'realpolitik' Realpolitik is based on realpolit
 In practice, realpolitik meant dealing with other nations in a practical and flexible manner . Realpolitik means dealing with others in a flexible manner, says the UK's Foreign Secretary .
 The two superpowers agreed to pursue détente and to reduce tensions . While the U.S. continued to try to contain the spread of communism .
 Nixon’s new policy represented a personal reversal as well as a political shift for the country . Nixon Visits Communist Powers in the 1950s and 1960s .
 His rise in politics in the 1950s was largely due to his strong anti-Communist position . He was a strong opponent of the Communist Party in the early 1950s .
 The first U.S. president to visit Communist China in the 1950s . Twenty years later, he became the first president of the United States to visit China .
 Page 4 of 4 superpowers eyed each other suspiciously . The visit made sense in a world in which three, not just two, superpowers eye each other .
 Three months after visiting Beijing, Nixon visited the Soviet Union . Nixon visited Beijing in February 1972 . Three months later, he visited Moscow .
 After a series of meetings called the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, Nixon and Brezhnev signed the SALT I Treaty . The treaty was signed by Nixon and the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 The five-year agreement was limited to 1972 levels the number of intercontinental ballistic and submarine-launched missiles each country could have .
 In 1975, 33 nations joined the United States and the Soviet Union in signing a commitment to détente and cooperation . The Helsinki Accords were signed by the U.S. and Russia in 1975 .
 The Collapse of Détente led to the collapse of détente in 1980s and '80s . China and the Soviet Union were allies of the U.S. and the West .
 President Jimmy Carter was concerned over harsh treatment of protesters in the Soviet Union . President Carter was the strong patriotic in the late 1970s, however, .
 This threat is part of his ened to prevent a second round of SALT negotiations . This threat has been made by the president of the United States .
 Concerns mount as more nations, including China and India, began building nuclear arsenals . Concerns mounted as more countries, including India and China, began developing nuclear weapons .
 Ronald Reagan was a fiercely anti-Communist U.S. president . Reagan took office in 1981 . Reagan was known for his anti-communist stance .
 He increased defense spending, putting both economic and military pressure on the Soviets . He increased military spending and economic pressure .
 In 1983, Reagan also announced the Strategic Defense Initiative Contrasting . Contrasting was a program to protect against enemy missiles .
 Tensions increased as United States activities such as arming Nicaragua's Contras pushed Reagan’s policies the United States and Soviet Union further from détente . In what ways remained a symbol of United States anti-Communist sentiment .
 As you learn in the next chapter, developing countries continued their own struggles for independence . Meanwhile, as you will learn in this chapter, the story continues to unfold .
 Write a poem or to Detente song lyrics expressing protest against Communist rule by a citizen of a country behind the Iron Curtain . Write a short poem or a short song to express protest .
 Look through a major newspaper or newsmagazine for articles on Eastern European countries . Find out what you need to know about Eastern Europe .