 The Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 tested the U.S. and the Soviet Union's resolve and moral judgment .
 At the White House, President Kennedy relied for advice on a select inner circle—the Executive Committee, or ExComm . Their eventual avoidance of Armageddon was by no means inevitable .
 They were America’s ‘best and brightest,” well-educated men who believed in their ability to manage any crisis . They believed in the ability of managing any crisis, they said .
 Kennedy’s deft response to the missile crisis led to a great foreign policy victory . Kennedy's leadership led the nation to a victory in missile crisis .
 From that point forward, Cuba ceased to be a viable threat to American security . Within two years, many of the same tough-minded ‘wise men’ led another president into a bloody quagmire in Southeast Asia .
 Doubts grew about the defining logic of “mutual assured destruction” and “acceptable risks” the rhetoric of nuclear security . “Militarism’s” is a defining logic .
 During the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, the men who ran the affairs of the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba were locked in a titanic struggle that tested their resolve and moral judgment .
 Doubts grew about the defining logic of ‘mutual assured destruction’ and “acceptable risks” the rhetoric of nuclear security . Kennedy ran for the presidency on a pledge that a ‘new generation’ would resist communist aggression .
 Only a month before the missile crisis began, the president assured Congress and the nation that the Soviets had no plans to build a military base in Cuba . He would “do whatever must be done” to protect American security and drive them out .
 If he confronts the Soviets and miscalculated, he could plunge the nation into nuclear war . On the other hand, if he confronted the Soviets, he may plunge the country into war . He could also risk nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 The stakes had never been higher . Kennedy and Khrushchev were “one mistake away” from triggering a holocaust . Kennedy handled the crisis with aplomb, navigating a viable course .
 In 1959, Nikita Khrushchev became the first Soviet leader to visit the U.S. and the first to begin rolling back the totalitarian excesses of Stalinism . Kennedy listened carefully, asked probing questions, and demonstrated that he was in charge .
 For Khruschev, Cuba was the harbinger of socialism in the Americas . Cuba was an opportunity for Soviet influence to escape the containment strategy of the Western allies . Khruschev's Cuba was a harbinger for socialism .
 A nuclear confrontation might lead to the complete destruction of the island and its people was a risk the revolutionaries appeared willing to take . The Soviet offer of nuclear missiles was quickly accepted .
 Castro became infuriated with Khrushchev’s unilateral decision to remove the missiles and bombers he’d delivered only months before . It was preferable to giving in to U.S. attempts to put an end to the revolution .
 Robert Kennedy met secretly with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to communicate the urgency of the situation and find a way to let both nations back away from the nuclear brink . In 1968, he wrote Thirteen Days, for years the authoritative account of the crisis .
 Theodore Sorensen was President Kennedy's most loyal adviser . He was assassinated moments after giving his victory speech in the Democratic presidential primary in California in 1968 .
 He advocated a naval blockade as the best first response to the missile crisis . JFK’s chief speechwriter and special counsel .
 Sorenson helped write the standard account of the crisis, Thirteen Days, in 1968 . He wrote Kennedy’s speech to the nation, in which the president announced the presence of the Soviet missiles .
 Dean Rusk had served in the State Department under President Truman during the early days of the Cold War . Rusk worked for President Truman .
 Rusk pressed for a “surgical” air strike, but with a prior warning to Castro and Khrushchev . Rusk was the most senior and experienced diplomat within ExComm .
 Rusk spoke formally and at great length about the need for careful deliberation in foreign affairs . He recommended that Robert Kennedy offer informal assurances to Soviet ambassador Dobrynin that the U.S. would withdraw its Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 McGeorge Bundy was a dean at Harvard and a hereditary Republican when Kennedy tapped him to be his adviser for National Security Affairs in 1961 . Bundy was Harvard dean and hereditary Republican at the time of Kennedy's appointment .
 During the missile crisis, Bundy sat directly across from the president during ExComm meetings at the White House . Like JFK, Bundy had served in the Navy during World War II .
 As a key member of Kennedy’s ExComm defense team, he objected strongly to an air strike and was one of the most persuasive advocates of the naval blockade . McNamara was very successful in his management of the Pentagon and Congress .
 Ball used his skills as an attorney to argue in favor of the naval blockade . He later served in the Johnson White House, advising the president on American policy in Vietnam .
 He was the first administration official to become convinced of a Soviet military build-up in Cuba . He ordered the U2 reconnaissance flights that discovered the first hard evidence of nuclear missiles on the island .
 Thompson was one of the few ExComm members who didn't hesitate to interrupt or correct the president . Thompson supported the naval blockade and argued against trading American missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Paul Nitze was a key member of ExComm during the Cuban missile crisis . He was instrumental in persuading JFK to accept Krushchev’s Oct. 1962 proposal . Nitze urged immediate military action to take out the missile sites .
 Nitze argued United States military superiority in the Caribbean would prevent the USSR from retaliating for an American attack on Cuba . Dillon had been a staunch anticommunist since the dawn of the Cold War .
 As a member of ExComm he initially favored a quick air attack on the Cuban bases .
 From that point forward, Cuba ceased to be a viable threat to American security . But within two years, many of the same tough-minded “wise men” led another president into a bloody quagmire in Southeast Asia .
 President Kennedy relied for advice on a select inner circle—the Executive Committee, or ExComm . Their eventual avoidance of Armageddon was by no means inevitable."
 John F Kennedy ran for the presidency on a pledge that a “new generation” would resist communist aggression and maintain American nuclear superiority . Doubts grew about the defining logic of “mutual assured destruction” and “acceptable risks” of nuclear security .
 A month before the missile crisis began, the president assured Congress and the nation that the Soviets had no plans to build a military base in Cuba . If they did, he would “do whatever must be done” to protect American security and drive them out .
 Kennedy handled the crisis with aplomb, navigating a viable course between the truculence of his ExComm hawks and the conciliatory logic of the doves .
 Nikita Khrushchev was the first Soviet leader to visit the United States and the first to begin rolling back the totalitarian excesses of Stalinism . During the tense discussions, Kennedy listened carefully, asked probing questions, and demonstrated that he was in charge."
 To Americans, he seemed a crude, bombastic bear, a man who might be capable of anything . Khruschev, Cuba was the harbinger of socialism in the Americas .
 A nuclear confrontation might lead to the complete destruction of the island and its people was a risk . The Soviet offer of nuclear missiles was quickly accepted .
 Castro became infuriated with Khrushchev’s unilateral decision to remove missiles and bombers he’d delivered only months before . It was preferable to giving in to United States attempts to put an end to the revolution."
 Robert Kennedy met secretly with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to communicate the urgency of the situation and find a way to let both nations back away from the nuclear brink . Robert Kennedy wrote Thirteen Days, for years the authoritative account of the missile crisis .
 President Kennedy looked to long-time political aide Theodore Sorensen as his most loyal adviser . That same year, he was assassinated moments after giving his victory speech in the Democratic presidential primary in California .
 He advocated a naval blockade as the best first response to the missile crisis . He served as JFK’s chief speechwriter .
 Sorenson helped Kennedy write the standard account of the crisis, Thirteen Days, in 1968 . Rusk had served in the State Department under President Truman during the Cold War .
 Rusk pressed for a “surgical” air strike, but with a prior warning to Castro and Khrushchev . Rusk was the most senior and experienced diplomat within ExComm .
 Rusk recommended that Robert Kennedy offer informal assurances to Soviet ambassador Dobrynin that the U.S. would withdraw its Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 The president routinely referred to Rusk as “Mr Secretary.” While other ExComm members were referred to by their first names or nicknames, he always addressed Rusk .
 "During the missile crisis, Bundy sat directly across from the president during ExComm meetings at the White House. Like JFK, he had served in the Navy during World War II."
 As a key member of Kennedy’s ExComm defense team, he objected strongly to an air strike and was one of the most persuasive advocates of the naval blockade . McNamara was very successful in his management of the Pentagon and Congress during the early 1960s .
 Gen. Eisenhower advocated a hard line toward the Soviets throughout the crisis . "Gen. Eisenhower: "He was very tough on the Soviets"
 Thompson supported the naval blockade and argued against trading American missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba . Thompson was one of the few ExComm members who didn’t hesitate to interrupt or correct the president .
 Nitze was instrumental in persuading JFK to accept Krushchev’s Oct. 1962 proposal and to ignore the second part of that communication that suggested a quid pro quo . Nitze urged immediate military action to take out the Cuban missile sites, saying they dramatically altered the strategic
 Nitze argued that U.S. military superiority in the Caribbean would prevent the USSR from retaliating for an American attack on Cuba .