 We're about to dive deep into a micro-portion of U.S. history . Hold onto your hats — we're going deep into the micro-section of United States history .
 Fear of weapons sitting 90 miles from U.S. boarders led to nationwide panic . The fear of weapons sat just 90 miles away led to the launch of a Naval blockade of Cuba .
 The event took place over 13 days and was dissolved when sitting president, John F Kennedy and Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev reached an agreement . The event was dissolved in a deal between the two countries .
 The United States would not invade Cuba, and the Soviet Union would remove missiles from Cuba . The U.S. would never invade Cuba and the Soviets would remove its missiles .
 Adlai Stevenson shows missiles to UN Security Council with David Parker standing . David Parker is standing in the frame of Adlay Stevenson's speech .
 The addition of missiles to Cuba was widely fueled by the Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961 . The invasion of Cuba was the result of a CIA mission to Cuba .
 The United States learned about the missiles from aerial photos taken by a Lockheed U-2 . Fidel Castro convinced Fidel Castro that a United States invasion was imminent .
 Fearing that such planes would be shot down, it took a high-altitude pass over the country but was still able to take images . Fearing such a pass over would have been shot down .
 On October 27th, 12 Navy ships found a Soviet Submarine outside of Cuba and began dropping explosives that would force it to surface . The sub was found by the U.S. Navy .
 The Soviet submarine was unaware if the war had begun or not . Not having had communication in days, the Soviet submarine did not know if it had begun .
 Soviet protocol required agreement by three onboard officers in order to launch a nuclear weapon . Three onboard officers were required to agree to launch nuclear weapons .
 Submarine's captain wanted to respond with a nuclear torpedo, however, another member, Vasili Arkhipov would not consent . The Submarine’s captain wanted the submarine to respond to the attack . The submarine's captain did not agree with the decision .
 It's widely agreed that having done so would have started a nuclear war . It’s widely agreed it would have done so .
 JFK obtained more than 12,000 Cuban cigars before enacting a trade embargo with Cuba in 1962 . The end of the crisis also ended Khrushchev's political reign .
 The Soviets disliked backing down from the event they say their leader initiated . The Soviets say they didn't back down .
 Khrushchev held office for two more years, but the event weakened his power and trust from the people . The event is said to have weakened his authority and trust .
 Because of the crisis, the White House added a phone line that went directly to the Kremlin . This weakened the relationship between Cuba and the Soviets, with Casto angered he hadn’t been involved .
 Today, the access operates by lightning-fast email/chat and is called Washington–Moscow Direct Communications Link . The link is called D.C. Link and operates by email and chat .
 It was the only time the U.S. has been at DEFCON 2 — that’s Defense Readiness Condition . The United States has never been at such a high level of readiness .