 If Russia were to move in that direction, we would deal with it decisively, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We would deal [with] it decisively if it goes that way"
 Russia has announced the possibility of a military deployment to Cuba and Venezuela if talks with the West on Ukraine fail to go their way . Russia has also warned the latest discussions with NATO were hitting a dead end .
 The Biden administration responded to threats from Russian officials vowing a decisive response if it sees any evidence that the threat is real . Biden administration responds to threats by vowing to respond if they see any evidence .
 Sergei Ryabkov told Russian television he could neither confirm nor exclude sending military assets to Cuba and Venezuela if talks fail . He said he could not exclude sending assets to Venezuela and Cuba if talks failed .
 Russian official: "It all depends on the action by our U.S. counterparts" Ryabkov: Moscow could take military-technical measures if the United States provokes the Kremlin and turns up military pressure .
 Putin voiced concern that NATO could potentially use Ukrainian territory for deployment of missiles capable of reaching Moscow in just five minutes . Putin noted that Russian warships armed with the latest Zircon hypersonic cruise missile would give Russia a similar capability if deployed in neutral waters .
 Putin said Zircon flies at nine times the speed of sound to a range of more than 1,000 kilometers . Putin said it is hard to intercept and could be fitted with conventional or nuclear warheads . Putin: "Zircon, which Putin said flies at 9 times speed of
 The ship is set to be commissioned by the Russian navy later this year . It will be installed aboard its frigates and submarines . The Russian navy is expected to use it as a weapon for the next few years .
 Russia is preparing to fabricate claims of an imminent Ukrainian attack on Russian forces as a pretext for invasion, U.S. national security adviser says . Jake Sullivan said the US had intelligence that Russia was preparing to use the claims as pretext for invading Ukraine .
 Sullivan said the administration would share more of the intelligence in the following 24 hours . Sullivan said that the administration will share more information in the next 24 hours.
 "We’re in communication with the Russians, and we’ll see what comes next," says President Obama . "It’s a good thing for the U.S. to be in contact with Russia," says Obama .
 That wasn't raised in the discussions at the Strategic Stability Dialogue . That wasn’t raised in discussions .
 Tensions have been rising between Washington and Moscow since December . Russia began amassing tens of thousands of troops on its border with Ukraine in December .
 Russian officials, including President Vladimir Putin, have not ruled out an invasion of Syria . Russian officials have said they will not rule out a Russian invasion .
 Talks have taken place among Russian, American, European, and NATO officials over the past three days across Europe . Officials have not reported any breakthroughs in the talks .
 Russian diplomats had not mentioned the prospect of military deployments in Cuba or Venezuela during their meetings, Sullivan said . Sullivan said that the Russian diplomats did not mention the possibility of a military deployment .
 The crisis ended after then-US President John F Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed that Moscow would withdraw its missiles in exchange for Washington’s pledge not to invade Cuba and removal of United States missiles from Turkey .
 Some Cuban exiles have been closely watching the Biden administration’s standoff with Russia and China . They hope that a new geopolitical realignment would entice the administration to claim Cuba in the United States circle of influence and more actively seek regime change .
 Ryabkov’s comments could add to the speculation that the Caribbean island could again become entangled in a replay of the Cuban missile crisis .
 The governments of Cuba and Venezuela have not publicly responded to the comments . The governments are not publicly responding to the reports .
 The Cuban Embassy in Washington did not immediately respond to a request for comment . The Cuban embassy in Washington has not commented on the matter .
 Russia has become closer to Cuba, approving loans and increasing military cooperation . As tensions grew between Havana and Washington during the Trump administration, Russia became closer to the island .
 Russian official: A “robust’s presence in Cuba would bring millions in spending for infrastructure upgrades of airports and ports . A senior-level official of the Russian Ministry of Defense quoted by the U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council estimated that a ‘rob
 Up to 2,500 Russian civilian and military forces in Cuba could bring $100 million annually to the Cuban government . The Russian official estimated the economic impact of the Russian presence in Cuba would be worth $100million annually .
 Russia could also pay an additional fee to Cuban authorities as it did in the past for hosting the Lourdes intelligence listening post near Havana . Russia also could pay an extra fee to Cuba for hosting a listening post .
 Russia briefly dispatched a pair of its nuclear-capable Tu-160 bombers to Venezuela in a show of support for Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro in December 2018 .
 Russia increased its economic involvement in the oil sector in Venezuela, helping the country skirt U.S. sanctions . Russia also increased its role in Venezuela to skirt United States sanctions . The country has been hit hard by the sanctions .
 According to U.S. officials at the time, Russia also played a role in convincing Venezuela’s Nicolás Maduro to stay in power when the opposition attempted to flip top military leaders in 2019 . The opposition was trying to oust Maduro from power in Venezuela .
 The interim government led by Juan Guaidó, which the U.S. recognizes as the country’s legitimate authority, rejected Ryabkov's comments in “categorical” terms . The interim Venezuelan government is led by the interim government .
 Kremlin spokesman: There could be a complete rupture in US-Russian relations if proposed sanctions are adopted . Putin and other top civilian and military leaders could be hit by proposed sanctions .
 Senate Democrats have also proposed targeting leading Russian financial institutions if Moscow sends troops into Ukraine . Senate Democrats want to target financial institutions in response to Russia's intervention .
 Peskov criticized the proposals as an attempt to up the pressure on Moscow during the talks, saying it wouldn’t work . Peskov said the proposals were an attempt by Russia to up pressure on the Kremlin during talks .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov denounced the proposed sanctions as a reflection of U.S. “arrogance” Russia expects a written response to its demands from the United States and NATO next week in order to mull further steps . Lavrov: Moscow expects written response from the U.
 Peskov rebuffed the West’s calls for Russia to help de-escalate tensions by pulling back troops from areas near Ukraine . Peskov says Russia is free to move troops wherever it wants on its own territory .
 Russia says it's hardly possible for NATO to dictate to us where we should move our armed forces on Russian territory . Russian President Vladimir Putin says NATO should not dictate where to move its forces .
 NATO said it was willing to talk to Russia about arms control and missile deployments to avert the risk of war in Europe . Moscow said the situation was ""very dangerous"" and the way forward was unclear . NATO said they were willing to discuss arms control with Russia .
 NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said the alliance was willing to hold arms talks but would not allow Moscow to veto Ukraine's ambition to join NATO one day . Russia says it will not yield on a core demand on which it says it won't yield on joining NATO . NATO
 With tens of thousands of combat-ready troops, armed with heavy capabilities, the U.S. is on the brink of war .
 NATO Foreign Ministers called again on Russia to remove its forces from Ukraine and from your Ukraine’s borders . NATO foreign ministers called again this week on Russia's withdrawal from Ukraine .
 Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Alexander Grushko said Moscow was ready to talk about weapons deployment and verification measures . He said Moscow would not allow its proposals to be cherry-picked . Russia's deputy foreign minister said Moscow is ready to discuss weapons deployment .
 Russia could not take seriously NATO's claim to be a defensive alliance that posed no threat to it, Grushko said . Russia would respond symmetrically to any attempt to contain or intimidate it, he said .
 Russia denies planning to invade Ukraine but says it needs a series of guarantees for its own security . Russia says it wants a halt to further NATO expansion and withdrawal of alliance forces from central and eastern European nations that joined it after 1997 .
 Russia has strongly repeated its demand that NATO will not expand eastwards . NATO has rejected that by the military alliance amid a Russian troop buildup near Ukraine . The Russian government has strongly rejected NATO's decision to expand eastward .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov described Moscow’s demands that NATO will neither expand nor deploy forces to Ukraine and other ex-Soviet nations as essential for the progress of diplomatic efforts to defuse tensions over Ukraine .
 NATO forces and weapons near Russia’s borders pose a security challenge that must be addressed immediately, he said . He argued that the deployment of NATO forces near Russia's borders poses a security risk .