 The crisis was boththeoutcomeof yearsofcold warcompetitionandacontributingcauseof subsequent events, since later actions were influenced by perceptions of what had happened and why .
 As the crisis recedes into history and becomes part of our national mythology, the messages people derive from it continue to influence our expectations about how national leaders should behave . The crisis has become part of the national mythology .
 If the crisis was President John F Kennedy’s ”finest hour,“ then other presidents should emulate his behavior, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Kennedy's courage, resolve, and fearlessness in facing the Soviet Union is seen as especially fine about his actions . His courage and resolve are seen as particularly fine in facing Soviet Union, he says . He says the "finest hour" interpretation is the dominant one .
 The image of the President as fearless leader remains a powerful force in our political culture . President Obama's image of himself as a fearless leader is still powerful in American politics .
 Given the vast destructive powers of both nuclear and conventional weapons and the urgent need for global cooperation, I believe that this image is a dangerous and destructive one . The image of the world's nuclear weapons is dangerous and dangerous, he says .
 Even with the end of the Cold War, this image remains as a stimulus to reckless deeds and an obstacle to actions that are necessary to secure peace . The image is still a stimulus for reckless deeds, and is an obstacle .
 President Bush’s policies in Panama and the Persian Gulf are under fire . His policies have been criticized in the wake of the Panama crisis and the Gulf crisis .
 Kennedy’s actions during the Cuban crisis are important to continue to assess . For these reasons, I think it is important to try to derive the proper lessons from this assessment .
 Kennedy acted well in certain respects and badly in others, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says Kennedy acted badly in some respects but well in others . He says it's important to separate out those positive aspects of what he did from negative aspects .
 If Kennedy is to be emulated, let it be selective emulation, and if he is criticized, it is necessary to make clear what he is being criticized for . Kennedy is not being emulated in the way he should be, he says .
 The crucial fact about the Cuban missile crisis is that there was a serious risk of nuclear conflict between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The crisis was centered around the threat of a nuclear war between the two countries .
 A central question in assessing Kennedy’s actions is whether this risk was justified or not . Kennedy's actions were justified, but not justified, according to CNN.com .
 In thinking about Kennedy’s actions, one might expect that those who believe that the risks that he ran were justified would hold that he acted admirably . Those who think that Kennedy ran unnecessary risks would think that . He acted in a way that should be condemned .
 Kavka’s discussion is of specialinterestbecause he both assesses Kennedy's actions and tries to shed light on the role of moral reasoning in political decision-making . His views raise central questions about the relationship between politics and morality .
 Kennedy’s actions from a moral perspective, he says . First, he wants to evaluate Kennedy's actions from the moral perspective .
 Kennedy’s actions show that political decision-makers operate with a different mind set from that of moralists, he says . Second, he wants to explain Kennedy's actions by showing that political decisions are made by political decision makers, he adds .
 Kavka: Recognizing this fact is necessary in order to understand and assess Kennedy's actions properly . Recognizing Kennedy’s actions is necessary to assess his actions properly, Kavko says .
 Kavka: 'If one overlooks this KENNEDY AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS CRISIS 95 distinction, one will simply condemn Kennedy for ‘what he did.’ He says .
 Kavka wants to shield Kennedy from such condemnation and even to praise him for an admirable performance, in spite of the fact that he condemns Kennedy's actions for their morally unjustified riskiness .
 I agree with Kavka that Kennedy’s performance during the crisis was in many ways admirable . Kennedy's performance was admirable, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Kennedy resisted pressures to initiate an immediate air strike against missile sites . He wanted to avoid large scale casualties, partly to avoid escalation, and to avoid putting the Soviets in a position where they would be forced to retaliate .
 When an American U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba, he resisted pressures to retaliate against anti-aircraft weapons in Cuba . The Cuban government resisted pressure to retaliate .
 He ignored a second, more demanding letter from Khrushchev and replied to an earlier, more conciliatory one . After the Soviets agreed to withdraw the missiles, he praised Khruschev for statesmanlike behavior . He ignored the second and third demanding letter, and after the Soviets
 Throughout the crisis, he tried to think through the implications of his actions and took many precautions to avoid accidents or misunderstandings .
 Kennedy could have done nothing about the Soviet missiles-which some believed did not genuinely threaten the U.S. Some believed they did not threaten the United States . Kennedy could not have done anything about the missiles .
 He could have initiated private talks with the Soviets or worked through the U.N. to have the missiles removed . The missiles were removed by the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy turned down the offer of a public trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for US. missiles in Turkey . Instead, he ordered a blockade, which is an act of war, and announced it to the world .
 Kennedy seemed willing to initiate an air attack on the missile sites if the Soviets did not back down, in spite of his belief that this might well lead to nuclear war . Kennedy was willing to attack the sites if they refused to back down .
 In short, Kennedy risked a possible nuclear war with the Soviet Union, even though there were less risky alternatives . Kennedy risked the risk of a nuclear war even though it was a less risky option . Kennedy's risky choice was to go nuclear with the Soviets .
 Given the extreme destruction that a nuclear war would have caused, avoiding such a war should have been the President‘s highest priority,’s. President Obama .
 Kennedy gambled with the chance of nuclear war for the sake of international and domestic political gains . Yet, as Kavka notes, he gambled on the risk of war .
 He can be said to have acted wrongly from a moral point of view . For this reason, he can be seen as having acted wrongly in the way he did .
 Kavka then sets out to explain the moral implications of his actions . He says they are condemnable from a moral point of view .
 He wants to explain how Kennedy and his advisers could have been led to run these risks . He doesn't believe that Kennedy and advisers were ”bad people”
 He wants an explanation of their actions that will shield them from a strongly negative moral judgment . Second, believing that they were not bad people, he wants to know more about their actions .
 It includes characteristic ways of defining problems, searching for and selecting solutions, and interpreting the behavior of others, as well as assumed constraints on actions and policies .
 From a decision-maker’sperspective, there may have been good reasons for acting, even though these actions would be disapproved by someone operating from a “moralist’s”mind set . Within different mind sets, different sorts of reasons are operative
 Kavka appears to think that moralists like Russell failed to appreciate the context of Kennedy’s decision-making, just as Kennedy failed to see the situation in the way that Russell did .
 Reasons that are decisive within one framework may have little or no weight in others . Thus, reasons that were decisive within a framework may not have little weight .
 People operating within different mind sets will have difficulty understanding one another and reach different conclusions about issues in dispute . Moreover, people operating in different minds sets will be able to understand each other's views .
 Kavka's mind sets are not entirely distinct or mutually impenetrable . Unlike Kuhn’s paradigms, Kavkas’ mind sets aren’t entirely distinct .
 Kavka discusses two possible models for how mind sets might interrelate . He also discusses two models of mind sets interrelating .
 For Kavka, mind sets may either be nested within one another or overlap with one another . Mind sets can be nested or overlap or nested within each other . For more information, visit www.kavka.com .
 If the decision-maker’s mind set is nested within the moral mind set, then political decision-making is just a special application of moral principles . Political decisions could not turn out that an action is morally wrong but politically right, he says .
 He believes moral and political mind sets overlap with one another . He believes that moral, political mindsets overlap with each other .
 Adecision might be justified within one mind set while being questionable or wrong within another . While they share some features, they are different enough to justify adecision in one mind .
 Kavka characterizes the political decision-maker's mind set by spelling out three principles of international politics and one axiom of domestic politics . He claims that they shaped Kennedy’s thinking during the crisis .
 Kavka explains why Kennedy imposed the blockade, rather than seeking a diplomatic solution or ordering an air strike . He says Kennedy’s mind set was to impose the blockade .
 Following the third norm, he felt a strong need to resist a challenge to the balance of power, and this justified strong action in response . Therefore, following the third . norm, the . president felt he felt the need to . resist a . challenge to . the balance . of power
 The second norm, prohibiting surprise attacks on smaller powers, counted against a military strike against Cuba . In spite of this need for decisive action, the second norm was not allowed to be considered .
 By invoking the notion of a political decision-maker’s mind set and by laying out some KENNEDY AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS CRISIS 97 of the principles and axioms that constitute it, Kavka implicitly argues that Kennedy’
 These actions were reasonable from the decision-maker’s point of view . Even though they fail to pass the tests laid down by the moralist, they were reasonable .
 A ”good person’s reasoning from this perspective, could be led to these actions, even though the actions are not those that moral deliberation would bring one to adopt . Thus, a ‘good person,” reasoning . could be . led to such actions,
 If Kavka’s defense of Kennedy is to work, then a number of things must be true, he says . The defense of the former president is unlikely to work .
 First, the principles that make up the decision-maker’s mind set must be reasonable principles . “Reasonable principles’ are reasonable principles,” says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 If they are obviously outrageous and could not be adopted by a morally good person, then Kennedy’s following them will not shield him from criticism . Kennedy's following them won’t be adopted as morally good people, it will not be able to shield him .
 First, they must be distinct from moral principles, since they're supposed to be principles that a moralist would not use . Second, they are supposed to not use moral principles that would be used by moralists .
 They must either be unavoidable features of the decisionmaker’s situation or more appropriate for decision-makers to follow than are the principles that make up to the moral mind set . Third, they must be unavoidable or appropriate to follow, or not appropriate, to follow .
 We urge decision-makers to be moralists. If they are not, then we will simply reject the mind set and urge them to be .
 If Kavka's explanation of Kennedy’s actions is to work, then Kennedy must have acted in accord with these principles and not with those of the moralist . Kennedy must actually have acted on these principles, not on moralist principles .
 The principles Kavka describes do not differ from ones that are part of the moral mind set, he says . The principles he describes don't differ from those of moral mind sets, he adds .
 Where they do differ, the moral perspective is the superior one . Second, where they differ, it's the moral one .
 In some respects, Kennedy’s performance was more opportunistic and less principled than Kavka suggests . Kennedy's performance was opportunistic, less principled, says Kavko .
 In other respects, Kennedy’s approach was more like that which Kavka thinks would be recommended from the moralist's point of view . In other respect, Kennedy's approach was like that of a moralist, says the author .
 The first of Kavka’s “principles of international politics’’-that great powers should not suddenly upset the balance of power-sounds reasonable in the abstract . It does seem to explain both Kennedy's reaction to news of the missiles .
 As Kavka sees it, the Soviets violated this principle by placing the missiles in Cuba . As a result, he says, the U.S. violated the principle by putting the missiles there .
 Kavka suggests that a balance had existed and that its existence had contributed to peace and stability . By invoking the principle forbidding sudden alterations in the ”status quo balance of power” Kavaka suggests a balance has existed .
 The balance was wrong because it increased the danger of war, he said . 'Unpredicting the balance was right,' he said. 'It was wrong to upset the balance of war'
 In 1962, there was neither stability nor a balance of power in power in 1962 . In fact, however, there were no stability nor balance in the country's politics .
 The U-2 affair and the failed summit between Eisenhower and Khrushchev were just a few years past . The failed summit was the U.2-U.S. affair .
 From 98 STEPHEN NATHANSON their point of view is that they were trying to correct an imbalance of power . From 98 Stephanie's view, it was an attempt to correct a power imbalance in the world .
 Kennedy and his advisors recognized this as a possible Soviet motive for placing missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's advisors recognized that this may have been a possible motive .
 President Obama sought to preserve U.S. nuclear superiority and unchallenged political dominance in the Western hemisphere . He and his advisers wanted to preserve America's nuclear superiority .
 Kennedy and his predecessors had achieved this, even though Soviet bluffs had obscured this fact . As for nuclear superiority, Kennedy and predecessors had . achieved this . Kennedy and others had achieved nuclear superiority .
 Kennedy knew that the US had a distinct advantage, and he was committed to maintaining that . By 1962,however, he was determined to maintain that superiority .
 Castro government called this into question, but it did not upset a balance of power . As for political dominance, the Castro government said this was called into question . The Castro government was criticized for its political dominance .
 Kavka’s third norm calls for strong actions against upsetting the balance of power . The missile crisis was resistance to actions that tended to equalize the relation between Soviet and American forces .
 The norm that Kennedy acted on called for sustaining US.advantages in the distribution of power . Kennedy acted for sustaining U.S. advantages in distribution of the .
 The idea of perpetuating a balance carries an aura of fairness and stability with it . That may be reasonable, but it may not be as uncontroversial as the idea of a balance .
 In this sense, the balance of power is simply the current distribution of power . "Balance of power" is based on the distribution of the power in a democracy, says David Cameron .
 If power is badly distributed so that some can dominate others or so that instability exists, then there is no reason to be committed to preserving the balance . The balance of power should be kept in balance .
 It could be supported by appeal to justice, to the idea that all should possess the degree of power that justice recommends . Then, maintaining it could be . supported by appealing to justice . It could also support the idea of all being able to possess the power that Justice recommends .
 If all have their fair share, this may well contribute to peace, it may well be peace, says author .
 There is no inconsistency between this principle and the way of thinking that we might attribute to moralists. Preserving a balance in this sense has much to recommend it. Preserve a balance of this sense of preserving a balance, however, .
 In this form, the balance of power principle would be supported by moralists since it is justified by appeal to both justice and peace . In this case, it would be justified by appealing to both peace and justice .
 On this interpretation, there would be no serious difference between the moral and the political mind sets in their response to maintaining a balance of power, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 To preserve the distinction, one might argue that this notion of a balance of power is not one to which decision-makers are likely to be committed . But it's not likely that decision makers will be committed to this notion .
 Decision-makers are committed to acquiring and preserving the most favorable balance of power that they can obtain for their own country . Perhaps decision-makers want to preserve and preserve the best possible balance of powers .
 Moralists might have a hard time accepting moralists might be hard to accept . Yet, we might reasonably expect decision-makers to hold to a principle that we might expect .
 As I have argued above, what he sought was military and political superiority . He sought to achieve military superiority in order to achieve power .
 The balance of power will be acceptable to persons making moral judgments if balance is an ideal that is conducive to peace, he says . He says .
 If it means a distribution of power that favors one side, then it's not obvious that it is an acceptable principle . Even if leaders adhere to it, it is not obvious if it is acceptable principle, even if leaders follow it .
 If that is what Kennedy pursued, Kavka should simply say that Kennedy pursued a policy of maintaining superiority . If that's what he did, it would be a policy to maintain superiority, he should have been a policy .
 Such a policy might be justified if it were the only way to preserve other important values, or if one were actually at war and seeking victory . The policy might not be justified, but it might be necessary to protect other values, he says .
 Kennedy and other leaders did see the United States as involved in a long term war with the Soviet Union . Much of U.S. policy during the Cold War rested on just such an assumption .
 Kavka’s failure to include it is a serious omission from his explanation is serious . To the extent that this assumption was important to Kennedy's choices, it's an important omission .
 Kennedy and his main advisors did not think that the missiles in Cuba produced a serious alteration in the military balance . Kennedy's main advisors thought the missiles would not alter the balance of the military .
 It is hard to see how anyone would think that risking a nuclear war was justified by the need to maintain perceptions of power . What it did affect, however, was that the President was undoubtedly concerned .
 The more this factor is emphasized, the less reasonable do Kennedy’s actions look . Kennedy's actions look reasonable, the more reasonable do his actions look.
 Kavka says Kennedy did not order the air strike because of a principle forbidding the carrying out of attacks on a small ower . He says the principle is that a principle forbids attacks on small owers is forbidden .
 It's hard to believe that this was a norm that either Kennedy or Kennedy adhered to . Nonetheless, it is hard to imagine that this wasn't a norm .
 President Kennedy authorized the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, and after its failure, his administration continued to support covert attacks on Cuba . After the failure, the CIA attempted to assassinate Fidel Castro .
 The proposed air strike against the missiles was supported by many of Kennedy’s advisers and was widely seen as the next step for the U.S. to take . In addition, the proposed strike was widely supported by some of Kennedy's advisers .
 Robert Kennedy told Ambassador Dobrynin that an air strike would be launched within twenty-four hours if the Soviets did not announce that the missiles would be removed . Robert Kennedy said that the Soviets would not have to remove missiles .
 Kennedy was both opportunistic and less principled than Kavka’s description of these norms suggest . Kennedy was more opportunistic, less principled, than his critics say .
 From another point of view, Kennedy may have been more of a moralist than Kavka believes . Kennedy may not have been the moralist, but he may be more of an artistist than a politician .
 In March 1987, Dean Rusk, Kennedy’s Secretary of State, revealed that Kennedy was willing to make a public swap of Cuban for Turkish missiles . In March of 1987, after the publication of Kavka’�s paper, .
 If Khrushchev had not agreed to remove the missiles, an intermediary would have contacted U.N. secretary General U Thant and asked him to propose the missile swap . Kennedy would not agree to a Soviet demand to remove our missiles from Turkey .
 Kennedy might have been willing to make a public swap of missiles in Cuba for those in Turkey in order to avoid a nuclear war . Kennedy's advisers didn't know until recently that he might have made the move .
 Kennedy may have been willing to take domestic political risks if that were necessary to avoid nuclear war . It indicates that Kennedy may be willing to risk his political risks to avoid war .
 At the crucial time, Kennedy, like Khrushchev, was willing to blink, that he realized that none of the political gains or losses involved in the crisis could justify a nuclear war . If this was his plan, it also shows that at the crucial .
 In the end, the reasons that count most for Kavka’s ‘moralist’ may have counted most for Kennedy as . If this is so, it casts further doubt on the description of the different mind sets .
 The Axiom of Domestic Politics is an axiom of domestic politics . The lack of a sharp distinction between moral and political perspectives becomes even clearer when we look at the aspect of the decision-maker’s mind set .
 More than any of the principles that Kavka formulates, this one seems to reveal an especially sharp dichotomy between the moralist’smind set and that of the political decisionmaker . The moralist'smind is a strong contrast to the political decisions made by the
 It suggests that an option that is backed by morally compelling reasons may be completely ”eliminated from consideration” for political reasons . It suggests a morally compelling option that may be backed by moral reasons may not be considered for consideration .
 A reason that might count decisively for the moralist may carry no weight at all for the decision-maker . A reason might count for a moralist but carries no weight for a decision maker . A moralist might have a moral point of view, but the decision maker may not,
 Political decision-maker's approach, unlike moralist’s, is opportunistic, unprincipled, even amoral . The axiom suggests that the political decision-makers are opportunistic and amoral, unlike the moralist's .
 The relatively neat contrast that Kavka draws here depends, however, on oversimplifications of both the moral and the decision-maker’s perspectives . The relatively nice contrast depends on both moral and decision-making perspectives .
 Kavka assumes that the moral point of view is inherently globalist or universalist, while the decision-maker’s perspective is nationalist . The moral point-pointing point-of-view is not universalist or globalist .
 His main discussion seems to assume both that a decision-maker’s specialconcern for his or her own country is purely political and amoral . And that the moralist, by virtue of his . or her universalist perspective, cannot recognize moral obligations to particular persons or groups
 In fact, political leaders do have genuine, nonglobal, moral duties, and this is the case . Political leaders do not need to be seen as immoral, but they have moral duties .
 In short, Kavka’s contrast depends on an inaccurate portrayal of both moralists and decisionmakers, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 We can accept Kavka’s view that moralists are committed to some version of universal morality . But moralists must condemn special obligations or fail to recognize the duties that go with specific positions .
 A universal morality may permit or even require that parents devote special care to their own children, that children show special regard for their parents, that physicians make special efforts toward their own patients .
 A president has a duty to be specially concerned about the well-being of his own country . Likewise, a president, by virtue of his position, has a right to be concerned about his country .
 That is not to say that he should be indifferent to the well-being of people in other countries, he says . That's not the case for him, he adds .
 By accepting his office, he swears to devote his energies and attentions to his own country, and he has a higher duty to it than he does to others . Nonetheless, by accepting his . office he . swears . to devote . energies and . attentions . to his
 "If they fail to do so, then they will ignore important considerations and will necessarily arrive at a defective moral assessment of a situation," he says .
 In a democracy, elected officials have a duty to be responsive to the will of the people, says Sen. John McCain . Sen. McCain: "In a democracy. elected officials must be responsive"
 The President is not supposed to possess the unlimited discretion of a Hobbesian sovereign in judging what policies to adopt . The President should not be allowed to choose what policies he chooses to adopt, says Mr Obama .
 He is supposed to consider what the citizens want or believe to be right . He should consider what he thinks is right, rather than what he believes is right .
 He is supposed to deal with members of Congress, who are also elected to represent the views of the people . He's supposed to be dealing with Congress .
 From a moral point of view, it is ordinarily wrong for a president to take actions that have no political support, and he may be required to act in certain ways because they have broad support or are accepted as the policy of the nation .
 Kennedy might have dismissed certain options because they lacked political support or pursued others because they were widely supported . This does not show that he was acting from a perspective that is separate from or alien to morality . Kennedy may have dismissed some options because of political support .
 Kennedy made his own assessment of the public mood without any real opportunity for the public to express its views . Having said this, however, it is worth noting that in fact Kennedy made .
 Perhaps the public at large would have preferred options that were different from those he thought would be preferred . Perhaps he would prefer options that would be different from what he thought was preferred .
 Congress should have been consulted prior to initiating a blockade . A blockade is an act of war and Congress alone has the Constitutional power to declare war . Congress alone can declare war.
 Kennedy might well be criticized for failure to act within the limits of his office . If one believes in the importance of procedures for consultation and for democratic approval of actions, Kennedy might be criticized .
 Kennedy ran unnecessary risks of nuclear war, which can be condemned from the perspective of a globalist morality and a concern for the real interests of the nation . Similarly, to the extent that Kennedy ran risks of war, this can also be condemned not only from the . perspective of globalist
 A president who unnecessarily risks nuclear war jeopardizes his own country and its citizens, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "A president who jeopardizes the well-being of other peoples"
 Kennedy had a moral obligation to respect public opinion, and a moralist would recognize this, he says . Kennedy had to respect the public opinion of his actions .
 The axiom of domestic politics is not necessarily in conflict with morality, as Kavka seems to suggest . Domestic politics does not necessarily conflict morality with morality . Domestic policy is a matter of principle, not morality .
 Kennedy may have been less deferential to public opinion and the national interest than he ought to have been . Second, however, Kennedy may in fact have been more deferential than he should have been.
 Moralists and Morality analysis is valuable because it calls attention to the fact that decision-maker’s operate under special constraints . Decision-makers operate under different constraints, says Kavka . Moralists, Morals and Morals are moralizing and ethical .
 For this reason, their practice may embody principles that do not normally enter into moral evaluations . For example, the practice of sexual violence in the U.S. is illegal in the country .
 His sharp distinction between the two mind sets, however, seems to be both misleading and dangerous . He says the distinction between mind sets is misleading .
 By using this term, he unintentionally suggests that morality is the special concern of a restricted class of people who have a narrow perspective on events . This is not the case of morality, but morality should be a matter of concern for a narrow class .
 Decision-makers may ignore moral considerations because these are, after all, only the views of so-called “moralists,” people with a mind set that differs from that of decision-makers . It suggests that decision makers may ignore morality because of the view of moralists
 People who were appalled by the risks that were taken during the Cuban missile crisis were not special types of people, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: The risks were not the only people appalled by what happened .
 "They were simply people who thought that the pursuit of national power or ideological victory did not justify the risk of millions of people being killed," says the author of the book .
 Political decision-makers should avoid taking risks of political risks, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Politicians should be careful not to take risks, he says. Politicians need to be careful of the risks .
 Since Kavka claims that the moral and political mind sets do overlap, he could accept many of the points I have made. Since he claims that he could agree with many of his points he could .
 His use of the term ”moralist” may unwittingly lend support to the idea that an amoral perspective is part of the mind set appropriate to political decision-makers . Nonetheless, his contrast between different mind sets and his use of . the term 'moralist' may unwittingly
 I do not think, however, that we ought to recognize these views as legitimate or justified . I think we should recognize them as legitimate and justified, but not legitimate .
 At the least, morality places constraints on the means by which we may pursue our goals, and it may require the adoption of certain ends as well . morality may require us to adopt certain ends, as well as those of us .
 When officials become so narrowly focused on their special duties and lose sight of other moral obligations, this is a perversion and distortion of the inevitable specialization and role responsibilities that are part of life .
 People who slip into narrow perspectives and ignore moral values may well be ”bad people,” even if, in some sense, they mean to do no harm and are acting for the best as they see it . Even if they mean no harm, they may be bad people,
 Khrushchev said such distortions are dangerous and need to be rejected . Khrushchevitch said that such distortions were dangerous in the wake of the crisis .
 Kavka must be right to talk about distinct mind sets, and any denial of this is implausible . Thus, Kavaka must have been right to say this .
 He must also be right that the moral and political mind sets overlap but only partially, he says .
 Political leaders do consider moral reasons in making decisions, but there are other factors that they consider as well . Political leaders consider moral and political factors in making such decisions .
 The overlapping view, rather than the nesting model, must be correct . Thus, the overlapping view is correct . The nesting model is correct, and the view is overlapping .
 This objection is at least partly correct, but it requires me to make my view more complex, rather than to reject anything 1have defended . This objection requires us to make our views more complex rather than reject anything we defend .
 Political leaders tend to be psychologically attuned to certain kinds of factors in ways that non-politicians are not . I accept it as a plausible psychological claim that political leaders have characteristic ways of thinking .
 Philosophers, carpenters, nurses, and police officers acquire habits of thought and tendencies to be aware or unaware of certain kinds of factors .
 A full explanation of why someone acts in a certain way may well include some reference to these mind sets . When they make decisions, these differing mind sets no doubt have their effect, and a full explanation may likely include these .
 Notice that this explanatory function of mind sets has no normative implications . Notice, however, that this is not the case for mind sets to be used .
 O It may explain their response to a situation without saying anything about whether it was justified . O it may explain the response without saying whether it is justified . It may also explain the reaction to a crisis without saying if it was necessary .
 Where Kavka goes wrong is in suggesting that mind sets play a genuinely normative, justificatory role when, at most, they can only explain what someone does . The author of the book "Kavka" says he's wrong to suggest that a mind set can explain what
 Suppose that Kennedy did act according to the principles Kavka describes, and suppose further that these are characteristic of the political leader’s mind set . If Kennedy acted according to these principles, he would have been a better leader .
 In fact, one might point to this mind set as a kind of deformation that occurs when people are in political life . One might lament the fact that political life makes people less moral, and one might lament that .
 It is possible to admit the truth of the mind set thesis as a psychological explanation without embracing Kavka's claim that because the moral and political mind sets only partially overlap, a political leader’s actions may only be partly assessable by moral standards . So, it is possible
 In this connection, it is important to see that while the overlapping model may be correct psychologically, the nesting model is normatively correct . The nesting model may not be right psychologically .
 Political decisions are "nested within" morality, but they are candidates for moral evaluation, that morality applies to them . For, in one sense, to say that political decisions are “nested” within morality is only to say they are .
 At the least, a knowledge of moral principles must be supplemented by factual premises and other beliefs that incorporate the political leader’s skills . At the very least, the moral principle must be followed by facts and facts .
 The latter don’t derive from morality itself and hence are not “nested within“ it’s” it . The latter are not the products of morality itself .
 It includes much that is not part of morality itself and includes much not of morality . The moral mind set is only partially overlapping with the moral mindset of morality, he says .
 This does not imply, however, that the carpenter’sactions are free from moral assessment, and the same is true of the political leader . The carpenter's actions should not be judged by moral assessment .
 Political leaders are required to consider other people’s views of what is right or wrong . Political leaders tend to look especially unprincipled, and that is the case .
 "Ideally, they possess this power not for themselves or for virtue of who they are," she says . "They possess it not for self-interest or virtue, but for virtue, who are"
 "They possess this power in order to be able to act on behalf of others who have their own views about what is right and wrong"
 The traditional problem of whether representatives are supposed to do what their constituents approve or simply vote their consciences is one expression of the difficulties in this kind of role . The problem is whether representatives should do what they constituents approve .
 Political leaders do not exempt them from moral demands, says Julian Zelizer . Political leaders should not be exempt from moral obligations, he says . Politicians must be morally right to take action, he adds .
 The mind set hypothesis cannot be invoked to justify immoral actions, but it is relevant to questions about the moral character of decision-makers . One might object that while the mind set . cannot be used to justify . immoral actions .
 If part of the explanation of their actions is that they have a distinct mind set, this may show that even though they have acted wrongly , they need not have been bad people . Even though they've acted wrongly, they need to not be bad people.
 Their persons and characters need not be negatively evaluated from a moral point of view, even if their actions are. The people and characters of these people should not be judged as moral .
 The experience of being a political leader may alter one’s thinking or emotions in ways that make certain kinds of immoral actions more likely . Mind sets, then, are relevant to evaluation of agents, even if they are not relevant to the evaluation of actions .
 The fact that this has occurred may then be a kind of excusing condition so that acting badly does not show one to have been a bad person . The fact of this is then considered an excusement condition . It is then an excuse for people to act badly .
 Political leaders may, for example, have certain pressures on them that the rest of us are free of . This may make them more subject to certain kinds of temptations or errors . Political leaders can be more susceptible to temptations and errors .
 In evaluating them as persons, so the objection goes, we need to keep these things in mind . The objection is that they are not persons, but people are persons .
 This objection urges us to be generous in evaluating our leaders when they do wrong, and there is surely something correct about it . There are surely something wrong about it, and it's right .
 When we criticize leaders like Kennedy and think less well of them because of their wrongful actions, our criticism is not merely personal . Our criticism of Kennedy should not be personal, it should be more of a matter of principle .
 "I have no desire to evaluate Kennedy the man, but I do think it's important for us to evaluate JFK the president," he says . "I'm not interested in evaluating Kennedy the president. I'm interested in his legacy," he adds .
 The way in which we evaluate political leaders is one means by which we create standards and expectations that apply to current and future leaders . The reason for this, as I suggested at the start of this paper, is that .
 There is an important political dimension to what may appear to be merely personal assessments of the characters of our leaders. Hence, there is a political dimension, says David Frum .
 If we are too generous in exempting leaders from blame, we may help to create the standards that permit current and future leaders to act badly . If we're too generous we may create standards that allow leaders to be exempt from blame .
 By being critical of past leaders, we create expectations for current leaders . We create expectations of current leaders. We need to be critical of our leaders, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If we praise Kennedy for facing down the Russians, we tell current presidents that that is how we want them to behave . Kennedy's actions would be a good example for current presidents to behave more like Kennedy's .
 "If we criticizehim, we indicate that we do not approve of such risks as Kennedy took," says CNN.com's John Sutter . If we criticize him, we say we approve such risks, he says .
 While I have been very critical of his use of this concept, I believe that it can be a valuable one . While I've been critical of him, I think he can be valuable one.
 In particular, it is useful for philosophers to apply their methods of analysis to filter out the presuppositions that underlie important policy decisions, says David Frum .
 By exposing these presuppositions, we can then test them to see if they are sensible . By exposing them, we will be able to find out if they're sensible .
 Kavka’s discussion is a valuable philosophical attempt to analyze and formulate the principles that underlie a decision of this sort . The discussion is valuable philosophical .
 Kavka is correct in thinking that the often unspoken and undefended assumptions may be the ones that crucially affect policy choices . He says the unspoken assumptions are often crucial to policy decisions .
 There are a few dangers that need to be avoided, however, if philosophers engage in this form of analysis . The dangers of using this type of analysis can be avoided .
 One danger is that of falling into a kind of rigid, platonistic conception of a particular mind set, as if there were one and only one distinctive way that “moralists”, political leaders, or others think, writes David Cameron .
 This error would obscure the fact that the very same person may shift from one mind set to another . This error is not only an error, but it is a mistake to think the same person could shift from mind to mind set .
 Kennedy and his advisors wrestled with the problems that faced them . Such shifts come through very clearly in the transcripts of the meetings at which Kennedy met with his advisors .
 At the very first of these meetings, on the morning of October 16, 1962, the President’s mind set is distinctly military in orientation . At the start of the meetings, President Nixon's mind set was distinctly military .
 The missiles need to be removed, and the main choices are an air strike and an invasion . The missiles must be removed . The main choices would be a air strike or an invasion, CNN's Peter Bergen says .
 At the end of the meeting, Kennedy appears to have settled on an air strike, though questions remain about a possible invasion . Kennedy seems to be settled on the air strike .
 The last words of the transcript record McGeorge Bundy injecting the idea that perhaps a ‘political track” might still be pursued . Bundy: "A political track’s still being pursued. A political track is still pursued"
 Early in the crisis, even though there is some attempt to understand the Soviets’motives, the mind set is distinctly self-centered . The Soviet mind set in the early 1980s was distinctly self centered .
 Kennedy shows little detachment from his own perspective or balance in thinking about the Soviets’ perspective . Kennedy shows no detachment from himself or balance between his perspective and that of the Soviets, he says .
 This comes out in a somewhat ludicrous fashion in the following exchange during the evening meeting of October 16 .
 Later in the crisis, Kennedy has a much broader, more diplomacy-oriented perspective on the situation . In contrast, he has a more diplomatic-oriented view of the crisis .
 Mind sets are not permanent features of people and their approach to problems, say experts . Mind sets can be a permanent feature of people's approach to solving problems, they say. Mind sets must be part of the solution .
 If this is so, we might do better to talk about ways in which people frame issues or problems, rather than to focus on allegedly permanent features of the people themselves . We might better talk about how people frame their problems, not how they frame issues .
 A mind set might be a tendency to frame problems in a certain way, but it would not be seen as excluding possible shifts of view as different features of a problem are given more or less prominence . Or a mind set may be seen in a way of framing problems in certain ways .
 One would not want to want the mind set concept to blind one to the occurrence of such shifts .
 There is another way in which the mind set concept might lead one to oversimplify . There is also another way that the concept might be misunderstood .
 By talking about the perspective of the political decision-maker or the moralist, one might take these as essential features of people in these roles . The moralist is a moralist or a political decision maker .
 To overlook the crucial role of history and historical experience is to overlook the importance of history, historian says .
 In particular, he overlooks the fact that the United States was engaged in a ""cold wnr"" against the Soviet Union . The United States had a long-standing relationship with Russia .
 Much of Kennedy's response to the crisis was dictated by the fact that he was the ""commander in chief"" and that we were engaged in a war with an enemy that we saw as powerful, dangerous, and bent on world domination .
 "This enemy would exploit any opportunities and would only be deterred by threats of force and evidence of willingness to fight off any ~hallenge. Moreover, this enemy would exploited any opportunities," says President Obama .
 Diplomatic replies to the missiles in Cuba were rejected and that the risk of nuclear war was one that Kennedy was willing to incur . In the context of these assumptions and commitments, it is not surprising that diplomatic replies were rejected, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Dulles wrote, ""Some say that we were brought to the verge of war. Some say that some say that . some say we were . brought to war. We were brought . to the brink of war," he wrote .
 The key difference is that by the end, Kennedy seems to have been sobered . "By the end of the night, Kennedy seemed to have sobered," he said .
 He s e e m to have concluded that going to the brink was too dangerous and that crises needed to be avoided . He concluded that crises should be avoided.
 This represented an important shift in the assumptions about how the cold war was to be conducted, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: This represented a shift in how the Cold War should be conducted .
 In appealing to mind sets as explanatory devices, we need to remember that there is an important historical dimension . Individuals need not be wedded to any particular mind sets, and individuals need no particular one .
 Shifts and changes of perspective are possible, though they may be more difficult for some to achieve than others . Shifts may be possible, but they may not be easy to achieve .
 One of the great dangers of appealing for unity on matters of foreign policy is that prejudices go unquestioned and our blind spots become more firmly entrenched . Where mind sets are especially dangerous is in their ability to block out considerations that are relevant to decision-making .
 If Kennedy acted admirably, this is not because we judge him from a special perspective, he says . In answering these questions, he takes it to be important that if Kennedy acted well, it's not because of his special perspective .
 It is because he took seriously the moral principles that applied to his decisions and acted on them conscientiously and skillfully, writes Simon Tisdall .
 If he is morally criticizable, it is because he failed to adhere to the same principles . If he's morally criticised, it's because he didn't adhere to these principles, he's not moral .
 The Cuban crisis was a complex set of events in the course of which he performed many actions and made many decisions . "It is not surprising that one might think that he acted well in some respects and badly in others," he says .
 When he took actions that increased the risk of nuclear war, he acted badly . When he acted with caution and restraint he acted well. Roughly, I would say that when he tookactions that increased risk of nuke war he acted bad, he said .
 It avoids the paradox in part by simply denying that overall Kennedy acted admirably . It avoids a paradox by simply saying that overall, Kennedy acted .
 Theodore Sorenson, Kennedy’s close advisor and speech writer, said the crisis was successfully resolved . “The past twenty-five years there has been a great deal of self-congratulation that a serious crisis had been successfully resolved,” he said .
 'Let us not forget that what we did in the first place was to bring the world closer to the brink of nuclear destruction than it has ever been'
 The first is that Kennedy did face a public that wanted tough actions against the Soviet Union . The public would have reacted badly to accommodation of Soviet interests .
 Kennedy contributed to the creation and continuation of this public mood, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Kennedy: "It's important to see that Kennedy himself contributed to this mood"
 Cold war politicians promoted their own careers by feeding the public a steady diet of calls for toughness against the Soviet enemy . He and other cold war politicians .
 When a crisis emerged, the President faced with a public that demanded the toughness he had promised, he was faced with the public . The public believed in the threat that had been described to them .
 He was faced with a public that saw things in stark black and white, good vs. evil terms . He was also faced with the public seeing him as a good and evil .
 Never were suggestions made or considered that the United States might be at all responsible for the long crisis . Never were suggested that the U.S. might be responsible .
 In the end, Kennedy and his advisors were trapped by their own rhetoric and by the picture of the world that they help to convey to the public . Kennedy was trapped by his own rhetoric .
 The missile crisis only put off this threat for a few years . However much one might think that the Soviet missiles in Cuba represented a threat to the United States, the fact remains .
 The Soviets increased their force of intercontinental missiles and submarine launched missiles . Within a relatively short time, the Soviets increased both intercontinental and submarine missiles .
 The level of vulnerability created by the missiles in Cuba was simply created in other ways, and, like it or not, we came to live with that threat . "The levels of vulnerability in Cuba were created in the other ways," says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Given that the situation we tried to prevent in Cuba came about anyway proved to be tolerable, it should be evident that it was not worth risking nuclear destruction .
 This point, which Kavka accepts, remains the central moral fact about the missile crisis . It is the one that ‘moralists’ have correctly emphasized. This point remains the . point of the crisis .
 A successful resolution of the crisis required that at least one of the central decision-makers would come to accept this “moralist’s” assessment, says Julian Zelizer .
 For a good summary of the crisis and a valuable selection of conflicting interpretations and evaluations, see Robert Divine, ed., The Cubnn Missile Crisis, 2nd ed. For a useful summary of this crisis and more conflicting interpretations of it, see Divine .
 All page references in the text will be to this version of Kavka’s essay . The essay will be published in the next edition of this article .
 Richard Barnet describes ‘the operational code of the national security managers,” but his account is severely critical . Barnet's account is not meant to support the view that this mind set is a reasonable one .
 This contains transcripts of the meetings of October 16 and summaries of later meetings . This includes transcripts of meetings from October 16 to October 18 .
 In support of Somerville, Somerville’s skepticism, it is odd that none of Kennedy's other advisors, including his brother Robert, appear to have known about this initiative .
 Bundy thinks that a tightening of the quarantine-rather than an air strike or a public trade-was the most likely next step for Kennedy . Bundy: A tightening of quarantine- rather than a air strike- is most likely step . Bundy says that a tightening of quarantine is the most