 Balfour's rise is what I believe to be the essential elements of his rise as outlined by Balfurour . They are what I think are the elements I believe are essential elements to his rise . They include the support for the president, support for his wife and family .
 He promised to carry out a number of social reforms and eventually to hold elections . He had not lost his populist touch, he said .
 The promises could not have been more cynical, for he began his new rule by suspending constitutional guarantees such as the right to strike, and abolishing both Congress and political parties, he says .
 Cuba's political system had been discredited by eight years of Autentico administration . Many Cubans welcomed his coup . Yet the political system of Cuba had been so discredited that many welcomed it, many say .
 A more serious split that led to punch-ups between members separated those who advocated peaceful resistance and others, led by Castro, who were campaigning for more violent methods .
 The timidity of the Ortodoxo leadership increasingly exasperated Castro . Castro was already organising a clandestine network and an underground press . Castro had already organised an underground network and underground press.
 In a repeat of the Machado years, several middle-class underground organisations were set up . One of these was the Movimiento Nacional Revolucionario, which tried unsuccessfully to carry out a coup within the army in 1953 .
 He planned to seize a military barracks in Santiago, the capital of Oriente province, calling on the people of Cuba to rise against the new dictator . Inspired by several famous incidents in Cuban history, he planned a coup .
 It was from here that the movements of independence had been launched against the Spanish colonialists occupying mainly the western provinces . The spark that had set alight the rebellions had been the seizure of barracks and the distribution of weapons .
 Cuba's east became Cuba's frontier land where escaped slaves and fugitives from the law found refuge . While the western provinces had been settled by immigrants, the east became the frontier land .
 East suffered the highest level of unemployment in the fifties . Oriente accounted for almost 30 per cent of the jobless . It had also been the scene of numerous slave revolts, and more recently of sugar workers' uprisings .
 Living standards were also considerably lower there than in the west and political dissatisfaction, consequently, was higher . Political dissatisfaction was also higher than political dissatisfaction in the West .
 The rebels were to seize the Moncada barracks and distribute arms to the people . The rebels are also to seize a barracks to distribute arms . The barracks were to be seized by the government .
 If the uprising were to fail, the rebels would retreat into the densely wooded mountains of the Sierra Maestra, there to begin a rural guerrilla campaign . The uprising is expected to last until the end of the month .
 The weakness of the plan rested on the faith that the people of Oriente would rise up spontaneously in response to the exemplary action of Castro's band . The plan was based on the hope that Oriente's people would rise spontaneously, but the plan failed .
 Castro and his men were fired on and forced to retreat before they could penetrate into the barracks square . Dressed in military uniform, Castro was fired on by his men . Castro was wearing military uniform when he was attacked .
 The attempted capture of the Moncada barracks on 26 July 1953 has been presented in some orthodox accounts as the first stage in a more or less defined strategy leading to the proclamation in 1961 of a Marxist-Leninist state .
 None of this proves that Castro was inspired by Marxist ideas or Leninist strategy, as he later claimed . It was likely therefore that he had already moved beyond a social democratic policy of radical reform within the existing political framework .
 The 26th July Movement, as it soon came to be called, had popular roots, unlike all the other anti-Batista underground groups except the Communists, but it was not a working-class organisation .
 The speech contained the blueprint of most of the social and economic reforms that the new regime would attempt to carry out after the victory of the Revolution in 1959 . A Historiographical Debate .
 They are right to point out the continuity of Castro's programme for reform . A Historiographical Debate on Castro's legacy in Cuba .
 Moncada action and the trial brought Castro vividly into the public eye . But in 1953, he was a Marti follower, tendance Marx, not the other way round .
 Batista was facing an upsurge of protest against his rule and responded by tightening his measures of repression . Batista responded to the protests by tightening measures of repressive measures of his rule .
 His followers on the island set to work to build the organisation from scratch . His followers set to set up the organisation .
 There was considerable support among Ortodoxo militants for Castro's strategy of armed resistance in contrast to the leadership's policy of political agitation .
 By early 1956, Castro felt sufficiently strong to break publicly with the Ortodoxo leadership and declare the new Movement . Castro was jailed in Mexico City after a police round-up .
 He took care also to spread wide his net of contacts . But it also marked his distance from the PSP, which was calling for non-violent, united-front policy .
 Ex-President Prio, now in exile in Miami, made large contributions to the Movement in Cuba .
 Alberto Bayo was a veteran of the Spanish military campaign against Moorish guerrillas in the twenties . He was a Loyalist general during the Spanish civil war and a guerrilla warfare expert .
 Mexican police had already been alerted to the activities of the Cuban oppositionists . Any postponement, moreover, might jeopardise the expedition that was now ready to set sail .
 A continuous war was waged by the landlords' foremen to prevent them encroaching any further on their territory . The mobility of these peasants enabled Castro's band to survive and begin to grow in number .
 Guerrilla Warfare was a two-year campaign that led to the defeat of the Batista regime . Guerrilla warfare was the key to defeating Batista's regime .
 The ability of the rebels to repel military units not only eroded the morale of the rank-and-file soldiers . But it also strengthened the belief that the army could be defeated by military means .
 Castro learnt the value of using the media to drawn attention to his ideas . Castro had learnt from his student days to use media to draw attention to ideas . He said he had learnt the importance of using media to promote ideas .
 He had become aware of the opportunities for agitation offered by radio broadcasting through his old mentor, Eddy Chibas . He had also become aware .
 Castro used the airwaves with great effect to put over his programme for reforms . The regular news bulletins featured in the broadcasts gave a conscientiously accurate report of military engagements .
 Below them, the army attempted to lay siege but the flow of messengers, arms, and recruits to and from the guerrilla stronghold slipped through the army patrols . The city slipped through army patrols without undue difficulty .
 Most accounts of the strike of 9 April consider it to have been a total failure . The strike was the largest strike in the history of the British labour movement .
 It failed to dislodge Batista, and indeed, encouraged the dictator to believe for a short while that events were moving his way once again .
 According to the American Ambassador, 'Batista apparently felt he was in the ascendancy. Batista apparently . felt he would be in the . ascendancy,' he said .
 The campaigns in the urban centres of Cuba, whether they were sabotage, demonstrations, propaganda, or strike action, fatally weakened the Batista regime .
 Both Castro and Castro were more familiar with Marxist ideas than Castro . But both were familiar with Marxism ideas of whatever tendency than Castro.
 Whatever his political definition at the time, Castro was taking care to avoid raising suspicions among anti-Batista opposition and in the U.S. The Caracas Pact was not intended to raise suspicions of Castro's intentions .
 Castro's search for unity with moderate and conservative opponents of Batista occurred as the army launched a mass offensive against the guerrilla stronghold . The document referred to the restoration of constitutional and democratic rights and made a vague promise of economic and social progress .
 By March 1958 Castro had felt confident enough to establish new fronts in Oriente . Castro had established a new front in the country .
 Failure of Batista’s offensive was the story not so much of the military strength of the guerrillas as of the moral weakness of the regular army . Twelve thousand troops, backed by the air force, had been sent to destroy rebel forces in both Sierras .
 But after the first shock, they will find it a boon no more thieving tax collectors, no more plundering army chieftains or bribe-hungry officials to bleed them white .
 Having beaten back the army, the rebel forces launched their own general offensive . "Our revolution is as much a moral as a political one," says the rebel leader .
 Guevara's and Cienfuegos's units cut the island in half, preventing the flow of reinforcements from the West . They then moved on Havana .
 Senior army officers were plotting to replace him with a mixed civilian and military junta . They were assured that the junta would be recognised by the U.S. government .
 Batista fled to the Dominican Republic on New Year's Eve . The junta that replaced him enjoyed only a brief moment of power . Castro Castro took power in 1959 .
 Castro issued a call for a general strike to overthrow the military coup that was answered by the vast mass of workers . Castro issued the call from his headquarters just outside Santiago, Chile .
 The next day, Castro entered Santiago in triumph and shortly afterwards, to widespread jubilation, Guevara and Cienfuegos took control of Havana .
 Even the military was sharply divided, as the Cienfuegos naval mutiny had shown . But it also fell, just as it had risen to power in 1934 and 1952, because it did not represent any social class .
 Batista's closest advisers were officers who had risen from the ranks with him in the 1933 Revolution . Batista was one of the most successful military leaders in the country .
 Only the top layer of the union bureaucracy still identified with the regime . Batista had lost his populist base, but he had not endeared himself either to the indigenous elites that controlled much of Cuba's wealth .
 To the instability of the Cuban political system, there is a growing sense of material insecurity among the middle class . The Cuban middle class is feeling more insecure than ever .
 Per capita income in Cuba had fallen by 18% in the two years following the coup and by 1958 had dropped to its 1947 level . By 1958 per capita income had dropped from 1947 to 1958 .
 A new economic downturn in the second half of 1958 created a generalised discontent . The tightening of economic competition and control from the United States encouraged sections of the middle class and the bourgeoisie to look favourably on the assertive nationalist policy promised by Castro .
 He seized power on the eve of general elections that favoured another candidate and had maintained his rule through repression . The two presidential elections of 1954 and 1958 were fraudulent exercises in democracy . He had seized power .
 Castro managed to get no less than twenty-five denunciations of Batista published in Cuban periodicals . Castro's denunciation of the Batista was published in periodicals throughout the country .
 The conservative parties had been too fragmented to be a focus of representation, while the Autenticos were discredited, having consistently reneged on their promises to end corruption .
 Cuba could not carry through any much-needed and desired structural reforms while it was trapped by its sugar monoculture . Cuba is a relatively well-developed society, but it was not able to carry out any reforms while trapped by the sugar industry .
 Castro thus stepped into a power vacuum that was not entirely of his making . Castro stepped in to fill the power vacuum . Castro is not the only person to step in .
 Manuel Urrutia was president, Jose Miro Cardona was prime minister, and Fidel was commander-in-chief of the armed forces . Fidel was the president of the Spanish Republic .
 Results of the Bay of Pigs: U.S. could no longer identify themselves as anti-colonialist . It caused concern among Latin American nations that the United States would engage in colonialism . Results: United States no longer identified themselves as an anti-colonialist .
 Khrushchev did it in order to redress the embarrassment he received as a result of the Berlin wall . Gaddis and others suggest they were placed in Cuba as a response to the Bay of Pigs .
 The USSR had first strike capability and the missiles range would’ve been much more effective than American missile in Turkey . The U.S. wanted to protect communism in Cuba with the hope of it spreading throughout Latin America .
 The Russian military in Cuba shot down a United States U2 spy plane – a sign of how easily things to spiral out of control . As well, without the permission of Soviet leadership, the Russian military shot down the U2 .
 Kennedy was right to respond to the crisis in a firm and forceful way, as the missiles represented a Soviet threat to alter the balance of power . The quarantine exerted maximum pressure on the Soviets and minimized risk of war .