 The establishment of verification arranGenerts will be effective for as long as the Cuban Government is Cowcuniat-dominated which villi 1. K\
 To whatever extent may be feasible, contribute to the development in Cuba of a government independent of Soviet or Chinese Communist interests . Reduce the ability of Cuba to enlace in military, paramilitary activities against Vt. Hemisphere countrieei .
 In absence Cuban and Soviet agreement ICRC would refuse to carry out. Cftnentt in absence of Cuba and Soviet deal ICRC wouldn't carry out .
 Threat to do so could constitute pressure on Cuba and Soviets to a ree to continued ICilC 1 spection or other acceptable arrangements . Threat could also be pressure on Russia and Cuba and Cuba to continue to participate in the ICI .
 The military probler of dcimj so in the face of opposition would depend on the degree of continued participation in Cuban air defense, and especially surface-to-air missiles are maintained .
 Freedom of action as have under this assunption may be related to degree of ""guarantees" we may have given under these circumstances . Thus, freedom of action ue as have . under this . assunction may . have under some circumstances, freedom . of action may
 With the withdrawal of the Soviet military presence (and thus presumably the SAIIs) there should be no great military difficu in maintainirj effective air eurvoillanee .
 Cuban attests at interference could be net by calculated measures of defense . Cuban air capabilities could be used to counter the claims of interference .
 Cuba cooperates or acquiesces in control measures . C.C. C. Third Assumption t Cuba is a state of Cuba . Cuba is one of the world's most repressive countries .
 The likelihood of such cooperation will in large part be dependent on Castro's estimate as to whether such control measures will also operate so as to protect his regime . Castro's estimates will depend on whether such measures will be used to protect the regime .
 The problem, tbsrefore, is to devise measures Walsh, while effective from the standpoint of our interest in ensuring against the reintroduction of offensive wjapona also will appear to . appear to Castro as constituting sous protection f cAia .
 Thero are several theoretically possible solutions to the situation . A continuing A continuing . continuing A . continuing . presence in Cuba placed tfaore by the Security Council . Theo are several . theoretically possible . solutions .
 Ibis arrangement would conf Ira and extend Soviet involvement in the Caribbean . It would make the UK's inspection system in Cuba subject to Russian veto . Ibis deal would make inspection system subject to Russia veto .
 The most promising line of approach is to combine the virtues of all three of these propoeala and minimizes their vices . The most likely way to deal with the problem is to find a way of combining the virtues with the vices of each other .
 The General Assembly passes a modified Brazilian resolution, praising the general idea of regional denuclearized zones for Latin America and Africa . The resolution is a modified version of a Brazilian resolution .
 The United States (at a nation of the region) and the United Kingdom, France and the Hetherlands would also be invited to the meeting . This meeting adopts a Belf-denying ordinance on the acquisition of nuclear weapons and delivery systems .
 Ad hoc meeting would request Secretary General to establish an Inspectorate to serve the sone fey inspection to the degree necessary to assure all signatories of the self-denying ordinance were abiding by their commitment .
 Inspectorate would have free oeeess to all of the countries of the sone and would -visit them j*-y either isn its own initiative or to investigate complaints of violation L '%£,. The Inspectorate, which would be or anizand appointed by the
 The ad hoe conference wo'^ld establish a continuing Conndttee to supervise adlberence to theT«*ment, to hear complaints .