 Starting April 5, the Research Room will be open Tuesdays and Thursdays by appointment only . The Research Room is open by appointment .
 Threat of Nuclear War Brought Home in New Exhibit at JFK Library . The John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum will unveil a riveting new exhibit about the thirteen days in October 1962 .
 To the Brink is the first special traveling exhibit to be featured in the Kennedy Library’s new 3,000 square foot gallery since the new wing was completed in 2011 . The Kennedy Library's new gallery features a traveling exhibit of the works .
 At six interactive listening stations, visitors listen in as the President and his advisers work furiously to avert a nuclear catastrophe . Visitors listen in to listen to President and advisers working furiously to avoid a nuclear disaster .
 With the fate of the world hanging in the balance, the tapes remind visitors that no one knew what the outcome would be . The tapes were recorded in the 1980s and '90s .
 Original documents and artifacts from the Kennedy Library and the National Archives complement the tapes . Original documents, artifacts, and photographs complement the presentation . The Kennedy Library provides a dramatic presentation of this milestone 20th-century event .
 Watch this 3:38 minute video short to get a look at exhibit highlights and see an interview with exhibit curator Stacey Bredhoff .
 It was created by the National Archives and the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . It was made possible in part thanks to the generous support of Lead Sponsor AT&T .
 The exhibit was on display at the National Archives building in Washington, D.C. from October 12, 2012, through February 3, 2013 .
 The app is available for free download in the Apple Store and at www.JFKCMC.org, where Android phone and tablet users can also experience the exhibit .
 Pei sits on a 10-acre waterfront site on Columbia Point offering panoramic views of Boston’s skyline and Harbor Islands . Pei was born in New York City, New York .
 General admission to the Museum at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library is $12.00 . General admission at the museum at the JFK Presidential Library will cost $12 .
 The Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum is open daily from 9:00m. to 5:00 m.m. daily . The museum is open on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and New Year's Day .
 There is free shuttle-service from JFK/UMass T Stop on the Red Line .
 For more information, call JFK-1960 or access www.jfklibrary.org on the Internet . The library is located in New York City .