 Kennedy authorized a clandestine invasion of Cuba by a brigade of Cuban exiles . After much debate in his administration Kennedy authorized the invasion . The invasion took place in Cuba in the early 1950s .
 The brigade hit the beach at the Bay of Pigs on April 17, 1961, but the operation collapsed in spectacular failure within 2 days . The operation collapsed within two days and was a spectacular failure .
 Kennedy took public responsibility for the mistakes made, but remained determined to rid Cuba of Castro . Kennedy was determined to get Cuba out of Castro's hands .
 In November 1961 Kennedy approved Operation Mongoose, a secret plan aimed at stimulating a rebellion in Cuba that the U.S. could support . Kennedy approved the plan in November 1961 . The plan was intended to stimulate a rebellion that the United States could support in Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev secretly introduced medium-range nuclear missiles into Cuba . The Kennedy administration planned Operation Mongoose, but the missiles were never deployed .
 U.S. intelligence picked up evidence of a general Soviet arms build-up during routine surveillance flights . On September 4, 1962, Kennedy issued a public warning against the introduction of offensive weapons .
 A U-2 flight on October 14 provided the first proof of Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . The U.2 flight was the first to carry out the mission .
 Kennedy called together 18 of his closest advisers to try to resolve the most dangerous U.S.-Soviet confrontation of the cold war . Kennedy's advisers were able to find a way to avoid a nuclear war with the Soviets .
 Some advisers argued for an air strike to take out the missiles and destroy the Cuban air force followed by a United States invasion of Cuba . Others favored warnings to Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 He sent a letter to Khrushchev calling upon him to remove the missiles, thus initiating an exchange of correspondence . The two leaders continued to exchange correspondence throughout the crisis .
 On October 24 Soviet vessels approached the quarantine line but turned back . 3 days later, the Cubans shot down a U.S. reconnaissance plane . On October 25 Soviet ships approached quarantine line and turned back; on October 31 Cuban vessels shot down the plane .
 Kennedy responded on October 27 to the first of two letters sent by Khrushchev on October 26 and 27 proposing various settlements of the crisis . After these near flash points, Kennedy responded .
 The Soviet Union agreed on October 28 to remove its missiles from Cuba . On the basis of those understandings, the Soviets agreed to remove the missiles from the country .
 The quarantine and crisis lingered until the removal of the Soviet missiles was verified at sea on November 20 . The Soviet Union agreed to remove the medium-range Il-28 bombers it had also introduced into Cuba .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union came to nuclear war over Cuba remains one of the most keenly discussed issues of the cold war . Exactly how close the United States and the Soviets came to a nuclear war is still a key question .
 This site is a portal for information from the United States State Department . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on this site .