 In only one respect, the second half of 1962 differed from other comparable Cold War periods . Impair national seciinty 4 i emergency flrepardedness plaits . Violate a statute, treaty, or iiil CINCPAC .
 West New-Guinea is where the United Nations established temporary executive authority on 1 October . The U.N. established temporary presidential authority in West New Guinea . West New Guinea is one of the poorest countries in Africa .
 William Vassall received an 18-year prison sentence for* violation of the British Official Secrets Act . Juan Bosch was elected president of the Dominican Republic on 20 December .
 The probe established contact with its target on 14 December, sending back. After a space voyage of oyer three months, it was sent back to Earth .
 Voters endorsed de Gaulle in a referendum on the selection of future French presidents . Not too surprisingly, the French were 'wrapped up in. ah internal political discussion'
 30 September rioting in Qxford, Mississippi highlighted a major internal concern for the U.S. State Department .
 West Germany was both bemused and aroused by the uproar over items published in Per Spiegel . The affair was still causing governmental repercussions in Bonn a month and more later .
 Some of these major events in the period leading into October 1962 were tangentially related to the events of the month leading up to October 1962 .
 The Laotian compromise was certainly a tactical victory for Comimunisim arid the West German bickering had overtones of espionage . The West German bickering had overtones .
 In a related sense, too, no conceivable delicacy could have eased the jolt received by the British in the 18.-21 .
 On any ""temperature"" gauge, Cold War tensions ran consistently above normal, fluctuating with Communist pushes and relaxations at a score of known trouble spots around the world .
 The focus of international tension came to rest upon the island of Cuba, Cuba, in 1962 . Cuba was an especially sensitive point because of its geographic proximity to the continental U.S.
 Cuba by mid-1962 was firmly in the hands of Fidel Castro, who had publicly announced and demonstrated his Communist sympathies, dedication, and objectives . Cuba was known since 1947 or earlier aS the entry port for Communist infiltration into Latin America, Cuba .
 By 14 October, the high-flying U-2 aircraft were able to bring back good photographs of unusual construction work on the island .
 The American quarantine went into effect on 24 October . A number of Cuba-bound ships refused to heed the warning and change course .
 Kennedy-Khrushchev contact and apparent Russian willingness to negotiate a settlement comprised probably the strongest single factor in alleviating the Cuban crisis . The swift marshaling of American striking power certainly had something to do with the cooling of Cuban emotions .
 It was midDecember before the American Government was satisfied with the removal of offensive Russian missiles and jet bombers from Cuba .
 American surveillance continued, accompanied by a gradual, partial relaxation of the special military buildup in the U.S. The United States has relaxed its special military build-up .
 Fidel Castro's agreement to release the 1,113 -o prisoners captured at the Bay of Pigs made it obvious even to the most optimistic that this was no thoroughgoing ""thaw"" in the Cold War .
 This background sketch of international events during the ""Cuban.crisis"" seiJ^^^i|^^u£poses. It is based on events in the country's political crisis .
 Peoples and nations did not set aside their other preoccupations, though they did hold their breath for a momentary focus on the dangers inherent in the Cuban situation .
 General Schriever said that his organization was in the front line of the Cold War . The General had actually described the General's remarks as a joke, though the general's remarks had actually been true .
 The Systems Command could honestly evaluate its operation in the Cuban crisis as ""effective beyond expectation/' A Useful Preamble .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the first of these practice projects; called HIGH HEELS II . The project was designed to test command alert procedures throughout the Air Force .
 The effort included realistic practice runs on combat and combat support actions . In the process, major commands' war plans received a good workout .
 The personnel manning command posts and alert staffs derived profitable experience, in operational, administrative, and reporting procedures . The personnel on duty at the base of the base received profitable experience .
 The simulated emergency also gave participants a firsthand appreciation of the command and control difficulties resulting from a nuclear attack .
 Experience in the two exercises suggested several changes and improvements in current procedures .
 The Cuban crisis started so soon after the 28 September end of High Heels II/SPADE FORK, ■ however, that there was no time to translate the indicated improvements into formal revisions of existing plans and directives .
 The more important changes were introduced informally into operational procedures . But the actual experience gained was invaluable when the real emergency came along, he says .
 This move coincided with that evening's Presidential address, which informed the Nation of the serious situation in Cuba and revealed the accentuated alert status of U.S. military elements .
 The move to ""Defense Conditions 3"" status automatically activated the Commander's Alert Staff . The move was in accordance with prescribed Systems Command procedures .
 General Schriever had all field commanders contacted to confirm their actions, in increasing the local alert posture and in realigning their research and development missions in the face of the international crisis, 10 . The following morning, 23 October, met again with his senior staff and canvassed actions under
 All elements of the Command should gear themselves to extended maintenance of the 24 -hour alert staff . The vulnerability of communications to sabotage, the availability of emergency power, and an alerting phone network for key officials were checklist items, including an alert phone network .
 Command also prepared its plans for cancelling all leaves . While reducing temporary duty to a minimum, the Command has also prepared plans for cancellation of leaves .
 Command installations to support combat forces, including the presence of competent crews to fire missiles, if necessary, from the Atlantic and Pacific Missile Ranges . Command installations will be used in support of combat forces .
 Downrange airfields of the Atlantic Missile Range had potential uses . International agreements governing those fields located on foreign soil would permit their use by active U.S. forces .
 IfiifCommand's 1 continuity-of-operations plan was already embodied in the contingency . Another operational consideration was designation of an alternate headquarters for the Systems Command .
 Ground Center's 3201st Air Base Wing at Eglin, the Space Systems Division's 6594th Instrumentation Squadron at Westover Air Force Base, Massachusetts, and all Site Activation Task Forces of the Ballistic Systems Division . Ground Center is responsible for the Air Force's Air Force
 The basic aim was to bring to an ""Emergency Combat Capability"" posture those missile sites already far enough along to have an "Emergency Launch Capability" status, on the correct assumption that these weapons could be added to the operational arsenal in a matter of days .
 Systems Command units at Vandenberg Air Force Base and various sites brought 20 missiles to the desired state of readiness . 13 were weapons at incomplete sites and 7 were at training or test launchers .
 The Strategic Air 1 Command acquired temporary control over all 20 missiles . This supplement added-at the peak of the crisis-71 megatons to the available nuclear striking force . At the peak the crisis, this supplement added 71 megatonons .
 The smooth operation of Project GOLDEN BULL elicited an Air Force SCEH64-308 Headquarters complime^f ""on 2' &''6'ctober,' and by 10 November 1962 the Systems Command again owned these weapons and prepared to resume the interrupted test and activation
 The net effect was a thoroughgoing blackout of specific military news . The list encompassed most features of the tactical and strategic posture, current or planned .
 Missile Test Center assessed how effectively it could supply range stations with its own limited transport fleet . Military Air Transport Service airlifts of cargo and personnel were no longer available .
 The Patrick evaluation also considered the possibility that tactical requirements might preempt the whole Patrick airfield complex . In this eventuality, the Missile Test Center concluded it could continue restricted downrange support flights out of Melbourne Municipal Airport .
 Air Force levy of 25 October took three T-33's from Systems Command and one U-3 each from Headquarters and Logistics Commands, as well as three C-47's from the Strategic Air Command .
 The Flight Test Center reported 10 of its aircraft were not immediately available, because of modifications, maintenance, or other mechanical conditions . All other test and test support aircraft under Edwards control were in commission that day .
 It is my desire that every commander personally see to the readiness of his command, and be prepared to exercise his capability to the utmost .
 Such exercises as High Heels II and SPADE FORK had provided valuable practice in crisis .control pf the Systems Command and its important resources .
 At least two more Miriutemen and another Titan I were on the verge of Emergency War Operation status . In addition, at least two other Miriutsemen and a Titan I are also on verge of being declared an emergency war operation .
 In reporting on the availability of its aircraft that same day, the Proving Ground Center at Eglin applied a priority for withdrawals . In reporting that the aircraft was available, the center applied a prioritization .
 Missile Development Center assessed Holloman Air Force Base's ability to support combat units . Holloman could accommodate one tactical fighter wing ortroop carrier wing 21 equipped with C-123 or C-130 .
 The AN/FPS-49 radar at Moorestown, New Jersey, will be used to track the Cuban horizon . The radar was used to fill a critical gap in the national defense system .
 Pentagon had expressed concern about the lack of ballistic missile detection in that direction . Pentagon expressed concern as early as 22 October .
 FPS-49--a prototype of the ""BMEWS."" raders with an effective range of 1,500 nautical miles-went on a 24-hour day on 25 October . Under temporary Air Defense Command control, it went on 24 October .
 Under the nickname ""Falling Leaves,"" the Air Defense Command assembled a missile early warning network aimed at Cuba . The network is dubbed "Falling leaves" and "falling leaves"
 The FPS-49 returned to itsbasic research and development mission on 26 November .
 Systems Command project checked out a special operational concept for possible Cuban requirements . TTrmr INCHES iMililililili: ihlililihlili ilililihhlil .
 The entire Air Force Systems Command felt the impact of the crisis, but four of the field agencies were affected most sharply .
 The centers at Patrick and Eglm were physically on the firing line and thus became bases and staging areas for the combat forces . Of these, the centers were located on the fire line .
 The Electronic Systems Division at Hanscom Field, Massachusetts, guided the creation of the electronic systems on which modern military operations depended . The department's electronic systems are used for communications, command and control, surveillance and reconnaissance .
 Patrick was ready to go to ""Defcon 2" status, and there were plans for using "hardened" disaster control and communication centers at Cape Canaveral .
 Ballistic Systems Division response, also on 27 October, was equally reassuring . Ballistic systems Division response also reassuring .
 The Systems Command had responded to the 26 October directive and had identified five B; 52H and one B-58A aircraft which could be transferred to Strategic Air Command . By 28 October a review of the proffered bombers had determined that none were suitable for immediate use .
 Systems Command program has a special priority within the Systems Command Program . The program is a special focus for the U.S. Air Force in the United States .
 Intelligence reports had identified C-band radars among Russian equipment functioning in Cuba . Intelligence reports early in the crisis had identified the radars .
 An existing. project to provide C-band electronic countermeasures gear for all B-52 antedated the Cuban emergency . Air Force Headquarters directed a sharp acceleration of this endeavor .
 A contractor was building a multisensor reconnaissance system in a bailed YB-58 aircraft aircraft . The system was part of a Systems Command project known as "QUICK CHECK/' in which a contractor built the system .
 Cuba was an early inspiration, and on 25 October the Systems Command chaired a Pentagon meeting to explore the possibility .
 By 29 October the Air Force had tentatively planned for the following day a reconnaissance flight along the northern coast of Cuba . The Air Force planned to fly along the north coast of the island .
 A cOn. tractor tractor crew would fly the mission, since an estimated two weeks would be . necessary to orient an Air Force crew in effective use of the . multiple sensors . Strategic Air Command would have operational control of the flight .
 As planned originally, the aircraft would fly two straight-line segments-east and southeast . No closer than 30 miles to the northern coast of Cuba and from one end of the island to the other .
 The return flight would be direct-line to Fort Worth, Texas, or to Florida if fuel was low .
 Following unavoidable delays, the B-58 took off at 1830 hours on 30 October . Following several unavoidable delays the plane took off .
 The flight was uneventful, and the aircraft was back at Fort Worth by 2240 hours . The plane returned to Fort Worth, Texas, at around 3am .
 Initial reports indicated the mission was about 80 percent successful in its data coverage and multiple sensing . Initial reports said the mission had been successful . The mission was expected to be 80 percent success .
 By 30 October the Cuban crisis was still a Serious thing, but it had lost its fine edge of stark tension . The Cuban crisis still was still serious, but the crisis had lost the fine edge .
 Systems Command's 30 October directive called on its Ballistic Systems Division to contact the Strategic Air Command and arrange an orderly, phased return of those ballistic missiles which had been temporarily added to the operational inventory . There was no public announcement to this effect, but there were such indications of lessened pressure
 The Strategic Air Command responded by proposing the return of 14 sites--5 Minutemen and 1 Titan I at Vandenberg, and 4;AtlaS-F sites each at Walker and Plattsburgh Air Force Bases .
 Temporary official visitors at Eglin included 53 officers, 2 30 airmen, and some 770 people .
 A significant element in the Systems Command performance during the crisis was the ability of these centers and other units to. support the U.S. effort to. maintain their mission .
 An operational problem identified early was the danger of overruns by F^106 aircraft on Runway 20 at Patrick Airport . The problem was identified early and was a problem early in the 1980s .
 With no guarantee that the crisis was over, there could be no real relaxation . The crisis was not over, but it was still very serious, with no guarantee it was over .
 To avoid misleading the missile warning network covering Cuba, the Center arranged to notify the North American Air Defense Command of any planned Cape Canaveral test launches which would rise above 70,000 feet .
 Eglin received the first 3 of 10 refuelers to augment the local capacity for servicing transient aircraft . Eglin is also receiving 3 refuelers for the first time in recent years .
 The Western Contract Management Region estimated that 24-hour command post operation throughout the Region 33 would require an additional $39,718.62 monthly . The Region 33 estimates that the cost of the command post would be $39.7 million .
 As early as 23 October the Pacific Air Forces had used the Cuban crisis to justify the imposition of its presumed authority over the 6594th . The Pacific Air Force's equipment was used as a pretext for imposing authority .
 When the Russians began to dismantle their offensive weapon Bites in Cuba, watchful wariness became the American password . The Russians began dismantling their offensive weapons in Cuba .
 Site D-8 of the Eglin Gulf Test Range will be used for airspace surveillance . Site was noted in the Proving Ground Center's survey of its radars in October .
 There was some mothballed equipment at the Site, notably an S -band radar and communications gear .
 D-8 could be made operational again in about three . daySi though the condition of the equipment-""pickled"" for over a year-could not be predicted .
 One year's 24-hours-a-day operation could require as much as $129,500 . Round-figure calculations suggested that reactivation and 24-hour operation could cost as much .
 The Air Force Security Service directed that a Systems Command ""emergency reaction unit"" establish itself at Cudjoe Key and begin operations to acquire ""intelligence information"" by the morning of 7 November .
 The Proving Ground Center moved at ortce to assist in_ preparation of Site D-8 for this purpose . Proving ground center moved to assist with preparation of site D-9 .
 The Space Systems Division responded in detail to General Schriever's 25 October message . The space systems division reported the accomplishment of all necessary steps .
 If sabotage or infiltration becomes an unmanageable problem, there are plans to secure Army troops for extra support . If sabotage and infiltration became an issue, there were plans for extra troops .
 Potential problems include the vulnerability of land-line communications into the Los Angeles complex, a complete dependency upon municipal sources for water, and a minimal emergency power supply . Other potential problems included the vulnerability .
 These would be critical items only if the situation deterio39 rated considerably . The situation would be rated considerably more closely .
 Rome Air Development Center reviewed its program in the light of crisis requirements . The Rome Air Force Development Center had reviewed the program in light of the crisis .
 Systems Command personnel proceeded to ""un-cock"" the ballistic missile complexes released from the firing line . Project GOLDEN BULL was the first phase of Project Golden Bull .
 November the Strategic Air Command added seven more missiles (two at Walker and five at Pittsburgh), to be returned on the request of site activation teams for resumption of installation and checkout process .
 In the days which followed, the Systems Command followed the pattern established after these first 15 days of the Cuban crisis-eo.nt'inued support of the alert forces and, insofar as resources permitted, an aggressive assault upon its own systems acquisition program . The systems command followed the
 On lTTNSyember, there were identified, four Cuban sites each holding equipment for a small Russian armored regimental combat team .
 Command to enlist Eglin help in a range test of napalm bombs . The bombs had been loaded for days or weeks on aircraft in southern Florida . They alerted aircraft in Florida .
 The Systems Command advised its field agencies that they might assume the ""Defcon 5"" attitude, though those elements directly supporting combat forces still deployed would continue to continue to be deployed . On 28 November the Systems Command told field agencies to assume a 'Defcon' attitude .
 A prolonged or intensified emergency would have reduced the degree of accomplishment in the latter category . Even the two-week crisis and slippage in some programs imposed measurable additional costs on the Systems Command effort .
 Earlier planning appeared to rely too much on the existence of post-attack communications . Certain actions had to become automatic and be set in motion by specific events, regardless of communications failures .
 The voluntarilymanned Military Affiliate Radio System should not be counted upon as a primary emergency communications link . And the voluntarymanned military radio system is not an emergency communication link .
 The High Heels II/SPADE FORK exercise and the subsequent Guban crisis pinpointed defects and desirable alterations in the Systems Command's contingency plans . The High HEELS II/Spade Fork exercise pinpointed the defects in the systems Command's plans .
 The sum total of accomplishments underscored the broad scope of the Command's participaetion . In addition to the specific events outlined in this narrative, . The events outlined were the culmination of the .
 Eglin took care of as many as 1,141 people from tactical, strategic, and transport units . Edwards accommodated-as noted-a deployed B-47 task force .
 Special technical problems attacked and solved by the Systems Command included several accomplishments in electronic engineering . The Systems Command was responsible for many of the problems .
 The Pentagon on 25 October identified a singular requirement to which the Systems "" ■ Command responded by modifying an AN/FPS-35 frequency diversity radar at Thomasville, Alabama, a part of the Semi -Automatic .
 Systems Command had modification kit ready for shipment on 2 November . Systems Command worked from a 24 October requirement, the modification kit was ready to ship .
 The response went-effectively 'and eommendably--well beyond the Command's mission requirements,' the Pentagon says .
 The net result was to add a bright new chapter to 50 the history of Air Force research and development . The project is the first of its kind .
 See also, Dept of State Publication 7449, ""The United States Response to , Soviet Military Buildup in Cuba,"" Pres. Pres. Manuel Manuel Castro was President of Cuba in 1961 .
 A commemorative silver calendar for Oct 62 . See the feature Story in the magazine section of The Washington Post , 2Q Oct 63 .
 Operational planning, anotherelement in this picture anticipates possible courses of action . The picture was taken in the early hours of the day . The image was taken by a helicopter carrying out a search for the site .
 This abbreviated discussion of the event is dictated by limited resources in time and personnel . The key data have been assembled in quantity-from the Historians of AFSC field organizations and from within AFSC .
 Msg, SCEP-23-10r55 J Hq AFSC to-ALAFSC, 2 3 0ct 62; Msg. SCE-23.10r56, Hq ATSAFSC to AFSC, 23 Oct 62; SCMO
 Transportation and the Cuban Crisis, 13 Dec 62; Welsh interview, 6 Feb 64, 17, 17. Welsh interview .
 Status of AFSC Sensors in Support of Cuban Crisis, 29 Nov 62; . Status of ADOOP-ES 2942, Hq ADC td CofS USAF, 30 Oct 62. , 23 Nov 62 .
 AFSC toCote USAF, 27 Oct 62; msg, SCE-1-ll-l, HqAFSC to ALAFSC, 1 Nov 62. AFSC was sent to Cote USAF in October .
 APEX SITREP 22, Hq APGC to Hq AFSC, 20 Nov 62; Msg, APEX . Msg. APGC, APGA, 20 Dec. 62; msg. APGA to 20 Nov. 62. Msg . APGC is