 Most Americans, Russians, and Cubans associate the missile crisis with the 13 days following the discovery of offensive nuclear weapons in Cuba on October 14, 1962 .
 The crisis did not officially end until November 20, 1962, when the U.S. formally lifted the “quarantine” against Cuba . However, the United States lifted the "quarantine" against Cuba on November 20 .
 Popular misconceptions about the events stem largely from Robert F Kennedy’s Thirteen Days . The memoir is a memoir from the White House's perspective . It was written by Robert Kennedy, who was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy’s narrative suggested the very real danger posed by the weapons . John F Kennedy cast his brother in a favorable light for acting in such a levelheaded way in the face of grave danger .
 Revelations by the Russians after the Cold War indicated the danger Kennedy implied was very real .
 Thirteen Days downplayed the role the Soviets and the Cubans played in resolving the near disaster . The Soviets and Cubans helped resolve the crisis in Cuba .
 In 1959, the American government refused to accept Fidel Castro’s rise to power . The U.S. refused to allow the Castro family to enter Cuba .
 JFK inherited a CIA plan to invade the island, which turned into the disastrous Bay of Pigs Invasion in 1961 . John Kennedy inherited a plan that turned into a disastrous invasion of Cuba .
 Fearing another American-backed operation against Cuba, Castro looked to the Soviet Union for assistance . Fearing a U.S. invasion, Castro turned to the Soviets for help .
 Nikita Khrushchev could hardly turn down the offer to place Soviet troops so close to the United States . The proposal was made to the U.S. by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 The Soviets provided planes, missiles, advisers, and troops to the Cubans . Thus, the Soviets provided them with planes and missiles . The Cubans were eventually defeated by the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy acquiesced to the possible presence of defensive missiles, but never imagined Khrushchev would risk nuclear war with the U.S. Kennedy acquiesce to the possibility of the missile deployment .
 The discovery of offensive weapons began what some have described as the tensest two weeks of the Cold War . Some have described the discovery of the weapons as the 'tensest weeks of Cold War'
 John Kennedy convened the “ExComm’s” ad-hoc subgroup of his national security team . Kennedy tasked the group with providing options for an American response . Kennedy: "ExComm" is a subgroup that provides options for a response .
 After several days of debate and waffling on the best course of action, Kennedy’s advisers suggested either a blockade or an invasion . Kennedy's advisers suggested a blockade and an invasion.
 The blockade would stop supplies needed to finish construction of the missiles before those supplies arrived . The blockade is expected to stop construction of missiles before supplies arrive .
 The invasion would eliminate the missile sites before they became operational . It would eliminate them before they become operational . The invasion is the first time the sites have been targeted .
 Kennedy announced the blockade, labeled a “quarantine,” in a televised address on October 22 . Kennedy said the blockade was labeled a quarantine .
 Khrushchev ultimately decided not to challenge the blockade, and the first ships carrying military supplies turned around on October 25 . The blockade began October 25, 1962 .
 In the ensuing days, Kennedy and Khrushchev communicated about resolving the crisis . The crisis occurred in the wake of the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Robert F Kennedy met secretly with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet Ambassador to the United States, to discuss the options for a settlement . Robert F. Kennedy met secret with Dobrynins to discuss options for the settlement .
 On October 28, Khrushchev announced publicly that construction on the missile sites had stopped largely because Kennedy had privately stated the United States would not invade Cuba . Kennedy had publicly stated that the U.S. would not invasion Cuba .
 For most Americans and Russians, their countries had averted war when cooler heads prevailed . But the crisis had not quite passed, and the crisis was not quite over .
 Three hours after Khrushchev’s announcement, Castro indicated his dissatisfaction with U.S. assurances . Castro indicated he was unhappy with American assurances .
 He also wants the U.S. to end its economic blockade and stop covert operations against Cuba .
 Castro's dissatisfaction prolonged the crisis because it made negotiating a final settlement more difficult . Castro’s dissatisfaction prolongs the crisis . Castro: “I’m not satisfied with what I’ve done, I want to see the end of the crisis."
 Khrushchev did not want to risk his alliance with Castro . He felt a written agreement was all that would hold the U.S. to a non-intervention pledge .
 Kennedy would not lift the quarantine against Cuba without a formal agreement – ideally, one that spelled out exactly what equipment the Soviets would remove from Cuba . Meanwhile, Kennedy wouldn't lift the ban on Cuba without an agreement – a deal that would spell out what equipment they would remove .
 In the ensuing weeks, it fell to Soviet diplomat Anastas Mikoyan to convince Castro that an agreement between the U.S. and the USSR could work in his favor . In the following weeks, the Soviet diplomat convinced Castro that the deal could work .
 Castro opposed any agreement that included inspections . It was a tedious process because Castro opposed inspections . Castro was a key figure in negotiations .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy worked on determining which weapons to include in the agreement . The agreement was signed by the Soviet Union and the U.S. government .
 Kennedy's demands included the IL-28 bomber, but Khrushchev wanted those planes to remain in Cuba . Kennedy’s demands included a $1.2 million Cuban oil oil embargo . Kennedy wanted the planes to stay in Cuba, but the planes were allowed to stay .
 His refusal strengthened a call from Pentagon officials to move forward with invading Cuba since a deal seemed unlikely . His refusal strengthens a call for the U.S. to invade Cuba .
 Moscow privately accepted including the IL-28s in the deal by November 10 . By November 10, given the situation, the deal was in place, Moscow said . Moscow has not commented on the deal .
 Officials worked to lay out a justification, especially for Castro, on how removal had not occurred because of the American negotiating position . Over the next few days, officials worked out a rationale for Castro's removal .
 Soviets and Americans ironed out acceptable language on the bombers . Americans agreed to accept Khrushchev’s assurance the IL-28s would be dismantled within thirty days of an agreement .
 Castro’s frustration with his allies mounted . While the terms seemed promising, Castro was frustrated by his allies . Castro's frustration with the allies mounted. Castro was disappointed with the terms .
 He also felt slighted because neither superpower felt he should play a significant role in resolving the crisis . He said he was slighted as neither superpower wanted him to play a major role .
 Castro told Mikoyan that he ordered his military to shoot at any American warplanes conducting reconnaissance missions over Cuban airspace . Castro ordered the shooting to be carried out over any American reconnaissance missions .
 Castro’s decision did not win him much support in Moscow . Khrushchev vowed not to consult the Cuban leader prior to an agreement with the Americans .
 Between November 16 and November 20, the Soviets and the Americans finalized the terms of a settlement . The settlement was finalized between November 16 to November 20 .
 The Soviets conceded to the removal of the IL-28s, and the Americans agreed not to demand on-site inspections . The U.S. agreed to remove them, but the Soviets also agreed to allow inspections .
 On the evening of November 20, Kennedy announced the end of the quarantine against Cuba . Kennedy announced that the quarantine had been lifted .
 Castro's decision came too late to affect the Soviet-American agreement . Castro appeared to be shifting positions, but it was too late . Castro made the decision to withdraw from the agreement .
 Looking again at the duration of the crisis tempers the tendency to attribute success solely to President Kennedy . This provides a more accurate picture of the role that Soviet, Cuban, and American leaders played in 1962 .
 Silver-plated paperweight given to Jacqueline Kennedy from JFK to mark the crisis . Kennedy had 34 made by Tiffany and Co. each engraved with the recipient’s and his initials .
 Arthur M Schlesinger, historian and Kennedy adviser, discussed the real dangers posed by the crisis based on conversations between Soviet, Cuban, and American participants and scholars at a conference to mark the thirtieth anniversary .
 Sarah Katherine Mergel is an associate professor of history at Dalton State College in Northwest Georgia . She is also a history professor at the college . Mergel has published a series of books on the topic .
 She is passionate about researching, writing, and teaching on political, intellectual, and diplomatic history since the end of the Civil War . She is also passionate about research, writing and teaching .
 Join our mission to recreate America's history then for Americans now . Ted Dealey and JFK The 3/5ths Clause and Indian Removal are at the center of our history . Join us on our mission: Re-create America .
 We're History . Follow us on Twitter @CNN.com/Heroes . Share your thoughts in the comments below .