 November 22, 1963, is the infamous day that everyone remembers where they were when they heard the news that President Kennedy had been shot . For my parents’ generation, November 22 is the day of the Kennedy assassination .
 The assassination of President John F Kennedy is one of the most historic and horrific days of the 20th century . The impact of the assassination is still being felt today, and its impact is still felt .
 It has been 50 years this week since the Dallas, Texas, tragedy unfolded . Dallas police officers were killed in the city of Dallas in 1968 . The city was devastated by the shootings .
 JFK was a U.S. Senator from Massachusetts when he was running for President . JFK was also a candidate for President in the 1960s .
 These publications give insight to the man during this period of transition from active Senator to President-elect .
 Classic Speeches, 1830-1993 contains the text of some of the most famous speeches by U.S. Senators, including a young Senator John F Kennedy . The text of these speeches is published in this book .
 Intelligence Briefings of Presidential Candidates, 1952-2004 and the Audiobook-MP3 edition are new publications that tell the story of how the CIA and the U.S. Intelligence Community begin to brief Presidential candidates and Presidents-elect, including JFK and Lyndon Johnson, on vital intelligence
 Senator Kennedy proposed “a peace corps of talented men and women” who would dedicate themselves to the progress and peace of developing countries . Kennedy proposed a peace corps dedicated to developing countries in order to achieve peace .
 President Kennedy established the Peace Corps on March 1, 1961, with his brother-in-law, R Sargent Shriver, as its leader . More than 25,000 letters responded to Kennedy's campaign promise .
 The lasting legacy of the Peace Corps’ and its ongoing inspiration to America’s younger generations is clearly shown in these two books . Peace Corps' and its inspiration to younger generations are clearly shown .
 Tales of Peace Corps Service is a collection of autobiographical reminiscences by 28 former Peace Corps volunteers . Crossing Cultures With the Peace Corps: Peace Corps Letters From the Field is an actual letters from Peace Corps Volunteers serving in various nations .
 President Kennedy was confronted with some dramatic foreign policy issues from his first days in office . He faced how to avoid nuclear war with the Soviet Union over their missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy faced a series of crises in his first term .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff and National Policy, Vol., 1961-1964 provides a fascinating inside look at the Joint Chiefs’ participation and their point-of-view in dealing with the following foreign crises from the U.S. arms race, Berlin Wall construction, Cuba, to Laos
 Resolving the Missile Gap With Technology from the CIA . Includes analysis and hundreds of recently declassified intelligence documents about the Soviet missile build-up and perceived United States missile gap .
 The Importance of Clandestine Reporting studies the reaction by the Soviets to the West’s formation of NATO including West Germany by establishing a military bloc of Communist nations with the Warsaw Treaty of May 1955 . West Germany .
 This study continues CIA’s efforts to provide a detailed record of the intelligence derived from clandestine human and technical sources from that period .
 Berlin Wall became a symbol of Cold War hostilities between the U.S. and the Soviets . The Berlin Wall was the symbol of the Cold War .
 Building of the Berlin Wall is a new multimedia book with DVD that covers the period of 1945 to the end of 1961, during the Kennedy administration . The book includes a vast collection of recently declassified CIA documents, videos, and photographs .
 This statement turned to real policy and eventually manned missions to the moon . This statement became a real policy for space exploration .
 JFK’s lasting legacy to the U.S. space program is incalculable . JFK's lasting legacy will be in the United States space program .
 Scholars turn a critical eye toward the achievements of NASA’s first 50 years . NASA is widely seen as the premier agency for exploration in the world . It carries on a long tradition of exploration by the United States and the human species .
 After the Brown Board of Education ruling, desegregation was a slow process in many Southern school districts and universities . The Supreme Court ruled unanimously in 1954 that racial segregation in public schools was unconstitutional . After the Supreme Court .
 President Kennedy was fond of the music to the popular 1960-63 smash Broadway musical, Camelot . The lyrics of the musical were penned by Kennedy’s Harvard classmate, Alan Jay Lerner .
 Jackie Kennedy’s historic role as First Lady is outlined in the beautifully done First Ladies of the United States of America book by the White House Historical Association . The book profiles the many courageous First Ladies, from Martha Washington to Jacqueline Kennedy to Hillary Rodham Clinton .
 The end of Camelot came with President Kennedy’s assassination by Lee Harvey Oswald . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 President Lyndon Johnson created a commission, chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren, to investigate the events that led to the assassination and any possible conspiracies . The commission was created by President Johnson in 1964 .
 It became known unofficially as the Warren Commission Report or the Warren Report . The Warren Report was named for Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren who chaired the commission . The report was later known as "The Warren Report"
 Before it was released to the public on September 27, 1964, special security measures were set up .
 Eyewitnesses re-live the events surrounding the events in Dallas in 1963 from eye witnesses . Today it is still fascinating to re-watch the events around the Dallas shootings .
 Report contains numerous photos, maps, diagrams, and illustrations . Report contains witness testimony and witness testimony .
 John F Kennedy, Jr. salutes his father's coffin at President Kennedy’s funeral . First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy, daughter Caroline, and brothers Edward Kennedy and Robert Kennedy attended .
 These Official publications are part of the legacy of President John F Kennedy . Help us remember his 1,000 days of an American Camelot .
 GPO provides copies of these publications to Federal Depository libraries worldwide . GPO is a member of the National Library of America's National History of America .