 He suggested that the combination of the existence of such weapons and human fallibility could result in the destruction of all nations . The United States and the Soviet Union confronted each other over Soviet missiles on Cuban soil in October of 1962 .
 Many fear that nuclear Armageddon could occur, even if leaders and people do not choose it, as long as nations possess these powerful weapons . Many fear the threat of nuclear Armageddon even if they do not want it .
 The story involves the long history of the Cuban peoples’ pursuit of national self-determination, traditional U.S. hegemony over the island, and the dangerous and militarized relationship between the United States and the former Soviet Union, known as the Cold War .
 The United States had long dominated the island nation 90 miles from its shores . Fidel Castro’s 26th of July Movement seized power in Cuba in January 1959 . The U.S. had been dominated by the United States .
 In the 1950s, the country was ruled by dictator Fulgencio Batista, a close ally of the United States . Through repression and corruption, he generated large-scale opposition in the countryside and the cities .
 The island nation had been under the yoke of the Spanish from the dawn of the 16th century until 1898 . British investors dominated the island nation economically dominated in the 19th century .
 As a result of the Spanish-American War of 1898, Cubans achieved their formal independence . Cubans became formal independence from Spain in 1898 .
 Congress passed the Platt Amendment in 1901, which declared that the U.S. could unilaterally intervene in Cuban affairs when instability occurred . The amendment was passed in 1901 .
 U.S. troops and diplomats frequently intervened in the island’s affairs . Subsequently, United States troops and diplomatic interventionists frequently intervened .
 In the 1950s, Fidel Castro, Che Guevara, workers, peasants, and students carried out a revolution ousting the dictator from power . In opposition to the U.S.-supported Cuban dictator Batista, the Castro brothers carried out the revolution .
 Castro-led revolutionaries assumed office in 1959 . They began to develop a series of policies to alleviate the worst features of Cuban poverty .
 The revolutionary government invested in housing, schools, and public works . It invested heavily in housing and schools, including housing and public housing .
 Salaries were raised, electrical rates were cut, and rents were reduced by half . Electrical rates were also cut by half, and rent was reduced by a third .
 On a visit to the United States in April of 1959, Castro proposed a large-scale assistance program for the Western Hemisphere . President Eisenhower ignored Castro's proposal .
 Castro announced a redistributive program of agrarian reform that generated opposition from conservative Cuban and American landowners . Castro announced the program after a hostile visit to Washington .
 The agrarian reforms involved land transfers to the Cuban people, with compensations that the United States rejected . The U.S. rejected the land transfers .
 Threatened with a reduction of purchases of Cuban sugar long in place, Cuba nationalized the industry . Cuba nationalizes the industry in response to the threat of a reduction in purchases .
 In February of 1960, Cuba signed trade agreements with the Soviet Union . Cuba signed a trade agreement with the USSR in February 1960 .
 The Soviets agreed to exchange sugar no longer purchased by the U.S. for oil . The Soviets also agreed to swap sugar with oil for sugar . The United States and the Soviet Union exchanged sugar for crude oil .
 Cuban government nationalizes U.S.-owned oil refineries after refineries refused to refine Soviet oil . Refineries were owned by the Soviet Union but refineries were not refined .
 The Cuban government nationalized U.S.-owned corporations and banks on the island . Over the next several months, the Cubans nationalized some of the country's largest banks .
 Between the spring of 1960 and January of 1961, U.S.–Cuban economic ties weakened . Cuba established formal diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, the Cold War communist adversary .
 The break was made symbolically complete with the United States termination of formal diplomatic relations with Cuba . Shortly before Eisenhower left office, the U.S. terminated formal diplomatic ties with Cuba in 1961 .
 President Eisenhower made a decision that contributed to escalating tensions and a growing presence of the Soviet Union on the island of Cuba . Eisenhower made the decision in March 1960 .
 He ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to create a Cuban exile force that would invade the island and depose Fidel Castro from power . The State Department knew at that time that Castro was enormously popular .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion, April 17 to 19, 1961, was launched by 1,400 Cuban exiles . The invasion took place in Cuban exile camps in Cuba .
 He saw a need to respond to communism, whether in Cuba or South Vietnam . He saw the need for a response to communism in Cuba and Vietnam .
 In the face of the perceived communist danger to the Western Hemisphere, he reserved the right to intervene as needed . He reserved the power to intervene against communist threats .
 The lesson he drew from the Bay of Pigs was the need for escalated confrontation with Cuba, not caution, he says . "The lesson he learned from the bay of Pigs is the need to escalate confrontation," he writes .
 "Let us express our special friendship to the people of Cuba and the Dominican Republic," President Obama said . "We hope they will soon rejoin the society of free men," he said .
 Those who make peaceful revolution impossible will make violent revolution inevitable . Peaceful revolution is possible, but violent revolution is inevitable, those who make peace impossible will be .
 The Kennedy administration initiated a policy of foreign assistance in Latin America to complement the U.S.’ historic use of military force in the region .
 The president’s plan was announced in the aftermath of long-standing complaints from Latin American dictators and some elected leaders that the U.S. supported European recovery .
 The Kennedy Administration and anticommunist friends in the hemisphere became increasingly concerned about the enthusiasm the Cuban revolution was generating in the region . Most important, the Kennedy Administration became increasingly worried about enthusiasm .
 The United States pressured members of the Organization of American States to expel Cuba . The U.S. pressured OAS members to expel the country from Cuba .
 The CIA began campaigns to assassinate the Cuban leader, and President Kennedy initiated the complete economic blockade that existed until 2015 . The CIA and the U.S. government have been involved in the anti-Cuba campaigns .
 Castro warned that the United States was continuing to plan for another invasion . Castro also said that the U.S. is planning another invasion of the Philippines .
 Soviet Union began providing more economic and military support to the Cubans . The Soviet Union provided ant-sceptic missiles and jet aircraft .
 U.S.–Soviet tensions also began to escalate in June 1961 after an acrimonious summit meeting between Nikita Khrushchev and President Kennedy in Vienna .
 Each declared his continuing commitment to his allies in the divided Germany . Each declared their commitment to each other in a speech .
 During the summer, Soviet troop mobilizations in East Germany were matched by a Kennedy mobilization of the air force and the activation of 150,000 National Guard reservists . In the summer of the same year, the Soviet-East German air force was mobilized .
 The Soviet and East German militaries constructed the infamous Berlin Wall in August . With thousands of East Germans fleeing from East to West Berlin, thousands of people were forced to flee .
 Heated rhetoric from both Cold War adversaries escalated until October . Chairman Khrushchev announced the Soviets were postponing any further treaty making with the German Democratic Republic .
 This signaled a de-escalation of the crisis, but it was to resume in 1962 over Cuba . In 1962, the war broke out between the U.S. and Cuba .
 On October 14, 1962, U.S. spy planes sighted the construction of Soviet surface-to-air missile installations and the presence of Soviet medium-range bombers on Cuban soil .
 Republican leaders had been attacking the president for allowing the Soviet Union to arm Cuba . For months, Republican leaders have been attacking President Obama .
 Kennedy had warned the Soviets in September not to install ‘offensive” military capabilities in Cuba . Kennedy warned the Soviet Union in September that it would not install “offensive’ military capabilities .
 The October photos indicated that the Soviets had also begun to build ground-to-ground missile installations on the island . Kennedy defined the installations as “offensive” and a threat to national security .
 Kennedy assembled a special team of advisers on October 16, known as EXCOMM, to discuss various responses the U.S. might make . After securing the photographs, JFK assembled a team of experts to discuss possible responses .
 Social psychologist Irving Janis claimed that the president had learned the lessons of the failed decision-making process leading up to the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Janis Janis called the propensity of groups to make decisions without detailed reflection on alternative responses and their impacts groupthink . Janis: Groupthink is a form of groupthink that leads to groupthink and groupthink.
 President wanted EXCOMM to deliberate on all possible responses to Soviet missiles on Cuban soil . Janis said that the president wanted to know the consequences that would be faced after each policy choice .
 EXCOMM began with 10 options, then addressed two of these at length . ExCOMM is looking at a range of options, including options for a new CEO .
 Graham Allison notes that although the president asked for a full discussion of various options, he did preclude a reliance on diplomacy to solve the problem . Allison says that although President Obama asked for full discussion, he didn't want to rely heavily on diplomacy .
 The UN ambassador Adlai Stevenson suggested taking the issue to the United Nations, but the president dismissed this approach at the outset .
 Both options had a high probability of escalating to nuclear war if the Soviet Union refused to back down . Both options were likely to escalate to a nuclear war .
 The president, supported by some EXCOMM members, believed that the naval blockade would give the Soviet leadership and diplomacy more time to succeed . The president believed the blockade would allow diplomacy and diplomacy to succeed.
 President Kennedy told the American people in a televised speech on October 22 of his decision to launch the naval blockade . President Kennedy made the announcement in a nationally televised speech .
 High drama, much of it televised, followed the initiation of the naval blockade of Soviet ships heading across the Atlantic to Cuba . The blockade was initiated by the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara encountered resistance from naval officers when he sought to oversee the implementation of the blockade . Graham Allison reported that Secretary McNamara faced resistance from Navy officers .
 Soviet ships sailing across the Atlantic stopped when they confronted the U.S. blockade on October 24 . Soviet ships stopped when confronted by the United States .
 On October 27, an American reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba . The plane was a U.S. reconnaissance plane shot down by Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev sent two notes to the president offering a way out of the conflict . As the drama unfolded, some televised, the leader of the Soviet Union, some TV, offered an alternative solution .
 Soviet missiles would be withdrawn from Cuba, and the United States would promise not to invade Cuba to overthrow the Castro government . The U.S. would promise to withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba and not invade Cuba .
 In addition, the president indicated privately, through diplomatic channels, that obsolete U.S. missiles in Turkey would be disassembled over time . The president also indicated privately that obsolete United States missiles would be dismantled .
 Most scholars argue that the missile crisis constituted Kennedy’s finest hour as statesman and diplomat . Most scholars say it was Kennedy's finest hour of diplomacy .
 The missiles did not change the strategic balance between the United States and the Soviet Union, despite Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s claim in EXCOMM meetings that the missiles were not a threat to U.S. security .
 Social scientists have written that the Kennedy team carefully considered a multitude of policy responses before initiating the naval blockade as a first step . Given the importance of the missiles, many social scientists have said that .
 EXCOMM did not ignore competing analyses, as had been done in the decision process prior to the Bay of Pigs . The decision was made in the wake of the attack on Cuba .
 The blockade policy that was adopted, experts believe, constituted a rational application of force that it was hoped would lead to de-escalation of tensions . Experts believe the blockade policy was a rational use of force to deal with tensions .
 Janis regarded the EXCOMM decision-making process as counter to the groupthink that had characterized the Bay of Pigs invasion one year earlier . Janis said EXCOMm was counter to groupthink .
 The policy was rational, even though observers agreed that the U.S. and the Soviet Union had gone to the brink of nuclear war . It was rational even though it was clear that the two countries had gone on the brink .
 Even the president estimated that there was a 50% probability of full-scale nuclear war . Even the U.S. president estimated .
 In the end, the Soviets withdrew their missiles in exchange for the promise by the Kennedy administration to dismantle the obsolete U.S. missiles in Turkey . In the deal, the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw its own missiles from Turkey . The deal was made with the promise to dismantle obsolete U
 Analysts say the Soviet Union suffered a propaganda defeat for putting missiles on Cuban soil . Analysts said it was a propaganda victory for putting the missiles there in Cuba .
 Khrushchev was criticized by the Chinese government, and within a year, he was ousted from leadership in the Soviet Union . The Chinese government was critical of the former leader .
 In the light of this U.S. “victory,” Kennedy has been defined as courageous and rational . Kennedy has defined himself as courageous, rational, in light of his "victory"
 Graham Allison, in his definitive study of the crisis, offers competing explanations of the decisions made by both the United States and the Soviet Union . Allison offers a more sober-minded conclusion about rational decision making during nuclear crises .
 Allison suggested that organizational dynamics and politics make rational means–ends decisions less than feasible . The rational actor model is based on what leaders seek to achieve and what they use to achieve, she said .
 Using the missile crisis as his case, he traced key decisions made by both powers . He found instances in which bureaucracies behaved using standard operating procedures, not rational practices .
 In the United States case, the CIA, the air force, the State Department, and EXCOMM all acted in the ways they were programmed to, not as instruments of decisions to rationally pursue predetermined goals . In the U.S. case, it's not the CIA or
 Organizational processes in large institutions always interfere with the rational pursuit of policy making and implementation, says John Defterios .
 Allison: The link between decision making and political variables, such as the image of the president, electoral opposition, and upcoming elections, always reduce the capacity for rational decision making .
 President Kennedy was calculating the effects of the missiles on the chances for his party to regain control of Congress in 1962 . For example, he was calculating how the missiles would affect his party's chances of re-election in Congress .
 A second ‘defeat’ over Cuba would have heightened the opposition’s criticisms of his foreign policy, he says . A second defeat would have increased the opposition's criticisms of him .
 In personal terms, Kennedy was driven by the need to establish a public image as courageous and powerful in confronting the Soviets . Kennedy was inspired by the desire to establish an image of himself as brave and powerful .
 Khrushchev had spoken harshly to Castro at a summit meeting in Vienna in 1961 . Castro had been victorious at the Bay of Pigs, and Khrushchevitch had spoken to him at the summit meeting .
 The president’s own ‘credibility’ had been damaged, and a show of force in October 1962 was necessary for his career . The president's own “credible’ was damaged, he said .
 Planting missiles on Cuban soil would lead to a perceived, if not actual, change in the balance of military power between the U.S. and the two superpowers . Planting a missile on Cuba could lead to an actual change in military power .
 In the Soviet Union, organizational processes and internal politics were found to impede the decision to place missiles on Cuban soil and how that policy was carried out .
 Allison lens suggests that leaders of nations, even powerful ones with armaments, can only barely control the information they receive, the decisions they make, and the operationalization of policies . Allison: Leaders of nations can barely control what they receive and what they make .
 McNamara had good reason to conclude that the world was lucky to have survived the gravest nuclear crisis the world has ever seen . From this point of view, former secretary of defense McNamara said, "I'm lucky"
 Stephen Krasner criticized the theoretical insights of Irving Janis and Graham Allison . Subsequent to the crisis, other commentators criticized the insights of the two .
 The president orchestrated informal diplomacy with the Soviets, managed interaction with EXCOMM, and engaged the public in the crisis . Others, such as former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger, Theodore Sorenson, and the president’s brother, Robert Kennedy, emphasize the skill with which
 The president was willing to risk nuclear war to achieve a narrow, largely symbolic victory over the Soviet Union, according to Stone Stone . Stone, a historian, says .
 Stone claimed Khrushchev was left to decide whether the world would embark on a new World War . Stone claimed the leader of the adversary, the Soviet Union, was left alone to decide the outcome of the war .
 From Stone’s point of view, it was bad policy to let the adversary decide the outcome of the crisis, he says . Stone: It's bad policy for letting adversary decide outcome of crisis . He says it's a mistake to let adversaries decide outcome .
 Former secretary of defense Robert McNamara reported that the Kennedy administration did not believe that nuclear weapons were already on the island .
 President Fidel Castro indicated that if such an attack on Cuba had occurred, he would have supported a military response . Fidel Castro said if such a strike occurred, Cuba would have responded with military force . Also said Fidel Castro would have backed military response to the attack .
 McNamara said that if the U.S. had embarked on a strategic air strike, contrary to EXCOMM expectations, nuclear war would have ensued . McNamara: "If the United States had embarked upon a strategic . air strike ... it would have led to nuclear war" McN
 We must learn as much as we can about nuclear danger in October 1962, says McNamara . McNamara: "We must learn about the factors that led to it, about the reasons we escaped the consequences in the events"