 Habermas’s theory of communicative action observes how communication is strategically distorted into an extreme version of what we call the inverted speech situation . This is a version of Haberma's theory of communication .
 Bateson’s ecology of communication shows how metacommunicative messages can affect relations between nations, generating potentially catastrophic relational dynamics but also opportunities for constructive change . Bateson: ‘Communication can be catastrophic but also create constructive change’
 Both nations desperately tried to find some way to resolve the conflict through negotiations rather than violence . While the world contemplated a future without any future, both nations desperately .
 Nuclear deterrence had by this point become an established method of avoiding nuclear conflict through paradoxical communication . Hindering this process was the communicative structure of nuclear deterrence .
 In this communication environment actors could not engage in rational discourse oriented to mutual understanding . They could only negotiate on a metacommunicative level, through strategic, indirect, and contradictory exchanges, to negate the conflict and stabilize their relationship .
 Craig in general and can be seen in everyday interactions from dating to business deals . Craig is a popular online dating star .
 Bateson theorized that communication goes on simultaneously at several levels of abstraction . Bateson's theory is based on the fact that communication is simultaneous at multiple levels of abstractions .
 Habermas's normative foundation is a principle of communicative rationality that requires mutual consensus seeking in a free and open process of reasoned discourse . Bateson’s normative foundation requires ongoing adaptation of conscious purpose within complex interactive systems in which paradoxical contradictions across levels of abstraction can generate creative
 The two theories bring to light pathological tendencies in the doctrine of nuclear deterrence, say experts . The theory of the two theories brings to light .
 Habermas’s theory of communicative action observes how communication is strategically distorted against mutual understanding into an extreme version of what we call the inverted speech situation .
 The inverted speech situation allows communicators to maneuver their opponents into inaction . It allows them to maneuver opponents into taking action .
 Our use of Bateson reveals a weakness in Habermas’s theory of communicative action . We use Bateson to reveal a weakness .
 By overemphasizing the role of the linguistic level of communication, Habermas has underestimated the importance of metacommunicative processes, says Bateson . Bateson’s ecology of communication is foundational in the stabilization and change of social order .
 The Batesonian interpretation of the deterrence situation demonstrates that communication on the meta level can stabilize relations between hostile nations, thereby to keep the reciprocal schismogenesis of the arms race from spiraling out of control .
 This analysis also applies a cybernetic explanation that points out the limiting constraints upon the communicative environment . This analysis was also applied to the cybernetic understanding of the internet .
 This hostility was maintained through the power inherent in nuclear arms . This hostility has been maintained by the power of nuclear arms, it has been said .
 This study relies upon several primary and secondary sources for a timeline of events, with an emphasis upon Chang and Kornbluh’s timeline . The study relies on several primary, secondary sources .
 The phrase nuclear deterrence refers to policy discussions that occurred regarding the international relations between hostile nuclear powers . The phrase was used in nuclear deterrence discussions in the 1950s .
 Dauber believes we need an analytical framework to better understand policy decisions . It is these policy decisions for which policy decisions are difficult to understand .
 Deterrence was never a settled doctrine but rather a subject of intense debate regarding the material potential of nuclear weapons within a wartime environment . Deterrence never was a settled policy but rather an issue of concern about material potential .
 The doctrine of nuclear deterrence emerged because nuclear weapons redefined the consequences of warfare . Nuclear weapons possessed unique material qualities that changed the nature of war and shaped international relations .
 There are two primary schools of thought concerning nuclear engagement in the world . There are both sides of the debate on nuclear engagement .
 Craig Craig says defense from a nuclear attack difficult and almost impossible by conventional means . Craig says it is almost impossible to defend from nuclear attack . Craig: A nuclear attack would be impossible to do so without a nuclear weapon .
 This philosophy creates a paradox in the communication between nuclear nations, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The second level of paradox confounds the other party with conflicting secondary meta messages such that communicative understanding not only cannot be achieved but is strategically avoided to maintain a state of ambiguity . The other party cannot strategically act to maintain an ambiguity .
 The paradoxes of nuclear deterrence both function to create inaction from the other party . The paradox is that it creates inaction from either side .
 The consequences of acting outweigh the consequences of inaction, say experts . In the first paradox, acting outweighs inaction, says the author of the book .
 Through intentional ambiguity, the information suggests that the other party is willing and able to act against their best intentions and engage in a war with catastrophic outcomes for all parties .
 The U.S. sent nuclear arms to Cuba in response to the Soviet arms embargo . The Cuban government was forced to quarantine Cuba from the Soviet Union . The United States also quarantined Cuba from Cuba .
 Each party continually reinforced to the other that it was not in their collective interest to act . But staying true to the second paradox, they left the possibility of their action open .
 In the framework of Habermas’s theory of communicative action, this communicative dynamic constituted what we call an inverted speech situation . We call this situation an inverted situation .
 Habermas distinguishes communicative action, which seeks a freely formed consensus, from strategic action, in which communication is used to pursue their instrumental goals .
 Under challenge actors are required to provide good reasons to justify their claims . Under challenge the actors must prove their claims are justified .
 The paradoxical structure of nuclear deterrence constitutes a communicative relationship that radically inverts this ideal speech situation . The paradoxity of nuclear diplomacy is to be seen as a 'communicative relationship' in the world .
 In order for deterrence to work, both parties must be equally constrained by the other’s power . This is an unstable and disabling form of power neutralization that inverts Habermas's ideal in which power neutrality enables each party to question what is going on .
 In contrast, this communicative relationship relies upon the metacommunicative paradox within deterrence to freeze communication and action . The paradox is that deterrence freezes communication, action .
 The strategic avoidance of mutual understanding becomes an implicit norm of the deterrence relationship . The strategic avoidable understanding becomes the norm of deterrence relationship.
 In the case of deterrence it became recognized that action could only be deterred if both parties’ military systems were unable to produce consequences upon the other without self-destructive effects . The U.S. military system must be able to deter both sides of the fence, the U
 If a party found that the other was too weak for retaliation, then it would behoove them to act . It would be a good idea to act against each other if they found each other too weak .
 If a party found that the other was much more powerful, it would be better to strike first . On the other hand, a strike would be inevitable, if a strike was inevitable, he says .
 The idea of deterrence provides the option of either possible destruction in the case of inaction, or assured destruction in case of action . Deterrence provides the . option of . possible destruction . in the . case of . inaction, the . idea of 'deterrence' provides an option
 The agency of each party has been given over to the other, such that each can only act in response to each other’s action, giving up their right to pursue a rational discourse with ‘‘yes’’ or ‘no’ responses .
 The discourse relies on each participant observing the other (and presenting the self) as an irrational being who is willing to follow through with their threat despite the catastrophic consequences, otherwise the entire threat falls through . The discourse itself relies on the other presenting the other as irrational being .
 At the heart of this discourse is not a norm of reaching mutual understanding through rationally redeemable validity claims, but rather an implicit norm, dictated by the logic of deterrence, that validity claims must not be redeemable in discourse . In order to maintain the inverted speech situation on which deterrence
 This event demonstrates how the inverted speech situation emerges in a time of nuclear crisis, and how it confuses the situation rather than offering a resolution . The inverted speech confuses rather than offers a resolution.
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev made frequent references to the other party not understanding them . Both parties kept redefining the meaning of specific items .
 Confusion occurred over many communications and actions, all of which almost brought the world to war . Confusion led to confusion over many of the world's most important decisions .
 The semantics of these weapons were a linguistic choice in reference to future use, but the terms of the debate were in dispute the entire time . The semantics were made up of the semantics of the weapons .
 Fidel Castro and the Soviet Union exchanged words about a U.S. invasion of Cuba . Fidel Castro was Cuban president of Cuban government in the 1960s . The Soviet Union and the United States have been at odds for decades .
 Khrushchev understood Castro’s letter as a plea to launch a first strike against the U.S. He said it was a plea for a strike on the United States .
 Castro later claimed this interpretation to be the result of a ‘bad translation’’ that was also fueled by deterrence hostilities . Castro later said this interpretation was a result of ‘a bad translation,’'
 Craig Habermas and Bateson intentionally unclear during these communications including the interpretation of the blockade and its legitimacy, and the shooting down over Cuba of a U-2 spy plane .
 Each party repeatedly displayed the confusion engendered by ambiguous messages sent from the other party . Each party displayed confusion by sending ambiguous messages to each other .
 Habermas believes this creates a situation in which the validity of claims have to be addressed . The validity of these claims must be addressed, not necessarily redeemed but addressed nonetheless .
 Claims not only fail to be addressed but are strategically ignored in order to come to an agreement . However, in a deterrence situation, those claims fail to address, they must be addressed .
 An inverted speech situation concludes with both parties strategically avoiding understanding in order to avoid war . An outcome that reasoned discourse could only have endorsed, had reasoned discourse been possible, would have been possible .
 Neither side in a deterrence relationship can be certain of the other’s true nuclear capability . Truth is that neither side in such a relationship is certain of its true capability .
 This is the reason that the ideology of deterrence leads to an arms race . This is why the ideology leads to arms race, says the author of the book .
 A nation cannot trust their opponent’s figures, they must estimate and build up according to what they deem probable . Since a nation can’t trust its opponents’ figures, it must estimate what it is likely to believe .
 This lack of trust in itself creates a policy of ‘strategic superiority’’ to maintain an assured destruction capability in the realm of uncertainty . ‘Strategic superiority'’
 If it were possible to engage in open discourse to ascertain the true balance of strategic forces, then an arms race would not occur, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . Hammond .
 Some of these contradictory meanings occurred in the form of actions that sent a different message than the official statements . Some of the actions in the U.S. have been seen as contradictory .
 Both sides officially claimed to be acting defensively while each took steps that could lead to aggression . Both sides claim to have taken defensive steps in order to avoid aggression .
 The US declared publicly that they were only acting in defense of the United States and allied countries . While the entire time preparing for an invasion of Cuba and overthrow of Castro, the US was preparing for the invasion .
 Under deterrence it becomes necessary for both sides to believe that either would strike first in spite of the fact that they both claim that they will not . Craig Sincerity. Craig . Craig .
 Both sides question the sincerity of the other’s assurances regarding the conditions under which they would engage in a first strike . Once the ideology of deterrence is operative, both sides question each other's assurances .
 If both sides were convinced that the other would not engage in a nuclear war without the other engaging in a first strike, then both would be left open to conventional warfare . This would negate the power inherent in nuclear weapons through deterrence, the author says .
 Each side prepared for aggressive action while publicly claiming to be acting only in defense, but the sincerity of these claims could not be redeemed discursively . As we have seen, each side prepared .
 The ideology of deterrence requires each side to be willing to annihilate the other and be annihilated in turn . Normative rightness is in question under deterrence .
 Both parties recognize and address the possibility of self destruction, but continue to threaten or engage in actions that would promote such a result in order to prevent it . Both parties are aware of the possible self destruction .
 In an ideal speech situation, the parties would attempt to resolve this moral contradiction in discourse . But in the inverted speech situation of deterrence the claim must remain contested by both sides .
 Both sides believed that nuclear war was an unthinkable thing for their opponents to provoke . Both sides frequently stated that they were willing to go to war if the other didn’t cease .
 The possibility of escalating into nuclear engagement over Cuba was discussed as a possible outcome of the crisis . President Kennedy’s EXCOM discussed the possibility of nuclear engagement in Cuba .
 Castro’s communication to the Soviet Union regarding an imminent U.S. invasion led Khrushchev to believe that Castro was requesting a first strike against America . Castro's communication to Soviet Union believed to be a request for first strike .
 Communications between the Soviet Union and United States all contained the warning that the world would end in nuclear war if the other side didn’t back down . Neither side was able to act against the escalation of war . This occurred while the communications between the U.S. and the Soviet
 Bateson: Habermas relies on a model of linguistically mediated communication that fails to grasp the complexity of the mostly unconscious metacommunicative codes . Bateson says the codes function to establish relationships between communicators .
 Habermas struggles with how to theorize this dual structure of language in his normative model of communication . He struggles with theorizing how to do this in his model of language .
 Habermas does attempt to account for the metacommunicative structures in speech . But he does so by privileging linguistic speech acts, excluding those whose function operates outside of these codes .
 These explanations do not allow for a normative communicative process in which paradoxes are used to communicate complex multileveled messages . These explanations don't allow for an explanation of paradoxes in a public discourse .
 Bateson starts from the assumption that language itself ‘is first and foremost a system of gestures . . . and words were invented later. Bateson . Bateson: 'Words are invented later and words invented later'
 Bateson does not want to discard words from language, because they provide useful tools enabling complex ideas to be exchanged . Bateson: Words are useful tools for complex ideas, and they help people understand complex ideas .
 Human relationships are and must be nonverbal, metacommunicative codes, rather than linguistic codes . He makes the argument that human relationships must be, to avoid certain pathologies, negotiated .
 Bateson associates consciousness with purposive action . Bateson does not reduce reason to instrumental rationality . He does not eschew critical self-reflection .
 The hope for rational discourse that for Habermas is implied by human communication, for Bateson can only be realized in a process that, for good and necessary reasons, rarely conforms to a logician’s ideal . Bateson: The hope is that rational discourse is implied
 Bateson is highly critical of a narrow instrumental rationality and sees it as an ecologically dangerous tendency of human mind . Bateson, no less than Habermas, is critical of the narrow rationality .
 Bateson's system theory operates from the understanding that when either the individual or the environment overpower the other’s influence upon a situation, pathologies develop that threaten the individual . The system theory is based on the idea that when an individual or environment overpowers the other's influence upon
 This distortion neglects the relationship-building element within communication that should be fundamental to achieve any type of coordinated action . The distortion of communication neglects this aspect, and it is a key to success .
 Taking communication as an ecology of words, environment, and metacommunication creates a new method of understanding and evaluating interactions that is not possible with the theory of communicative action .
 The world has managed to establish relatively stabilized patterns of communication between nuclear powers . Nuclear deterrence is an irrational framework of the inverted speech situation of the nuclear deterrence .
 The inverted speech situation is a construction of this environment whereby communicative paradox is used to move people into inaction . In inverted speech situations, people are moved into taking action by the paradox .
 We show how this process of paradoxical communication can be understood differently using Bateson’s concept of metacommunication . While the inverted speech situation violates Habermas's norm of communicative rationality, we show how it can be explained differently by Bateson .
 Norms concerning nuclear weapons have been created using metarelational communication that functions even with paradoxes present within the situation . Norms were created by a system that functions with paradoxs present in the situation, say experts .
 These seemingly illogical messages communicate patterns of interaction that can be unpacked and understood through Bateson’s ecology of communication . Bateson: ‘Icynical messages are often misinterpreted and unpacked by the nature of communication.’
 Bateson offers a view of paradox in which it is a basic structure of human communication that functions to establish and maintain relationships, although too often in pathological ways . Bateson argues that human communication is a form of relationship that functions in a pathological way .
 To account for relational paradoxes we need to recognize that the structure of human communication comprises both a primary message and a framing, metacommunicative message that together can generate contradictory meanings . We need to understand that human communication is both primary and framing .
 The pairing of two contrary messages in a locutionary act cannot be resolved by determining the ‘‘true’’ act and discarding the false. ‘True’s’ and ‘false’ acts are not resolved .
 As when the oft-cited but never named schoolboy dipped the pigtails of the girl into the inkwell, the relational meaning cannot simply come from the illocutionary act of either ‘‘I like you and want your attention’’ or ‘
 The first context analyzed will be the large scale environment of the deterrence relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States, which constituted a Batesonian double bind . The U.S. and Soviet Union's deterrence relationship was a 'double bind'
 The first message was a private message from Khrushchev to Kennedy . The second was the official radio announcement that publicly announced the terms of the first message .
 The difference between the two messages was the inclusion of a demand in the public radio address that the United States withdraw missiles from Turkey . The difference in the message is not the U.S. withdrawal of missiles .
 The private message only asked the United States to remove the blockade from Cuba and offer assurances that the U.S. would not invade . The message was sent to Cuba by President Barack Obama .
 The second message claimed to be the same as the first and was presented through official public channels that metacomunicatively gave it the weight of official policy, so it officially superseded the previous communication . While the terms were changed, the terms of the message were changed .
 It was difficult for the U.S. to abide by the second communication because of the international environment . The United States was forced to abide with the international community .
 It would have required several days to figure out if Turkey and the U.N. would allow the missiles to be withdrawn . The United States ambassador to Turkey had already stated that the idea was anathema .
 This caused much debate about whether it was even possible to respond to the terms contained in the second transmission, and what was the official coding of the two transmissions . This caused some debate over whether it could be used to respond .
 Kennedy sent a message to Khrushchev that made a direct reference to the first communication and ignored the second . The EXCOM finally decided to recode the messages making the official transmission of the first . Kennedy sent the message .
 This recoding of messages occurred in spite of the fact that the public communication was coded as official, while private messages were coded as less official . Public communication was official, but private communication was less official, so recoding occurred .
 Khrushchev responded that he would accept the terms set by Kennedy’s response, thus implicitly accepting his metacommunicative recoding, and the crisis ended . Later he responded to Kennedy's request that he accept his terms . The crisis ended in a handshake .
 This action demonstrates what Bateson would call a transcontextual reaction present in the negotiations between the two nations, he says . The action demonstrates the trans contextual reaction to the negotiations .
 Two messages were sent, both coded as official doctrine, but due to scope of delivery and temporal placement, the second was coded as ‘more official’’ than the first . The messages were coded as 'more official' than the other .
 This official coding was placed into question by the EXCOM . They decided that they had the power to reinterpret the metacommunicative codes . The EXCOM decided to do so .
 Craig Habermas and Bateson established by the relations between the Soviet Union and U.S. Relations between the United States and Soviet Union .
 Double bind is a paradoxical situation in which a person is unable to avoid consequences no matter what action they take in response to those instructions . Double bind occurs when a person receives two contradictory relational instructions from someone in the same message .
 The set of instructions is paradoxical through a conflict between the linguistic and metacommunicative codes . The instructions are paradoxical and contradictory, says the author .
 Analysis of nuclear deterrence discourse shows how both parties transmit conflicting metacommunicative messages from which both parties understand there is no correct response . Both parties understand that there are no correct responses to each other .
 Whatever either party chooses to do, they can still be punished with a first strike . Whatever they do, the first strike is likely to be a strike strike .
 Each message forces the parties to evaluate the metacommunicative coding before forming a response . In this relationship, no message is ‘just this and nothing more,’’
 The act of recoding the official Soviet messages by Kennedy reflects the fact that they were operating within a double bind . Kennedy's actions reflect the fact he was operating within the double bind of the Soviets .
 The Soviet Union accepted the new code, even when it conflicted with the officially released public transmission . This is reinforced when the Soviet Union agreed to accept the code . This was reinforced when it was accepted by the Soviets .
 The scenario was established through the constant ‘no-win’’ situation caused by deterrence . The situation was established by deterrence, the author says . ‘No-wins’ is the result of deterrence .
 This use of transcontextual gifts by both nations was not a ploy or a fluke, but rather a reaction that makes sense in the context of the double bind .
 Bateson describes a threat as a statement with a denotative message that refers to a possible future yet that future depends upon the other party’s response to the threat . Threat ritual Bateson says a threat is a statement .
 Threats create a paradoxical communicative situation in that they not only refer to something that doesn’t exist but also imply a willingness to engage in a possible future while the sincerity of this statement is in question . Threats make a statement that doesn't exist but implies a willingness
 The ritual metacommunicatively states ‘don’t’’ in the denotated message of a proposal of a possible future containing violence . The rest of the message states that the violence is contingent upon the future actions of the other actors .
 Under nuclear deterrence, nations engage in metacommunicative threat rituals to secure themselves from attack . Nations engage in rituals to ensure they are safe from attacks .
 One party suggests that they are willing to go to war, a proposal that would critically endanger both parties . The other party is expected that the other party would not complete the interaction and go war . Both parties are expected to reject the proposal .
 The initial metacommunicative message from both nations isn’t a message of war, but rather a . message of ‘‘don't’’ conveyed upon the world stage . The primary meaning of the message is that both nations are sending the primary message
 This is the primary strategy of deterrence, and in order to be successful it relies upon an expected response to the message . "Deterioration" relies upon a response to a message, and the message is expected .
 When applied to nuclear arms this communicative strategy can become retrogressive, it can evolve into the policy of brinkmanship practiced by both Eisenhower’s Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, and by Khrushchev . The policy was also practiced by Dulles and Khrush
 The first possible event would be the placement of missiles in Cuba by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union may have placed missiles there in Cuba .
 Two elements make this an ambiguous starting point . While initially it appears to be an interaction that would qualify, two elements make it an ambiguous start point .
 The first is the fact that the Soviet Union was placing missiles in secret . The second is that the missiles were placed in secret, the first is that they were placed by the Soviets in secret.
 Attempting to hide their actions could be interpreted as meaning that they did not intend to use this action to engage in a threat ritual . Attempts to hide actions could have been interpreted as indicating that they didn't intend to engage into a ritual .
 Craig Habermas and Bateson missiles could be seen as a part of the threat ritual . If this is the case, it could be part of a threat ritual.
 Scholars have noted that even though Khrushchev was probably badly advised, he certainly knew that this deployment would be interpreted as hostile . Scholars have also noted that . even though he was probably bad advised, . certainly knew . that this . deployment would have been interpreted as hostility .
 This event was carried out publicly on the international stage as a clear ‘don’t’s’’ message regarding the placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba . ‘This is a clear 'don't’� message,’ says Russian President Vladimir Putin
 It took the form of an already established threat ritual that was apparent in the EXCOM when it was discussed how to carry out this threat, and what appropriate actions needed to take place prior to the blockade .
 Each event referenced by the other party as the starting point for the hostile interactions . Whatever the original intent, each event was referenced as the beginning point of the hostilities .
 The United States made clear that they felt the placement of nuclear weapons on Cuba was a clear threat that they would not allow . The U.S. made clear they felt that they . felt the . placement of . nuclear weapons was a . clear threat .
 The Soviet Union claimed that the blockade was the primary instigator of hostilities . The blockade was just responding to that provocative act, the Soviet Union said .
 Even with an ambiguous starting point, both parties recognized that this interaction was framed in the ritual of a threat . The other party referenced possible future events to the other party .
 The codes took the form of schismogenetic relations, or self-referencing behavior patterns, that were established between the nations . These codes were established by the nations in the 1930s .
 Bateson classified these response patterns as either symmetrical or complimentary, either of which when left unchecked can run away in an exponential pattern and lead to the breakdown of the whole system .
 One country increases their arsenal, the first responds by increasing still more, and so on. The first responds to the first's increase by increasing more and more . The other increases their arsenals by increasing their arsenal . The first increases their weapons, the other increases theirs by increasing them .
 Complementary systems work when one party responds with a complimentary reaction, for example hostility is met with submission, which causes more hostility, or causes more aggression, or more submission . Complementaries work when the two parties respond to each other's actions with a complementary reaction .
 Schismogenesis takes the ‘self’s’ out of the steering properties of the environment and causes the self to respond to the system rather than steer it .
 A separation between a person and their communicative environment can create pathological actions . The environment applying corrective measures or destroying the ecology to which the self is directly tied can create the self-destructive actions .
 Without steering available through the self, the system can run to destruction unless corrective measures are applied . The self-centered society needs to be steered by the self to avoid its own fate .
 This was a symmetrical schismogenetic relationship whereby each party matched the other’s hostility in relation to weapon stockpiles . The relationship was a 'sympathetic' relationship between the two parties .
 A second process of symmetrical schismogenesis was the relationship of threat . The relationship between threat and threat was formed by the threat of threat.
 Each party saw the other as the threat instigator, and the threats became entwined to the point that increasing hostility was unmanageable . As shown above, each party saw each of them as the instigator .
 In the Cuban missile crisis, both parties claimed to be acting in response to the other when exchanging threats . Both sides claimed to have acted in response when they exchanged threats .
 Third process, enabled by transcontextual gifts arising from the double bind relationship, corrected escalation of hostilities inherent in the first two processes, led to a resolution of the crisis .
 Our construction of the inverted speech situation demonstrates how paradoxes present within actually occurring communication can be understood using the theory of communicative action . Conclusion: The theory of communication action can be used to understand paradoxes .
 This construction has the benefit of showing how paradox operates against actors reaching a rationally motivated consensus . This construction shows how paradox works against reaching a consensus .
 This created a pathological situation in which survival of the species was threatened by the imperative of strategic advantage . The situation was created by the need for strategic advantage in order to survive the species .
 The United States and Soviet Union were able to navigate these paradoxes and end hostilities around Cuba . What it does not demonstrate is how the U.S. and the Soviet Union managed to navigate this paradoxes .
 This is not necessarily a failure of Habermas’s theory of communicative action, but it does demonstrate the limits of this normative model . This does not necessarily be a failure . It does demonstrate that this is not the case of a normative model, but the case shows the
 This limitation of Habermas’s theory indicates the need for further analysis, says Haberma . ‘Habermas's theory’ is limited to a limited amount of analysis,’ says Habermas .
 From a historical perspective, perhaps some past event not covered in this analysis would prove key to the entire situation . Perhaps some past events not covered would prove crucial to the current situation .
 A game theoretic analysis would show that the strategic players behaved according to a rational assessment of the situation . From a political science perspective, perhaps a game theory analysis could show that . Perhaps a game theoretical analysis would have shown that the players behaved in a rational way .
 From a psychological perspective, perhaps the ultimate desire for survival overcame all other objectives and a diplomatic solution was manufactured after the fact . The ultimate motivation for survival may have been the desire to survive, perhaps even for survival .
 We propose to investigate the possibility that the solution lies within the paradoxical communicative environment itself . We, however, propose to look at the possibility of the solution to the problem .
 The solution should present itself by applying a different normative theory that will account for the stabilization of relationships through strategic action . From the viewpoint of this analysis, which holds that normative communication theories should be tested by using them to address actually occurring communication problems .
 Bateson’s communication theory provides a normative model for evaluating pathologies in the communication environment that threaten the survival of the human species, says the study .
 It shows how paradoxical patterns of interaction can operate to create relatively stable relationships in spite of strategically avoiding Habermas’s standard of communicative rationality .
 It is an alternative normative theory because it explains why certain ‘Habermasian nonrational properties’’ of human communication are not only practically unavoidable but functionally necessary in the formation of human relationships .
 The application of this normative theory to the problem of nuclear deterrence demonstrates the strength and weakness of the theory . The use of this theory to solve nuclear deterrence is a test of its strength and weaknesses .
 Even actions undertaken in a paradoxical environment like nuclear deterrence can only be justified under challenge by arguing that they are reasonable under the circumstances . The arguments can be debated, and those arguments can't be debated .
 We are left with a problem for normative communication theory to address . We need to find a solution for this problem to be solved .
 The beginning of a solution may be to recognize that Habemas’s lifeworld-system distinction is relative, not absolute . There is no lifeworld entirely outside of systems because all relationships are ecologically embedded interactional systems .
 This application demonstrates that a fundamental element of communication, that of metacommunication, is inadequately conceptualized as merely a distortion of the communicative process . It demonstrates that this application demonstrates the fundamental elements of communication are not being understood .
 Metacommunication is a fundamental process that frames communicative action, forms relationships, and generates social order . It is the result of the process of communicative communication and communication . It can be used as a tool to communicate with people and form relationships .
 While Habermas is renowned for close readings of complex theorists, without his ambiguous highly conditional qualifying statement ‘‘sufficiently,’’ this claim could easily demonstrate a surface reading of Bateson’s work with the double bind .
 We believe that taking into consideration Bateson’s work with paradox, he does sufficiently demonstrate a marked difference between the three types of paradox observed . We also believe that Bateson does not demonstrate a clear difference in the three kinds of paradox .
 Communicative action or the mode of communication for society as a whole . Communication is a form of communication in society .
 Hearings before the Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee of the Committee on Armed Services, United States Senate Ninetieth Congress, Second Session . Hearings were held in a hearing before the Armed Services Committee .