 For conspiracy theories surrounding the assassination of John's brother Robert, see Robert F Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories . For other conspiracy theories, see John Kennedy's brother's assassination .
 The assassination of John F Kennedy on November 22, 1963, and the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald by Jack Ruby by nightclub owner Jack Ruby spawned numerous conspiracy theories . Texas Governor John Connally minutes before the assassination .
 These theories allege the involvement of the CIA, the Mafia, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro, the KGB, or some combination of these entities .
 The original FBI investigation and Warren Commission report, as well as an alleged ""benign CIA cover-up"", have led to the claim that the federal government deliberately covered up crucial information in the aftermath .
 In 1979, the U.S. House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that Kennedy was probably assassinated in a conspiracy . The committee concluded that Oswald did not act alone .
 The HSCA concluded a second gunman also fired at Kennedy, based on acoustic evidence that was later discredited . The second gunman was also shot at Kennedy . The evidence was later later discredited.
 Views of those close to Kennedy 2: Circumstantial evidence of a cover-up . Circumstant evidence of an attempt to cover up has been found in the Kennedy family . 2: There is no evidence of any wrongdoing in the case of Kennedy .
 Alleged inconsistencies include witness tampering, intimidation, and foul play . Allegations of witness tampering and witness tampering . 3 alleged inconsistencies in the case .
 Witness deaths 4 Allegations of evidence suppression, tampering, and fabrication . Allegations that evidence suppression and tampering was suppression, tampered with, and fabricated . 4
 Role of Oswald 5.10 Alternative gunmen 5.11 Three tramps 6 Allegations of other conspirators 6.11 Allegations that Oswald was involved in the assassination .
 Assassination of John F Kennedy Handbill circulated on November 21, 1963, one day before the assassination . Handbill was circulated in 1963, a day before JFK's assassination .
 President John F Kennedy was assassinated by gunfire while traveling in a motorcade in an open-top limousine in Dallas, Texas in 1963 .
 Immediately after President Kennedy was shot, many people suspected that the assassination was part of a larger plot, and broadcasters speculated that Dallas right-wingers were involved .
 Mark Lane has been described as firing ""the first literary shot"" with his article, ""Defense Brief for Oswald"", in the National Guardian's December 19, 1963 issue . Lane wrote the article in which he described Oswald as a defense brief for the assassin .
 In 1964, the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald had acted alone and that no credible evidence supported the contention that he was involved in a conspiracy to assassinate the president . Thomas Buchanan's book Who Killed Kennedy? published in May 1964, has been credited as the first to allege a conspiracy .
 The Commission also indicated that Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara, Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, FBI director J Edgar Hoover, CIA director John A McCone, and Secret Service Chief James J Rowley each individually reached the same
 The Zapruder film indicated that the fatal shot to Kennedy's head was fired from the ""grassy knoll", a small hill that featured prominently in later conspiracy theories . During the trial of Clay Shaw in 1969, New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison challenged the single-bullet theory
 The HSCA concluded that at least four shots were fired, with a ""high probability"" that two gunmen fired at the President, and that a conspiracy was probable . It concluded that there was a 'high probability' that two men fired at President .
 President Trump set a new deadline of October 26, 2021 for the remaining documents to be released . Exercising a provision of the 1992 act that allows for a President to extend the deadline, President Trump extended the deadline . The new deadline for the documents is October 26 .
 In October 2021, President Biden further extended the deadline to December 15, 2022, citing delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic . The deadline has been extended to December 2015 .
 The number of books written about the assassination of Kennedy has been estimated to be between 1,000 and 2,000 . The books have been written about Kennedy's assassination .
 Author David Krajicek describes Kennedy assassination enthusiasts as people belonging to ""conspiracy theorists"" on one side and ""debunkers"" on the other . Krajicesk describes conspiracy theorists as people who believe the Kennedy assassination was a hoax .
 Public opinion polls consistently show that most Americans believe there was a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy . Most Americans believe the government was involved in Kennedy's assassination .
 Polls show no agreement on who else may have been involved in the shooting . Polls also show that polls also show no consensus on who was involved in shooting .
 A 2003 Gallup Poll reported that 75% of Americans do not believe that Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone . 75% believe Oswald acted alone, according to the poll .
 ABC News poll found 70% of respondents suspected that the assassination involved more than one person . That same year, a poll found that 70% suspected that more people were involved .
 In 2009, 76% of people polled for CBS News said they believed the President had been killed as the result of a conspiracy . 76% said they believe the President was killed as a result of an assassination .
 A 2013 Gallup Poll found that 61% of Americans believed other people besides Oswald were involved in the assassination . That figure is the lowest figure in nearly 50 years .
 Robert F Kennedy Jr. believes his uncle was killed in a conspiracy, and endorsed the book JFK and the Unspeakable . Kennedy's nephew, Robert F. Kennedy Jr., believes the murder was a conspiracy .
 He has also said that his father, Robert F Kennedy, who publicly supported the Warren Commission, privately called it a ""shoddy piece of craftsmanship"", and was ""fairly convinced"" that others besides Oswald were involved in his brother's assassination .
 After Oswald's death, FBI Director J Edgar Hoover wrote a memo detailing that the Dallas Police would not have had enough evidence against Oswald without the FBI's information .
 CIA intercepts say someone impersonated Oswald in phone calls and visits made to embassies in Mexico City weeks before the assassination . The phone calls were made to the Soviet and Cuban embassies, officials say .
 The Oswald case was one of the CIA's most closely guarded secrets on the Oswald case . Over the next 40 years this became one of its most closely kept secrets .
 A CIA career agency officer, Anne Goodpasture, admitted in sworn testimony that she had disseminated the tapes herself . She admitted to disseminating the tapes .
 An individual identifying himself as Lee Oswald contacted the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City inquiring as to any messages . The Central Intelligence Agency advised that on October 1st, 1963, an extremely sensitive source had reported that an individual identified himself as Oswald .
 Special agents are of the opinion that the referred-to individual was not Lee Harvey Oswald . Special agents say they believe the person referred to Oswald was not Oswald .
 Oswald's name is used in the tape and the photograph of the man at the Soviet Embassy . Oswald was killed in November 1963 . The tape, the photograph, and the photo of Oswald, are shown in the video .
 Johnson relayed his concern to both Chief Justice Earl Warren and Senator Richard Russell, telling them that they could ""serve America"" by joining the commission Johnson had established to investigate the assassination . The commission would later become known unofficially as the Warren Commission .
 In turn, Katzenbach wrote a memorandum to Lyndon Johnson aide Bill Moyers that said the results of the FBI's investigation should be made public .
 Katzenbach suggested that a commission be formed, composed of people with ""impeccable integrity"", to conduct a complete investigation of the assassination . Katzenberg also suggested that the commission be made of people who have 'impecable integrity' to conduct an investigation .
 Johnson formed the Warren Commission with Earl Warren as chairman and Senator Richard Russell as a member . Four days after Katzenbach's memo, Johnson formed a Warren Commission .
 Richard Buyer wrote that many witnesses whose statements pointed to a conspiracy were either ignored or intimidated by the Warren Commission . Buyer says many witnesses' statements pointed out a conspiracy pointed to conspiracy were ignored .
 Bill Sloan wrote that Arlen Specter tried to humiliate, discredit, and intimidate Hill into changing her story . The Last Dissenting Witness, a 1992 biography of Jean Hill, was published by Bill Sloan .
 Breaking the Silence quotes several assassination eyewitnesses as saying that Warren Commission interviewers repeatedly cut short or stifled any comments casting doubt on the conclusion that Oswald had acted alone . The book, Breaking The Silence, is published by the group of eyewitnesses .
 In his book Crossfire, Jim Marrs gives accounts of several people who said they were intimidated by either FBI agents or anonymous individuals into altering or suppressing what they knew regarding the assassination .
 Reynolds later testified to the Warren Commission that, in February 1964, someone attempted to kidnap his 10-year-old daughter . Reynolds testified that someone tried to kidnap Reynolds' daughter in 1964 .
 Jim Koethe was one of two reporters who went to Ruby's apartment the night after he shot Oswald . Koethe is one of the reporters who visited the apartment that night .
 Bill Hunter was one of two reporters who went to Ruby's apartment the night after he shot Oswald . Hunter says Ruby shot Oswald the night before he shot him . Hunter: Ruby was the only one of the two reporters to go to the apartment that night .
 Killed by a policeman with a gunshot at a police station; the gunshot was deemed accidental . Died by a gunshot to a police officer at the station .
 William Whaley was the taxi driver who took Oswald from the scene of the assassination . Whaley took Oswald to the White House after he was shot by President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Died in a car crash, alongside the driver of the car which crashed into his cab . Died alongside the other driver in the crash .
 Howard went to Ruby's apartment with Koethe and Hunter the night after he shot Oswald . Howard also went to the apartment where Ruby shot Oswald the day after the shooting .
 Witness Lee Bowers was in a railway interlocking tower that overlooked Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination . Lee Bower was a witness who was in the tower that overlooks the site at the times .
 Killam later moved to Florida, and died there . He received a phone call at 4 am, after which he went to a building in downtown Pensacola and jumped out of a first floor window . Killam bled to death from cuts to his throat, amid pieces of broken
 Died of a gunshot to the head in a bar; no one else was killed in the bar shooting . No one else died in the shooting; no other person was killed .
 Jones Jr. implied it was a case of mistaken identity and that Domingo Benavides was the intended victim . Jones Jr.'s Jr. said it was not a murder-suicide, but a suicide .
 Nancy Jane Mooney, aka Betty McDonald, was a stripper at Jack Ruby's club . She was known as Betty McDonald .
 Mooney was arrested for fighting with her roommate and reportedly hanged herself in her Dallas jail cell . Mooney reportedly killed herself in jail cell after fighting with roommate .
 Tippit and reported this to the FBI, was shot in the head in January 1964 . He was shot by the FBI in 1964, but survived .
 The Ramparts article also referenced witnesses who said that Ruby and Oswald knew each other and that Ruby had ""gangland"" connections . Witnesses said Ruby had connections with gangland gangland .
 In 1973, similar claims about suspicious deaths of witnesses were brought to national attention by the theatrically released movie Executive Action . Similar claims were made by the same film Executive Action in 1973 .
 The Senate Intelligence Committee and the House Select Committee on Assassinations are investigating the assassination of George W. Bush . Garrison is the chairman of the committee . Garrison was the CIA director in the late 1980s .
 Vincent Bugliosi devoted two pages of his book Reclaiming History: The Assassination of President John F Kennedy to journalist Dorothy Kilgallen . The author claims 50 people linked to the assassination were murdered as part of a cover-up .
 Kilgallen was skeptical of the official version of the assassination of President Kennedy and Jack Ruby’s shooting of Lee Oswald . He was publicly skeptical of official versions of the shooting .
 During 1964 and 1965, she wrote several newspaper articles on the subject and many relevant short items in her daily column . She also wrote several short articles about the subject .
 Whether Kilgallen and Ruby had a second conversation in a private room in the Dallas County, Texas courthouse has been disputed .
 Kilgallen was found dead in her Manhattan townhouse in November 1965 . Two months later, on November 8, 1965, she was found to be dead .
 Her death was determined to have been caused by a combination of alcohol and barbiturates . She was found to have died from alcohol, barbitura and other drugs . Her death has been ruled out of alcohol poisoning .
 Kilgallen’s husband and son were in their five-story townhouse throughout the night when she died . He added that the presence of her husband and child in their townhouse proves she could not have been murdered .
 Bugliosi said an intruder would have awakened her husband or her eleven-year-old son and then the husband would have called the police . According to author Jerome Kroth, Mafia figures Sam Giancana, John Roselli, Carlos Prio, Jimmy Hoffa, Charles
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations investigated another alleged mysterious death – that of Rose Cheramie, whose real name was Melba Christine Mercades . Lee Bowers, Gary Underhill, William Sullivan, David Ferrie, Clay Shaw, George de Mohrenschildt, four show
 Louisiana State Police Lieutenant Francis Fruge traveled to Eunice, Louisiana, on November 20, 1963, to pick up Cheramie . She sustained minor injuries when she was hit by a car two days before the assassination . The Committee reported that Louisiana State police Lieutenant .
 Cheramie was admitted and treated at the state hospital in Jackson, Louisiana for alcoholism and heroin addiction . She was admitted to the hospital for alcoholism, heroin addiction and alcoholism .
 Warren Commission named 12 witnesses to the Tippit shooting and its aftermath . The Warren Commission released a list of witnesses in the shooting .
 Warren Reynolds was shot in the head 2 months after the Tippit shooting, but survived . Warren Reynolds, a witness, survived .
 Author Gerald Posner said list was taken from group of about 10,000 people connected even in the most tenuous way to the assassination . People identified in official investigations and research of conspiracy theorists .
 Many of those who believe in the JFK assassination conspiracy also believe evidence against Oswald was either planted, forged, or tampered with . Allegations of evidence suppression, tampering, and fabrication have been made .
 Josiah Thompson stated that the Commission ignored the testimony of seven eyewitnesses who said they saw smoke in the vicinity of the grassy knoll at the time of the assassination . Thompson: The Commission ignored testimony of an eighth witness who smelled gunpowder .
 Jim Marrs wrote that the Commission did not seek the testimony of eyewitnesses on the triple underpass whose statements pointed to a shooter on the grassy knoll . Marrs: The Commission didn't seek testimony from eyewitnesses who said they saw a shooter .
 Gordon Arnold said that his film of the motorcade was taken by two policemen shortly after the assassination . Author Jim Marrs and documentary producer Nigel Turner presented the account of Gordon Arnold .
 Another witness, identified as Beverly Oliver, came forward in 1970 and said she was the 'Babushka Lady' who is seen filming the motorcade . Beverly Oliver came forward as a witness to Zapruder film in 1970 .
 Oliver was approached by men who wanted to take her film, develop it and return it to her within ten days . Oliver said they wanted to return the film to her in ten days, but she said they would only take it back if they developed it .
 Withheld documents have been withheld over the years, including documents from the Warren Commission, the House Select Committee on Assassinations, and the Church Committee . Richard Buyer and others have complained that many documents pertaining to the assassination were withheld .
 The existence of several secret documents related to the assassination suggests to some the possibility of a cover-up . Tax return information which identified employers and sources of income has not yet been released .
 In 2010, the CIA said it had over 1,100 documents in relation to the assassination that have not been released due to national security-related concerns . In total, about 2,000 pages in total, that have been released . The CIA said in 2010 that it has over 1
 Photographs of Oswald carrying a Carcano rifle in his backyard are evidence against Oswald . The weapon identified by the Warren Commission as the assassination weapon . Photographs show Oswald carrying the rifle .
 Oswald photos are genuine and Oswald's wife Marina said that she took them . The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that the Oswald photos were genuine . Oswald was killed by the assassination of President Kennedy in November 1963 .
 In 2009, the journal Perception published the findings of Hany Farid, a professor at Dartmouth College, who used 3D modeling software to analyze one of the photographs .
 He demonstrated that a single light source could create seemingly incongruent shadows . He concluded that the photograph revealed no evidence of tampering .
 Groden says a photograph of a cadaver's head was inserted over another depicting a large exit wound in the back of the president's head . Groden: A photograph was inserted into a photo of the head of a corpse . The president's exit wound was caused by a large
 Dino Brugioni examined the Zapruder film of the John F Kennedy assassination the evening of Saturday 23 November 1963 and into the morning of Sunday 24 November 1963 . He concluded that there was no detectable evidence of manipulation or image alteration on the film's original version .
 Brugioni recalls seeing a ""white cloud"" of brain matter, three or four feet above Kennedy's head . This ""spray"" lasted for more than one frame of the film . Brugionsi says it lasted for one frame .
 The version of the Zapruder film available to the public depicts the fatal head shot on only one frame of the film, frame 313 . The film is available only to a public who sees the fatal shot .
 David Lifton presented the thesis that President Kennedy's dead body had been altered between the Dallas hospital and the autopsy site at Bethesda for the purposes of creating erroneous conclusions about the number of and direction of the shots .
 The Warren Commission found that the shots that killed Kennedy and wounded Connally were fired from an Italian 6.5mm Manlicher Carcano rifle owned by Oswald . Oswald was the only person to fire the rifle that fired the shots .
 Deputy Sheriff Roger Craig claimed that he saw ""7.65 Mauser"" stamped on the barrel of the weapon . Craig claimed to have seen the weapon with a number of words on it .
 District Attorney Henry Wade told the press that the weapon found in the book depository was a 7.65 Mauser, and the media reported this .
 The Warren Commission identified Weitzman as the source of the original source of information that the weapon was a Mauser . Warren Commission later identified the weapon as a 6.2mm rifle . Author Richard Gilbride suggested that both weapons were involved in the assassination .
 Warren Commission determined that three bullets were fired at the presidential motorcade . Three bullets fired at President George W. Bush's motorcade, the Warren Commission ruled .
 One of the three bullets missed the vehicle entirely; another bullet hit President Kennedy and passed through his body before striking Governor Connally . The third bullet was the fatal head shot to the President .
 Some claim the bullet that passed through President Kennedy's body and hit Governor Connally was missing too little mass to account for the total weight of bullet fragments later found by the doctors who operated on Connally at Parkland Hospital .
 Two of Kennedy's autopsy surgeons, Commander James Humes and Lt. Robert Shaw, were among the autopsy surgeons . The autopsy surgeons were also involved in the Kennedy's death .
 Author Josiah Thompson took issue with this claim in his book Six Seconds in Dallas . However, Thompson says it is not true .
 Forensic pathologist Dr. Thompson added up the weight of the bullet fragments listed in the doctor reports and concluded that their total weight ""could"" have been less than the mass missing from the bullet .
 Cyril Wecht and the Assassination Archives and Research Center petitioned Attorney General Janet Reno to recover the remaining bullet fragments from Connally's body . Wecht said the fragments would disprove the Warren Commission's single-bullet, single-gunman conclusion .
 Oswald fired three shots in a short amount of time from such a rifle . Evidence raises questions about the number of shots fired, the origin of the shots, and Oswald's ability to accurately fire three shots .
 In 1979, the House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that there were four shots, one coming from the grassy knoll . The Warren Commission concluded that one of the shots hit President Kennedy in ""the back of his neck" and struck Governor Connally .
 Mary Moorman said in a TV interview immediately after the assassination that there were either three or four shots close together, that shots were still being fired after the fatal shot, and that she was in the line of fire . Moorman says she was shot in the head by the president's
 In 1967, Josiah Thompson concluded from a close study of the Zapruder film and other forensic evidence, corroborated by the eyewitnesses, that four shots were fired in Dealey Plaza . Nellie Connally was seated in the presidential car next to her husband, Texas Governor
 She said she believed that her husband was wounded by a bullet separate from the two that hit Kennedy . Kennedy's widow said she believes he was wounded in the shooting .
 When interviewed by the Warren Commission in 1964, he reported that he saw two men behind the grassy knoll's stockyard fence before the shooting .
 The men did not appear to be acting together or doing anything suspicious, police say .
 Bowers said one of the men remained behind the fence and lost track of the second man whose clothing blended into the foliage . After the shooting, one man remained behind a fence, Bowers says .
 Bowers was interviewed by Mark Lane and Emile de Antonio in 1966 for their documentary film Rush to Judgment . Bowers said he saw something that attracted his attention, either a flash of light or smoke from the knoll .
 Bowers told Lane Lane that he heard three shots, the last two in quick succession . Bowers said he heard the shots from the gunman's gun . Lane told Lane that Bowers heard the gunshots .
 The Newmans said they thought the fatal shot came from ""the garden"" behind them . They said that they thought it came from the garden behind them.
 He viewed the presidential motorcade from the Terminal Annex Building's roof . President Obama's motorcade was seen from the terminal Annex Building .
 In 1993, George Whitaker, a manager at the Ford Motor Company's Rouge Plant in Detroit, told professor Doug Weldon that after reporting to work on November 25, 1963, he discovered the presidential limousine in the Rouge Plant's B building with its windshield removed .
 Whitaker said that the limousine's removed windshield had a through-and-through bullet hole from the front . Whitaker: "The driver's car was shot in the head with a bullet through the windshield"
 He said he was directed by one of Ford's vice presidents to use the windshield as a template to fabricate a new windshield for installation in the limousine .
 Film and photographic evidence of the assassination have led viewers to different conclusions regarding the origin of the shots .
 When the fatal shot struck, the President's head and upper torso moved rapidly backwards – indicating, many observers, a shot from the right front . Many observers believe the shot was fired from the front .
 Zapruder film shows Kennedy's head pivoting downward before it moves rapidly backwards . Paul Chambers believes that the fatal head shot is consistent with a high velocity rifle .
 Anthony Marsh suggests that this downward motion was caused by driver William Greer's deceleration of the car . Anthony Marsh suggested that the downward motion may have been caused by Greer decelerating of the vehicle .
 Acoustical analysis that HSCA presented as evidence for two gunmen has since been discredited . Acoustic analysis that was presented as . evidence for . two gunmen was also discredited .
 HSCA acoustic experts said the Dictabelt evidence came from police officer McLain . McLain was a police officer in the area and was killed in 2011 .
 McLain stated that he was not yet in Dealey Plaza when the assassination occurred . McLain said he did not know he was in the area at the time of the assassination . McLains said he was only in the city when the shooting occurred .
 They concluded that the recording was made after the President had already been shot . The recording did not indicate any additional gunshots, they said .
 Thomas challenged the 2005 Science & Justice article in which he restated his conclusion that there actually were two gunmen . Thomas also restated the conclusion that the gunmen were two men . Thomas: "There were actually two gunmen. There was no one in the line"
 Some critics skeptical of the official ""single bullet theory" have stated that the bullet's trajectory would have had to change course to pass through Connally's rib cage and fracture his wrist .
 Kennedy's death certificate locates the bullet at ""about the level of the third thoracic vertebra"" – which some claim was not high enough to exit his throat . Some claim the bullet did not exit Kennedy's throat, and that the bullet was too high to exit the throat
 The autopsy descriptive sheet displays a diagram of the President's body with the same low placement at the third thoracic vertebra . There is conflicting testimony regarding the autopsy performed on Kennedy's body .
 A bone fragment found in Dealey Plaza by William Harper the day following the assassination was reported by the HSCA's Forensic Pathology Panel to have been from Kennedy's skull . A part of the parietal bone was found in the area by Harper the next day .
 Some critics of the lone gunman theory say the bone fragment is not parietal bone, but is actually a piece of Kennedy's occipital bone ejected from an exit wound in his head .
 They allege this finding is evidence of a cover-up, as it proves that the skull radiographs taken during the autopsy, which do not show significant bone loss in the occipital area, are not authentic . They allege that the findings are evidence of an attempt to cover up .
 The Warren Commission examined the capabilities of the Carcano rifle and ammunition, as well as Oswald's military training and post-military experience . Oswald had the ability to fire three shots within a time span of 4.5 to 5.2 seconds .
 An army specialist using Oswald's rifle was able to duplicate the feat and even improved on the time . According to their report, an army specialist used the rifle to duplicate it .
 Oswald's rifle was tested 47 times and found to be "quite accurate" compared to the accuracy of an M14 rifle . The report also states that the Army Infantry Weapons Evaluation Branch test fired the rifle 47 times .
 Oswald's military records show that he qualified as ""sharpshooter"" in 1956 . Marine Corps Major Eugene Anderson testifies that Oswald qualified as a shooter in the Marine Corps in 1956.
 Conspiracy theorists contend Oswald was a notoriously poor shot, that his rifle was inaccurate, and that no reconstruction of the event has ever been able to duplicate his ability to fire three shots within the time frame given by the Warren Commission . Oswald was confirmed marksmanship in the USMC .
 The Commission came to this conclusion after examining Oswald's Marxist and pro-Communist background . Oswald's defection to Russia, the New Orleans branch of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee he had organized, and the various public statements made by him espousing Marxism .
 Conspiracy theorists have argued that Oswald's pro-Communist behavior was in fact a carefully planned ruse . Some conspiracy theorists argue that U.S. intelligence agencies infiltrated left-wing groups and conducted counterintelligence operations in communist countries .
 Dallas Police Department Chief Jesse Curry expressed doubts that Oswald killed President Kennedy . Dallas police chief expressed doubts about Oswald's involvement in JFK's assassination . Chief Curry said he doubts Oswald killed Kennedy .
 Oswald claimed he went outside to watch P Parade and was “out with in front” at the time of the assassination . Oswald claimed that he was at the “front entrance to the first floor” when he encountered a policeman . Oswald said he was ‘out with
 Several FBI employees had made statements indicating that Oswald was indeed a paid informant . But the Commission was unable to verify the veracity of those claims .
 FBI agent James Hosty reported that his office's interactions with Oswald were limited to dealing with his complaints about being harassed by the Bureau for being a communist sympathizer . Oswald's complaints were only to deal with his complaint that he had been harassed for being communist . Hosty said Oswald was
 A former roommate of Oswald, James Botelho, said he believed Oswald was involved in an intelligence assignment in Russia . Botelo did not mention this suspicion in his testimony to the Warren Commission years earlier .
 Richard Sprague, interim staff director and chief counsel to the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations, said he would have investigated the Kennedy assassination by probing Oswald's ties to the Central Intelligence Agency . If he had to do it over again, Sprague would have probed Oswald's
 In 1978, former CIA paymaster and accountant James Wilcott testified before the HSCA that Lee Harvey Oswald was a ""known agent"" of the Central Intelligence Agency .
 Both the CIA and many officers working in the region at the time have ""unofficially"" dismissed the plausibility of any possible ties of Oswald to the agency . Wilcott and his wife, Elsie later repeated those claims .
 Robert Blakey, staff director and chief counsel for the U.S. House Select Committee on Assassinations, supported that conclusion . Robert Blakei: "I believe that the president's actions were not justified by the circumstances of his actions"
 Vincent Bugliosi provides a ""partial list of assassins" in his book Reclaiming History . Buglio provides a list of three people who have been identified as having fired a weapon at Kennedy .
 Since the mid-1960s, various allegations have been made about the identities of the men and their involvement in a conspiracy to kill Kennedy . The men are alleged to have been involved in the assassination of Kennedy .
 The theory that former CIA agent and Watergate burglar E Howard Hunt was a participant in the assassination of Kennedy garnered much publicity from 1978 to 2000 . Hunt is accused of participating in the JFK assassination . Hunt worked for the CIA in the late '70s and '80s .
 In 1981, Hunt won a libel judgment against Liberty Lobby's paper The Spotlight . The Spotlight printed an allegation that Hunt was in Dallas on the day of the assassination . The libel award was thrown out on appeal .
 After Hunt's death in 2007, an audio-taped ""deathbed confession"" in which Hunt claimed first-hand knowledge of a conspiracy, as a co-conspirator, was released .
 Hunt claimed to have been a "bench warmer" in Dallas during the events . Hunt named several high-level CIA operatives as those who likely carried out the logistics of the assassination . Hunt also claimed to be a 'bench warmer' in Dallas .
 Hunt named Vice President Lyndon Johnson as the most likely figure behind the main impetus of the conspiracy . Hunt said Vice President Johnson is most likely to be the main figure behind main impetus .
 Tippit has been named in some conspiracy theories as a renegade CIA operative sent to silence Oswald and as the ""badge man"" assassin on the grassy knoll . He has also been named as the 'badge' man' who killed Oswald .
 Some Warren Commission critics say Oswald was set up to be killed by Tippit . Oswald was killed by Oswald in self-defense, according to some critics . Oswald killed Oswald in the assassination of Oswald's wife .
 Critics doubt that Tippit was killed by Oswald and assert he was shot by other conspirators . Other critics doubt that Oswald killed Tipperit .
 Critics have alleged that Tippit was associated with organized crime or right-wing politics . Some critics have accused him of being involved in organized crime .
 A full-page, paid advertisement critical of Kennedy was published in the November 22, 1963, Dallas Morning News . It was investigated to determine whether any members of the group claiming responsibility for the ad were connected to Oswald or to the assassination .
 Mark Lane testified during the Warren Commission's hearings that an informant whom he refused to name told him that Weismann had met with Tippit and Ruby eight days before the assassination . The Commission stated that there was no evidence linking the four men responsible for the genesis of the ad with
 According to Lane, a ""prominent Dallas figure" who frequented Ruby's Carousel Club told Waldo, and later Lane, that he observed the meeting of the three men at the club . Waldo and Lane were both men who attended the club in Dallas .
 Lane disputed their findings and complained that they failed to ask Waldo about it . Despite not revealing to the Warren Commission that Waldo was his original source of the alleged meeting .
 The source of the allegation whose identity Lane promised not to reveal was Carroll Jarnagin, a Dallas attorney who had also claimed to have overheard a meeting between Oswald and Ruby . Lane promised to keep the identity of the alleged source secret .
 Some critics doubt that Tippit was killed by Oswald and assert he was shot by other conspirators . Some critics say Oswald shot him in the head . Others say he was not shot by Oswald .
 They allege discrepancies in witness testimony and physical evidence that they think call into question the Commission's conclusions regarding the murder of Tippit . They say witness testimony, physical evidence is inconsistent with the Commission conclusions .
 Others say that multiple men were directly involved in Tippit's killing . Others say multiple men are involved in the killing .
 Conspiracy researcher Kenn Thomas has alleged that the Warren Commission omitted testimony and evidence that two men shot Tippit and that one left the scene in a car . William Alexander – the Dallas assistant district attorney who recommended that Oswald be charged – later became skeptical of the Commission's version of the T
 Tippit may have been killed because he impregnated the wife of another man, according to Henry Hurt's book, Reasonable Doubt . Dallas police officers may have lied and altered evidence to set up Oswald to save his reputation . Francis Conolly claims to have shot Tipp
 Conolly speculatates that the assassination plot did not go as planned . She speculates that the conspirators needed a second body to carry out the assassination .
 Tippit's body and JFK's body were switched on Air Force Two, he theorizes . He further theorizes that the bodies may have been switched on the plane . JFK was killed in November 1963 .
 Warren Commission identified Helen Markham and Domingo Benavides as two witnesses who actually saw the shooting of Officer Tippit . The Warren Commission has been accused of lying about witness testimony .
 Domingo Benavides initially said he did not think he could identify Tippit's assailant . Benavide was never asked to view a police lineup, even though he was the person closest to killing .
 Benavides later testified that the killer resembled pictures he had seen of Oswald . Benavidees testified that Oswald resembled the killer in photographs .
 Witnesses who did not appear before the Commission identified an assailant who was not Oswald . Critics have questioned these lineups as they consisted of people who looked very different from Oswald .
 Acquilla Clemons said she saw two men near Tippit's car just before he was shot . Acquilla said two men were seen near the shooting suspect's car . Clemons says she saw the men in the car before the shooting .
 Frank Wright said he emerged from his home and observed the scene seconds after the shooting . Frank Wright: "I don't know what happened to me. It's like a scene from a scene in a movie theater"
 He described a man standing by Tippit's body who had on a long coat and said the man ran to a parked car . Critics have questioned whether cartridge cases recovered from the scene were the same as those entered into evidence .
 Poe told the FBI that he marked the shells with his own initials, ""J.M.P."" to identify them . Poe said he marked them with his initials, 'J.m.P,'" to identify the shells . Poe told FBI he marked shells with initials, "J
 Sergeant Gerald Hill testified to the Warren Commission that it was he who had ordered police officer Poe to mark the shells . Sergeant Hill later testified that he had ordered Poe to do so .
 Poe's initials were not found on shells produced by the FBI six months later . However, the FBI found the initials of Poe's on the shells .
 The identification of the cases at the crime scene raises more questions . The ID of the victims at the scene raises questions about their identities .
 Oswald reportedly arrested carrying a non-automatic .38 Special revolver . Oswald was reportedly arrested with the gun . Oswald reportedly was arrested carrying the revolver .
 Deputy Sheriff Roger Craig stated that when he heard the news that Tippit had been shot, he noted that the time was 1:06 pm. In an unpublished manuscript titled When They Kill a President, Craig stated he noted the time of the shooting was 1.06 pm .
 Warren Burroughs, who ran the concession stand at the Texas Theater where Oswald was arrested, said that Oswald came into the theater between 1:00 and 1:07 pm . However, in a later statement to the press, Craig seemed confused about the time .
 A theatre patron, Jack Davis, also corroborated Burroughs's time, claiming he observed Oswald in the theatre prior to 1:20 pm. Jack Davis also claimed he witnessed Oswald at the theatre .
 Following the assassination of President Kennedy the ""umbrella man"" can be seen sitting on the sidewalk next to the ""dark complected man"" on the right side of the photograph . Unidentified witnesses can also be seen following the assassination .
 Some conspiracy theories have focused on witnesses to the Kennedy assassination who have not been identified . Despite the media attention that the assassination has received, some witnesses have not identified themselves . The Kennedy assassination is the subject of many conspiracy theories .
 The so-called "umbrella man" was one of the closest bystanders to the president when he was first struck by a bullet .
 The 'umbrella man' has become the subject of conspiracy theories after footage of the assassination showed him holding an open umbrella as the Kennedy motorcade passed, despite the fact that it was not raining at the time .
 One conspiracy theory suggests that a dart with a paralyzing agent could have been fired from the umbrella, disabling Kennedy and making him a ""sitting duck"" for an assassination .
 Witt said he brought the umbrella to heckle Kennedy and protest the appeasement policies of the president's father, Joseph Kennedy . Witt testified before the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations . Witt was testifying before the committee .
 Unidentified individual can be seen in several photographs taken seconds after the assassination . Unidentified person is seen on the sidewalk next to the ""umbrella man""
 Louie Steven Witt, who identified himself as the ""umbrella man," said he was unable to identify the other individual . The dark complexion has led some conspiracy theorists to speculate Cuban government involvement, or Cuban exile involvement, in Kennedy's assassination .
 Conspiracy theorists believe that ""badge man" could have fired the fatal shot that killed President Kennedy .
 The ""badge man" is a figure who appears to be wearing a uniform similar to that worn by a policeman, with a badge prominent . He helped fuel conspiracy theories linking Dallas Police officers or someone impersonating a policeman to the assassination .
 The so-called ""black dog man"" figure can be seen at the corner of a retaining wall in the Willis and Betzner photo of the assassination . Black dog man ""Black Dog Man"" Another ""figure ""figure"" is the 'black dog dog man' figure who can
 Marilyn Sitzman told Josiah Thompson that she saw a young black couple eating lunch and drinking Cokes on a bench behind the retaining wall . It is possible that the ""black dog man"" figure is actually the black woman and her child . Marilyn Sitsman said she saw the
 The United States House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that a head of an individual could be seen but that this individual was situated in front of, rather than behind, behind the bushes . The committee concluded that the head of the individual could not be seen .
 Bill Miller argues that this individual is actually Emmett Hudson . Miller argues this is not Hudson . Hudson was an eyewitness to the events .
 Edgar Hoover, Earl Warren, the FBI, the U.S. Secret Service, the John Birch Society, and far-right wealthy Texans.
 Some other alleged foreign conspirators includes, the KGB and Nikita Khrushchev, the government of South Vietnam, and international drug lords, including a French heroin syndicate .
 Oswald's activities in New Orleans, Louisiana, during the spring and summer of 1963 came under scrutiny . Trial of Clay Shaw and David Ferrie was held at the trial of both men .
 New Orleans attorney Dean Andrews told the FBI that he received a call from a man named Clay Bertrand, on the day of the assassination, asking him to defend Oswald . Andrews said he received the call on November 25, 1963, asking for help .
 Andrews would later repeat this claim in testimony to the Warren Commission . Andrews would go on to repeat it in testimony before the Warren commission .
 David Ferrie with Lee Harvey Oswald in the New Orleans Civil Air Patrol in 1955 . Ferrie was involved in the assassination of JFK in 1963 .
 He said Ferrie had outlined plans to kill Kennedy . Ferrie might have taught Oswald how to use a rifle with a telescopic sight .
 Martin claimed Ferrie had known Oswald from their days in the New Orleans Civil Air Patrol . Martin claimed that he had seen a photograph, at Ferrie's home, of Oswald in an Air Patrol group . Martin also claimed that Ferrie knew Oswald from his days in New Orleans .
 It was later discovered that Ferrie had attended Civil Air Patrol meetings in New Orleans in the 1950s that were also attended by a teenage Lee Harvey Oswald . Ferrie denied any association with Oswald .
 Frontline obtained a photograph taken in 1955 showing Oswald and Ferrie at a Civil Air Patrol cookout with other C.A.P. cadets . In 1993, the PBS television program Frontline got a photograph of the two men at a cookout .
 Ferrie and Banister were working for lawyer G Wray Gill on behalf of New Orleans Mafia boss Carlos Marcello in an attempt to block his deportation to Guatemala . Whether Oswald's association in the Civil Air Patrol in 1955 is relevant to their later possible association in 1963 is a subject
 New Orleans private investigator Guy Banister and his employee, Jack Martin, were drinking together at a local bar on November 22, 1963 . The day John F Kennedy was assassinated and the day Marcello was acquitted in his deportation case was the day Banister was acquitted .
 Oswald was the sole member of the New Orleans chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Oswald ordered 1,000 leaflets with the heading, ""Hands Off Cuba"" from a local printer . Oswald was one of the sole members of the committee .
 Oswald passed out Fair Play for Cuba leaflets in front of the International Trade Mart in New Orleans . One of the leaflets had the address ""544 Camp Street" hand-stamped on it, apparently by Oswald .
 The address was in the ""Newman Building" which from October 1961 to February 1962 housed the Cuban Revolutionary Council, a militant anti-Castro group .
 Banister's office was involved in anti-Castro and private investigative activities in the New Orleans area . Banister worked for the government in the 1960s and 1970s .
 In the late 1970s, the House Select Committee on Assassinations investigated the possible relationship of Oswald to Banister's office . Oswald's office was the subject of an investigation by the committee .
 The committee was unable to interview Guy Banister . Ross Banister was interviewed by the committee . The committee did interview his brother .
 Ross ""told the committee that his brother had mentioned seeing Oswald hand out Fair Play for Cuba literature on one occasion . Ross "" told the committee he had seen Oswald give out the literature .
 Guy Banister's secretary, Delphine Roberts, would later tell author Anthony Summers that she saw Oswald in his office . Oswald filled out a form of an application form for an agent for Banister .
 In 1966, New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison began an investigation into the assassination of President Kennedy . Garrison was the first person to file a formal complaint against Kennedy .
 Garrison's investigation led him to conclude that a group of right-wing extremists, including David Ferrie and Guy Banister, were involved with elements of the Central Intelligence Agency in a conspiracy to kill Kennedy . Garrison concluded that the CIA was involved in the plot . Garrison: The right-
 Garrison believed Shaw, Banister, and Ferrie conspired to set up Oswald as a patsy in the JFK assassination . Garrison also believed Shaw and Banister conspired . Garrison further believed the three conspirators conspired in the assassination .
 On March 1, 1967, Garrison arrested and charged Shaw with conspiring to assassinate President Kennedy . Shaw was charged with conspiracy to kill Kennedy in March 1967 . Garrison arrested Shaw and charged him with conspiracy .
 On January 29, 1969, Clay Shaw was brought to trial on these charges, and the jury found him not guilty . Shaw was found not guilty of the charges against him .
 Judyth Baker's employment records show she worked at the Reily Coffee Company in New Orleans at the same time Oswald did . Baker appeared in an episode of the television documentary series The Men Who Killed Kennedy .
 Mary Sherman on a clandestine CIA project to develop a biological weapon that could be used to assassinate Fidel Castro . She says it was a clandestine effort to develop the weapon . The weapon could have been developed to assassinate Castro .
 Baker and Oswald were hired by Reily in the spring of 1963 as a ""cover" for the operation . Baker says they were hired as a cover for Reily's operation .
 Baker claims Oswald told her about Merida, Mexico, where he suggested they might begin their lives over again . Baker further claimed that she and Oswald began an affair, and that later Oswald said they might start their lives again .
 Others on both sides of the research community have widely dismissed her claims . Others have also dismissed her claim that her research was wrong .
 Former U.S. Army Intelligence officer and National Security Agency executive assistant John M Newman published evidence that both the CIA and FBI deliberately tampered with their files on Lee Harvey Oswald both before and after the assassination . He stated that CIA agent David Atlee Phillips, using the pseudonym ""M
 Both agencies withheld information that might have alerted authorities in Dallas that Oswald posed a potential threat to the President . The President was assassinated in Dallas in November 1963 .
 Newman expressed his belief that CIA chief of counter-intelligence James Angleton was probably the key figure in the assassination . Newman expressed the belief that Angleton probably was the CIA chief . Newman: Angleton is probably the person responsible for the CIA's assassination .
 In 1977, the FBI released 40,000 files pertaining to the assassination of Kennedy, including an April 3, 1967, memorandum from Deputy Director Cartha DeLoach to Associate Director Clyde Tolson . The memo was written less than a month after President Johnson learned from J Edgar Hoover about
 Peter Dale Scott has indicated that Kennedy's death allowed for policy reversals desired by the secret government to escalate the United States' military involvement in Vietnam .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower warned the nation about the power of the military establishment and the arms industry . Eisenhower's farewell speech was given before he left office in January 1961 .
 According to author James W Douglass, Kennedy was assassinated because he was turning away from the Cold War and seeking a negotiated peace with the Soviet Union . Douglass: JFK was assassinated due to his desire to negotiate peace with Russia .
 Fletcher Prouty, Chief of Special Operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Kennedy, wrote that Kennedy's assassination was actually a coup d'état . He wrote that the character who inspired the character "Mr X" in Stone's film was based on the assassination .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations investigated alleged Secret Service complicity in the assassination . The committee concluded that the Secret Service was not involved in the alleged conspiracy .
 No actions were taken by the agent in the right front seat of the presidential limousine Roy Kellerman to cover the President with his body . It would have been consistent with Secret Service procedure for him to have done so .
 The primary function of the agent was to remain at all times in close proximity to the President in the event of such emergencies . The agent's primary function was to stay close to the president .
 Some argue that the lack of Secret Service protection occurred because Kennedy had asked that the Secret Service make itself discreet during the Dallas visit .
 Vince Palamara interviewed several Secret Service agents assigned to the Kennedy detail . However, he disputes this, and says he interviewed several of the agents .
 With the 1959 Cuban Revolution that brought Fidel Castro to power, many Cubans left Cuba to live in the U.S. Many Cubans have since moved to the United States . Fidel Castro was the Cuban leader of the Cuban Revolution .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that some militant Cuban exiles might have participated in Kennedy's murder . Their hopes were dashed with the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in 1961, many blamed President Kennedy for the failure .
 These exiles worked closely with CIA operatives in violent activities against Castro's Cuba . CIA operatives worked with exiles in Cuba to carry out violent activities .
 President Kennedy's popularity among the Cuban exiles had plunged deeply by 1963 . President Kennedy was popular among ex-Cuban exiles, but his popularity had waned in 1963 .
 Anti-Castro Cubans and right-wing Americans met in Dallas suburb of Farmer's Branch in 1963 . Their bitterness is illustrated in a tape recording of the meeting . The tape was recorded in a Dallas suburb .
 Joan Didion explored the Miami anti-Castro Cuban theory in her 1987 book Miami . Joan didion also explored the theory of the Cuban state of Cuba .
 Guillermo Novo was involved in shooting a bazooka at the U.N. headquarters from the East River during a speech by Che Guevara . Marita Lorenz testified about Novo, a Cuban exile who, in 1964, was involved .
 Allegedly Novo was affiliated with Lee Harvey Oswald, and Frank Sturgis . Allegedly, Novo worked for the Oswald family . Novo allegedly worked for Oswald, who was involved in the assassination of JFK .
 Lorenz claimed she, Oswald, and seven anti-Castro Cubans transported weapons from Miami to Dallas in two cars just prior to the assassination . Lorenz said she and Oswald transported weapons to Dallas just before the assassination.
 Lorenz put forth to the House Assassinations Committee by Lorenz . These claims have never been substantiated . Lorenz's claims were never substantiated by the committee .
 In 1964, the Warren Commission found no evidence linking Ruby's killing of Oswald with any broader conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy . Organized crime conspiracy ruled out any link between Ruby and Oswald's killing .
 Author Gerald Posner similarly ignores Ruby's ties to Joseph Civello, the organized crime boss in Dallas . Posner ignored Ruby's links to Civellan, who organized crime in Dallas, Texas .
 In fact, Campisi and Ruby were close friends . They had dinner together at Campisi's restaurant, the Egyptian Lounge, on the night before the assassination . Ruby and Campisi were friends .
 After Ruby was jailed for killing Oswald, Campisi regularly visited him . Campisi visited Ruby after he was released from jail .
 Government documents have revealed that some members of the Mafia worked with the Central Intelligence Agency on assassination attempts against Cuban leader Fidel Castro .
 The CIA recruited ex-FBI agent Robert Maheu to approach the West Coast representative of the Chicago mob, Johnny Roselli . In summer 1960, the CIA recruited an ex FBI agent to approach Roselli, a member of the mob .
 Maheu hid the fact that he was sent by the CIA, instead portraying himself as an advocate for international corporations . When contacted by Roselli, he said he was working for international companies .
 He offered to pay $150,000 to have Castro killed, but Roselli declined any pay . Roselli also offered to kill Castro, but declined to pay .
 Many Cuban exiles and Mafia bosses disliked President Kennedy, blaming him for the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion . President Kennedy was accused of being responsible for the failure of the failed invasion of Cuba .
 They also disliked his brother, then U.S. Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, who had conducted an unprecedented legal assault on organized crime . The Kennedy brothers also disliked their brother's brother, Robert F. Kennedy .
 This was especially provocative because several Mafia ""families"" had allegedly worked with JFK's father, Joseph Kennedy, to get him elected . This was particularly provocative because of the Mafia's alleged involvement in JFK's election .
 Carlos Marcello allegedly threatened to assassinate the President to short-circuit his younger brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy . Attorney General Kennedy was leading the administration's anti-Mafia crusade .
 Information released in 2006 by the FBI has led some to conclude that Carlos Marcello confessed to his cellmate in Texas, Jack Van Lanningham, an FBI informant, to having organized Kennedy's assassination . Some believe the FBI covered up this information that it had in its possession .
 Anderson claimed in his book Peace, War, and Politics that Mafia member Johnny Roselli gave him extensive details of the plot . Anderson claimed Roselli told Anderson that he was a Mafia member .
 Anderson said many of Roselli's details checked out . Anderson said that although he was never able to independently confirm the entire story, many of his details check out . Roselli was convicted of murder in 2007 .
 Anderson said Oswald may have played a role in the assassination, but that more than one gunman was involved . Anderson said that Oswald may play a role, but not one of the most involved .
 Johnny Roselli, as previously noted, had worked with the CIA on assassination attempts against Castro . Roselli had worked for the CIA with an assassination attempt on Castro .
 History Channel program The Men Who Killed Kennedy presented additional claims of organized crime involvement . The History Channel show The Men who Killed Kennedy was presented with additional claims .
 He said that he was offered the assassination contract on President Kennedy, but that he did not accept it . He said he did accept it, but was offered a contract .
 David said it would break a code of conduct for him to identify the other two shooters . David said that since they are still alive, it would be illegal to identify them . David: It would be a breach of conduct if he identified the other shooters .
 David noted the shooters' modus operandi was to dress in costumes such as official uniforms . When asked what the shooters were wearing, David noted they were dressed in costumes .
 Much of Christian David's testimony was confirmed by former Corsican member Michelle Nicole . The book Ultimate Sacrifice, by Lamar Waldron and Thom Hartmann, attempted to synthesize these theories with new evidence .
 The authors argued that government officials felt obliged to help cover up the truth . They argued that the assassination conspiracy had direct ties to U.S. government plots to assassinate Castro .
 Mob leaders had President Kennedy killed to remove Robert from power . Outraged at Robert Kennedy's attack on organized crime, mob leaders had him killed . Mob leaders killed President Kennedy to remove him from power.
 A government investigation of the plot was thwarted, authors allege, because it would have revealed embarrassing evidence of U.S. involvement with organized crime in plots to kill Castro . The authors allege a government investigation was thwarted .
 A 2003 Gallup poll indicated that nearly 20% of Americans suspected Lyndon B Johnson of being involved in the assassination of Kennedy . Nearly 20% suspected LBJ was involved in Kennedy's assassination .
 Critics of the Warren Commission have accused Johnson of plotting the assassination because he ""disliked"" the Kennedys and feared that he would be dropped from the Democratic ticket for the 1964 election .
 In the book, Jones provided excerpts of a letter purported to have been authored by Jack Ruby charging LBJ with the murder of the President . The letter was purported to be written by Ruby, who accused LBJ of the murder .
 The Dark Side of Lyndon Baines Johnson is credited by Bugliosi as being the first conspiracy author to accuse Johnson of having a role in the assassination .
 In 1968, Kennedy's personal secretary Evelyn Lincoln wrote in her book, ""Kennedy and Johnson"" that President Kennedy had told her that Lyndon B Johnson would be replaced as Vice President of the United States .
 As Mr Kennedy sat in the rocker in his office, his head resting on its back he placed his left leg across his right knee . Mr Kennedy's left leg was placed across the knee .
 In a slow pensive voice he said to me, 'You know if I am re-elected in sixty-four, I am going to spend more and more time toward making government service an honorable career'
 Lincoln went on to write ""I was fascinated by this conversation and wrote it down verbatim in my diary" Lincoln wrote that he was fascinated with the conversation and recorded it in his diary .
 Barr McClellan published the book Blood, Money & Power in 2003 . The book was published in 2003, and has been published since then .
 McClellan claims that Johnson masterminded Kennedy's assassination with the help of his friend, Austin attorney Edward A Clark . Johnson was motivated by the fear of being dropped from the Kennedy ticket .
 The book suggests that a smudged partial fingerprint from the sniper's nest likely belonged to Johnson's associate Malcolm ""Mac ""Mac"" Wallace . Mac Wallace was, therefore, on the sixth floor of the Depository at the time of the shooting, the book says .
 McClellan states that the assassination of Kennedy allowed the oil depletion allowance to be kept at 27. percent . The assassination allowed the allowance to remain at 27 percent .
 According to McClellan, this resulted in a saving of over $100 million to the American oil industry . This resulted in an oil industry saving of more than $100million .
 McClellan's book subsequently became the subject of an episode of Nigel Turner's ongoing documentary television series, The Men Who Killed Kennedy .
 The episode drew angry condemnation from the Johnson family, Johnson's former aides, and former Presidents Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter following its airing on The History Channel .
 History Channel apologized to the Johnson family and agreed not to air the series in the future . Madeleine Brown, who alleged she was the mistress of Johnson, implicated him in a conspiracy to kill Kennedy .
 Brown claimed that by its fruition in 1963, the conspiracy involved dozens of persons, including the leadership of the FBI and the Mafia, as well as prominent politicians and journalists . Brown claims that by the time of 1963, dozens of people had been involved .
 Madeleine Brown and May Newman both placed FBI Director J Edgar Hoover at a social gathering at Murchison's mansion the night before the assassination . The documentary The Men Who Killed Kennedy is based on the events at the mansion .
 Brown said she met Johnson at the Driskill Hotel in Austin, Texas, on New Year's Eve 1963 . He confirmed the conspiracy to kill Kennedy, insisting that ""the fat cats of Texas and intelligence" had been responsible .
 Brown reiterated her allegations against Johnson in the 2006 documentary Evidence of Revision . Brown continued her allegations in a documentary released in 2006 .
 In the same documentary, several other Johnson associates also voiced their suspicions .
 Conspiracy of Silence, along with conspiracy theorists Jens Hansen and J Gary Shaw, are conspiracy theorists and conspiracy theorists . The conspiracy theorists are known for their work on conspiracy theories .
 Crenshaw was a third-year surgical resident on the trauma team at Parkland Hospital that attended to President Kennedy . He was a surgical resident at the hospital that attended Kennedy .
 While attending to Oswald, Crenshaw said that he answered a telephone call from Lyndon Johnson . Crenhaw said he answered the phone call from Johnson .
 In 1984, convicted swindler Billie Sol Estes made statements to a Grand Jury in Texas indicating that he had ""inside knowledge"" that implicated Johnson in the death of Kennedy and others . Shortly afterwards, an audio-taped ""deathbed confession"" in which Hunt claimed first
 According to Kurtz, Johnson believed Fidel Castro was responsible for the assassination and that Johnson covered up the truth because he feared the possibility that retaliatory measures against Cuba might escalate to nuclear war with the Soviet Union . Kurtz says Johnson believed Castro was behind the assassination .
 In 2012, biographer Robert Caro published his fourth volume, The Passage of Power, which chronicles Johnson's communications and actions as Vice President .
 Political consultant and convicted felon Roger Stone believes that Johnson orchestrated Kennedy's assassination . Caro Caro wrote that ""nothing that I have found in my research" points to involvement by Johnson .
 He also claims that Rafael Cruz, father of Texas Senator Ted Cruz, is tied to Lee Harvey Oswald . Cruz is a Republican presidential candidate for the 2016 elections .
 George Bush of the Central Intelligence Agency was given a briefing on the reaction to the assassination by Cuban exiles living in Miami .
 Bush was appointed head of the CIA by president Gerald Ford in 1976, 13 years after the assassination . President Ford appointed Bush in 1976 . President George W. Bush was the CIA's first president to head the CIA .
 During Bush's presidential campaign in 1988, the memo resurfaced, prompting the CIA to claim that the memo was referring to an employee named George Williams Bush .
 Bush biographer Kitty Kelley alleges that Bush was unable to remember his whereabouts on the day of Kennedy's assassination, despite the fact that this information is known . Kelley alleges this is despite this information being known to Bush .
 The day of the assassination, Bush flew to Tyler, Texas, to make an appearance ahead of his upcoming campaign for the U.S. Senate in 1964 . Bush spoke to the FBI about a local who had threatened Kennedy .
 The previous day, Bush had been in Dallas to speak at an oil industry meeting . Bush was speaking at a meeting of the oil industry .
 Those who believe Bush may have been involved in the assassination have presented photographic evidence of a man resembling Bush in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination .
 No comparative measurements of the two men's facial features has been made . Morley argues this evidence is weak, as no comparative measurements have been made of the men's features .
 Bush was already an announced Senate candidate for several months by the time of the assassination . Bush had received much press attention when he was assassinated .
 No eyewitnesses have publicly recalled seeing Bush at the scene, though his opponent, incumbent Senator Ralph Yarborough, passed by in the presidential motorcade .
 Mohrenschildt was being pressured by House Select Committee on Assassinations investigators to testify on the assassination, causing him to write the letter in distress . He wrote it in distress because he was pressured to testify .
 Bush responded to Mohrenschildt's letter, but said he would be unable to help . Bush responded, saying he would not be able to help the family .
 Morley argues that Bush was uninterested in questioning the CIA's account of the assassination . Morley says the existence of the letter does not demonstrate guilt for either Bush or Obama .
 The Warren Commission found no evidence of Cuban involvement in the assassination of President Kennedy . In its report, the Warren Commission stated that it had investigated ""dozens of allegations of conspiratorial contact between Oswald and agents of the Cuban Government""
 Some conspiracy theorists continue to allege that Fidel Castro ordered the assassination of Kennedy in retaliation for the CIA's previous attempts to assassinate him . Clare Boothe Luce was one of a number of prominent Americans who sponsored anti-Castro groups in the 1960s .
 This support included funding exiles in commando speedboat raids against Cuba . Exiles were funded by ex-Cuban ex-Cuba rebels .
 Clare Luce said on the night of the assassination she received a call from a member of a commando group she had sponsored . In 1975, she said that on the . night of . the assassination, she received . a call . from a . member of the commando . group
 According to Luce, the caller's name was ""something like"" Julio Fernandez and he claimed he was calling her from New Orleans . Fernandez told Luce that Oswald had approached his group with an offer to help assassinate Castro .
 Fernandez said he and his associates eventually found out that Oswald was a communist and supporter of Castro . Fernandez further claimed that he and associates later found out he was a supporter of the Castro regime .
 Oswald's group kept a close watch on Oswald until Oswald suddenly came into money and went to Mexico City and then Dallas . He said that with this new-found knowledge, his group kept an eye-out on Oswald .
 In May 1967, CIA Director Richard Helms told President Lyndon Johnson that the CIA had tried to assassinate Castro . Both committees investigated the incident, but were unable to uncover any evidence to corroborate the allegations .
 Johnson told two prominent television newsmen that he believed that JFK's assassination had been organized by Castro as retaliation for the CIA's efforts to kill Castro . Helms also said that the plots against Castro continued into the Kennedy Administration and that Attorney General Robert Kennedy had known about both the plots and
 There were people in the U.S. government who thought Kennedy was a traitor because he didn't invade Cuba when he had the chance, when they were asking him . Kennedy was not a traitor, he says, but he was a good man .
 Warren Commission found no evidence that the Soviet Union was involved in the assassination of President Kennedy . Warren Commission: No evidence of Soviet involvement in Kennedy's assassination .
 Ion Mihai Pacepa, said that he had a conversation with Nicolae Ceauşescu who told him about 'ten international leaders the Kremlin killed or tried to kill"", including Kennedy . The former Romanian Prime Minister said that the Kremlin killed or tried
 Lee Harvey Oswald, the Soviet KGB, and the Kennedy Assassination, in 2007 . The KGB was responsible for the assassination of the president in 1963 .
 Similar views expressed by Robert Holmes, former First Secretary at the British Embassy in Moscow, in his 2012 book Spy Like No Other . Similar views were expressed by Holmes in his book Spy like No Other.
 David Lifton presented a scenario in which conspirators on Air Force One removed Kennedy's body from its original bronze casket and placed it in a shipping casket . Decoy hearse and wound alteration may have taken place during the flight from Dallas to Washington, D.C.
 Once the presidential plane arrived at Andrews Air Force Base, the shipping casket with the President's body in it was surreptiously taken by helicopter from the side of the plane that was out of the camera's view .
 Richard Lipsey on January 18, 1978, by committee staff members Donald Purdy and Mark Flanagan . Lipsey was the first president of the Democratic National Committee in 1978 .
 Richard Lipsey said that he and General Wehle had met President Kennedy's body at Andrews Air Force Base . He said that they met the president's body .
 Lipsey placed in a hearse to be transported to Bethesda Naval Hospital . Lipsey was placed in the hearse and taken to a hospital in Bethesda Naval hospital . He died in the hospital .
 David Lifton theorized that the casket removed by Lipsey from Air Force One – from the side of the plane exposed to television – was probably also a decoy and was likely empty . With Lipsey's mention of a ""decoy hearse"" at Bethesda, Lifton
 President Kennedy's body arrived at Bethesda inside a body bag in a cheap, shipping-type casket . O'Connor said that President Kennedy arrived in a "cheap, shipping type of casket" The description differed from the description of the ornamental bronze casket and sheet that
 O'Connor said that the brain had already been removed by the time it got to Bethesda, and that there were ""just little pieces"" of brain matter left inside the skull . Researcher David R Wrone dismissed the theory that Kennedy's body was surreptitiously removed from
 Jim Marrs, in his book Crossfire, presented the theory that Kennedy was trying to rein in the power of the Federal Reserve . Marrs: Forces opposed to such action might have played at least some part in the assassination .
 Executive Order 11110 was an effort by Kennedy to transfer power from the Federal Reserve to the United States Department of the Treasury by replacing Federal Reserve Notes with silver certificates . The order was issued by President Kennedy in 1961 .
 Critics of the theory note that Kennedy called for and signed legislation phasing out Silver Certificates in favor of Federal Reserve Notes, thereby enhancing the power of the Federal Reserve . Critics say Executive Order 11110 was a technicality that only delegated existing presidential powers to the Secretary of the Treasury
 Speculation that Kennedy was assassinated by a 'Zionist conspiracy' was prevalent in much of the Muslim world .
 Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion orchestrated the assassination after learning that Kennedy planned to keep Israel from obtaining nuclear weapons . The missing link in the JFK Assassination Controversy is the Israeli prime minister's assassination .
 The theory also alleges involvement of Meyer Lansky and the Anti-Defamation League . The theory claims involvement of Lansky, who was involved in the Holocaust, also alleged to have been involved .
 In a speech before the U.N. General Assembly in 2009, Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi also alleged that Kennedy was killed for wanting to investigate Dimona .
 Reasonable Doubt by Henry Hurt, who writes about his Warren Commission doubts . Other published theories: Secret Service Agent George Hickey .
 Behold a Pale Horse by William Cooper alleges that Kennedy was shot by the presidential limousine's driver, Secret Service agent William Greer . Cooper alleges Greer shot Kennedy in the head . Cooper's book alleges that Greer was the driver .
 In the Zapruder film, Greer can be seen turning to his right and looking backwards just before speeding away from Dealey Plaza . Greer is seen looking back at the scene of the shooting .
 This theory has come under severe criticism from others in the research community . The theory has been criticised by some in the scientific community .
 Abraham Bolden's The Echo from Dealey Plaza and Kevin James Shay's Death of the Rising Sun detail plots that occurred shortly before Kennedy's trip to Dallas in 1963 .
 Within the Secret Service during those chaotic months, ""rumors were flying"" about Cuban dissidents and right-wing southerners who were stalking Kennedy, Bolden wrote .
 The security threat in Chicago in early November 1963 involved former Marine Thomas Arthur Vallee . Police found an M-1 rifle, handgun, and 3,000 rounds of ammunition in his vehicle .
 A high-powered rifle was confiscated from another suspect in Chicago shortly before Kennedy's trip there was canceled, Bolden said .
 The Role of J Edgar Hoover in the Assassination of President Kennedy, implicates the FBI Director . The role of FBI Director implicates him in the assassination of the president .
 North documents that Hoover was aware of threats against Kennedy by organized crime before 1963 . The documents suggest he failed to take proper action to prevent the assassination .
 North also charges Hoover with failure to work adequately to uncover the truth behind Kennedy's murder, ISBN 0-88184-877-8. North also charged Hoover .
 The Shot That Killed JFK by Bonar Menninger alleges that while Oswald did attempt to assassinate JFK, the fatal shot was accidentally fired by Secret Service agent George Hickey . Hickey was riding in the Secret Service follow-up car directly behind the presidential limousine .
 George Hickey sued Menninger in April 1995 for what he had written in Mortal Error . Hickey was sued for what had been written in 1995 . Menningers' Mortal Error was published in 1994 .
 Oswald killed JFK due to mental impairment stemming from an addiction to refined sugar, a theory suggested by the editor of an organic gardening magazine . Oswald's need for sugar was evidenced by his need for his favorite beverage immediately after the assassination .
 Passport to Assassination by Oleg M Nechiporenko, the Soviet consular official who met with Oswald in Mexico City in 1963 . Oswald met with Soviet consul official in Mexico in 1963 and Oswald was killed in September .
 Oswald wants to get a Cuban visa for his Cuban visa . Oswald was given the opportunity to interview Oswald for the first time .
 An American Mystery concludes that Oswald was guilty, but holds that the evidence may point to a second gunman on the grassy knoll . The evidence points to a gunman who, purely by coincidence, was attempting to kill JFK at the same time as Oswald .
 The Kennedy Mutiny by Will Fritz claims that General Edwin Walker framed Oswald for the crime . The assassination plot was orchestrated by General Walker, and that he framed Oswald .
 Matthew Smith explores the strange case of Roscoe White . The Second Plot by Matthew Smith examines the case of the mysterious man .
 In 1990, Roscoe's son Ricky made public a claim that his father was involved in killing the president . Roscoe was a Dallas police officer in 1963 when he was killed by President Kennedy .
 David Wrone's The Zapruder Film concludes that in-and-through shots originated from the grassy knoll . The film concludes that the shot that killed JFK and JFK's throat and back wounds were caused by the in- and-through shot .
 Roosevelt was riding in an open car with Mayor Anton Cermak of Chicago . Roosevelt was traveling in open car in Chicago with Mayor .
 In Dallas, JFK was the real target, and Connally was a secondary target . JFK was JFK's first target, Connally's second target . Connally died in a plane crash in September 1968 .
 The military, CIA, NASA, NASA and anti-Castro factions were involved in the CIA, CIA and others . Hoover's FBI and others were involved, including the FBI .
 He concludes that the person that allowed all of these groups to form a ""coalescence of interests"" was Vice President Lyndon Johnson . Johnson was vice president of the United States .
 Dinkin was arrested nine days before Kennedy was killed . He was placed in psychiatric care and released shortly thereafter . Dinkins was released from psychiatric care .
 Hugh McDonald's Appointment in Dallas stated that the Soviet government contracted with a rogue CIA agent named ""Saul" to have Kennedy Kennedy killed .
 McDonald said he worked for the CIA ""on assignment for $100 a day"" and met ""Saul" at the Agency's headquarters after the Bay of Pigs Invasion . McDonald said that he met Saul at the CIA's headquarters in the wake of the invasion .
 According to McDonald, his CIA mentor told him that ""Saul"" was the world's best assassin . McDonald: "Saul" was the best assassin in the world . McDonald says he was told by his mentor that 'Saul' was an assassin by CIA .
 McDonald recognized the man's photo in the Warren Commission report and tracked him to a London hotel in 1972 . McDonald stated that after the assassination, he recognized the photo of the man in the report .
 The pseudonymous author claimed to be a lawyer with investigative skills working in the South . He claimed to have been a lawyer working in South .
 The claim of government awareness and negligence regarding a plot to kill Kennedy has since become a key framework surrounding discussion about the Kennedy assassination . Despite the work's obscurity, it has since been used as a framework for discussion .
 Russell said he harbored a ""lingering dissatisfaction"" with the Commission's work . Russell said that he disagreed with the single bullet theory .
 "I remember the back of his head seemed like his hairline was sort of – looked like his . hairline sort of went square instead of tapered off, and he looked like he needed a haircut for about 2 weeks, but his hair didn't taper off, it kind
 Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations . United States House of Representatives . Report . Select Committee . Report on Assassination .
 Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations of the United States House of Representatives . Report of a Select Committee . Report . Report: Report of an assassination investigation .
 HSCA Report, Volume 3, Investigation of the Assassination of President John F Kennedy, was released on November 25, 1963 . Report: Investigation of President Kennedy's assassination was published in November 1963 .
 Hearings before the Select Committee on Assassinations of the United States House of Representatives . Hearings are held in the U.S. House and the Senate .
 Miss Kilgallen has reported on the assassination inquiry with a most unusual zeal . In the 'Journal American' it filled several pages over three days with revealing commentary .
 The Chief Justice was not asked of Ruby by the Chief Justice . It was fascinating for what she did not ask of Ruby .
 Dorothy Kilgallen, Abuse of Power, and the Most Compelling JFK Assassination in History, is a compelling piece of JFK's life . Dorothy KilGallen: JFK's assassination is the most compelling assassination of all time .
 Appendix to Hearings before the Select Committee on Assassinations of the U.S. House of Representatives . Hearings are held in the United States .
 One witness felt he was too distant from the gunman to make a positive identification . One witness said he was not close enough to identify the gunman .
 Warren Commission Hearings, CE 1968, Location of Eyewitnesses to the Movements of Lee Harvey Oswald in the Vicinity of the Tippit Killing . Warren Commission hearings were held in 1968 and 1969 .
 On Solving History's Greatest Murder Mystery, The Assassination of John F Kennedy. On Solve History's greatest Murder Mystery. On solving history's greatest murder mystery. On the assassination of JFK JFK: "It's a mystery"
 Committee on Assassinations of the United States House of Representatives. September 3, 2006 . September 4, 2006. September 5, 2007 .
 Social Constructivism and the Forensic Evidence in the Kennedy Assassination. Social constructivism and Forensic Evidence . In the Kennedy assassination. The Kennedy assassination .
 Rumors that Oswald was an undercover agent, J Lee Rankin, General Council for the Warren Commission – via Mary Ferrell Foundation . Rumors were made by Rankin .
 Archived from the original on August 12, 2001 – via jfkci.ci.dallas.us.com . The original version of this article was published in August 2001 .
 Roger Craig, Mcadams.posc.mu.mu., 1971, ASIN B00072DT18 . When They Kill a President, 1971, is Roger Craig's 1971 book .
 The committee believes, on the basis of the evidence available to it, that President John F Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy .
 Abraham Bolden, Abraham. The Secret Service and the JFK Murder, , , ISBN 0-965656582-4-4 .
 A Mafioso's Story, , ISBN 0-312-20388-8 . Interview by Bill Curtis, September 1991 .
 John and Robert Kennedy, the Plan for a Coup in Cuba, and the Murder of JFK, was published by Lamar Waldron, with Thom Hartmann; Carroll & Graf. The plan for a coup in Cuba is based on the assassination of JFK .
 The Love Story of Madeleine Brown and President Lyndon Baines Johnson is published by the Conservatory Press . Brown's book, "Madeleine's Love Story," was published in 2007 .
 The Straight Scoop on Freemasons, the Illuminati, Skull & Bones, Black Helicopters, the New World Order, and many, Many More. The Straight S. Scoop is a weekly look at the Freemasons and the Illuminati . Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline