 The first is in political science, where exciting new research has been published about the causes of nuclear weapons proliferation . The linkages between the growth of civilian nuclear power and the spread of nukes are also discussed .
 A second renaissance is occurring in history, as new archives have opened up and scholars are studying such important subjects as Cold War crises, the evolution of international institutions such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the IAEA .
 Over the past decade, two intellectual renaissances have emerged in the field of nuclear security studies .
 Historians and political scientists have largely developed in completely separate spheres, or on parallel tracks at best, with little interchange between historians and political science . These two scholarly renaissances, however, have little interchange .
 This is deeply unfortunate, for creative multidisciplinary research can significantly improve our understanding of complex technical, historical, and political phenomena such as the causes and consequences nuclear weapons proliferation . This is particularly unfortunate, as it can be used to understand complex issues such as proliferation .
 During the golden age of nuclear strategy in the 1950s and 1960s, many of our theories about nuclear weapons were first developed . The breadth and diversity of scholars engaged in the field was stunning, as well as the breadth of scholars .
 Both political scientists and historians too often publish only in their own disciplinary journals . They care only about policy implications of their findings, and only engage in debates with members of their own academic tribes .
 Robert Jervis, James McAllister, and Francis Gavin are to be thanked for putting together this H-Diplo forum . The forum encourages dialogue across the disciplinary divide .
 Second, I will briefly outline the major points made by the contributors to this lively forum . I will also outline the main points made in the forum . The forum was lively and lively, with many contributors contributing to the discussion .
 Third, I will discuss how historians and political scientists can interact and contribute to, rather than simply critique, each other’s work more effectively .
 In the decades after the Cold War, political science students and scholars turned their attention to studying civil wars, insurgency, and terrorism, with far less research conducted on nuclear issues .
 Over the past decade, much new research has been published on nuclear weapons issues . Policy concerns about North Korea, Iran, nuclear terrorism, and global disarmament have spurred new research .
 This H-Diplo Forum focuses mostly on new nuclear security literature using large-N statistical methods . Political science work on nuclear issues is much broader in focus and more diverse in terms of methodology than this .
 New nuclear weapons research in political science includes important case-study work examining the domestic political and psychological determinants of proliferation . New game theoretic models of proliferation and preventive war decisions .
 Some nuclear scholars – Vipin Narang and Matthew Kroenig – use multiple methods, combining detailed case studies with quantitative tests to determine correlation between variables and the importance of causal mechanisms .
 The renaissance in nuclear security studies among historians also displays considerable diversity regarding methods and approach . Historians are divided on methods and approaches to nuclear security .
 Important books by Marc Trachtenberg and Francis Gavin use American archives to illuminate the evolution of U.S. nuclear strategy and diplomacy during the Cold War .
 Other scholars have focused on social factors and domestic politics to examine nuclear decision making in different countries .
 Some scholars – Timothy Naftali and Aleksandr Fursenko are a prominent example – formed effective partnerships to conduct joint research in Soviet and American archives .
 Historians, anthropologists and sociologists using approaches developed in science, technology, and society studies have produced stunningly innovative work on missile accuracy, the Indian nuclear power and weapons programs, and the links between nuclear technology and development in Africa .
 These are exciting developments in political science and history, but it is surprising to see how rarely work in one discipline influences work in the other .
 This H-Diplo forum is therefore an important and pioneering effort of cross-fertilization . This is the first of its kind in the world, the forum has been established in the U.S.
 Historian Francis Gavin provides a critical assessment of some of the recent large-N statistical studies on deterrence and compellence . Gavin also provides a detailed and critical assessment .
 He argues that misunderstandings about specific historical cases, especially the 1961 Berlin Crisis, have created deep flaws in the specific articles he reviews here . These are also illustrative of fundamental weaknesses in the social science approach to nuclear studies more generally .
 The political scientists who are the targets of Gavin’s critical review – specifically Matthew Fuhrmann, Matthew Kroenig, and Todd S Sechser – defend their use of statistical methods in a joint 'united front' essay .
 Brands calls for diplomatic and international historians to become more ‘theory-literate’ and to be more willing to do comparative work in order to make accurate generalizations and to contribute more effectively to policy debates . Brands: Diplomats and historians should be more “theory
 I will leave it to the readers to decide for themselves who ‘wins’ the debate presented in this forum about what kinds of methods and evidence are best utilized to improve our understanding of nuclear politics .
 This forum should, however, be considered merely the start of a dialogue across disciplines . The forum should be considered just the beginning of the dialogue, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 One way to gain the benefits of multidisciplinary research is to form joint research collaborations . Joint research collaborations can be beneficial for multidisciplciplciplinical research .
 Historians and political scientists working as co-authors on nuclear-related projects include work on Nixon's Madman nuclear alert in 1969 .
 Political scientists and historians can debate accuracy of interpretations and facts of individual cases . Francis Gavin’s critical reviews can be valuable for historians and political scientists to debate .
 Historians often focus their criticism on interpretations of the specific cases that they know well . Yet I see an unfortunate tendency, as exemplified by Gavin’s approach, for historians to focus criticism on interpretation of the cases .
 Political scientists can't wiggle away from broader criticisms by claiming that even if one accepted that a single case was wrong, there are so many other cases represented in their data that one small change in coding does not hurt the robustness of their general findings . This is a useful and fair
 Historians can and should play even more important roles in helping to improve the research and findings of political science scholars . The nature of this kind of intellectual critique and the resulting defense is unfortunate, however, for historians to help improve their work .
 First, they can assess whether the theory or theories developed are logically consistent . They can then decide whether the theories or theories are logically compatible .
 Authors can examine the accuracy of the empirical evidence to determine whether the correlations presented by authors are valid . Second, they can examine whether the correlation is based on a correlation .
 Third, they can dig into the details of cases – using what Alexander George calls “process tracing” – to determine whether the factors and causal mechanisms posited as being influential in the theory are actually performing that function in the historical record .
 Historians challenge interpretations of individual historical cases, in this instance the 1961 Berlin Crisis, in their critiques of political science . It is perhaps understandable that historians like Gavin mostly challenge interpretations . Gavin: It's perhaps understandable to criticize interpretations of historical cases .
 Gavin does not make an effort to demonstrate that Berlin is, as he claims, ‘the most important and most representative case” of the effects of the nuclear balance between adversaries on crisis outcomes . Political scientists can easily claim, as they do repeatedly, that their findings are robust .
 Even if one accepts Gavin’s critique about this one case, the generalizations or findings based on a much larger set of cases in the database remain valid . This means that even if . one accepts . that one case is wrong, the findings are valid .
 Historians can usefully perform critical roles in contributing to all three of the kinds of critiques outlined above . It is important that historians be much more than mere ‘fact checkers’ for political scientists, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Kroenig theorizes that states with a larger number of nuclear warheads in their arsenal are more likely to win in crises with other nuclear weapons states . He says states with more nuclear warheads are likely to achieve their central objectives .
 He argues that leaders of superior states will have more resolve because they would suffer less in a nuclear exchange . He provides a formal model demonstrating the logical consistency of the argument .
 Historical sensibility would encourage a theorist to think differently about the logic in two ways . But a historical sensibility is needed to make a point .
 One would want to know if there is any reason to believe that statesmen in many of the cases knew whether their nuclear arsenal was larger or smaller than their competitors’ nuclear arsenals during crises . One would also want to ask if there was any reason for such knowledge .
 Indian or Pakistani leaders knew the size of their adversary’s nuclear arsenal when they tested nuclear weapons in 1998, during the 1999 Kargil war, or during the 2001 crisis after the terrorist attack on the Indian parliament . But I see no reason to believe that Indian or Pakistan leaders
 One would want to examine whether the variable being measured is logically connected to the factor that the theory claims is of causal importance . Second, one would examine the whether the variables being measured are logically connected with the factors that are being measured .
 Kroenig operationalizes nuclear superiority in a binary way, coding the state that has the overall larger number of warheads as the superior state . The state is shown to be superior regardless of whether the difference in arsenal size is massively large or minutely small .
 Kroenig says the Soviet Union "won" the 1979 “Invasion of Afghanistan’s crisis with the U.S. He says that this case supports his theory that the Soviet leadership had more resolve than U.K. leadership because the USSR had nuclear superiority .
 In 1979, the Soviet arsenal had 27,935 nuclear warheads, the U.S. arsenal had “only” 24,107 warheads . The database he uses shows that the United States arsenal had only ‘only’
 I leave it to the reader to determine whether there is a logical reason to think that Soviet leaders with such a “superior” nuclear arsenal in 1979 would find such an “advantage” in overall nuclear warhead numbers to be an important source of resolve in the
 Another avenue for critiquing political science is to ask if the evidence is accurate, or in the case of large-N work, if the coding of the variables is done in a manner that is consistent with the known facts .
 A stronger historical critique would examine whether there are systematic biases in the data that produce not one error, but a pattern of errors that push in one direction . This would therefore can make the findings less robust .
 This requires that scholars jump into the details of the data, studying it the way a good historian studies the materials in an archive . This requires a scholar to study the data in the way of a historian .
 Gavin nicely questions the coding used in political science databases that claims that the Soviet Union “won’t” the 1961 Berlin crisis . Gavin questions the claims in the political science database .
 A much larger bias in the widely-used coding contained in political science databases has been suggested by Yevgeniy Kirpichevsky and Phillip Lipscy in their research .
 They theorize that democratic leaders are less willing than autocratic leaders to accept secret deals that mask compromises as public defeats . They say democratic leaders tend to be less willing to take secret deals than autocrats .
 If Kirpichevsky and Lipscy’s hypothesis is correct, our confidence in the traditional coding of crisis outcomes will be reduced . Many findings about crisis management, democratic advantages, and coercive diplomacy will need to be reexamined due to systematic biases .
 A third way to critique political science findings – conducting detailed case studies to assess whether the causal mechanisms deemed to be important are actually producing the outcomes – is what historians excel at . Historians excel at assessing whether causal mechanisms are important .
 Gavin Obeidallah's commentary on Berlin and other crises is at its strongest in this dimension . He says the Berlin crisis is the focus of this column .
 Social scientists should always, in my view, be concerned about causation, not just correlations . But I hope that political scientists do not leave the crucial task of ‘process tracing’ to historians, for example .
 Many of Kroenig, Fuhrmann, and Sechser’s “statistically robust” findings could still be utterly spurious, says Gavin . Gavin: Until they have studied the details of at least carefully selected cases, many of their ‘statistically
 Historians should be even better than political scientists at identifying discontinuities that can influence the ability to make accurate generalizations across space and time . Historians focus on explaining both continuity and change, as well as explaining continuity, change .
 The degree to which the development of nuclear weapons in 1945 changed the dynamics of international politics, is one common subject of scholarly debate in this regard .
 There are other potential nuclear discontinuities that need to be studied with the historian’s sensitivity for seeing change and the political scientist’�s penchant for discerning patterns .
 Every new nuclear state is born into a different nuclear system, which might alter both the complexity of balancing behavior in deterrent relationships and possible patterns of cooperation . In a similar way, every new nuclear system is born .
 These kinds of questions will best be addressed in the future through a mixture of political science and historical methodologies . Political science and history will be used to answer these questions, says author .
 There is enough heat generated in this exchange of opinions that one can confidently predict that the forum will spark further debates . Indeed, there is enough . to predict that there will be more debates .
 The field of nuclear security studies has sufficient complexity and importance to deserve a big tent . Certainly, the field is complex and important enough to deserve the big tent.
 Francis J Gavin, Frank Stanton Chair in Nuclear Security Policy Studies, MIT, writes a review essay . “Susan, we need to talk. A Review Essay”” by Francis Javin .
 "We can say we love each other all we want, but I just can’t trust it without the data," she said . "I just can't trust it"
 "I just don't think this is working out. And after performing an in-depth cost-benefit analysis of our relationship, I just don’t think it’s working out," she says .
 I just made a series of quantitative calculations, culled from available OECD data on comparable families and conservative estimates of future likelihoods . I made the calculations using OECD data, which is based on available data .
 I assigned weights to various ‘feelings’ based on importance, as judged by the relevant scholarly literature . I then assigned weights for various “feelings, based on the relevant literature .
 Given all of the options available, the winning decision was to see other people . The winning decision on both cost-effectiveness and comparative effectiveness grounds was to visit other people.
 Harry S Truman claimed he issued an ultimatum that forced Stalin to remove Russian troops from Iran in 1946 . President Truman claimed to have issued the first of the atomic age .
 Former U.S. State Department official George V Allen told political scientist Alexander George that neither he nor other high-level officials from that period – including Averell Harriman, the United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union – knew of any explicit threat issued by the President to the
 Allen: Sending an aircraft carrier would have sent a powerful message – “it might well have carried an atomic bomb” – but he worried how scholars would portray the incident . Allen: “It might have carried the atomic bomb"
 The 1946 Azerbaijan crisis came less than seven months after the U.S. became the first and only country to ever drop nuclear weapons on another country . The crisis has fascinated and confounded scholars .
 This would not be the last time these questions would confound and perplex observers . This would be the first time the questions would be asked about President Obama's actions .
 Strategists suggested that these powerful, horrific weapons might serve to prevent other states from attacking those who possessed them . Strategists said the weapons might help prevent other nations from attacking them .
 These are questions of fundamental importance that have been fiercely contested for years . Despite scores of articles and books, no consensus has been achieved. These are fundamental questions that have no consensus .
 Iran’s purported nuclear ambitions are being debated over the country's nuclear ambitions . Iran has been accused of trying to build a nuclear reactor in Tehran . Iran is accused of being the world's most secretive state of state .
 It is hard to formulate a consistent, logical position about contemporary challenges without wrestling with deeper theoretical and empirical questions surrounding nuclear dynamics .
 Three bright young scholars believe they have a way to answer these questions . They say they want to find a way of answering them . They hope to find out if they can do so .
 The goal is to identify and cumulate the ‘universe’ of like cases where important issues such as nuclear blackmail and superiority were engaged, identify and code the key variables, and undertake statistical analysis .
 Sechser and Furhmann want to know whether nuclear weapons give states a greater ability to “compel” their adversaries to change their behavior . They say nuclear weapons are more effective than merely deterring them, rather than deterring .
 The study explores nonnuclear as well as nuclear coercion in order to generate ‘variation’ to identify the real impact of nuclear weapons .
 They separate out crisis victories that are caused by compellence and those achieved by “brute force,” pointing out that the latter are in fact a failure . Furthermore, they separate out crises victories that can be achieved by brute force . The latter is in fact compell
 The paper concludes that compellence is only likely to be effective when a challenger credibly seeks to seize an adversary's territory and can enact a threat with few costs to itself .
 Sechser and Furhmann’s statistical analysis suggests that whatever deterrent benefits nuclear weapons may confer, they are poor tools to bring about changes in international relations . They say they are a poor tool to change international relations in the world .
 He constructs his own dataset, made up of what he has identified as fifty-two nuclear crisis dyads, in order to see what factors determined the outcome . To do so, he also constructs a dataset of fifty-second nuclear crisis crises .
 Kroenig concludes that nuclear superiority does matter, allowing the state in possession of larger numbers to ‘win’ more often . The state of a larger number of people can win more often, he says .
 Kroenig also finds evidence that the side with greater political stakes is more likely to prevail . Kroenigs: The side with more political stakes are likely to win in this election .
 Kroenig argues that nuclear crises are “competitions in risk taking,” or tests of nerve . Building on the work of Thomas Schelling, he argues that crises are tests of nerves or nerve .
 Possessing greater numbers of nuclear weapons allows a state to run greater risks and ultimately force the weaker adversary to back down . Possessing more nuclear weapons gives a state a greater chance to force a weaker adversary into backing down .
 Furhman, Sechser, and Kroenig are part of an exciting scholarly renaissance in nuclear studies . They are all part of a scholarly renaissance .
 In a field where younger scholars are increasingly incentivized to play ‘small ball,’ all three deserve high praise for wresting with issues of fundamental importance – both here and elsewhere, they have taken on big questions .
 Both papers build upon but also criticize an earlier generation of what political scientists call qualitative and case-study work on these issues . Furthermore, both papers criticize earlier generations of work on this issue .
 The murkiness, the contingency, and the contention that mark many of the historical debates over specific crises are missing here, which suggests that by quantifying and analyzing these issues ‘scientifically,’ certainty can be established, says Simon Tisdall .
 Both articles apply statistical analysis to many of the same issues and historical events . Yet they arrive at different conclusions about nuclear dynamics and world politics .
 Sechser and Furhman contend that nuclear weapons, while good for deterrence, are not useful to compel . They say nuclear weapons are good for deterrence but are not good for compel . The U.S. says nuclear weapons should not be used to compel.
 Kroenig claims nuclear superiority helps states prevail during standoffs . He says it allows them to demonstrate more resolve in standoffs because it shows they have more resolve .
 These differences have sparked a spirited online debate amongst the authors, and captured the attention of many younger scholars in the field . The differences have been sparked by the authors' online debate .
 Both pieces draw concrete policy lessons from the authors’ research for contemporary decision-makers . Perhaps most importantly, both pieces draw policy lessons .
 The U.S. should not be unduly worried if other states get the bomb, writes Aaron Miller . Nuclear weapons are not useful to compel, Miller says . The United States shouldn't use military force to prevent Iran developing the bomb .
 Sechser, Furhmann, and Kroenig’s arguments are straight-forward . As a historian interested in these questions, they should be able to assess them .
 I would identify the most important example where these issues are engaged, look at the primary documents, see how the authors ‘coded crucial variables’ and determine how good a job their analysis does .
 Nikita Khrushchev demanded the Western powers remove their military forces from West Berlin within six months . In a speech on November 10th, 1958, the Soviet Premier demanded the U.S. and Great Britain remove their forces .
 Given the stakes and the risks, it is not unreasonable to ask that any theory of nuclear dynamics help us better understand the 1958 to 1962 thermonuclear standoff .
 Most importantly, I would want to be convinced that the causal mechanisms identified by the authors did in fact drive the origins, development, and outcome of this crisis .
 Perusing these documents, the limitations of the coding in both the Sechser/Furhmann and Kroenig papers – or any effort at coding this complex crisis – becomes clear right away .
 Ambassador Thompson told Khrushchev that, “ United States prestige everywhere in the world was at stake it its commitments to Berliners” Khrushchev scoffed . Ambassador Thompson said the U.S. prestige everywhere was at risk when it committed to Berlin .
 The Soviets wanted to change the status of Berlin, going so far as to install medium-range nuclear missiles in Cuba to achieve their ends . The Soviets initiated the crisis in Cuba, going even further to install the missiles .
 Berlin's odd occupational status was temporary and needed to be fixed, U.S. had long recognized that Berlin’s odd status is temporary . Yet the Americans had long accepted that Berlin had to be re-built .
 Khrushchev’s primary goal in the period was to prevent, or deter, the Federal Republic of Germany from gaining access to nuclear weapons .
 Eisenhower administration's seeming support for a nuclearlized Bundeswehr would have to be coded as profoundly revisionist and deeply inimical to core Soviet interests . The Eisenhower administration’s seeming support of a nuclear-lized . would have been coded as profound revisionist .
 In secret documents and public signaling, both portrayed their own ‘stakes’ in the crisis in the highest terms . ‘Both portrayed themselves in the . highest terms. In secret . documents and . public signaling .
 Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy, and Premier Khrushchev, were willing to accept a not insubstantial risk of nuclear war to maintain their position . Both were prepared to accept the risk of a nuclear war .
 Khrushchev explicitly pursued a brinkmanship strategy, fully aware that America had nuclear superiority but believing it did not matter . The United States pressed on despite what would seem to be greater stakes for the Soviets . The U.S. pressed on .
 Sechser and Furhmann see military mobilization as an important way of signalling intent . Sechschser: Military mobilization is important way to signal intent .
 In other words, calling up reserves or sending additional divisions to Europe made it seem like the West was less likely to use nuclear weapons, undermining the adversary’s perception of their resolve . Calling up reserves makes it seem to be less likely than using nuclear weapons .
 Bundy and others believed that the Soviets would only be deterred if they believed any conflict would escalate almost immediately to general nuclear war, a condition which would not be affected by the call-up of reserves . Bundy said that the Soviet government would not have been deterred by call-ups
 In other words, it is the crisis behavior that reveals resolve, not the other way around . Crisis behavior reveals resolve not resolve, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Crisis behavior is a sign that crisis behavior is resolved, not resolved .
 There are three flaws to the way Kroenig deals with the way he deals with this issue . These questions lie at the heart of his arguments .
 Key decision-makers in both Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations saw the issue of 'acceptable damage' as the most important factor when considering nuclear balance . There was no consensus on the question .
 In fact, the Kennedy administration worked on a sub-SIOP program after the failed Vienna summit . Some within the administration believed it could knock out the Soviet Union’s ability to respond .
 The plan was debated and discussed throughout the fall of 1961 . The key issue was not a simplistic measure of superiority but whether a strike could incapacitate the Soviet Union’s ability to retaliate, the author says .
 The United States maintained a massive numerical superiority, a fact that must have driven calculations . Furthermore, many in the administration – including the President – were aware that this potential first-strike capability was a waste asset .
 President asked whether even if we attacked the USSR first, the loss to the United States would be unacceptable to political leaders . The President asked if even if it were attacked first, political leaders would not accept the loss .
 President asked whether then in fact we are in a period of nuclear stalemate . The President asked if then in . fact we were in a . period of . nuclear . stalemate, he said .
 President asked how we could obtain nuclear superiority as recommended by the Air Force Association . Referring to a statement of the Air force Association which appeared in this morning’s Washington Post .
 He acknowledged that there is no way, no matter what we do, to avoid unacceptable damage in the U.S. if nuclear war breaks out . "No way, even if it's nuclear war, can't be avoided," he said .
 He acknowledged that it would be impossible for us to achieve nuclear superiority . He later acknowledged that he would be unable to achieve that .
 There is a profound difference between numerical superiority, no matter how large, and a nuclear balance that allows a country to launch a first-strike that allows it to absorb an acceptable level of retaliatory damage .
 Kroenig is correct that some countries may have wanted more strategic weapons . He says such an advantage “limits the expected damage that a country would incur in the event of a nuclear exchange,” even in the absence of a first-strike capability .
 The ability to increase ‘damage limitation’ capabilities has been driven as much if not more by qualitative improvements than the increase in raw numbers . It is important to note, however, that the ability to increase ‘damage capacity has been driven by qualitative
 SALT I and SALT II kept the strategic balance between the Soviet Union and the United States relatively stable in terms of numbers of strategic weapons . The U.S. kept the balance relatively stable .
 The U.S. spent hundreds of billions of dollars on technological changes in the nuclear area . The changes may have had a profound effect on how each side viewed the strategic balance .
 A wide range of initiatives to improve damage limitation capabilities were pursued . Stealth technologies, cruise missiles, increased accuracy, better targeting, improved command, control, communications, and intelligence, missile defense, target hardening, and submarine silencing were pursued.
 When new platforms, such as the B-1 bomber, MX missile, and Trident D-5, replaced old ones, the overall numbers of strategic weapons did not increase – in fact, megatonnage decreased . But damage limitation capabilities were much improved .
 Numerical parity in 1972 was not the same thing as numerical parity in 1985, a fact that influenced behavior of both sides . "Numerial parity" in 1972 and '85 were not as close as parity in '80s and '90s .
 The bottom line is that numerical superiority does not always convey the dynamics of damage limitation . "Numeracy superiority" is not always conveying damage limitation, says CNN.com .
 U.S. policymakers knew that without the assurances provided by a robust nuclear umbrella, countries such as Germany, Japan, South Korea, and a host of others might deploy their own nuclear weapons . The development would be inimical to America’s strategic interest, for reasons Kro
 This underlying and powerful geopolitical logic — that dampening nuclear proliferation amongst friends required security assurances – does not appear to be captured in either model . The U.S. pursued damage limitation when it was pursuing damage limitation – not the same model .
 The complex story of extended deterrence and nuclear nonproliferation was one of the key drivers of U.S. nuclear strategy throughout the postwar period . Yet the complex story remains a mystery .
 Historians believe you can only understand what drove both the origins and outcomes of the crisis by seeing the 1958 to 1962 period as continuous . These data sets break them down into three separate crises .
 The International Crisis Behavior project codes the 1961 construction of the Berlin Wall as a Soviet victory . The project is based on a study of Soviet history .
 Many within the Kennedy administration recognized that by walling off the eastern part of the city to stem the flow of refugees, the Soviets were more likely to allow the status quo in the western part to remain, which would make this an American victory .
 The Soviets removed the missiles from Cuba, the status quo in Berlin was maintained, and perhaps more importantly, the Americans had come to recognize that perhaps German nuclearization was not in their interests either .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union got what they wanted, highlighting how the zero-sum ‘win-lose’ approach of large-N studies is ill-suited to this case and international politics more broadly .
 All of this highlights how limited any effort to code complex historical events will be . All of the historical code is based on historical data .
 Under Sechser and Furhmann’s own coding, compellence did work in 1962 . Under Kroenig's, a vastly outgunned Soviet Union pursued nuclear brinkmanship over a long period of time .
 The 'crisis' emerged because the Soviets were worried that a NATO war game may have been a preparation for an attack on the Soviet Union . The ‘crisis’ emerged because of the fears that NATO war games were being used to prepare for a possible attack .
 These kinds of subtleties are inevitably lost in the efforts to code and quantify complex events . Unfortunately, these kinds of crucial subtletics are lost in these efforts .
 The problems in this approach, however, go well beyond the difficulty of coding, say experts . The problems are not just coding, but they are also the problems of coding .
 To make meaningful insights from statistical analysis, we need a certain number of like and comparable observations . We need to find a number of similar or comparable observations to make meaningful conclusions .
 A common-sense approach quickly tells you that for most of the cases in both datasets there was no danger that nuclear weapons would be used . The datasets are based on the fact that there is no danger in nuclear weapons being used .
 While the focus in both papers is on outcomes, there really should be a fuller discussion of how we even know something is a nuclear crisis before we compare them .
 Thomas Schelling made the distinction between deterrence and compellence . The distinction is crucial to both sides of the debate .
 First, deterrence is supposed to be easier and compellence harder, a proposition that has rarely been tested in either the qualitative or quantitative literature . The proposition is rarely tested in both the quantitative or qualitative literature .
 This implies that it should have been relatively straight-forward to prevent the Soviets from taking over West Berlin but much harder to compel them to leave . The Soviets were able to take control of West Berlin, but were forced to leave by the West .
 Who is the ‘comller’ and who is the deterrer – is often in the eye of the beholder . More fundamentally, as the 1958-1962 period makes clear, defining the status quo in the 1950s and 1960s makes clear .
 James Fearon and others have pointed out that countries select into crises like the ones studied here . Their pre-existing beliefs about the balance of military power and resolve have already come into play in their decision to initiate and respond to a crisis .
 To truly understand how important military balances or resolve are, you would also need to include the crises that never happened, because a state calculated that either it was outgunned or didn’t possess the requisite resolve to prevail . To understand the importance of military balances and resolve, you
 The question of resolve and the military balance has already come into play before a crisis is even initiated, so studying nuclear crises does not reveal the full story of whether and how military power plays affect world politics . In other words, the question of resolution and military balance is already in play before
 It is hard to imagine how you can effectively ‘control’ for such a thing — who knows how many nuclear crises never happened because one side or the other was deterred from either initiating or responding to a provocation .
 It may very well have been the Soviet Union’s sense of military inferiority or lack of resolve that caused it to stand by as the U.S. re-armed West Germany between 1952-1954 .
 It is very hard to undertake statistical analysis on events that have never happened, and perhaps the best we can to do is reconstruct the decision-making on both sides .
 The authors might respond that they are interested in the far more narrow explanation of crisis that outcomes have already been selected into . They might say that outcomes are already selected into.
 If so, then their causal explanations behind their theory must work . They cannot explain just the outcome, but must also explain why the outcome happened the way it did .
 The 1958 to 1962 crisis was resolved through a political settlement that emerged by 1963 . In the end, the 1958-62 crisis was . resolved through the political settlement .
 There is little doubt that nuclear weapons have transformed world politics, and that military factors played a crucial role in the 1963 settlement . There is also no doubt that the nuclear arms race in the world has transformed the world .
 A state's political goals and preferences shape its military strategies, not the other way around . But it is a state’s political goals, preferences that shape its . military strategies . The U.S. has been criticized for its actions in Syria .
 The years leading up to the 1971 agreement on Berlin were overshadowed by a nuclear crisis that many expected but never happened . To better understand this point, think about the years before the agreement .
 Documents from the late 1960s make it clear that Nixon administration feared a renewal of the Berlin crisis when it took office . The documents show that the Nixon administration wanted to avoid renewing the crisis in Berlin .
 Khrushchev demanded in 1958 that the West Berlin situation had been resolved . But the one thing that had changed was the military situation . The United States British, and French troops were still in West Berlin .
 The nuclear balance shifted from overwhelming U.S. superiority to near parity with the Soviets . The balance shifted between the United States and the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 Richard Nixon and National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger expected the Russians to exploit their improved military status . The Soviets were far more reasonable than anyone had anticipated and no crisis occurred . Nixon and Kissinger were surprised by the Soviets' behavior .
 In the end, the Soviets offered a settlement which West German Chancellor Willy Brandt pointed out was more favorable than what “was discussed in Geneva in 1959” or what Dean Acheson’s Berlin report to President Kennedy hoped to achieve in 1961, when the United
 A decent guess is that the fundamental geopolitical issue that drove the crisis in the first place – West Germany’s nuclear status – had been resolved in ways pleasing to Soviet Russia . The West Germany's nuclear status was resolved in a way pleasing to the Soviet leadership, writes Peter Bergen
 In other words, neither the nuclear balance nor the actual territory was the key variables in determining whether there was a superpower crisis .
 Focusing exclusively on military factors can obscure the issues that really matter, the author says . Focusing solely on military . factors can also obscure the forces that drove the origins and outcomes of these clashes, he says .
 We don't analyze the U.S. first strike advantages over Canada or Brazil, because they are not enemies . We know this intuitively – we don’t analyze the United States first strike advantage over Canada, Brazil . The United States is not an enemy, but they are
 These types of models tell us very little about why this is so, or why Russia was an enemy and is now a friend . China was an ally, then an enemy, then a friend, and now something in between . We worry more about an Iran with the bomb than a nuclear
 It turns that this whole set of issues surrounding both nuclear dynamics and methodology is a sequel of sorts; we’ve seen this movie before . It turns out that the issues surrounding nuclear dynamics are a sequel to this movie .
 In 1984, Paul Huth and Bruce Russet compiled a comprehensive list of what they called extended-immediate military deterrence situations between 1900 and 1980 . The list was compiled to assess when deterrence worked, when it failed, and why .
 Using a statistical analysis, they determined this type of deterrence only worked in 31 cases . The keys to success were factors like close economic and political-military ties between the defender and its protégé .
 Nuclear possession was shown to be of only marginal importance . Surprisingly, nuclear possession was found to be only minor importance in the study .
 Huth and Russett updated their data set in 1988, dropping some cases and adding others, and increasing the time frame to 1885 to 1984 . The new data set was updated in 1988 .
 Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein critique of articles published by Richard N. Lebow, Janice G. Stein . The articles inspired a sharp critique from Richard Ned .
 Lebow and Stein questioned much of Huth and Russett’s coding, arguing that in many cases they got the aggressor and the defender wrong . They also argued that they confused deterrence with compellence .
 Huth and Russett’s cases should not have even been in the data set, identifying only nine cases that met the appropriate criteria, a number too small to generate significant findings from statistical analysis . They contended that the overwhelmingly majority of the cases should have been in their data set
 The authors went back and forth, questioning definitions, research design, scope conditions, and coding decisions . The authors questioned definitions and research design of the research .
 Others eventually weighed in, including James Fearon, who focused less on the research design and empirical dispute . Fearon highlighted what he saw as “the inadequacy of rational deterrence theory”
 Fearon helped popularize Fearon’s important insights about selection effects . Fearon's insights on selection effects were published in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The substantive and methodological problems that surfaced in this early debate are remarkably similar to the problems in Sechser, Furhmann, and Kroenig papers . The substantive problems surfaced in the early debate, but they were similar to those of Sechschser and Furhman .
 Both papers make claims to ‘control’ for a variety of factors, such as the interdependence of cases and the survivability of strategic forces . Both papers claim to 'control' for a number of factors such as interdependency of cases .
 These types of issues are precisely why studies of this type are so vexing to historians and policymakers . The study was published in the U.S. last week .
 It may be that the only way to get real insight is to reconstruct the thoughts, decisions, interactions between, and reconsiderations of top decision-makers as they wrestled with these extraordinarily important questions .
 There is, however, another important argument in favor this kind of historical work – opportunity costs . There is also an argument that the project should be preserved .
 Today, we are in the midst of a declassified document revolution, with archives around the world and organizations like the National Security Archive providing access to millions of pages of material .
 The dirty secret is that with much of this material being made available online and in published volumes, an international relations scholar needn't leave her living room to see reams of extraordinary evidence that bear on the questions engaged in these articles, he says .
 Let’s say you wanted to really understand how nuclear dynamics worked in the critical 1958 to 1962 period, to explore the role that deterrence, compellence, brinksmanship and nuclear superiority played in the nuclear standoff .
 On the United States side, there are literally tens of thousands of pages of declassified documents available online about the Berlin and Cuban Missile Crises .
 You could gain great insight on the thinking of America’s closest ally, Great Britain, by examining the papers of Harold McMillan . The British Prime Minister's papers were published in the 1930s .
 Of course, there are powerful disciplinary incentives that shape the research strategies of younger scholars and prevent them from making this choice .
 I am part of a discipline that has largely abandoned studying important issues such as international security and nuclear weapons . I'm in the midst of a four-decade, slow motion act of collective suicide. I'm part of the discipline that have largely abandoned studies of international security, nuclear weapons
 There simply is not, nor will there be anytime soon, a critical mass of diplomatic and military historians available to research these important questions or make use of these amazing materials . Historians will not be able to research this important question .
 "This is a national tragedy for which the field of history and our institutions of higher education should be ashamed," he says . "I fear that the United States will pay a price," he writes .
 Political science is one of the few places within higher education where there is serious, sustained, collective interest and debate over crucial issues of national and international security . The field of political science deserves great praise for taking up some of the slack .
 A Ph.D. student in international relations undertakes a dissertation that does not include formal models, data sets, and multiple regressions . From what I gather, brave – and from a career perspective, sadly, unwise — is the student .
 Employing quantitative tools, especially statistics, is highly rewarded within political science . It is often seen as being more ‘rigorous and scientific’ and scientific .
 Whether this is a good or a bad thing for political science more broadly is not really for me to say, I said . Whether this will be good or bad for the political science community is not for me .
 Turning complex historical processes into quantifiable variables risks losing both information and accuracy, which should affect our confidence in the findings . Turning complex processes into quantifiable vigues risks losing information and even accuracy, says author .
 Statistical analysis does not strike me as the best method for understanding complex, interactive political decision-making about issues of life and death . This is especially true in the area of nuclear statecraft, where the most important ‘N’s’ are 9, 2, and 0
 There are bound to be legitimate disputes about coding, just as there are arguments about historical interpretations . There are also legitimate disputes over historical interpretations of coding .
 The authors could understandably disagree with my coding of 1958-1962, or argue that this case was exceptional . Other cases in the sample were more indicative of the underlying causal mechanisms that may operate in future cases .
 Their models could be refined to better deal with selection effects, more accurately handle the issue of resolve, or more effectively measure nuclear superiority .
 There is no shortage of problematic research designs among qualitative and formal scholars . There is also a problem with research designs in the field .
 The authors could point out that for all the availability of new primary materials, pursuing a ‘historical’ strategy appears no more likely to produce certain results than their quantitative efforts .
 In theory, access to more primary materials should provide a more accurate picture of events . But policymakers can misrepresent the past, mislead, or even provide contradictory views of the same meeting in written documents .
 Even if a deep immersion in documents produces historical accuracy, it often comes at the cost of generalizations and policy insights about nuclear dynamics we all crave . Even if historical accuracy is accurate, it comes at a cost of the generalizations .
 Historical puzzles, riddles and anomalies elude our best theories . Everywhere you look in the historical record there are puzzles and anomalies that seem to elude us .
 He also regularly engaged in what he believed was nuclear brinkmanship . As he told Kissinger, “we’ve got to play it recklessly.”
 It is not clear the Soviets ever picked up, understood, or reacted to any of his nuclear threats .
 Perhaps the real issue is not what methodology we use to explore these issues, but rather, our comfort with uncertainty, our reluctance to embrace epistemological modesty on such great importance .
 For a long time, we believed that the answer surrounding nuclear dynamics was relatively simple – once the superpowers achieved secure, second-strike capabilities, the possibility of thermonuclear war would prevail . The answer was that once they achieved secure second strike capabilities, they would not be able to
 Some even suggested that the stabilizing features of nuclear weapons were a positive feature . proliferation should not be seen as the end of the world, experts say .
 As more and more documents become available we began to fully recognize how dangerous and often unstable the nuclear age has been . While the reckless attitudes like Nixon’s may have been anomalous, they may be anomalous .
 General Johnson agreed, adding that nuclear war is impossible if rational men control governments . General Johnson said that rational men should control governments rather than nuclear war .
 If both sides believed that neither side would use nuclear weapons, one side or the other would be tempted to act in a way which would push the other side beyond its tolerance level . Secretary Rusk said he agreed, but he did not get much comfort from this fact .
 He added that a response to pressure might be suicidal, being prompted by a desire to get it over with . He said that a suicide response might be prompted by wanting to get over with the pain .
 Sechser, Furhmann, Kroenig deserve credit for wrestling with these fundamental issues in a serious way . The debate over immigration in the U.S. should be a priority, they say, but not a priority .
 Both papers overstate their theoretical claims and their policy relevance, and leave this historian no more confident on these questions than he was before . But getting beyond the obvious is difficult, and in the end, both papers are overstated .
 At times both of these propositions were, at one and the same time, true . At times, they were true, but at times they were not true .
 For those that would complain that such indeterminacy undermines the idea of a political ‘science,” I would respond, guilty as charged . For those who would complain, I would say, guilty .
 These two articles, it should be pointed out, are not the first occurrence of rival quantitative studies of nuclear statecraft .
 In the end, despite great fears, expectations, and apocalyptic predictions, we have never had a thermonuclear war . Despite great fears and expectations, it looks like we will not have one anytime soon .
 The problem is that, notwithstanding the confident claims of countless theorists, including those reviewed here, we don’t really know why nuclear bombs have not been dropped since 1945, or at the very least, cannot prove our theories and instincts .
 We have a difficult enough time making sense of things that actually occurred. We have to make sense of what has actually occurred, he says .
 There is still no consensus on the causes of the First World War . Despite the labors of . countless scholars from around the world, . assessing millions of pages of . documents, there is still not consensus .
 The methodological challenge of trying to understand something that never happened, even something as important as thermonuclear war, is far, far more difficult . The challenge is to try and understand something never happened - even something important .
 As is often said about the inadvisability of testing nuclear deterrence failures, we’ve never run the experiment, and hopefully never will. We’re not sure if it’s possible to test nuclear deterrence failure .
 The papers’ theories are unconvincing, their methods problematic, and the policy implications unclear . This is why the questions that both papers engage are so important, even if the papers' theories are not convincing .
 We are eager to have an explanation for the most important non-event in human history, if only to see if there are lessons that can be applied today to keep the streak going as long as possible .
 Many of the research questions that we do focus on are merely proxies for this larger concern . It is a daunting task, far more challenging than we like to acknowledge, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Despite the limitations of these and other studies, it is hard to imagine a more important question, one that is worthy of the most vigorous research and debate .
 The scope of Gavin’s critique extends well beyond our articles, however, encompassing the broader scholarly literature employing quantitative analysis to understand questions of nuclear security . Gavin's critique extends to the wider scholarly literature .
 Gavin Gavin’s critique arrives at a pivotal time for the field of nuclear security . Gavin: "Gavin's critique comes at a crucial time for nuclear security" Gavin: 'Gavin’
 Scholars are increasingly turning to quantitative methods to answer questions about the political dynamics of nuclear weapons . Scholars say they want to know more about the politics of nuclear arms .
 It is crucial that nuclear security scholars carefully scrutinize their research methods . Given the importance of the subject matter, it is crucial to examine their methods carefully .
 If Gavin is correct, much intellectual firepower is being wasted – with potentially serious consequences . Gavin: 'Much intellectual firepower has been wasted' If Gavin correct, this could have serious consequences for society .
 The issues Gavin raises are not unique to the field of nuclear security, he says . Gavin says the issues are not only unique to nuclear security . He says they are not just one of the issues he raises .
 The value of statistical analysis has been a topic of heated discussion for years in political science, sociology, anthropology, and other disciplines traditionally dominated by qualitative approaches .
 Quantitative analysis is being used today for corporate employee evaluation, the targeting of digital advertisements, political campaign management, online product recommendations, and many other areas of our lives .
 Gavin's criticisms of these methods have far-reaching implications, and deserve to be taken seriously . Gavin’s criticisms of the methods have been taken seriously, he writes . Gavin: ‘I’m not sure what I’ve done, but I think I�
 We appreciate Gavin’s engagement with our work, and it is a privilege for us to participate in this important roundtable . We thank Gavin for his engagement with the work .
 Gavin’s work on nuclear proliferation has helped reshape our understanding of the ways in which nuclear weapons shape world politics . As regular readers of this roundtable series already know, Gavin's work has reshaped our understanding .
 In this essay, we defend quantitative analysis as an important tool for illuminating the complex effects of nuclear weapons . The essay concludes that quantitative analysis is a useful tool to illuminate the complex effect of nuclear warfare .
 Statistical analysis has several useful attributes for studying nuclear security, such as statistical analysis .
 Gavin’s critiques suggest a misunderstanding of the nature and purpose of quantitative research, particularly as applied to nuclear security studies . Instead of revealing the flaws of quantitative analysis, Gavin's critiques suggest that quantitative analysis should be avoided .
 Gavin proposes would not solve the problems he highlights, and some would exacerbate them . Gavin says alternative Gavin proposes wouldn't solve problems he points out . Gavin: Alternative Gavin proposes not only would exacerbate problems .
 The authors of this essay disagree among ourselves about many important substantive issues . But they believe statistical analysis has an important role to play in nuclear security studies .
 First, we briefly describe our approach to studying nuclear issues, and contrast it with Gavin’s method . We also describe how Gavin's method is different to our approach . Gavin's approach to nuclear issues is different from Gavin's .
 Second, we explain the unique advantages offered by statistical analysis . We also explain the advantages of statistical analysis in the world of statistics .
 Next, we discuss the limitations of this approach and the complementary strengths of alternative methods . We also discuss the strengths and weaknesses of alternative approaches .
 There are few issues of greater policy significance than the causes and effects of nuclear proliferation . Indeed, there are few greater policy issues that matter more than nuclear disarmament .
 All of the participants in this roundtable want to better understand how nuclear weapons influence deterrence and coercion . Nuclear superiority provides countries with advantages in crisis bargaining .
 We approach these issues from fundamentally different methodological perspectives . Yet we approach them with fundamentally different perspectives. Yet, they approach them differently from different perspectives .
 Gavin argues that the best way to understand the political effects of nuclear weapons is to probe a single case deeply . Gavin: The best way of understanding the effects of the nuclear weapons are to probe the case deeply.
 He points to the 1958–1962 superpower standoff over Berlin and Cuba as the “most important and representative case” for studying nuclear crisis behavior . He returns to this episode repeatedly to support his arguments about nuclear deterrence and compellence .
 Our respective articles in International Organization adopt a considerably different approach. We are happy to clarify that our articles adopt a different approach to the issue .
 For each study, we devise quantitative indicators for several key concepts . These include nuclear capabilities, crisis actions, and several other factors . For more information, visit www.nasa.gov.uk .
 We then estimate statistical models to determine whether nuclear capabilities are reliably correlated with crisis outcomes, while controlling for other variables that could influence both a state’s nuclear status and whether it prevails in a crisis .
 While smoking and nuclear crises are vastly different phenomena, they share important similarities from a research standpoint . While smoking is vastly different from nuclear crises, it's important to research from a standpoint .
 Both cigarettes and nuclear weapons have potentially significant effects on large numbers of people . But the ways in which they operate are not always visible to the naked eye .
 Conducting direct experiments to assess their effects is infeasible, whether due to ethical or practical reasons . Further, conducting direct experiments would be infeasibles .
 Both questions require us to think carefully about how to distill causal effects from imperfect data . Both questions therefore require careful consideration .
 Using the “most important example” approach discussed by Gavin, the first step would be to locate the most important individual example of smoking and evaluate this person’s life .
 Identifying the most important nuclear crisis is likewise fraught with difficulty . As we will discuss below, identifying the most significant nuclear crisis will be difficult . We will discuss this with CNN iReport.com .
 We might then ask, for example, how much this person smoked each day, what diseases or health problems he acquired, his opinion about how smoking affected his life and health, and at what age he died .
 We would also scour medical records and the results of medical tests for information about this person’s behavior and health over his lifetime .
 With this trove of information, we could then formulate an understanding about smoking and cancer based on the written and verbal record of this person’s health .
 By contrast, our approach would begin by collecting data on a large number of individuals, including smokers and nonsmokers, as well as people with and without cancer . We hope to find out more about the link between smoking and cancer .
 Smoking may be correlated with, and may therefore be a cause of, cancer, researchers say . Smoking is statistically associated with a higher incidence of cancer, they say .
 Gavin’s method is not without merit, but it suffers from major drawbacks that impede one from making reliable inferences about how nuclear weapons affect world politics . Gavin: "Gavin's method has merit but it has many drawbacks, including major drawbacks"
 Our approach has important limitations as well, but we believe that it is a more powerful tool for providing answers to the questions we raise in our International Organization articles .
 Both studies in International Organization endeavor toward causal inference . They aim to learn about the causal effects of nuclear weapons in crisis situations .
 Four key advantages of employing a quantitative approach to evaluating the political effects of nuclear weapons, say experts .
 quantitative approaches allow us to compare large numbers of observations . Quantitative approaches have been used in the study of the evolution of the universe .
 Gavin’s approach to studying nuclear weapons is the better method for learning about the events of the 1958–1962 period . Undoubtedly, Gavin's approach is the best way to learn about the period of nuclear weapons .
 Our International Organization articles ask broader questions about how nuclear weapons have impacted world politics in the past and after this period – and how they might do so .
 Claiming that the Berlin/Cuba episode is sufficient for answering these questions presumes that the decades before and since the Cuban missile crisis have little to teach about the consequences of nuclear weapons – a claim we find specious at best . The claim we make at best is that the Cuban
 The main limitation of Gavin’s approach to assessing the effects of nuclear weapons is that it provides us with few, if any, generalizable inferences . Social science is the central aim of social science, he says .
 In other words, his approach tells us much about the Cuba and Berlin crises, and rather little about nuclear weapons more broadly . In other . words, he says . "In other . Words, he tells us, much of his approach is that of the Cuba, Berlin crises and rather
 Gavin’s approach offers no answer because it unduly limits its scope to a single historical episode, rather than examining how that episode fits into broader trends, he says . Gavin: “I’m not sure what I’ve learned about the history of American history
 The questions we ask in our articles require a more comprehensive approach to data collection. We need to be able to answer questions we asked in this article .
 By collecting information about dozens of cases rather than just one or two, we can gain insights into whether patterns we observe in any individual case are representative of broader trends .
 Of course, it is impossible to answer this counterfactual with certainty with certainty since history happens only once, and we cannot repeat the ‘experiment’ in a laboratory . Of course .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com photos of your favorite destinations .
 We can gain insight by looking at cases in which conditions were, in fact, different . Instead of looking at the situation, we can look at cases where conditions were different .
 Studying a single smoker in depth might give us an accurate and textured understanding of the role of smoking in this person's life, but it would be a poor way to learn about the broader health effects of smoking . We could not make an informed guess about what would have happened had
 Our approach described earlier, in contrast, allows us to generalize about the effects of smoking on health . Our approach is similar to our approach to generalizing about the health of smokers, we say .
 Some of the data in our hypothetical study would surely be inaccurate, but we would know comparatively little about the lives of each individual subject . To be sure, some of the . data in the hypothetical study .
 The loss in individual case knowledge would be more than compensated by the increase in information about the variables we hope to study . But the loss of individual cases would be offset by the increased information about variables, researchers say .
 To understand how nuclear weapons impact international crises, we must examine crises in which nuclear ‘conditions’ were different . We need to examine how nuclear 'conditions' were different to those in nuclear 'crises'
 For Kroenig, this means comparing the fortunes of crisis participants that enjoyed nuclear superiority to those that did not . The author of the book, "Kroenig" says he is looking at the nuclear crisis in the U.S.
 For Sechser and Fuhrmann, it means comparing the effectiveness of coercive threats made by nuclear states to those made by nonnuclear states . They say they compare coercive threats by nuclear powers to those by nonnukes .
 By making these comparisons, we can begin to engage in informed and evidence-based speculation about how nuclear weapons change crisis dynamics .
 Statistical models we employ require this comparison – they will return no results if all of our cases look the same . Statistics will not be able to predict the outcome of all of their cases .
 Gavin argues that the Berlin/Cuba episode is sufficient for understanding the dynamics of nuclear weapons . It is the “most important and representative” case of nuclear deterrence and coercion, he says . Gavin argues .
 Gavin offers no criteria for evaluating what an ‘important” case might be . With respect to the first claim, Gavin offered no criteria .
 Gavin may view the 1958–1962 case as critical for understanding nuclear dynamics, but it is by no means clear that policymakers today look to this example for guidance about dealing with Iran or North Korea .
 This is not to say that we disagree with Gavin’s assessment – undoubtedly the 1958–1962 episode is important in many respects . But we agree with Gavin that it is important to know about the 1958-1962 period .
 Without examining other cases, Gavin simply has no grounds on which to base this claim, he says . Gavin simply must examine other cases before making such a claim .
 In the broader universe of crises, this episode actually may be quite anomalous, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: In broader universe, the episode may be an anomaly .
 If so, studying it to the exclusion of other cases would yield misleading conclusions about the role of nuclear weapons in world politics, says David Cameron .
 Statistical models provide ways to identify – and exclude – anomalous cases that deviate markedly from dominant trends . Statistical models can help identify and exclude anomalies in society .
 Quantitative analysis can be a useful precursor to the selection of individual cases for in-depth analysis . It allows us to locate cases that either represent or deviate from the overall pattern, says author .
 These selections are based on careful comparisons with other cases, not opaque judgments . These selections, however, are based upon careful comparisons, not transparent judgments .
 Quantitative analyses provide greater transpararence about methods, judgments, and conclusions . Quantitative analysis provides greater transprecision about methods and conclusions, says author .
 One of Gavin’s central critiques is that various cases in our quantitative analyses have been miscoded . Gavin's central critique is that some of the quantitative analyses in this article have been misdiagnosed .
 This criticism is possible only because our coding decisions are unambiguous and easily ascertained from our datasets . This criticism – irrespective of its validity – is possible, it is possible to accept the criticism, it says .
 Each of our studies sets forth clear rules for how each variable in our datasets was coded .
 This does not mean that our coding decisions are all correct and beyond dispute, but it does mean that they are clearly stated for outside scholars to evaluate . This doesn't mean that all coding decisions in the world are beyond dispute .
 This degree of transparency is a key strength of quantitative research, says the author of the study . The author of this article has published a series of articles on quantitative research .
 Each case in a quantitative analysis necessarily must be clearly coded . There is no ambiguity about how the researcher has classified each case . Each case is clearly coded to indicate the researcher's classification .
 Quantitative research designs allow scholars to easily evaluate how much a study’s findings depend on individual coding decisions . By extension, quantitative research designs give scholars an idea of how much of a study's findings are affected by individual coding choices .
 Simply noting a few coding errors or differences of interpretation in a large quantitative dataset is of little consequence . Instead, one can demonstrate that those differences are responsible for generating incorrect inferences .
 A quantitative study typically amounts to recoding disputed cases and repeating the core statistical models to determine whether the results change substantially . In a quantitative study, this typically amounts . to recode disputed cases, this . amount of recoding disputes is a key question .
 The original coding decisions are laid bare, but it is also straightforward to determine whether the study’s inferences depend on them . Not only are the original coding . decisions laid bare .
 This high level of transparency – and the external quality-control it enables – is one of the most attractive features of quantitative research designs . It is also a high-level of transparency and quality control it enables .
 Transparency is useful not because it produces scholarly consensus, but because it allows opposing sides to identify the precise nature and implications of their disagreements . Transparency is a useful tool for opposing sides, but it allows them to identify their opponents' views .
 Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein exchange in 1990s World Politics . Paul Huth and Bruce Russett exchanged on one hand, and the other on the other hand .
 Gavin highlights the similarities between this debate and the present exchange, separated by almost twenty-five years, as evidence that quantitative analysis has made little progress in understanding nuclear issues .
 Our central findings do not change even if we accept Gavin’s arguments, we say . Similarly, as we report in our articles, our central findings don't change .
 quantitative approaches allow us to evaluate the substantive importance of questionable coding decisions . Gavin is correct to argue that coding cases is a tricky exercise .
 Qualitative research, by contrast, is not always so amenable to external oversight . Qualitative studies are often more amenable than quantitative research . The study was published by the World Institute for Quality Research in 2005 .
 Quantitative models demand clear coding decisions, but qualitative research designs can be forgiving of ambiguous classifications . Quantitative research designs are much more forgiving than quantitative models, such as quantitative models .
 He raises questions about our coding decisions, but then declines to answer them . He says, "I'm not sure what I'm doing here, but I'm sure we're doing it"
 Quantification is sometimes criticized for presenting a false illusion of certainty . Uncertainty, of course, is inherent to any scientific enterprise, but quantification is often criticized .
 To be clear, quantitative research cannot create certainty where the evidence is ambiguous . "Quantarative research cannot ... create certainty," says author .
 Just because a case is coded a certain way does not mean that the broader scholarly community has reached a consensus about that case, says John Sutter . Sutter: "Just because a certain case has been coded, doesn't mean that a consensus has been reached about it"
 The process of quantifying allows scholars to debate each decision and evaluate whether potentially questionable choices are decisive in generating a study’s core results .
 This transparency is central to peer evaluation and, ultimately, scientific advancement, scientists say . The transparency of peer evaluation is central for peer evaluation .
 A third advantage of statistical analysis is that it is designed to cope with probabilistic events . A statistical analysis can be used to help predict future events, say experts .
 So long as conditions are kept constant, this result will obtain again and again, no matter how many times the experiment is repeated . The experiment is an experiment that can only be repeated if conditions are constant .
 In the social world, however, we are not blessed with such ironclad reliability . In the media world, we have to rely on the reliability of social media .
 No two individual people are exactly identical, and even in carefully controlled environments it is rare to find a ‘force’ that begets exactly the same effect on all people with perfect regularity . No two individuals can be compared to each other .
 The causal relationships we observe are not deterministic – they are probabilistic, occurring with imperfect regularity . The causal relationship we observe is not determandable, it is probabilism, it's not always predictable .
 The 'force' of interest to us is, broadly, the possession of nuclear weapons . The ‘force’ of interest’ to us in our articles is, broadly, the presence of nuclear arms .
 Sechser and Fuhrmann seek to discover the likelihood that a coercive demand made by a nuclear-armed state will be met . They also seek to find out the likelihood of a state's refusal to meet its own demands .
 We cannot examine a crisis and directly observe the probability of one side capitulating; we can only observe whether it actually capitulated . We cannot directly observe a crisis in order to see if one side is willing to capitulate . We can only see if it capitulated.
 Quantitative research is designed for precisely this sort of situation . Quantitative research research is designed to help people understand what is happening in the world .
 If we cannot directly observe whether we are holding a loaded six-sided die, for example, we can throw it many times, observe the result, and infer the underlying probability from the results . We can throw a loaded die many times and throw it again, and then infer the outcome
 All six numbers are theoretically possible even if the die were loaded . Throwing the die just one time would tell us little, since all six numbers would be theoretically possible . The die is loaded .
 Only after observing the pattern of results across many events can we determine the underlying probabilities of each number turning up, we can determine the outcome of each event .
 The single-case approach Gavin proposes cannot cope with probabilistic events as effectively . Gavin proposes a single case-only approach to solve problems .
 Knowing that one smoker happened to die of cancer does not tell us much about the broader health effects of tobacco, it says . Knowing that a smoker died of cancer doesn't tell us about the wider health benefits of tobacco .
 The true relationship between smoking and cancer emerges only after looking at a large number of cases, experts say . Smoking and cancer is linked to smoking, according to experts at the University of Manchester .
 Even if we determine that nuclear weapons appeared to ‘matter’ from 1958-1962, we cannot safely infer from this observation that nuclear . weapons influence crisis outcomes in general . Similarly, even if we . determine that . nuclear weapons appear to “matter” from 1958
 Any relationships observed during this particular period could have been due to any number of chance events that might be unlikely to recur .
 Studying just one episode allows us to say much about that episode but little about the underlying relationships . Studying only one episode can reveal a lot of the relationships behind the scenes .
 Gavin’s approach, in contrast, requires finding primary source documents and learning what participants themselves believed to be the relevant causal factors at play . Gavin's approach is to find out what participants believed to have been the cause of the events at play, rather than what they believed .
 His essay conveys an exceptionally narrow conception of how one should gather knowledge about the effect of nuclear weapons on international politics . It conveys a very narrow conception about how to gather knowledge of the effect nuclear weapons have on world politics .
 We believe that a narrow focus on primary documents can often lead a scholar astray . While we agree that studying primary documents has great value, there are many other ways to generate useful knowledge .
 First, the historical record is often incomplete, but the absence of evidence is not evidence of absence . Second, the lack of evidence does not mean absence of absence, but it means absence .
 In any historical nuclear crisis, a leader might have made an important statement to his advisers about how nuclear weapons fundamentally affected a crucial decision . The statement might have never been recorded or could have been lost in the sands of time .
 Without that crucial piece of information, one might conclude, incorrectly, that nuclear weapons were not part of the calculation . Without that information, the calculation would be incorrect, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Something might not appear in the historical record because it was taken for granted . Second, and related, something might not be recorded in the history because of it being taken granted .
 Researchers might then conclude that this factor was not salient, when in fact it might have been so important that it was well understood by everyone in the room and did not need to be mentioned . Researchers might instead conclude that the factor was . not salient .
 Nuclear weapons may have been so irrelevant to a particular crisis that leaders didn't even see the need to raise the issue . For example, nuclear weapons may not have been relevant to a crisis .
 Leaders may make inaccurate or incomplete statements – even in private – in order to influence the outcome of an internal debate, to improve domestic political fortunes, or to shape how they will be viewed by posterity, or a variety of other reasons . Leaders may also make inaccurate statements to influence internal
 Something might not appear in historical documents because participants themselves were unaware of how important it was . Fourth, something might not be recorded because participants were unaware it was important .
 A case study of a smoker in the 1920s might not turn up any evidence from the smoker’s medical records that smoking was damaging to his health . The case study could turn up no evidence that smoking is damaging to health .
 Nuclear weapons may have had an influence on crisis dynamics even if leaders themselves didn't fully appreciate it . Similarly, nuclear weapons may also have influenced leaders themselves .
 Statistical analysis, on the other hand, does not depend on the participants themselves to understand and record accurately the causal forces at work . Statistical analysis is not dependent on the participant's knowledge of the causes at work, it says. Statistical analysis doesn't depend on people understanding and recording accurately the
 The researcher can independently identify and measure the variables of interest and search for correlations in large samples of data . The study was published in the journal Nature Nature .
 Factors may matter regardless of whether the participants record them, record them accurately, or even understand their existence . Factors may be important regardless of the participants recording them, or recording them accurately .
 Statistical analysis can help us understand world politics, but it is not without limitations . Statistical analysis has limited impact on the world's political system .
 Large-N analysis has potential pitfalls with which scholars must grapple . Like any method, large-N Analysis has some potential pitfalls .
 In this section we review some of the key limitations of this approach and describe how we cope with them in our studies . We also discuss how to cope with these limitations in their studies .
 Social scientists are social scientists who aim to understand causal relationships between variables of interest . Their goal as social scientists is to understand the causal relationships of interest, they say .
 It is difficult to determine causality in studies that use observational data, like ours . However, it is hard to determine whether the study was true .
 When we find a strong correlation between variables A and B in our observations of the real world, this does not necessarily mean that A “causes” B . If a researcher found a positive and statistically significant correlation between ice cream consumption and drowning, this would not necessarily imply that
 In warm weather people are more likely to go swimming, which increases the risk of drowning, and eat ice cream . Temperature is more likely that a third variable – temperature – was responsible, say experts .
 There is a similar risk of drawing spurious relationships when studying the political effects of nuclear weapons . There is also a risk to draw spurious relationships between nuclear weapons and political power .
 Imagine if one discovered a positive correlation between nuclear weapons and military conflict . Imagine that one discovered that one of the world's most powerful nuclear weapons was linked to military conflict. Imagine that . Imagine .
 This would not necessarily imply that nuclear weapons cause states to behave more belligerently . Instead, it would be more likely to be followed by more aggressive states .
 The factors causing states to build the bomb – rather than the weapons themselves – might account for the observed relationship between bomb possession and conflict .
 In particular, states in threatening security environments may be more likely to seek atomic bombs to protect themselves, says CNN.com . State in threatening environments may also seek atomic bomb to protect itself, he says .
 The dangerous security environment is causing the state to both build nuclear weapons and become embroiled in a large number of disputes . In this case, the state is building nuclear weapons, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The best way to deal with it, from the perspective of causal inference, would be to create an experimental world in which no state possessed nuclear weapons, artificially manufacture dozens of crises . Then randomly assign nuclear weapons to some states .
 A state’s nuclear status emerged by chance – not as a result of a strategic process . If they were, we could reasonably conclude that nuclear weapons caused countries to become more belligerent, since they were not strategic .
 We must rely on other solutions to address barriers to inference that arise in observational studies . We therefore must rely upon other solutions .
 The most straightforward way to reduce the risk that an observed relationship is spurious is to control for the factors that might be correlated with both the independent and dependent variable . Control for the factor that might have been correlated with the dependent and independent variable .
 Our studies account for several covariates – including conventional military power – that could affect crisis bargaining and the nuclear status of the crisis participants .
 In some cases, the relevant factors for which one needs to control may not be observable or measurable . However, some cases of which one need to control are not observable .
 Political scientists increasingly turning to ‘high-tech’ tactics for addressing concerns about causality . Political scientists are increasingly turning towards 'high tech' tactics to address causality concerns .
 If an analyst has a logically consistent argument that can plausibly explain an observed correlation, she might have more liberty to make causal claims about that relationship . An analyst might have to make a causal claim about the relationship, she says .
 This would be especially true if she could use theory to rule out alternative explanations that could account for the observed pattern .
 In addition to statistical findings, supplementing statistical findings with case studies that unpack causal mechanisms can be an especially fruitful strategy . Case studies can be especially useful in unpacking causal mechanisms .
 It is important to note that challenges related to causal inference are hardly unique to our methodological approach . The challenges are not unique to the approach of causal inference .
 Establishing causation in the social sciences is notoriously difficult . It is a problem that plagues not just statistics, but many research methods, as well as statistics .
 Gavin’s preferred method is particularly ill equipped for assessing causality . Gavin's preferred method, however, is ill equipped to assess causality, he says .
 It's exceedingly difficult to know whether nuclear superiority caused the U.S. to win crises by following his approach . It's not known if nuclear superiority helped the United States win crises from 1958 to 1962 .
 What we really want to know, if our goal is to make causal claims, is whether the outcomes of the crises during that period would have been different if the Soviets possessed strategic superiority instead .
 Of course, there is no way to rerun history, as we noted earlier in this essay . But there's no way of re-running history .
 The U.S. had nuclear inferiority in the 1950s and '60s, but later crises were similar to the Berlin/Cuba cases in other respects . Yet one could get at this indirectly .
 Readers might respond that Gavin’s approach is not designed to make causal claims . Readers might say that one's ability to make such inferences using any method is exceedingly limited . Gavin: "I’m not making causal claims, but I’ve got a point to
 At least one statement in Gavin’s essay implies that he accepts this view . Gavin: ‘I’m not surprised that Gavin accepts that view.’ Gavin says he accepts that .
 Political scientists do not share the view of using qualitative methods, they say . This is a view that many political scientists share, including many who rely exclusively on qualitative methods .
 Prestige, for example, is widely believed to be important in world politics . Prestige is widely thought to be an important part of the world's politics .
 One reason states seek nuclear weapons is to increase their standing in the international system . Indeed, according to the prevailing wisdom, one reason is that they want to be stronger in the world system .
 We can devise variables to proxy for this concept, but we cannot measure it directly . One recent study codes status seeking behavior based on performance at the Olympics . We cannot measure this directly .
 It is difficult to test theories about prestige using statistical analysis . It is therefore difficult to use statistical analysis to test theory about prestige .
 He argues that seemingly straightforward phenomena, like who won a crisis, can be difficult to code . He says it can be hard to code for seemingly straightforward things like winning a crisis .
 Kroenig codes this case as a crisis victory for the United States and a defeat for the Soviet Union . Kroenigs codes the case as "a crisis victory" for the U.S.
 Sechser and Fuhrmann code the U.S. demand to withdraw the missiles as successful . The United States also code the United States' demand to withdrawal as successful, they say . The U.N. has not responded to the request .
 The Soviets withdrew nuclear weapons from Cuba in response to U.S. pressure, he says . Both sides ultimately got what they wanted, he adds .
 The Soviets "won" because they preserved the Castro regime and forced the U.S. to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The Soviets “won’t” because they kept the United States to remove the missiles, the author says .
 Gavin Gavin says nuance is lost in our quantitative analysis . Yet this nuance has been lost in the quantitative analysis, he says . Gavin: "We need to focus on the nuance of our analysis, and we need to be very careful"
 We agree with Gavin that measurement issues can create challenges for scholars employing quantitative analysis . We agree that measurement problems can be difficult for scholars to use quantitative analysis.
 Reliance on qualitative methods does not free an analyst from dealing with potentially thorny measurement issues . Analysts must also deal with thorny measuring issues, such as measurement accuracy .
 "It is impossible to conduct a proper test of the argument in the absence of this information," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Any social scientific inquiry requires analysts to measure their key variables, whether they employ qualitative or quantitative analysis . Social scientists need to measure key variables in order to make progressable progress .
 The measurement problems that Gavin identifies undoubtedly exist to some degree in our studies, but they are by no means unique to our studies or to statistical analysis more generally . Gavin: "The measurement problems are certainly not unique"
 Gavin also overstates the magnitude of these problems for our research when he implies that they impede our ability to glean any meaningful insights . Gavin says Gavin's research has been hampered by these problems but he says they can be beneficial to our research .
 Gavin Gavin suggests which state was victorious in many instances . But it's not clear which state won in many cases, he says .
 In 1979, a crisis erupted after supporters of the Iranian revolution took 52 hostages at the American embassy in Tehran . The crisis erupted in 1979 after a hostage crisis erupted at the U.S. Embassy in Iran .
 The Iranian government refused to return the hostages even after the United States threatened it with military force . The case was an unambiguous failure for U.S. coercive diplomacy, the authors say .
 We would not conclude that the Denver Broncos “won’t” Super Bowl XLVIII – a game they lost badly to the Seattle Seahawks – because their appearance in the game increased Broncos merchandise sales . The Denver Broncos’ Super Bowl appearance increased their merchandise sales.
 The Broncos undoubtedly benefited from many ways from their Super Bowl appearance, but this hardly means that they won the game . The Broncos won the Super Bowl on Sunday night, but it was not enough to win it .
 Even if the Soviets got something out of the Cuban missile crisis, they failed to obtain their main objective – namely, keeping the missiles in Cuba . Similarly, even if the Soviet Union got something from the crisis, it didn't obtain the main objective - namely, keep the missiles .
 Our respective codings of this case reflect the most direct interpretation of the crisis’ outcome . The case is the result of a court ruling in the aftermath of the 2008-2009 crisis .
 In some cases scholars who employ statistical analysis can cope with the measurement issues that Gavin identifies . Gavin: "In some cases, statistical analysis helps us understand what we need to do to solve these issues"
 If there is disagreement about the way a certain case is coded, scholars can simply recode it and see if the results change . If, for example, there are disagreements about how certain cases are coded, they can recode them .
 To the extent that the findings are consistent regardless of how certain cases are coded, one can have greater confidence in the robustness of the results, the study says .
 Our findings in these studies are robust to such changes, we say . As we explain above and below, our findings are robust .
 A third potential concern is that statistical findings may be sensitive, especially when studying rare events . Statistics may also be sensitive to sensitive statistical findings .
 Only 10 countries have built nuclear weapons, and only 10 have nuclear weapons . This is particularly true in the area of nuclear proliferation, given that only 10 of the world's nuclear weapons have been built .
 The rarity of nuclear proliferation does not mean that statistical analysis is useless for understanding how nuclear weapons affect world politics, as Gavin implies . Gavin says statistical analysis does not need to be used to understand world politics .
 It does mean, however, that scholars should exercise appropriate caution when using this tool .
 When dealing with rare events, there is always the possibility that statistical findings are driven by a small number of cases . There is the possibility of statistical findings driven by small numbers of cases, such as the death of a man in a car crash .
 It is worth noting that the phenomena of interest in our studies – crises involving nuclear states – are not particularly rare . Crisis involving nuclear state is not particularly uncommon, says the author .
 Crisis participants achieved their basic goals in 35 percent of Kroenig’s cases, and in 30 percent of the cases evaluated by Sechser and Fuhrmann . Crisis participants achieve basic goals, according to the study, in 35% of cases .
 Nuclear-armed challengers issued 20 percent of coercive threats in Sechser and Fuhrmann’s study . Half of all crisis participants enjoyed nuclear superiority, Kroenig says .
 In neither of our studies were the critical numbers “9, 2, and 0,” as Gavin suggests . Gavin suggests that Gavin’s number is 9, 2 and 0 . Gavin: ‘In neither of these studies were ‘9 or 2,’
 In short, the rare-events problem is far less pernicious in our articles than Gavin implies . Gavin says it's not a problem in the articles that Gavin implies, but it's a problem of rare events .
 The patterns we identified may be sensitive to minor changes in the statistical models . Still, given that our samples are relatively small, the patterns are still sensitive to changes in models .
 Additional tests are designed to evaluate the strength of a given finding . One way to deal with to this issue is to conduct additional tests that are designed for evaluation .
 We employ this strategy in our articles – we rerun our models after recoding the dependent variables, modifying how we measure nuclear weapons and nuclear superiority, dropping potentially influential cases, and excluding particular control variables that could potentially bias our results .
 As we report in our respective studies, our main results survive these further tests . The main results of our main tests survive further tests, according to the authors .
 This does not guarantee that our findings are bulletproof, but it should inspire greater confidence that the patterns we identified are reasonably robust, the study says . The findings are not bulletproof and should inspire more confidence that they are robust .
 A fourth limitation is that statistical analysis is not designed to explain outliers . Statistics is designed to help people understand outliers, rather than explain them .
 Statistical analysis can tell us, on average, how an independent variable relates to a dependent variable . Statistical analysis is a tool that tells us how a variable related to a variable is related .
 This is useful because it helps scholars to determine whether their theories are generalizable to a broad set of cases . It helps them determine if their theories can be generalizable . This is helpful because it can be used to test whether theories are true .
 Most statistical models in political science produce outliers – cases that are not explained by the theory being tested . Political science often produces outliers in statistical models, such as outliers . Political scientists are trying to find out how to explain the results of their statistical models .
 The 1999 Kargil War, for instance, is an outlier for the democratic peace theory . The war was a major outlier in the peace theory, writes Arjun Bhatal .
 India and Pakistan fought this particular war when they were both democratic states . Although democracies are in general unlikely to fight militarized conflicts with one another, they nevertheless fought the war .
 Most international relations theories are based on probabilistic logic . But the presence of a few outliers does not necessarily disprove them . The presence of an outlier does not disprove these theories, says David Frum .
 Kroenig and Sechser and Fuhrmann identify outliers in their articles . It is often helpful to explicitly identify out-of-the-range outliers .
 Scholars can study these cases to refine their theories or, at the very least, identify the conditions under which their arguments hold . Scholars can then study the cases to identify their arguments under the circumstances .
 ‘nested analysis’ – selecting cases for study based on results from a statistical model – is increasingly employed in international relations research to improve the explanatory power of theories . This type of ‘Nested Analysis’ is often used to select cases based on the results of a
 If we understand when nuclear powers were able to make successful threats in the past, we can better understand whether Iran’s ability to blackmail its adversaries might change if it builds the bomb .
 The implication seems to be that certain things, like love and nuclear security, are simply too mysterious to understand using numbers .
 Psychologists and sociologists interested in patterns of human courtship and mating have made major advances in their understanding of love and relationships .
 Newly-available data from online dating sites have allowed scholars to test and refine their theories, and to develop new ones .
 White Americans, despite stated beliefs in racial equality, are especially unlikely to marry outside of their race . And this line of research has uncovered startling new findings, such as that white Americans are especially likely to marry out .
 Like the study of human courtship, nuclear security has undergone a renaissance in recent years . New datasets and statistical tools have been used to address age-old questions . Nuclear security has been made possible by newly available datasets .
 These methods are advantageous for their ability to compare large numbers of observations, reveal the researcher’s methods and judgments, deal with probabilistic phenomena, and uncover relationships about which participants themselves might not be cognizant .
 Statistical analysis has important strengths, but it cannot be the only instrument in our toolkit. Nevertheless, while we believe statistical analysis has . important strengths . Nevertheless, we believe . statistical analysis is important strengths but it is not the only tool in the toolkit .
 Even with statistics, it is difficult to ascertain causation, key concepts may defy easy measurement, available data may be limited, and outliers will demand explanation . Even with stats, it will be difficult to determine causation .
 The drawbacks of statistical analysis do not mean that statistical analysis should be abandoned altogether, say experts . Yet, they say, statistical analysis is still necessary .
 Qualitative methods suffer from some of the same problems, and many others as well, as well . Qualitative techniques are not the only ones to solve the problem .
 For decades, scholars have been employing the methods proposed by Gavin to study the role of nuclear weapons in international politics . Gavin's methods have been used by scholars for decades, including academics .
 Scholars have written dozens of studies assessing the consequences of nuclear weapons for deterrence and coercion .
 Gavin’s own research yields no conclusive answers about the coercive effects of nuclear weapons, and little useful policy advice, he writes . Gavin: “ United States nuclear superiority mattered.”
 Faced with this situation, it would be unwise to continue to tackle questions of nuclear security in the same way as before . The next trove of documents will settle the debate once and for all .
 We should consider the possibility that an incomplete methodological toolkit has been obscuring our view, rather than an incomplete toolkit . We need to consider an incomplete methodology toolkit that obscures our view .
 His work has been published or conditionally accepted in peer reviewed journals such as American Journal of Political Science . Journal of Peace Research and Journal of Politics .
 From May 2010 to May 2011, he served as a Special Advisor in the Office of the Secretary of Defense on a Council on Foreign Relations International Affairs Fellowship, where he worked on defense policy .
 His research interests include coercive diplomacy, reputations in international relations, strategic effects of nuclear weapons, and the sources and consequences of military doctrine .
 His commentary on international affairs has appeared in the Wall Street Journal, Christian Science Monitor, Boston Globe, and other outlets . His work has been published in peer-reviewed journals such as the American Journal of Political Science .
 Gavin’s essay offers several thoughtful criticisms of our study, and of the use of quantitative methods in nuclear security studies more broadly . Gavin: "Gavin's essay offers a thoughtful critique of the study and of nuclear security"
 In a joint response with Matthew Kroenig, we explained why Gavin’s critiques of our methodological approach are well off the mark . In our joint response, we explain why Gavin's critiques are well-off-the- mark .
 We turn to his specific criticisms of our article and its findings . Here we turn to him for a look at his criticisms of the article .
 Gavin's arguments are interesting and worthy of serious consideration, but they fail to undermine our paper’s central conclusions, we say . Gavin says he is disappointed by Gavin's views, but his arguments are worth serious consideration . He says: ‘Gavin’�s arguments
 Our article explores how nuclear weapons influence international crisis bargaining . It also explores the role of nuclear weapons in international crisis negotiations .
 It would make little sense, for example, for China to wrest the Senkaku Islands from Japan by launching a nuclear attack against the disputed territory .
 China might try to gain control of the islands by threatening to destroy Tokyo . Alternatively, China might attempt to gain . control over the islands . Alternatively , China might . attempt to . gain control by threatening . Tokyo .
 Carrying out a coercive nuclear threat would be exceedingly costly for the challenger . The U.S. has a long history of using coercive nuclear threats against its enemies .
 It would result in international blowback and establish a dangerous precedent, among other costs, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Challengers might pay these costs if their vital interests are on the line . Challengers may pay costs if they want to protect their interests in the U.S.
 Historical record indicates that coercive threats rarely involve stakes that are high enough for the challenger to justify paying such a stiff price . But this is not the case, the authors say .
 Coercive nuclear threats therefore will usually be dismissed as incredible . The threat is usually thought to be the result of a threat of a nuclear attack .
 The costs of implementing nuclear deterrent threats would be comparatively low, because such threats are carried out only after an attack against a country or its ally . Such threats would only be carried out after a nation or ally attacks .
 Defender's national survival may be at stake . And the stakes are typically higher – indeed, the defender’s national survival .
 Many observers found it believable that the U.S. would have used nuclear weapons in the event of a Soviet invasion of Western Europe during the Cold War . Many observers believe the United States would use nuclear weapons against Soviet invasion .
 By contrast, it would have been far more difficult to have persuaded anyone that the U.S. was willing to launch a nuclear attack for the central purpose of forcing the Soviets out of East Berlin .
 Our argument stands in stark contrast to the emerging view that nuclear weapons are useful for military blackmail . Our argument is a stark contrast with emerging view of using nuclear weapons to blackmail .
 Nuclear weapons allow states to bully and intimidate their adversaries, according to this line of thinking, because they are so destructive . Nuclear weapons can be used to intimidate and bully adversaries, it is thought .
 A key tenet of this view is that nuclear weapons loom in the background, even when their use is not explicitly threatened . This view is based on the view of nuclear disarmament in the United States .
 In this view, nuclear powers need not play dangerous games of brinkmanship to get their way in world politics . Simply possessing the bomb is often sufficient to do the trick, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Our central objective was to compare whether nuclear challengers enjoy a higher rate of coercive success than their nonnuclear counterparts . We compare nuclear challengers to nonnuclear challengers with their coercive success rates .
 We found that there was very little difference in the success rates of nuclear and non-nuclear challengers .
 Nuclear weapons appear to provide states with little coercive leverage . Nuclear weapons, in other words, appear to be less coercive than nuclear weapons .
 He provides no evidence suggesting that our argument or evidence is incorrect, he says . Indeed, he provides no . evidence suggesting our argument is incorrect. He says .
 He offers several critiques of the scope and assumptions of our study . However, he offers a few critiques of our findings .
 We consider each of these points in turn, and explain why none of them pose a major challenge to the findings we presented in our paper . We also consider why no major challenge is posed to our findings .
 Gavin's main complaint about our article is that it does not help him better understand the superpower standoff from 1958 to 1962 . Gavin’s main complaint is that the article doesn’t help him understand the situation in the world .
 This is a puzzling criticism, since this was not the purpose of our article . This is not the only criticism, but it is not a result of the article . We are happy to clarify this, but we are not happy with this .
 Our objective was to investigate whether nuclear weapons help states make more effective coercive threats . Our objective is to find out if nuclear weapons can be used to make coercive threats more effective .
 The crises that occurred from 1958 to 1962 are undoubtedly relevant for understanding this question, but they are by no means the only cases that offer insights into it . The crises occurred in 1958 and 1962, but are not the only ones that offer insight into it, say experts .
 Gavin does not challenge us on those cases, nor does he explain why the 1958-1962 episode is a more important lens through which to view our question . Gavin doesn't challenge us . He does not explain why, nor why, that episode is more important to the question .
 He offers no reason to doubt our argument about the coercive limitations of nuclear weapons . In short, he offers no evidence of our argument .
 Gavin’s criticism is equally puzzling because he offers no reason to believe that our theory cannot account for the 1958-1962 period . Gavin's criticism of our theory is equally perplexing .
 Khrushchev was unable to use the threat of nuclear war to force American troops out of West Berlin, despite repeated efforts to do so . The threat of a nuclear war was not enough to force the U.S. to leave West Berlin .
 Contrary to Gavin’s suggestions, the 1958-1962 episode actually squares quite well with our argument . The 1958-1960 episode is actually quite a good example of the show's time .
 Gavin’s second criticism of our article is that we examine the wrong cases . Gavin: ‘I’m not looking at the wrong case. I’ll be happy to answer that,’ he says. Gavin: We’ve got to look at
 In his view, it is uninformative to study episodes in which nuclear war was not an obvious danger, he says . In the past, nuclear war wasn't an obvious threat, he argues .
 Gavin Gavin is wrong to assume that these episodes have nothing to teach about whether nuclear weapons convey coercive leverage . Gavin: It's wrong to think these episodes don't teach about nuclear weapons . He says the lessons should be learned about the use of nuclear weapons in coercive blackmail .
 "Expanding our scope beyond nuclear standoffs is crucial to understanding the coercive effects of nuclear weapons," says Peter Bergen . He says expanding our scope is crucial for understanding the effect on nuclear weapons .
 We cannot know whether nuclear states achieve better coercive outcomes than nonnuclear counterparts . We need to study both groups in order to know whether they achieve better outcomes .
 Imagine, for example, that we wish to find out whether a particular sports drink improves athletic performance . Imagine, if you want to know whether a sports drink can improve athletic performance, then you can find out if it can .
 We would also need to know how people fare without the sports drink so that we can compare the two groups . We would like to see how people fared without sports drink .
 Evaluating crises in which there was seemingly little danger of nuclear war is central to this task . The U.S. has been in the midst of a nuclear crisis crisis since the Cold War .
 First, studying lower-profile crises helps avoid stacking the deck in favor of our argument . Second, studying smaller-profile crisis helps avoid stacked the deck against each other . Third, studying a crisis is a good way to avoid stacking our deck in favour of our arguments .
 High-profile nuclear confrontations like the Berlin crisis tend to be considered historically important precisely because they nearly led to war . Berlin crisis was one of the world's most significant moments of nuclear confrontation .
 Studying only high-risk cases might overlook the most successful coercive threats, and bias the evidence in our favor . Studying high risk cases might also bias our view of coercive threats .
 Third, nuclear weapons may carry coercive leverage without ever being invoked . Nuclear weapons may also carry coercive power without ever invoking them .
 Some scholars have argued that nuclear weapons cast a shadow even in crises that we might consider nonnuclear . Some scholars argue that even in nonnuclear crises, nuclear weapons carry a shadow .
 We cannot fairly evaluate it without looking at a broad spectrum of crises in order to determine whether nuclear-armed states achieve systematically higher rates of success . Although we disagree with this claim, we can't fairly evaluate the claim, it's important to look at the broad range of crises, says
 If nuclear weapons are useful for coercion, examining only dangerous nuclear standoffs might not give us a complete picture of their utility . If our theoretical argument is wrong, nuclear weapons might not be useful .
 Nuclear weapons may be useful for deterrence, but they are poor instruments of compellence . Nuclear weapons can be useful in deterrence but they can be used for blackmail, says Peter Bergen .
 Gavin argues that in the 1958-1962 standoff between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, both sides saw themselves as protecting the status quo, while casting the other as the aggressor . Gavin, however, questions the distinction between these two concepts .
 It does not follow that we cannot objectively identify the status quo in historical cases . But it does not lead to an objective objective assessment of historical cases, it does follow .
 Our study employs a database of compellent threats that defines the status quo as objectively as possible . We use a database to identify threats that define status quo in order to make sure it's true .
 The question is whether the challenger’s demand required the target to modify the material status quo in some way, even if that status quo was only recently established . In other words, our operational definition of “compellence” does not require that the two sides agree on
 If so, then the case is included in the dataset; if not, it is excluded . If not, the dataset is excluded from the dataset .
 This is faithful to Thomas C Schelling’s original conceptualization of compellence, which held that compellent threats are unique because they require the target to act – to “do something” – in order to comply .
 Gavin may disagree with using a material baseline to identify compellent attempts, but if so, he does not explain why . Gavin says he doesn't want to use a baseline for the purposes of the election .
 Khrushchev failed in his first objective, and succeeded in the second, just as our theory expects, in theory . He said: "Krushchev's first objective was to defeat the Soviet Union, but his second was to achieve it."
 Deterrence and compellence are logical opposites, but they are not necessarily mutually exclusive . Deterrence is the most powerful weapon of power in the world, but it's not always the most effective .
 The distinction between deterrence and compellence is unhelpful for understanding how nuclear weapons affect crisis bargaining . Coding issues aside, one might nevertheless argue that the distinction between the two is not helpful .
 It might be preferable to analyze all crises together, regardless of whether a state is trying to preserve the status quo or change it . It might also be preferable, according to this line of thinking .
 Drawing the distinction between deterrence and compellence is useful for policy purposes . Moreover, drawing the distinction from deterrence and competition between them is useful .
 Scholars may not believe that it is important to distinguish between attempts to wrest away territory and attempts to defend it . But policymakers certainly do, and policymakers do .
 If a nuclear arsenal allows states to grab territory with greater ease, reverse unfavorable policies, or extract other concessions, the prospect of nuclear proliferation is quite threatening . Nuclear proliferation is very threatening, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In that case, aggressive nonproliferation policies – including, potentially, the use of military force – might be justified . The U.S. could use military force against Iran in the region .
 If nuclear weapons serve primarily defensive functions, the consequences of proliferation would be less severe . However, if nuclear weapons are used primarily for defensive purposes, they would be more likely to proliferate . The U.S. should not use nuclear weapons as a weapon of choice .
 To be sure, allowing another state to build the bomb might still be undesirable . It's still undesirable, but it's possible to build a bomb in the United States .
 The argument for aggressive nonproliferation policies weakens considerably if nuclear weapons deter but don’t compel, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: Nuclear weapons deter, but not compel, should be used to deter nuclear weapons .
 Gavin's final criticism is that our study provides only partial insight into the dynamics of nuclear coercion . Gavin’s final criticism: ‘Our study provides little insight into nuclear coercion.’ He concludes that this is only partially what the study provides .
 In other words, one also would need to study ‘the crises that never happened” in order to glean a complete picture of how nuclear weapons shape the dynamics of coercion .
 Studying only coercive threats, as we do in ‘Crisis Bargaining and Nuclear Blackmail,’s tells only part of the story . Studying coercive threats only tells only one part of a story, we say .
 Those decisions could skew our conclusions by concealing important pieces of the puzzle . Those decisions, however, could skew the conclusions .
 In the sports drink example above, assessing the drink’s effect on athletic performance could be complicated by the possibility that individuals who choose to consume the drink probably are more likely to exercise .
 If we simply compared the performance of people who regularly purchase the drink against those who do not, we would likely find a sizable difference . However, not necessarily because the drink itself has had any effect .
 He does not, however, offer any reason to believe that selection effects are responsible for the findings we report .
 One must explain why that selection effect has produced an incorrect inference . One must also explain why the selection effect produces an incorrect conclusion .
 In fact, our article explicitly considers the possibility that self-selection dynamics might be driving the results . Self-selection is a key factor in the success of the study .
 We evaluate whether nuclear states might be achieving coercive ‘victories’ without ever having to issue threats . We evaluate if nuclear states can achieve coercive "victories" without ever issuing threats .
 Using several methods of varying technical complexity, we find little evidence to suggest that this is the case . We use several methods to suggest this is not the case, including a number of methods of analysis .
 Selection effects undoubtedly exist in the cases we examine, but they do not appear to explain the patterns that we have uncovered . Selection effects may exist, but it does not explain patterns that have been uncovered, the authors say .
 Nuclear weapons, according to this perspective, help countries compel changes to the status quo in ways that serve their political interests . Nuclear weapons can be used to compel changes in the political process, says the author .
 We argue that nuclear weapons are poor tools of blackmail, in part, because it is difficult to make coercive nuclear threats credible . We also argue that coercive threats are not credible in the world .
 Gavin’s essay, in our view, does not undermine our central conclusions, we say . Gavin's essay doesn't undermine our conclusions, the authors say . The essay is published in the New York Review of Science .
 Although we find his criticisms unpersuasive, it is important to note that there is much about which we agree, we also agree .
 Questions relating to the causes and effects of nuclear proliferation are tremendously important, and worthy of dedicated study . Most importantly, we share the view that questions relating to nuclear proliferation need to be studied .
 Historical analysis is indispensable tool for understanding the political effects of nuclear weapons, especially when combined with statistical analysis . We also share his view that historical analysis is an indispensable tool .
 Our statistical tests were meant to be our first word on this subject, not our last . We hope to use this as our first ever statistical test results to make us more clear .
 Since the publication of our article, we have been researching the role of nuclear weapons in dozens of Cold War and post-Cold War crises for precisely the reasons that Gavin identifies .
 We believe nuclear weapons are poor tools of coercion and intimidation, despite their destructive power . A thorough analysis of these cases only strengthens support for our argument that nuclear weapons should not be used to coerce people .
 We hope that this exchange encourages further thinking and research about the role of nuclear weapons in world politics . We thank Gavin again for his engagement with our work .
 Matthew Fuhrmann, Todd Sechser, and I address many of Gavin’s broader methodological and disciplinary criticisms in our joint response . Matthew and Todd respond to Gavin's broader criticisms in their joint response.
 In this essay, I briefly address the specific concerns raised about my article . The author also addresses the concerns raised by some of the readers .
 He claims that there are problems with my attempt to theorize and measure my key explanatory variable, nuclear superiority . He says there are also problems with his attempt to measure his theory .
 Gavin argues that I don’t effectively account for selection into nuclear crises . Gavin argues he doesn't effectively explain why selection into crises is more important .
 Third, he makes other smaller criticisms of my analysis, which lead him to question my results, he says . Fourth, he questions my results .
 Gavin is one of the country’s leading scholars on nuclear issues . He says he is grateful for his deep engagement with his work .
 All three of his criticisms lack merit, however, I believe that all three of them lack merit .
 Gavin argues there are problems with my conception of nuclear superiority . Gavin argues that there are also problems with his conception of nukes superiority .
 I measure which state has a nuclear advantage, but do not account for whether the superior state has first strike capability or whether the inferior state has secure, second-strike capability .
 First, as I clearly explain in the article, I do account for second-strike capabilities . Second strike capabilities are necessary, and I'm not afraid of second strike strikes .
 Gavin repeats an outdated and overly simplistic notion of nuclear deterrence theory that has caused far too much confusion in the past . By reverting back to the hoary notion that nuclear superiority only matters if one state has a splendid first strike capability, Gavin repeats the outdated notion .
 My article explains why nuclear superiority matters even when both states possess secure-second strike capabilities . My article also explains why it matters even if both states have secure-Second strike capabilities.
 Gavin focuses his attention on my article’s evidence, but I believe its biggest contribution is theoretical . Gavin: "I believe the biggest contribution to this article is theoretical. Gavin focuses on his article's evidence."
 Gavin criticizes my measurement of nuclear superiority for focusing on quantitative, to the exclusion of qualitative, indicators . Gavin: "Turning back to the empirics, Gavin says my measurement is based on quantitative and qualitative indicators"
 I clearly explain my reasons for doing so in the published article and I stand behind them . "I clearly explain myself reasons for choosing not to publish this article," he said .
 It would be difficult to code and measure the qualitative nuclear balance between every pair of states in the international system from 1945 to the present .
 "There is good reason to believe that quantitative and qualitative superiority are tightly correlated," he says .
 Gavin does not specify the nature of measurement error, how the error results in bias, or why the bias would cause me to overestimate, rather than underestimate, the strength of the true relationship between superiority and crisis outcomes .
 Gavin asserts that the United States and the Soviet Union have pursued superiority and damage limitation more aggressively than other states . Gavin says the U.S. has done this out of part out of a desire to extend nuclear deterrence to its allies .
 He seems to imply that this somehow poses a problem for my analysis, but he does not clearly explain this point . He says this is not a problem, but it is a problem .
 I disagree with the premise of this criticism . Whatever Gavin’s intended criticisms might be , they are fully addressed in the published article and again below .
 As I clearly explain in the article and the online appendix, I do control for such a thing . But, as I clearly explained in the . article and . the online . appendix, the . online appendix .
 I perform three different tests to account for selection into crises and in each test I find that the nuclear balance of power remains correlated with nuclear crisis outcomes . Even after accounting for selection, nuclear balance-power remained correlated with crises outcomes .
 If there is a selection effect it should bias against, not in favor, of my hypothesis . Moreover, as I also explain in the article, if there is an effect it would bias against my hypothesis, it would be in favor of the hypothesis .
 If leaders take the nuclear balance of power into account before initiating crises, then this would mean that nuclear superiority is an important factor in international politics . But that we should not expect to see its largest effects in the outcomes of the crises that actually occur, he says .
 Selection is a bigger problem, therefore, for those who wish to argue that nuclear weapons do not affect crisis bargaining . Selection of nuclear weapons is a big problem for those seeking to argue it does .
 The fact that I find a strong relationship between superiority and crisis outcomes in actual crises even in the face of possible selection effects provides especially strong support for my hypothesis, says author .
 Gavin makes a number of other minor criticisms of the piece . Gavin also criticizes the piece for being too slow to respond .
 He inveighs against the widely-used International Crisis Behavior dataset for coding the Berlin Wall crisis as a victory for the Soviet Union . But if one wanted to argue that this was a victory . for the nuclear superior United States , then this would only strengthen my reported relationship between superiority
 Gavin claims that in some crises both states achieve their goals, “highlighting how the zero-sum ‘win-lose’ approach of large-N studies is ill-suited to this case and international politics more broadly,” but, as I explain in
 Some crises are coded as producing multiple winners and others as producing losers . Some crises produce multiple winners, others produce losers, according to a study .
 Gavin questions whether some of the observations belong to a study of nuclear crises . But, as I explain in his article, the findings are robust to the removal of each individual crisis and to each individual country, rendering such criticisms moot . Gavin questions if some of these observations belong in a study
 He argues that a study of nuclear crisis outcomes must clearly define what counts as a nuclear crisis . This definition should include some threshold for the level of danger and whether nuclear weapons were front and center in the crisis .
 It would be a mistake to focus only on cases that escalate to a certain level of danger, or in which nuclear weapons were front and center . In my article, I provide a clear definition of nuclear crises and explain why, for theoretical and methodological reasons, I explain why .
 The findings of this article might be in tension with my policy recommendations for addressing the Iranian nuclear challenge, but, in actuality, they strongly support them . Gavin raises the possibility that the findings may conflict with his policy recommendations, but they support them.
 A nuclear-armed Iran would be able to hold U.S. assets at risk with the threat of nuclear war . It would increase Washington’s expected costs in a conflict with Iran, and reduce its willingness to run risks in crises against Tehran .
 Iran's nuclear-armed Iran could pose many more dangerous threats to the U.S., author says . Iran has a long history of instability in the Middle East and beyond .
 I agree that this distinction is often fuzzy and that it does pose potential problems for studies that attempt to focus on one or the other . This distinction is not at all crucial to my analysis, but it is important to our analysis .
 I focus on the outcomes of all serious showdowns between nuclear-armed states, regardless of whether the initiator is attempting to deter or compel the target . Rather than trying to deter, the initiationator is trying to compel or compel a target .
 In closing, I would like to thank Gavin again for bringing attention to the subject of nuclear superiority and nuclear crisis outcomes .
 The most important requirement is that we be present in Iraq and Syria and will have planned ahead that the enemy, the air force, that will come and attack and destroy, etc. The air force will have to be ready for the enemy to attack, and the enemy will attack, etc
 We should bear it and keep going, and go put pressure on our Soviet friends and make them understand our need for one weapon . "We only want one weapon. We only want to use that weapon," he says .
 We want, when the Israeli enemy attacks our civilian establishments, to have weapons to attack the Israeli civilian establishments . We want to be able to attack Israel, Israel's military establishments, says the Israeli government .
 We are willing to sit and refrain from using it, except when the enemy attacks civilian establishments in Iraq or Syria, so that we can guarantee a long war that is destructive to our enemy . We can take at our leisure each meter of land and drown the enemy with rivers of blood,
 In Saddam’s view, having a nuclear deterrent would foreclose the possibility of Israeli nuclear escalation, he says . He says it would allow the Arabs to wage a “patient war” that would last “for twelve continuous months,” result in tens of thousands
 Saddam’s comments can be found in the transcript of a Revolutionary Command Council meeting . The transcript is one of several hundred Iraqi documents first made available to scholars on an unclassified basis in 2010 .
 We argue that Saddam’s nuclear calculus has important implications for theoretical debates about nuclear proliferation and its geopolitical consequences . We also argue that the implications of the calculus should be considered in theoretical debates .
 I think this passage serves as an appropriate point of departure for a paper about the role of new sources and new approaches in the study of nuclear politics . I think that this passage . serves as a . appropriate point-of- departure .
 The overall goal of the paper is not to serve as anything approximating a formal or comprehensive literature review, but simply to provoke discussion about potential avenues for improving and building on the exciting work now being done in nuclear politics .
 Since the Cold War, documentation on nuclear statecraft has become available through declassification and other processes . Documentaries on statecraft have been declassified in recent years .
 These documents shed light on a wide range of subjects pertaining to the international politics of nuclear weapons . They have the potential to reshape the ways that scholars think about important aspects of the nuclear age .
 There is lots of material to work with, even though declassification procedures are much more idiosyncratic .
 Iraqi documents dealing with Saddam Hussein’s approach to nuclear issues during his time in power have been made available to scholars . And as I’ll discuss in greater detail below, an upshot of the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003 has been to make .
 At the risk of belaboring the obvious, all of these records are very valuable to students of the nuclear age .
 In some cases, they shed light on little-known aspects of nuclear statecraft . Others, they illuminate to an unprecedented degree the ideas, motives, and perceptions that fed into nuclear politics .
 They can correct longstanding misunderstandings and push us toward the resolution of certain debates, while also opening others . They can be helpful, but also open others, as well as correcting misunderstandings .
 These are just some of the questions that the documents can help us begin to answer . The documents will help us start to understand what we need to know .
 Historians say the records enhance historians’ understanding of things that happened decades ago . Yet what makes these records so valuable is not simply that they enhance historians' understanding . It's important to understand things decades ago, they say .
 These records have real significance for some key theoretical debates surrounding nuclear weapons and international relations . Rather, these records have important implications for nuclear arms debates .
 These and related questions are at the center of scholars’ efforts to understand the nuclear age . The nuclear age is a key part of the understanding of nuclear power .
 Iraq's record-breaking Iraqi record is one of the world's worst since the fall of Saddam Hussein . The Iraqi government has been accused of corruption in Iraq .
 The most important information in the Iraqi records has to do with the question of why Saddam wanted the bomb in the first place . The issue is of interest not just to scholars of Iraq, but to anyone interested in studying the broader theoretical issue underlying that question .
 Saddam, it now seems clear, wanted nuclear weapons as a means of enabling conventional attacks on Israel . Saddam wanted to use nuclear weapons to enable conventional attacks, it seems seems clear .
 If Iraq lacked atomic weapons, it would remain vulnerable to nuclear blackmail even as its armies advanced . Iraq would be vulnerable to blackmail even if it had no atomic weapons . If Iraq had nuclear weapons, then it would be more vulnerable to such blackmail .
 "If we were to have the atom, we would make the conventional armies fight without using the atom," he says . The atom is the key to making conventional armies use the atom .
 If the international conditions were not prepared and they said, “We will hit you with the atom,” we would say, ‘We would hit you too.” We would hit them with the atoms too, he says .
 Saddam often came back to the same theme in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and even a decade later, as well . The late 1980s and late '80s were the subject of a series of stories .
 For Saddam Hussein, nuclear weapons were meant not simply for purposes of deterrence and prestige, but also to enable conventional war . For Saddam, nuclear arms were meant to enable the use of conventional war, he says .
 If one accepts this conclusion, then there are some interesting theoretical implications that follow . It is not only possible to conclude that this is true .
 The Iraqi records provide numerous illustrations of a statesman invoking the logic of the stability/instability paradox .
 Saddam believed that nuclear weapons could have great strategic and military utility even if they were never used . He believed that even a very small and primitive arsenal would be enough to deter a much larger Israeli arsenal .
 Iraqi documents show no evidence Saddam wanted nuclear weapons so that he could launch an unprovoked attack on Israel or any other country . On the one hand, the Iraqi documents are actually somewhat reassuring, in that there is no evidence that Saddam wanted to use nuclear weapons .
 Documents indicate that had Saddam obtained nuclear weapons, he might have used them for purposes that still would have been bloody and destabilizing . On the other hand, the documents are troubling because they indicate that if Saddam obtained nukes, they might have been used in bloody and highly destabilizing ways
 Documents help flesh out just how amateurish and idiosyncratic Saddam’s views on nuclear strategy could be . Saddam's views are an echo of other recent work on nuclear issues, the documents show .
 Saddam’s nuclear calculus seems to have been sincerely held, but it was flawed on numerous grounds . Saddam's belief that Iraq could defeat Israel in a conventional war once deterrence was established at the nuclear level was flawed .
 Saddam Hussein wanted nuclear weapons and what he planned to do with them, experts say . Other intriguing insights to emerge from Iraqi records emerge from Saddam Hussein's records .
 International sanctions and inspections impacted Saddam’s perceptions of the utility of his nuclear program in the 1990s . The regime ultimately parted with much of that program while still seeking to retain basic facilities .
 Iraqi records now available do not give a complete portrayal of Iraqi nuclear politics under Saddam Hussein . To be sure, the Iraqi records . Iraq records do not show a complete portrait of Saddam's nuclear politics .
 The existing records provide a fragmentary picture of Iraqi statecraft . They raise obvious questions about how literally one should take Saddam’s statements about nuclear weapons .
 The records provide greater insight than any other sources into the strategic motivations underlying Saddam’s nuclear decision-making, author says .
 In many ways, it would seem superfluous to suggest ways that scholars should utilize these new materials, or to offer comments on potential directions for the field of nuclear studies more broadly . III III: "I would rather rather than suggest ways to use these materials"
 History and Political Science already have strong cohorts of scholars doing innovative work on nuclear issues . Issues range from proliferation and its consequences, to arms control and reasons for nuclear abstention .
 In the spirit of generating discussion, here are a few brief observations about archives and nuclear studies .
 New materials offer an opportunity to strengthen and perhaps reinvigorate the qualitative research agenda . For political scientists particularly, the new materials offer a chance to strengthen their research agenda, says Simon Tisdall .
 Political scientists seem to be moving away from the sort of deep, archives-based, case-study analysis that would appear to be the most rewarding way of exploiting the emerging material . Political scientists are moving from archives to case-studying analysis, the author says .
 Political scientists have long asked the biggest, most ambitious, most interesting, most policy relevant questions about nuclear issues . Political scientists are asking the biggest and most interesting questions of nuclear policy .
 Survey of the field looks at quantitative analysis of the world's top science fiction fiction fictionists .
 Leading journals like International Organization, Journal of Conflict Resolution, American Political Science Review run nuclear-related articles . It would seem as though the subfield as a whole is trending in this direction .
 Quantitative work certainly has its benefits, which I do not aim to dispute here . Quantitative research has its own benefits, but it's not a matter of whether it's worth doing it .
 " quantitative work has limits. But when dealing with nuclear issues, it should also be noted that quantitative work must be done," the scientist says .
 There are, of course, the small-n problems that come with studying a number of nuclear issues .
 Using statistical analysis makes it difficult to capture the complexity that is often at work in studying nuclear politics . More broadly, relying on statistical analysis means it is difficult to understand the complexity of nuclear politics.
 The very attempt to code the outcomes of nuclear crises involving nuclear powers is fraught with nasty complications . As Francis Gavin has recently pointed out, for instance, the very question of who won and who lost is fraught .
 If you want to know how the strategic balance affected a crisis, for instance, you need to understand, as accurately as possible, how that balance was perceived by the officials in question . You need to be able to understand how the balance was viewed by officials .
 If you want to understand how acquiring nuclear weapons affects the behavior of a given state, you have to look at the complicated and often conflicting ways in which those weapons altered the strategic calculus of leaders in power .
 If you want to know how many bombs it takes to constitute an effective deterrent, you need to find out when leaders of the country in question believed that this threshold had been passed . Leaders of the countries in question—as well as the leaders of an opposing country—believed that this
 So much of nuclear history revolves around perception as much as reality . In other words, so much of the nuclear history is about perception .
 The possibilities for doing such work at tolerable costs in time and effort are greater now than ever before . And at the very least, the possibilities for such work are now greater than ever .
 As for historians, there are already a number of scholars who are doing terrific work with these materials on a wide range of subjects . Historians are already doing great work with the materials .
 As historians continue to do their work, they should think about new ways of wringing maximum value out of the records they use and the insights they generate, says author .
 Historians need to be more ‘political sciency’ when they address nuclear issues, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: Historians must be more political sciency .
 Social scientists need to be more attuned to theoretical implications of their work . They need to explicitly engage the relevant political science and strategic studies literature . They also need to try their hand at comparative history and work on collaborative projects .
 Historians need to be far more theory-conscious in dealing with nuclear issues . Historians must also be more aware of nuclear issues, writes Andrew Hammond .
 There is a vast body of theoretical literature, produced by the political science and strategic studies communities, on these subjects . Historians too often write their books and articles as though this theoretical work did not exist .
 This silence may be because historians simply aren’t conversant in the relevant theoretical literature, or because there isn't much professional payoff to engaging that literature if you want to make a living .
 The lack of theory-literate historians imposes real limitations on the work we do, historian says . Historians say they need to be more critical of the world's history .
 Political scientists are giving political scientists little incentive to engage historical work . They are further impoverishing the dialogue between the two disciplines, they say .
 Historians have overcome obstacles in other aspects of diplomatic/international history . There are good reasons to try it in nuclear history as well, as well .
 It can give scholars more analytical leverage than they would gain by simply looking at a single case . It allows them to explore similarities and differences across cases, to see which dynamics are common and which seem to be more idiosyncratic .
 Comparative history can be a powerful tool for illuminating the nuances, patterns, and anomalies of the nuclear era . Comparable history can also illuminate the nuances and patterns of nuclear age .
 Historians need to do more collaborative work, historian says . Historians must also do more of a collaborative effort to learn more about history .
 Historians have generally been reluctant to do such work, for some reasons that make sense and some that do not . Historians are generally reluctant to work on the subject of historical discoveries .
 There is much to be gained from trying new approaches to the world's most popular art form . But here as elsewhere, there are many ways to try new approaches, such as new technology .
 Collaborative work represents a natural way of bringing together the various expertise and language skills that are often necessary to do good comparative history . Collaborative history is a way of combining the expertise, language skills needed to do a good history of comparative history.
 Some very interesting work on nuclear issues has been done by teams that have brought together just these sorts of skill sets . Indeed, some of the most interesting nuclear issues have been solved by teams of experts .
 America’s Search for Purpose in the Post-Cold War World . Includes numerous articles on grand strategy, arms control and nuclear issues .
 This is an approach that has gradually swept through the sciences, engineering and is now increasingly practiced in the social sciences and humanities . This is the approach to the humanities and social sciences, it says .
 There are other ways of gaining knowledge, including deduction, expert judgment, and qualitative assessment .
 Quantification is not a substitute for qualitative evaluation or theoretical reasoning . Quantification should not be used as a substitute to theoretical reasoning or evaluation, author says .
 It poses important potential advantages that have proven fruitful in an enormous and enormously diverse set of intellectual disciplines . That said, it poses . potential advantages .
 For more than sixty years, it was widely assumed that the study of nuclear security was not amenable to quantitative analysis . The study was largely ignored by scientists for more than 60 years . Now, it has been proved to be a useful tool for understanding nuclear security .
 There were few countries with nuclear capabilities and nuclear weapons had existed for only a short time . There were only a few countries in the world with nuclear capability .
 The last decade has witnessed a flowering of quantitative empirical studies of correlates of the nuclear age . It has been a decade of quantitative evidence that correlates of nuclear age have been found .
 Studies have explored the reasons that nations proliferate and why they do not . These studies have explored why nations do not proliferate .
 Research has assessed the impact of nuclear capabilities on alliance ties and extended deterrence . Research also assessed impact of the nuclear capability on alliance relations .
 Studies have begun to assess the relationship between nuclear status and crisis escalation brinkmanship, (and nuclear arsenal size and conflict) The relationship has been noted in the U.S.
 In this very preliminary effort, I seek not to criticize the critics, but to make the case that quantitative analysis of nuclear security is a useful addition to the tools available with which to make sense of extremely important questions . Those questions may decide the fate of humanity .
 Pointing to the flaws in any approach is useful if it leads to refinements that improve the products of inquiry . Pointing out flaws in an approach can be useful in improving the product of inquiry, says John Defterios .
 It will be less constructive if the effort is designed to squash what is seen as competition in its infancy or dismiss a new perspective out of a desire to preserve established approaches or hierarchies .
 A strong critique of the quantitative approach is simply that it is not possible or perhaps pointless to measure nuclear capabilities . II A strong criticism is that it's not possible to measure or is perhaps pointless . II
 To the degree that such claims are true, one should find at best a tenuous relationship between nuclear status and consequences, such as the exercise of influence or the advent of conventional war and peace .
 Longstanding controversies about the effects of nuclear arsenals serve to emphasize the ambiguity surrounding such weapons . Longstanding debates about the effect of nuclear weapons have been long debated .
 Two of the leading scholars of international relations have spent at least 15 years in a public and active controversy over whether nuclear weapons deter or inflame . They have spent the last fifteen years in an active controversy .
 This embodiment of the adversarial system has led to a number of insights, but no firm resolution of the basic controversy . The system is the result of a debate over whether it should be allowed to exist in the future .
 Answers may prove elusive because the kind of information needed to arrive at answers does not exist . Answers may be elusive because of the lack of information in the world's most complex questions .
 Opposing counsel in a criminal trial can speak to facts that are at least potentially available . Opposing attorneys in criminal trial should be able to speak to the facts of the case, say prosecutors .
 A murder happened or it did not; the defendant owned a pump-action shotgun, or she did not . The defendant owns a pump action shotgun or she does not . A murder is not a murder or a murder is a murder .
 Information of this type may not be forthcoming in international relations and particularly not in studying nuclear security, with no cases of usage, few countries that have nuclear weapons .
 The dialectic is not particularly effective at providing scale . Perhaps both tendencies exist, though neither is large, at least in small samples . Neither is large enough to provide scale .
 It would not be surprising if early attempts to unravel ambiguity and surrounding controversy of this type through quantitative methods were subject to some controversy . Three generations of qualitative research have been unable to resolve these issues .
 The issues that remain are those over which qualitative debates have proven less than definitive, such as the Kenneth Waltz-Scott Sagan debate about nuclear stability . The issues remain: Those that remain: those that have proven to be less definitive .
 There may be many flaws that need to be ironed out in quantitative research, just as there have been with qualitative accounts of complex, multi-causal relationships . There may also be flaws in the quantitative research .
 Some of these difficulties remain and it may be in these areas that quantitative research proves valuable . Indeed, some of these problems remain and may be useful .
 Swiss cheese is either cheese, or it is not . Swiss cheese can be either cheese or not cheese .
 There are holes in the fromage that, depending on where one is looking, can make the cheese, not cheese . There are big holes that can be found in fromage .
 Controversies about relationships in which behavior or effects are heterogeneous can prove difficult to evaluate qualitatively because evidence will exist for contrasting claims . Controversy about relationships can be difficult to assess qualitatively, especially in the case of heterogeneous relationships .
 There is most definitely cheese in some places and decidedly no cheese elsewhere . There is no cheese in the U.S. and there is cheese everywhere .
 Imagine a debate between two observers, one who received a sample of the cheesy part and the other whose sample is the center of a hole . Imagine the debate between one of the observers and the one who receives the part .
 The Waltz-Sagan debate again can be used to illustrate the problem, precisely because it takes on this character, but also because of the deficiencies in the adversarial system already mentioned .
 The temptation is to exaggerate the pervasiveness of one’s preferred evidence . Whether effects reflect important contrasting tendencies of lots of not-so-much, the temptation is not so much, writes David Frum .
 Whatever differences exist are hard to scale, even while debate pushes participants toward rhetorical hyperbole . The differences exist, even if differences exist in terms of how different they are .
 One version of the Swiss cheese problem arose during work on a 2009 special issue in the Journal of Conflict Resolution . The Swiss cheese issue was discussed during work for the 2009 issue .
 Alexander Montgomery and Scott Sagan pointed out that different scholars were using different definitions of nuclear status . This belied some confusion about what, precisely, was being measured .
 Israel and India have not been entirely frank about their nuclear status at various times . The critique was a valid one on the merits, but it's not entirely true .
 Researchers for their part hold differing opinions about when North Korea crossed the nuclear threshold . North Korea's nuclear tests have never been seen to have occurred .
 There has been intense debate among experts about which date is correct . There is intense debate about whether the date of the first date was correct .
 The old adage that an intellectual is someone who cares more and more about less and less seems applicable to this instance . The old idea of an intellectual being an intellectual seems to be applicable in this case .
 Choosing dates arbitrarily primised an intellectual train wreck, since the intensity and diversity of expert opinion seemed to invite some disapproval of whatever dates were chosen .
 A surprising and useful thing happened that was only possible because of the application of statistical methods . As it turned out, it was a surprising thing happened .
 What could have degenerated into a lengthy and ultimately unresolvable debate about when, really, highly secret nuclear programs achieved certain milestones quickly established a simple fact .
 Whatever plausible dates one wished to champion, they did not matter in terms of the results of any of the analyses conducted by the studies involved in the project . The project was launched in 2008, and it is not known which dates were accurate .
 Academics can disagree about anything and there is no shortage of things about which to disagree . But there are plenty of things to disagree about which they disagree about .
 There is certainly an interesting debate to be had about numerous details of the development of nuclear weapons in each of the nuclear powers .
 It would be a disservice to a critical set of questions to let the search for better answers become mired in details, especially when it is possible to determine whether the answers hinge on particular values in any given controversy .
 If in addition it turns out that individual judgment or opinion is not critical in a given area, then this is an extremely liberating discovery for all involved . If in fact, this is a liberating discovery, it is a liberation for everyone involved .
 We can then leave such debates to be conducted at leisure by the appropriate scholarly community . We then leave it to the appropriate academic community to debate the issue .
 We can use statistics to tell us where values are or are not critical to the types of conclusions that may or may not be supportable, we can . Statistics can tell us about values that may not support certain conclusions, or not, supportable conclusions .
 This leads to a basic difficulty in all forms of analysis, not just those posed by the use of numbers . This is a basic problem in all of the analysis, and not just numbers, it's a problem .
 Researchers make an enormous number of assumptions to move forward with a particular line of inquiry . Researchers make a lot of assumptions about what they want to do .
 Francis Gavin’s laudable and carefully reasoned critique of two recent quantitative studies of nuclear brinkmanship is, like all works of non-fiction, packed with assertions, overt and otherwise . Gavin's laudable critique is full of assertions and assertions .
 Documents merely chronicle what participants thought, or worse yet said, not what actually happened . However, as he himself points out, he says, the documents merely chronicles what participants said .
 It is necessary to interpret history, to emphasize some things while discounting others, historian says . It's necessary to emphasize history, but discount others, he says .
 All of this is done through a screen of beliefs about what history is really about, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Different historians can read the same case differently . This is why, in part, different historians have different views of the case . Different historians are able to read the case differently.
 The more we rely on the precision of a case, the more on the objectivity of the scholar, the author says . "In the end, the end is not clearly demonstrable but is an article of faith," he says .
 This may be easy to do with a researcher of Gavin’s caliber, but it is not scalable, replicable, or readily assailable . This is something that may not be easily replicable or easily assailable, says Gavin . Gavin: "This is not easily scalable,
 One way to assist in relying less on the genius of the researcher is to use techniques that facilitate replication, such as replicating .
 On occasion it is discovered that replication is not possible, or that changes to the analysis alter published results . On occasion, it has been discovered that replicating results are impossible .
 This can cause a minor scandal and is not infrequently used as evidence of the deficiencies of quantitative analysis . This can be seen as evidence that quantitative analysis is inadequate .
 Rather than a flaw in the method, it is a virtue of quantitative work that it assists critics and advocates in conducting an evidence-based debate . The actual consequence is just the opposite; rather than the opposite, it's a virtue .
 I'm happy to see such controversies because of what often follows and because they focus attention on the right sorts of issues and questions . I am happy to . see such . controversies because they often focus attention to the right sort of issues, questions .
 We can have fairly high confidence that, where there is interest, conclusions will be drawn and a consensus will form from it . We can't have a lot of confidence that where there are interest, we can have a fairly high level of confidence .
 Matthew Kroenig, Todd Sechser and Matthew Fuhrmann are embroiled in controversy . Gavin Gavin makes an astute connection to an earlier controversy between Paul K Huth and Bruce Russett and Ned Lebow and Janice Stein .
 One thing that Gavin does not mention in his review is the disposition of this earlier debate, says Gavin . Gavin: "Gavin doesn't mention that debate was in place"
 Huth and Russett dropped all of the cases that Lebow and Stein objected to as being miscoded .
 The authors’ observations about tendencies in this debate did not depend on their preferred coding of the cases in dispute, they say . Whatever one thought about the coding of individual cases, the authors' observations were not dependent on the preferred coding .
 Quantitative analysis is better equipped to address certain kinds of controversy, but it is a more permissive environment within which to ignore other issues involved in making inferences . Even while quantitative analysis can address some kinds of controversies, it is also a more .
 Qualitative and quantitative research differs, importantly, in how each reacts to error . Qualitative research differs from quantitative research to quantitative research, says John Defterios .
 It goes against these instincts when a researcher sees what he or she deems to be an error in describing a case, for example .
 A sloppy or otherwise mistaken case wrong is very likely to lead to incorrect conclusions . Errors are unlikely to allow the researcher to infer even the direction of the mistake, researcher says .
 A less-than-perfect bit of . qualitative inference confounds conclusions in an indeterminant manner . A less than . perfect bit of qualitative . inference confound conclusions in . indeterminate manner .
 This is an excellent reason for lavishing enormous care on details of a case, and why debates evolve over when, precisely, India became a nuclear nation, for example .
 It does not follow, however, that the effort to avoid error is invariably, or even often, successful, or that the result is satisfactory in any case .
 In short, there exists in qualitative research no metric or even rule-of-thumb by which to evaluate what constitutes adequate precision . No method is available to conduct quality control, including the adversarial system mentioned above .
 A statistical study can be based on data that is mostly in error and still provide the ‘true’ relationship, as long as the errors are constructed in such a way that they are not intentionally, or systematically, biasing of results .
 Statistical estimation treats ‘random’ errors as noise, removing their impact on inference . ‘Random errors’ are ‘no noise’, removing the impact of their impact .
 There is so much noise in social scientific data anyway, and since in most circumstances we would rather not commit the error of believing the noise, whether by coding or generated by the environment that we are studying, separating out the signal and noise is extremely useful .
 Attempts to ‘fix’ or correct errant data, by interested parties, can actually lead to errors in inference . This leads to the paradoxical point that attempts to 'fix' data can lead to an error in inferential inference .
 Even Gavin’s criticisms of coding, many of which appear to be correct, are not without unintended consequence, he says . ‘Many of which are correct,’ he writes .
 Few will be equally attentive to cases that support both sides in an argument . Few among us will be as attentive to both sides of an argument as well .
 The tendency is to identify errors in cases that, once repaired, are more likely to support one’s own preferred conclusions . The tendency to over-researce is to find errors that are likely to be fixed, rather than fixed .
 Even if the error is genuine and the proposed correction correct, one could well end up degrading the quality of the inference by converting random errors in the coding of data into nonrandom errors, something that is much more difficult for any method of inference to address .
 If this objective is lost in the pursuit of what might ungenerously be described as the ‘little truths’ of particular cases, then surely this is a high price to pay .
 As I will emphasize throughout this essay, my claim is not that certain approaches should be replaced, but that a big tent is a better one when it comes to the study of the important questions of national and international security .
 A pragmatic standard may be the best one to apply in applied social scientific research . Let us use whatever works best in a given situation, and perhaps there are some places where quantitative analysis possesses considerable potential, says author .
 The most common critique of existing quantitative studies is that particular authors have mis-specified relationships . The strongest critique is that scholars have failed to code cases correctly, or that they've failed to do so .
 It may be useful to note that this is really not a criticism of method, but rather one of application . It is not the criticism of methods, but the criticism is of application.
 Noting that someone is ‘doing it wrong’ is a refutation of how one is doing something, not of what one is attempting to do . Noting someone is doing it wrong is not of how they are doing it, but of what they are trying to do,
 A bicycle poorly mounted is a problem of the cyclist rather than of bicycles . A bike poorly mounted can be a problem for cyclists, rather than for cyclists . A poorly mounted bike is not a problem in the cycling world .
 Rather that critiquing method, these criticisms serve to highlight virtues of the quantitative enterprise . Interestingly, rather than critiquating method, rather that . criticize method, it serves as a way to highlight the virtues of quantitative enterprise.
 The purpose of empirical research is not to demonstrate truth, but it is to eliminate mistruth . Research is not only to prove truth but to eliminate it, it's to eliminate falsehoods, Dr. Richard Quest says .
 Hypothesis testing literally does not affirm but fails to reject, an outcome that reflects the tenuous nature of inference . Hyposceptic testing is a form of hypothesis testing that does not confirm but rejects the results of the experiment .
 All that one can say is that a relationship exists or does not exist under a given set of assumptions . All that can be said to be is that relationship exists under certain assumptions . The relationship is based on those assumptions .
 A critic who rejects any of an author's assumptions has no reason to sustain the author’s conclusions, he says . Critic who rejects a critic's assumptions is no better than a critic to sustain his conclusions .
 There is value in achieving even this limited form of clarity, however, however . There are value in having clarity in achieving the right to be clear .
 The purpose of statistical techniques is to solidify the process of hypothesis testing, not to ensure that particular applications are free of fault or even objection . Statistical techniques are not to be used in particular applications, but to test hypothesis testing .
 The naive notion of science as truth is precisely wrong, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . Science is a method of removing mistruth, he says, and science is a way of removing it .
 It is also a considerable fallacy to confuse the method by which errors are detected more effectively with the origin of error . It's also a futility to confuse errors with the nature of error, says the author .
 quantitative techniques are intended and often appear in practice to facilitate the process of developing objections to research . First, quantitative techniques often appear to be intended to help develop objections to the research .
 The ease with which a critic can identify sources of concern is a strength of the method, not a weakness, he says . The ease of a critic identifying problems is the strength of his method, he adds .
 This is not an excuse for errors, even as the presence of errors is not the excuse for rejecting a method that makes it easier to identify errors . This isn't an excuse to reject the method, even though it makes it more difficult to find errors .
 Quantitative methods make it less difficult to address concerns about coding or specification . Second, quantitative methods are less difficult than addressing concerns, such as coding .
 If you don’t like what someone did, change it and see if the changes make a difference for the findings . If you want to change your findings, do it for yourself .
 It is a mistake to assert the faultiness of a conclusion from cases where errors can be shown to exist . Just as it's a mistake for a quantitative researcher to assert truth from a given set of results, so too it is wrong to assert a conclusion based on a set of errors
 One cannot know whether the results of particular cases obtain elsewhere . One cannot be sure if the results are obtained elsewhere . The results of this particular case cannot be known elsewhere .
 Third, quantification provides a common basis on which to adjudicate debates . Quantification provides the common basis for adjudicating debates .
 Such a standard, like several applied informally in discussions like this one, alludes to a nonexistent reference point in which an approach, because it is not without fault, is deemed faulty . Such a reference point would allude to an approach that is not necessarily without fault .
 The appropriate standard is to inquire as to what alternative methods of adjudication are available and whether, in fact, one or another approach poses advantages . It is to ask if alternative methods are available, and whether they pose advantages .
 The deterrence debate alluded to by Gavin was resolved to the satisfaction of many scholars in international relations, though certainly not all . Gavin: "The deterrence debate was resolved by many scholars"
 This was, and remains, a distinctive feature in the literature that seldom manages to find much more than its own intellectual tail . It was, or remains, the distinctive feature of the novel's distinctive feature, in a distinctive way .
 Many, though not all, objections can be raised, quantified and evaluated to determine which among existing alternative accounts is most nearly correct . Many of the objections are raised, but not all can be quantified .
 Uncertainty itself is an important argument for the utility of quantitative methods, not because quantification provides sufficiency, but because it may be necessary, says John Defterios .
 Recent thinking emphasizes the problematic nature of inferences about the causes of war and peace when it involves uncertainty about whether war will take place . The causes of conflict involve uncertainty about the outcome of war .
 For war to occur, participants themselves must not know whether war will occur, or at least one side must be mistaken in their beliefs about the onset, length or intensity of the looming contest . War must be decided by participants themselves, or one side is mistaken in its beliefs .
 To the degree that uncertainty is a cause of war, there exist important limitations on a researcher’s ability to rely on, dissect, and interpret the historical record . The risk of war is that uncertainty can lead to war, the author says .
 The fact that key actors in history must have incorrectly evaluated key variables or processes for war to occur means that their descriptions must be treated with some caution . War historians must use this cautionary note to avoid over-examinate .
 Gavin’s own method in critiquing the studies previously mentioned is perhaps best illustrated by referencing Gavin's own method . Gavin: A series of difficulties are perhaps best . best illustrated here are the difficulties Gavin has encountered in his own work .
 Clearly, to be important, an event must be an event, a happening that actually occurs . Clearly, at minimum, an important thing is an event that actually happens, and that it does .
 Given what we think we know about war, it's very likely that many of the most important cases never occur at all . The issues at stake were recognized to be potent enough that discretion was chosen by participants over a challenge .
 The problem of non-events is a crucial issue in studying deterrence . It is presumably no less vexing for historians studying the nuclear age .
 The fact that an event, crisis or crisis or whatever happened suggests that at least one side in a conflict did not think the issues at stake were important, or that they underestimated how an opponent would react . The fact of an event or crisis suggests that a side didn't think it was
 Gavin's is a ‘best case’ version of a case study; I am inclined to believe his interpretation of events. Gavin’s is a 'best case' version of the case study .
 It's not impossible that his take on things is shaded in a particular direction . However, it is not impossible to imagine that his views on things are shaded .
 "My faith in the validity of his inferences rests heavily on my confidence in his judgment," she says .
 Historians will note that the facts are there in the historical record, but the question is which facts are chosen and how are they weighted . Historians say facts are in the record but how are weighted .
 Every analysis is an assessment of what matters and what does not, and what matters more than other things also matter . Every analysis must be taken into account what matters, what doesn't matter, and that matters more often .
 The emphasis given particular elements of a historical case is art, not science . It depends on judgment that cannot be replicated by others using the same facts, unless they share the same prejudices and biases .
 It may be useful to consider the situation in terms of Jervis’s discussion of misperception . The situation is similar to the discussion of the role of the Pope in the Bible .
 Knowing that others misperceive is not in itself a problem, provided that one makes allowance for the errors and provided perhaps that others recognize that they have this problem . Knowing is not a problem in itself .
 The danger lies in those who do not know, who believe incorrectly that their own judgments are neutral and objective, when they are not . Those who believe that they or others are biased, when not .
 Politics is never just about facts, about the record, but about how facts are interpreted . Politics isn't just facts, but how the record is interpreted, it's about how it's interpreted .
 Statistical estimation can be quite crude in the treatment of these issues, but it has the important advantage of being overt and replicable . Statistics can be crude but it can be useful to understand how to use statistical estimation .
 It forces the researcher to make his or her weighting explicit, even as it removes some of the burden of guessing by estimating these effects mechanically .
 The subject matter requires that the participants misperceive, or at least err, such as in war causation . Evaluating the impact of different factors is made considerably more difficult when the subject matter is subject matter .
 The challenge is not just to infer intent and action, but to correctly identify misperception, error, excess, or insufficiency . "The challenge is ... to infer intention and action and to correct it correctly," says author .
 The presence of errors as a necessary causal condition says that the historical record itself must be suspect . However, the presence of error is a necessary condition for the history of the British Empire .
 Theory strongly suggests that those in power must have made errors for war to occur . Theory suggests that war must have been made for it to occur in order to take place .
 I do not mean to be harping on semantics; there is more than just a rhetorical critique in such a challenge . There is more to be done in this challenge than just the rhetorical critique, I say .
 The president of the United States is an important person, but for this very reason he is likely to be different in critical ways from the average citizen . The president is a very different person from average citizen, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Great War was important, but precisely because of this it does not represent other wars or their causes . It was important to remember the Great War, but because of its importance, it was not important .
 It was atypical in many ways, not least because it was extremely large . Indeed, it was a very large and unusual event in the world .
 The intensity of a contest can be affected by an enormous number of factors that have nothing to do with the reasons for war onset . War intensity is affected by a host of factors, such as a lack of preparation for war, say experts .
 The temptation is to give more weight to sources that turned out to be correct, something that contemporaries clearly did not do . Then too, the temptation is too much to give too much weight to the sources that later proved correct .
 The evening news does not tell one much about how the world works because it focuses on events that are at odds with the normal functioning of institutions, populations and politics in general . CNN's John Sutter says the evening news doesn't tell much about the world .
 We want to know why World War I happened, but may miss the causes of war generally . We rely on evidence that is itself idiosyncratic or which relies on association between events that coincide with, but did not cause, warfare . We may even miss indicators of the next big war,
 Political science would not characterize Gavin’s core criticism, though important and deserving of attention, as constituting a strong or critical test . Finally, I do not believe that political science would characterize political science as a strong test .
 The nature of such a test is the belief that, if a claim works anywhere, it must work in this instance, it does in this case .
 There is a common tendency to conflate the notable with the indicative or typical . There is again a common conflating the notable and the typical .
 Outliers are a bad test of theory, unless they are placed in the context of the larger sample . Outlier tests are a good test for theory, but they are bad tests of theory for theory .
 The stochastic nature of causal claims in the social sciences in general, and for theories of war in particular, means that, with certain exceptions, no case is likely to serve this function . At the same time, the stochastically nature of . causal claims means that no case
 The need for uncertainty as a condition for war must mean both that war can occur and that it can fail to occur for precisely the same set of observable conditions . Stated in a stronger way, it must mean that war must occur for the same reasons as observable circumstances .
 It is inconsistent with the theory of war to claim that war must result in some instances and not in others . War is in fact the product of these discrete conditions and not due to uncertainty about the status of these conditions, as is increasingly believed .
 Snyder and Borghard and Trachtenberg raise doubts about the empirical validity of audience cost theory in international relations .
 Audience cost theory argues that leaders constrained by domestic public opinion are more likely to signal resolve, less likely to bluff, and therefore better able to avoid the bargaining failures that lead to war .
 Trachtenberg and Snyder and Borghard take audience cost theory to task for the lack of evidence . The theory is a valid problem for the theory .
 The method of criticism involves looking at instances where audience costs ‘should’ have been present . The method has received considerable pushback, even among those skeptical about audience cost theory .
 It is by no means clear that a straight-forward approach to assessing arguments is destined to yield conclusions . Once these factors are considered, it is not clear that such a straightforward approach is likely to yield a conclusion .
 A straight-forward approach, though appealing on many grounds, does not work . Indeed, much of the justification for convoluted theory and assessment in the social sciences is based on the fact that such a . simple approach is not successful, says the author .
 This is not a criticism of the substance of Gavin’s objections, or indeed of those of others . To repeat, this is not the . substance of the . objections, it is not . a criticism . of Gavin's objections .
 The scholars whose work has been criticized should respond to the criticism . They should justify their coding decisions and make clear whether changes in these decisions alter their results . The scholars should respond, justifying their decisions .
 Counter examples will be ubiquitous and far from definitive disconfirmation of a theory . Still, under many, possibly most, circumstances in international security, counter examples are likely to be ubiquitous . Counter examples, even ones involving extremely important cases, will be commonplace .
 The stochastic, multi-causal nature of conflict processes suggests perhaps that causation will be clearly supported in no individual case, even when causal mechanisms are actually operating as predicted . The indeterminant nature of conflicts processes suggests that causation is not supported in every individual case .
 There can be no question but that considerable room remains to conduct research on all fronts in studying something that may well, eventually, cause the end of humanity as we know it . IV. IV: "There can be a considerable room ... room remains"
 Asserts a role for quantitative nuclear security research says little about the value of other approaches . Asserting a role is very little about other approaches to nuclear security, says Peter Bergen .
 It simply suggests that there is room for the ‘big tent’ that many of us believe in fact can prove most fruitful . The 'big tent' is a form of tent that can be most fruitful in the world .
 Criticism often takes the form of identifying where some alternative falls short, while ignoring similar or comparable deficiencies in alternative methods . Criticism is often a form of criticism where some of the alternatives fail to meet expectations .
 There is a basic tension in criticizing attempts to code attributes of crisis bargaining such as which state was the initiator, had more to lose/gain, or was more resolved because the participants themselves did not know these things . While at the same time asserting that such an effort at coding can
 Acknowledging that motives are complex or indistinct does not clearly lead to the conclusion that one should abandon a method that is permissive of ambiguity in favor of one that is much less flexible in its need for precision .
 The tradeoffs between these alternatives are perhaps minimized if we attempt both approaches . We will determine effectiveness of either approach by what we are able to find in doing so .
 There is reason to believe that quantitative imperfection may trump qualitative precision . Second, to the degree that one alternative must be chosen, there is also reason to think that quantitative perfection may trump .
 Coding is likely to be fraught with error, so a method that handles error relatively well is to be preferred . Precisely because of error, the method is preferred to be used in coding .
 The enemy of the good may be the search for the best . As in so many things, the enemy of good may not be the good .
 The attempt at refutation of inference from a sample by identifying flaws in the coding of an example, while intuitive, makes no more sense than rejecting quantitative analysis because of one or a few studies that said to fall short .
 The external validity of claims is only as good as the generalizability of one’s cases, which itself depends on an intimate understanding of the properties of the larger sample . The validity of a claim can only be proven by a larger sample, the author says .
 In sharing intellectual domain, quantitativists have a great deal to learn from their quantitative colleagues . Quantitative colleagues have been toiling away for decades if not centuries, they have toiled away for centuries . Quantitive colleagues have to learn a lot from their qualitative colleagues .
 Rather than asking what quantitative analysis has done for the subject lately, let us ask where we stood a decade or more ago . Let us ask: Where we stood 10 years ago?
 It's not as if scholars using traditional methods were prevented from figuring out how nuclear security worked, it's said .
 Much remains to be resolved, either because the evidentiary record is unclear or because it could be interpreted in more than one way . Still, much remained to be solved, with much still to be determined .
 Quantitative analysis is very good at finding relationships in areas where trends are not obvious, where cross-cutting effects are present or where multiple factors intercede . Quantitative analyses are very good for finding relationships where trends not obvious .
 There is also a false consciousness of qualitative opposition to quantitative methods. There are also false consciousness that quantitative methods are opposed to qualitative opposition .
 There will be little progress in any field of inquiry without this interaction, just as there will not be progress without the melding of deductive and inductive approaches . There will also be progress in all fields of inquiry if there is not an interaction between inductive and deductive approaches
 It has been roughly two and one half millennia since Thucydides revolutionized the study of international relations and security policy with qualitative analysis fortified by rational causal reasoning .
 In the interim, students of world affairs have used qualitative analysis to resolve numerous riddles .
 The passage of 2500 years and the fruits of many scholarly lifetimes suggest two things, including the passage of the past, suggests two things .
 First, that Thucydidian analysis, by itself, is at best not a blindingly rapid solution to endemic global problems . That is not the answer to global problems such as climate change .
 Second, that it may be a bit soon to judge the potential of alternatives or complements, particularly those introduced in the last generation or so . Third, that may be too early to judge potential replacements, especially new ones introduced in last generation .
 " qualitative approaches" have consumed some of the territory in which their advantages are most distinct, says David Frum .
 What remains is not a virgin forest but one in which the easiest pickings have already been exploited . What remains are not virgin forest, but one which is already being exploited, says CNN.com .
 What remains disproportionately disproportionately are questions that have proven difficult for qualitative analysis alone to resolve . What remains are the questions that are difficult to answer is whether or not to answer .
 Qualitative research is inspired at least in part by the conviction that the precise representation of one or a few cases can elicit relationships of interest . The research was inspired by the belief that it is possible to accurately represent one case of interest in a person .
 Quantitative analysis relies on numbers and approximation to accomplish the same objective . Quantities and approximation are often based on numbers to achieve the same .
 Rather than viewing one another with suspicion, it may be best to move forward in the mutual acknowledgment that each approach is imperfect . The best opportunity for real insight depends on a more virtuous interaction than has taken place to date .
 Gartzke’s primary area of study involves the impact of information and institutions on war and peace . His primary focus is the impact on information, institutions and war, he says .
 “The Myth of Cyberwar: Bringing War on the Internet Back Down to Earth,” International Security, 38:41—73 . “Trading on Preconceptions: Why World War I Was Not a Failure of Economic Interdependence,’ with Yonatan
 Improvements in these two methodological areas carry with them the promise of more systematically isolating correlates or, in the latter case, the holy grail of identifying causal variables .
 In general, as with any method, it is important for scholars to be transparent about the promise, and especially the limitations, of their choices, of choosing .
 In order to get published in the pages of Journal of Conflict Resolution, American Political Science Review, or International Organization, scholars have to sell their results to reviewers and editors . Scholar: "In order to sell your results to editors, scholars must sell them to reviewers"
 There has been a disturbing trend in nuclear studies of quantitative work to sometimes ‘oversell’ the robustness and magnitude of results to an unnecessary degree . But often, that comes at the expense of transparency in terms of limitations, says author .
 The results are simply unbelievable to most specialists, including political scientists and methodologists, including historians and international relations theorists . This perceived effect has had the perverse effect of potentially undermining the larger enterprise .
 This is unfortunate because this trend has overshadowed the positive effects that the large-n enterprise has had on the study of nuclear proliferation and deterrence . This is because of the positive effect of the large enterprise on nuclear proliferation, author says .
 This essay outlines the promise and limits of the large-n enterprise in nuclear studies as I see it . It also examines how the ‘causal inference revolution’ affects nuclear studies in political science .
 The incorporation of large-n methods in the study of nuclear proliferation and deterrence has been motivated by some very good reasons that are worth enumerating . The Large-n Enterprise in Nuclear Studies is worth noting .
 One of the biggest limitations was the tendency to select on the dependent variable, or those cases where we only observed, as with the case of successful proliferation .
 No-variation designs can erroneously identify factors that are believed to be important but which, in fact, are not because they are also present in the negative cases . This has the potential to bias our understanding of the causes of proliferation because no-varation designs .
 By sampling the full universe of actual proliferation as well as nonproliferation, the large-n enterprise can more systematically isolate correlates of proliferation than single or limited case study methods .
 The large-n enterprise allows scholars to analyze the relative importance of many variables at once . The large n enterprise is a way of analyzing the relative significance of many factors .
 This is particularly important in outcomes like nuclear proliferation or deterrence/compellence that are often not monocausal or monocorrelated . This is especially true in outcomes such as nuclear proliferation, which are often non-monocusal .
 As these methods and approaches have improved, conditional and interaction hypotheses can also be tested in ways that would be difficult in single or small case study method analysis .
 Large-n enterprise carries with it the promise of providing more precise estimates of which independent variables are significantly correlated with an outcome of interest and how much they matter .
 This effort toward precision and measurement allows scholars to directly and more precisely engage theory, empirics, and each other on the same terms . This effort to measure and measure is a step toward precision .
 One of the biggest advantages of the large-n enterprise is the ability for peers to know how to replicate the reported results if provided the original dataset and procedures for the analysis .
 This allows the codings and assumptions in the analysis and models to be laid bare for other scholars to see, and is very much in the normal science tradition . The codings are laid bare, and are in the tradition of normal science .
 This transparency has led to debates about whether reported results are particularly robust or fragile . It represents some degree of progress in our understanding of the correlates associated with a particular nuclear outcome of interest of interest .
 There is less subjectivity in the reporting of results, and other scholars have the ability to reproduce and thereby probe them from the same playing field . Subjectivity is still injected in the original coding of covariates in many cases .
 Most of our theories in international relations, but particularly nuclear security, are probabilistic . Most of us think about international relations in the world as a matter of probability .
 Modeling probabilistic processes in qualitative work is very difficult since the case study method necessarily truncates the sample size . Models are very difficult to use in this case study because of the size of the study samples .
 Large-n enterprise carries with it the ability to explicitly and systematically model probabilistic processes and estimate these probabilities more rigorously than the case study method . As a result, the large-n . enterprise carries . with it, it is able to explicitly . systematically model . processes and
 These are non-trivial methodological advantages that medium and large-n methods can offer to scholars of nuclear security . These advantages can be used to study nuclear security in the future .
 Large-n analyses must be balanced against a variety of pitfalls that accompany large-n analysis, such as nuclear proliferation and deterrence/compellence . But they must balance against a number of pitfalls, especially in nuclear proliferation .
 We must be transparent about the following limitations, what they mean for how we report and interpret results . We must also be transparent on how we deal with the results of our results, we say .
 Large-n data in international relations often employs very poor measures . Large n data often employs a poor measure of international relations .
 Too often, the measures deployed in quantitative IR studies, but especially nuclear studies, are total garbage . "Quantative IR studies" are "total garbage," says Peter Bergen .
 Some of the variables used to measure critical concepts such as ‘power’ score, may be the best out there . But no one really believes it measures what we want it to .
 We can make arguments for why they are good proxies, but they are a tough sell . We can't make arguments why they're good proxies but they're not good proxies .
 We treat some measures as if they can't be consistently operationalized over two centuries and are temporally stable, but no one really believes that that is the case . We treat measures like that they can be consistent operationalized for two centuries .
 In nuclear studies, we have often collapsed nuclear weapons states into a binary condition even though clearly some nuclear states are different than others in important and measurable ways . We often collapse nuclear states into binary condition, says author .
 Recent efforts to analyze concepts such as ‘nuclear superiority’ which move beyond the simple binary condition of nuclear/nonnuclear are important . But post hoc measures of aggregate numbers of warheads fail to measure what theorists and practitioners really meant by superiority, a concept which includes variables such as relative
 "One has to be exceptionally careful with analysis of rare dependent variables," says author . "One must be extremely careful" to analyze rare variables .
 Rare events logit techniques exist to correct for the low incidence of some of these dependent variables . However, these approaches are usually not implemented or deployed correctly .
 If a dependent variable is relatively rare, it is almost certainly the case that reported results are quite sensitive to coding decisions and/or noise or miscodings . Furthermore, if a dependent . variable is extremely rare, the results could be sensitive .
 When the dependent variable is as rare as it tends to be in nuclear studies, the results tend to break early and often . The dependent variable in nuclear research tends to break often, especially early .
 We need to be better about reporting the point at which they break and allow readers to judge whether that point constitutes a robust breaking point . We need a better reporting of the breaking point, we say .
 Large-n data structures and analysis must better account for time dependencies, and dependencies in general . Large n data structures must also account for the time dependencies .
 There are virtually no available techniques that model time, or uncorrelate temporal dependencies, accurately enough to really convince readers that ‘country-year’ datasets as they are often deployed in quantitative nuclear studies really represent independent observations year-to-year .
 This means that we are not modeling history and repeated interactions accurately in the large-n enterprise . This is not the case for large-scale firms, it means that they are not accurately modeling history .
 Conflicts and proliferation behavior have a history and operate through feedback loops that are not being captured by these modeling approaches . The estimated relationships and findings between the independent variables and dependent variable of interest are almost certainly erroneous .
 In addition to temporal dependencies, the problem of other dependencies creates a ‘degrees of freedom’ problem . If our millions of supposedly independent observations are actually only tens of independent observations, we have a problem . The problem of temporal dependencies is also possible .
 We have to be very careful about how we code time-series dependent variables . We also need to be careful of how to code time series dependent variables.
 If the theory and outcome of interest is the onset of a particular nuclear phenomenon, then the dependent variable needs to be coded 1 for the first instance of the outcome . coding them as 1 for every country-year after onset results in an estimate for duration, not onset, since these are
 Time-series cross-sectional data makes reverse causality much more complicated than lagging the IVs by a year . The IVs are a time-series of cross-series data that makes reverse causal difficult difference .
 Regression analyses have strong assumptions about functional form/linearity . Regression analysis is based on functional form and linearity of the study .
 Almost all econometric models deployed to analyze large-n datasets in nuclear security studies have very strong assumptions about the distribution of independent and dependent variables . The distribution of error terms, distribution of errors, and distribution of linearity are among the main assumptions .
 "Almost all of these assumptions are egregiously violated by the nature of our data," says John Defterios . Almost all of the assumptions are wrong, he says .
 Many processes of interest are not linear but either cumulative or follow completely unpredictable or unknown distributional forms . Frankly, many of the processes are in fact decidedly not linear . They are inherently strategic .
 Many analysts simply accept this but continue on, arguing that linearity is as good an assumption as any . So, many analysts argue that linearities are as good as any.
 There is still no good way to deal with selection effects or strategic behavior, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 While we often claim to have the ‘full universe’ of observations in large-n analyses, they are usually actually not the full universe . We often claim we have the 'full universe' of observations .
 The first stage exclusion criteria is extremely difficult to find and almost everything deployed in the extant literature is clearly correlated with the final outcome variable . Almost everything in the literature in the current literature is correlated with an outcome variable, says the author .
 Finding instruments is hard, so this is not a surprise, but we should not brush the difficulty of the selection effects problem under the rug . The selection effects are difficult in large-n analysis, so it is not surprising .
 The large-n enterprise can solve the truncated observation problem, but it cannot solve the selection effects problem if all the observations are themselves subject to a selection criteria .
 Scholars in the quantitative enterprise must be better about performing and reporting sensitivity analyses . Scholars must also report sensitivity analyses more carefully and more carefully .
 All analyses break at some point, but the large-n enterprise could be much more transparent about when results break . The results should be sufficiently robust at that breaking point .
 Results are sensitive to whether, for instance, the 1912-1913 Balkan Wars are coded as a single or multiple wars versus whether France would have to not exist . For example, it is very different for results to be sensitive to if there were multiple wars or not wars .
 Whether coding the 1999 Kargil War as a war or not breaks the results . Or, in nuclear studies, whether coding Kargill War was a war is a war .
 A growing proportion of methodologists in political science have increasingly shifted from analysis of big observational data to focusing on methods of causal inference . Political science has become more focused on causal inference rather than observational data .
 Analysis of observational data often only reveals correlations, not causation . There has been a shift in the past several years to focusing on identifying causation, rather than identifying simply correlates .
 Gold standard of causal inference is randomized experiments with a single treatment randomly assigned to a treatment group and with a placebo assigned to the control group . The gold standard is a randomized experiment with a one treatment being randomly assigned .
 There is also a class of quasi-experimental studies that rely on observational data to try to ‘match’ treatment and control observations to extrapolate causal relationships . But one of the very hefty assumptions is that treatment and observations are randomly different .
 We cannot randomly assign nuclear weapons to some states, not others, to identify their causal effect on deterrence success . We can't randomly assign nukes to some countries and not others to certain states .
 "We cannot randomly assign security threats or domestic political incentives in order to discern the causal variables for proliferation," says the author of the book . "We are not able to randomly assign national security threats," he says .
 Endogeneity and complicated multicausality present a problem for identification strategies that often require a single identifiable and manipulable ‘treatment’ since the research designs required for multiple treatments are complicated . Endogeneity is facts of life both in the study of nuclear weapons and most strategic decisions
 It is very difficult to identify exogenous variables or shocks that are uncorrelated with the causes or consequences of proliferation that might enable so-called natural experiments either . It is difficult to find out what shocks or causes of proliferation are causing or causing proliferation .
 Survey experiments can be powerful in identifying individual level preferences, such as mass opinion related to nuclear weapons . These methods, particularly survey experiments, can be quite powerful, say experts .
 Sample sizes can be large, and the ‘treatment’ can be manipulated . They can be incredibly useful in identifying microfoundations at the individual level, since sample sizes are large .
 This is a limited class of questions and problems for which these methods might be useful . But this is a few of the questions we need to answer for .
 On the bigger questions of the causes and consequences of proliferation, there are few plausible identification strategies because of the strategic and macro nature of the phenomena and the multiple, complex pathways .
 Thinking about the developing trends in political science and how nuclear security studies fits into them is important if we aim to remain an integral part of political science . We should be able to engage with other subfields, such as nuclear security, political science.
 This is one trend in which nuclear security studies future place is highly uncertain . Nuclear security studies are highly uncertain, experts say .
 The causal inference revolution in quantitative methods may lead to a resurrection in the discipline’s valuation of qualitative methods in nuclear security . Quizical methods in this particular area are much better suited to identifying and teasing out causal mechanisms and processes than the big data enterprise .
 In nuclear studies, qualitative methods probably do a better job of illuminating the ‘selection into treatment’ than quantitative methods . The study was published in the US National Institute of Health and Human Services .
 They may not be able to estimate the average treatment effect of our treatments of interest . But neither can quantitative methods in nuclear security issues .
 With careful case selection and research design, qualitative methods can at least allow us to convince ourselves, and others, that in nuclear security studies, there are non-zero treatment effects . However, with careful study design, research can be helpful .
 Research design trumps methods in nuclear security studies . The causal inference revolution should be based on research design, not methods, should be considered .
 As scholars and students of nuclear proliferation, we should pay much better attention to general research design than we presently do . More than the divide between qualitative and quantitative methods, this trend should be a wakeup call .
 We simply need to be more transparent and honest about the limitations of the enterprise, which will more credibly allow us to argue what insights it does provide . What it does mean is that we simply need more transparency and honesty .
 It is difficult for an enterprise to survive if it continues to take fire from multiple fronts simultaneously, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The quantitative enterprise offers some very real advantages over single or small case study methods, and these advantages are important . Quantitative enterprise offers many advantages over small or small cases, such as single-study methods .
 Nuclear studies cannot be devoid of theory, lack an internal logic, or be ahistorical . But because of the inherent limitations of the quantitative approaches to nuclear studies, they can't be without theory or lack logic .
 A mixed-methods approach that deploys and exploits the advantages of both quantitative and qualitative methods would be more fruitful . The advantages of quantitative approaches can and should be supplemented by theory and qualitative empirics .
 For the quantitative enterprise side, good hard theoretical and qualitative work that teases out causal mechanisms and corroborates convincing evidence is critical to avoiding the charge that our results are nothing more than bad data mining . Good hard theoretical, qualitative work is critical for the research side .
 International Organization 68, 1 : 1-31. “Power Shifts, Uncertainty, and War,” I.O. 68, is published by the International Organization of 68 .
 The American Historical Review 117, 5 : 5 : 1431-1460 .
 The Soviet advantage in nuclear weapons numbers was due to its expansion of tactical nuclear weapons in this period . Moreover, the Soviet advantage is due to expanding tactical weapons .
 In 1979 the USSR had 7,035 strategic nuclear weapons and the U.S. had 15,156 . The United States had 15.156 strategic nuclear warheads, Kroenig says .
 With this measure of nuclear superiority, therefore, the superior state did not win the 1979 crisis . The superior state failed to win the crisis in 1979, the author says .
 Forecasting nuclear Proliferation in the 2st Century: The Role of Theory, eds. Toward a New Consensus,” in Forecasting Nuclear Proliferation .
 I would like to thank Mark Bell, . Alexandre Debs, Rex Douglas, James Fearon, Rebecca Friedman, Celeste Gventer, Michael Horowitz, Robert Jervis, Colin Kahl, Austin Long, Jessica Mahoney, Mira Rapp-Hooper, Mir
 Kroenig’s monograph smartly recognizes that superpowers don’t like proliferation because it deters them . Superpowers don't like proliferation, they like it, but deters it, he says .
 Kroenig’s policy recommendations on Iran have generated strong critiques . Kroenigs' policy proposals have been met with strong criticism .
 Kroenig recently criticized President Obama’s recent proposal to further reduce Russian and American strategic nuclear weapons . He recently criticized the proposal to reduce Russia and the U.S. strategic nuclear arms .
 The idea that there is such a thing as a ‘crucial case’ is not without controversy among political scientists . Some believe that while such a standard might be applicable to deterministic phenomena, it is not appropriate to apply to non-deterministic interactions in international relations .
 For a thoughtful critique of the notion of a “hard or critical” test, see James Fearon and David Laitin, “Integrating Qualitative and Quantitative Research Methods,” in “The Oxford Handbook of Political Methodology .”
 Most historians see the 1958 to 1962 period as a singular crisis . While there are some disagreements over the causes and course of the standoff, most historians see it as one .
 Similar conversations occurred secretly among officials in both governments, as they tried to assess both the strategic importance of Berlin to both sides .
 The fact that not only in public but also in private, each side though its stakes were higher than those of the other reveals that the public statements were not simply made for bargaining purposes . Each side's stakes are higher than the other's, it is said .
 The Americans believed they had what they believed to be a meaningful nuclear superiority which would only last a few more years . The Americans, for their part, understood they had to demonstrate resolve, but were also keenly aware that they had a meaningful nuke superiority .
 Khrushchev’s threats were made from an inferior military position, but U.S. leaders took them seriously seriously . On the other hand, it is quite easy to imagine much different outcomes at various points .
 It is not only quantitative models that have difficulty recognizing these subtleties, it is also difficult to recognize . It's not just quantitative models, it's also quantitative models have trouble recognizing subtleticities .
 American Journal of Political Science: Coalitions and Cooperation, Cooperation, and Crisis Bargaining,’ .
 For a discussion, based on primary documents and interviews, see Fred Kaplan, “JFK’s First Strike Plan,” The Atlantic, October 2001, for a discussion .
 Robert Jervis makes the fascinating point that the U.S. willingness to protect an exposed Western Europe may have created mutual vulnerability far earlier than expected . Jervs says the United States willing to protect Western Europe creates vulnerability .
 The basic logic is that the U.S. threat was credible, the author says . The Soviets believed that the United States would believe that an attack on Europe was a prelude to an attack against it .
 The latter argument was the one that was repeated most often-and the repetition was partly intended to make it a self-fulfilling prophesy . The argument was intended to be self-defending prophesy.
 Neither observers nor policy-makers paid much attention to the opposite side of this coin . But neither observers or policy makers paid any attention .
 The Soviets’ ability to destroy West Europe gave them great leverage over the U.S. If the Americans really valued the Europeans to this extent, then the Soviets gained the equivalent of a second-strike capability .
 Kennedy had asked military officials for explicit answers about the mechanics and consequences of a U.S. first strike on the Soviets . Two years earlier, Kennedy had . asked military . officials for . explicit answers to questions surrounding the mechanics of a first strike .
 This idea that the U.S. faced a closing “window of opportunity” where it could launch a first-strike was not a new idea . This idea was not new idea, but it's a long-running idea .
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, recognizing how poor Soviet retaliatory capabilities were, lamented in 1958 that the United States had a first-strike capability that would not last forever . Dulles: U.S. has a first strike capability that won't last forever.
 Kroenig mischaracterizes Trachtenberg’s argument, Kroenigs says . Tratchtenberg's argument is not about the idea of a woman in a woman's role in the Holocaust .
 It is very clear that Trachtenberg is not focusing on simplistic numerical calculations of nuclear superiority . It is not the more meaningful notion of whether a state can go first in a crisis and suffer acceptable damage in a response, he says .
 Kroenig argues that the U.S. was not in such a position in this period . But as we see, it is not clear that he is correct .
 The September 12, 1963 briefing makes it clear that for President Kennedy, meaningful superiority meant an advantage that could be translated into better political outcomes, meant a first-strike capability . President Kennedy may have possessed earlier but no longer had a capacity he may have had earlier .
 When the Soviets could respond after being hit with enough force to make any U.S. nuclear attack nonsensical, the calculations changed dramatically . The Soviets were able to respond after they could make any United States nuclear strike nonsensical .
 For a good summary of this situation, see Austin Long, H-Diplo Roundtable Review, Francis J Gavin and Austin Long . Francis Gavin is a good example of the problem .
 The U.S. superiority in command, control, communications and intelligence meant that, “Soviet superiority in the number of launchers did not give them any real advantage," a high-level Soviet military official said .
 Kroenig does have a variable for “second strike’s forces, but it seems clear that these forces only make sense if used first . The Soviets fully understood this, and it's clear that it's a fact they fully understood .
 Kalashnikov: Soviet Union’s ‘Achilles heel’ was inability to “create a sophisticated, survivable, integrated command, control and communication system” after an “all-out nuclear strike” the Soviets would only be able to launch
 Kroenig implies that changing the coding on any one case will not challenge the robustness of his findings . Changing the coding will challenge the findings, he says .
 I leave it to others to decide whether my analysis of how these models explain 1958 to 1962 affects their confidence in his overall findings, theories, and policy recommendations . The results of this analysis should be decided by others .
 Did Soviet Leaders Really Fear an Imminent Nuclear Attack in 1983?”, unpublished paper. “Did Soviet leaders really fear an imminent nuclear attack in 1983?"”.
 In addition to the 1958 to 1962 period, the winter of 1950-51 was extraordinarily dangerous . The People’s Republic of China intervened in the Korean War nearly threw the Americans off the peninsula .
 The U.S. had lost the atomic monopoly, had not yet implemented the defense build-up called for in NSC-68 . Western Europe and Japan were still economically feeble, militarily impotent, and largely unprotected .
 American policymakers worried about a war, but felt that if one came they might lose it . U.S. policymakers worried that if a war broke out, they might have lost it .
 These two superpower standoffs strike one as being in categories of their own, significantly more dangerous than any other listed in either data set . These two superpowers are the most dangerous in both categories .
 Petersen’s study suggests that compellence is not harder than immediate deterrence . Petersen: “Competition is not hard, but it is not impossible to deter criminals .” Petersen says.
 In choosing initially whether to threaten or resist a threat, rational leaders will take into account observable indices of relative power and interest in a way that tends to neutralize their impact if a crisis ensues .
 For example, a militarily weak state will resist the demands of a stronger one only if it happens to be quite resolved on the issues in dispute . A weak state is relatively willing to escalate despite its military inferiority . A weaker state will choose to resist a stronger state's demands only
 A striking result from the equilibrium analysis is that observable measures of the balance of capabilities and balance of interests should be unrelated to the relative likelihood that one state or the other backs down in crises where both sides choose to escalate . A second striking result is that .
 The result suggests that rational states will “select themselves’s into crises on the basis of observable measures of relative capabilities and interests . This is in a way that neutralizes any subsequent impact of these measures .
 Possessing military strength or a manifestly strong foreign policy interest does deter challenges, in the model . Possession of military strength does not deter challenges in the US model, says President Obama .
 Marc Trachtenberg explains the meaning and importance of Fearon’s arguments to understanding these issues . I am grateful to Marc for identifying and explaining the meaning of the arguments .
 Eugene Gholz and Daryl Press make this recommendation to deal with selection effects in their paper, "Untangling Selection Effects in Studies of Coercion," unpublished working paper, 2006 .
 Alexander Fursenko and Timothy Naftali, Khrushchev’s Cold War: The Inside Story of an American Adversary . Hope Harrison, Driving the Soviets up the Wall: Soviet-East German Relations, 1953-1961 .
 Achen fears many statistical models do not think hard enough about what is being compared in the analysis, or correctly identifying the universe of ‘like’ events . He worries that the absence of any logical theory of how the variables interact prevents the correct econometric tools from being chosen
 If I am right about the state of the field of history, it is hard to see how political scientists can accurately code these events if there is not a good historical literature to rely upon . Furthermore, if I am correct, it would be hard for political scientists to accurately code events if
 Meeting between President Nixon and Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament, March 21, 1972 . Meeting between Nixon and committee on arms control and disarmament .
 President Nixon and his Assistant for National Security met in 1972 . Nixon was president of the United States during the Vietnam War . Nixon's National Security Council was created in 1968 .
 In the context of selection effects, it would be interesting to know how and whether the military balance affects peaceful, if coerced, bargaining .
 Nixon was aware of and spoke about how the nuclear balance had changed dramatically and put him in a much worse situation than Kennedy . Nixon spoke out about how he was aware and spoke of how the situation had changed and how he had to deal with it .
 Statistical efforts by Dong-Joon Jo and Erik Gartze to understand nuclear proliferation dynamics produced different answers than the quantitative model of Sonali Singh and Christopher Way .
 Independent variables overlook important factors such as prestige and bureaucratic power . Independent variables often use poor proxies for concepts such as the nonproproliferation regime .
 Third, methodologies and data sets should be tightly coupled to empirical questions but are instead often chosen for convenience . Data sets and methodologies are often not tightly coupled with empirical questions, says author .
 Fourth, some findings provide insights already known or believed to be true . Fifth, some of the findings provide new insights about the world's most powerful inventions .
 Probabilistic models may good for getting a sense of possible trends over the next fifty or one-hundred cases, but are of far less use to the decision makers trying to craft policies for the specific, highly consequential and likely complex issues in the n+1 case .
 The authors’ names are listed alphabetically; equal authorship is implied . Equal authorship of the book is implied.
 The authors would like to thank Jason Gusdorf for helpful research assistance . The authors of this article have been contacted by The Daily Mail .
 This case is also a central subject of Gavin’s recent book, Nuclear Statecraft . Gavin's recent book is about the case of nuclear weapons .
 We do not know for certain how Gavin would approach this question, since he does not address the relationship between smoking and cancer in his essay .
 Our goal here is simply to discuss how his approach to studying nuclear security would apply in another context . Our goal is to talk about how he would like to study nuclear security .
 King, Keohane, and Verba distinguish between descriptive inference and causal inference . The goal is to ascertain causal effects .
 Gavin Gavin: "What We Talk about When We Talk About Nuclear Weapons is 21" Gavin: We need to talk about nuclear weapons in the U.S.
 This is also a central pillar of Sagan’s critique of the quantitative turn in nuclear security studies . Sagan: The quantitative turn is also central to Sagan's critique of nuclear security research .
 In our individual responses to Gavin’s essay, we address the particulars of these coding disagreements . In the individual responses, we discuss the specifics of these disagreements .
 Cases are dropped from the statistical analysis if even one variable is not coded . In the quantitative models we use, cases are dropped . Cases were dropped from statistical analysis .
 These two possible worlds, they note, are indistinguishable to our eyes . Probabilistic theories are equally useful for describing phenomena in either one, the researchers say .
 There is no reason to believe participants, operating in the heat of the moment and with limited information, would have any better access to underlying probabilities than a disinterested analyst conducting an assessment after the fact . Yet, there is no evidence that participants operating with limited data would be better informed than
 Scholars may, however, conduct experiments in which they manipulate the treatment . Scholars may also conduct experiments to manipulate the treatments .
 People oppose the first use of nuclear weapons . A survey was conducted by Daryl Press, Scott Sagan, and Benjamin Valentino to assess why .
 A natural drawback of this method, of course, is limited external validity . insights from the laboratory do not always translate to the real world, he says .
 Matching analysis is increasingly used in international relations research . For example, matching analysis has been used to analyse international relations .
 Through this analysis, scholars construct samples in which the ‘treatment’ and ‘control’ groups are as similar as possible before estimating their statistical models .
 Gavin approvingly quotes this passage in his essay, leading us to wonder why he asks whether our work “resolve the decades-long debate over these long-contested issues in nuclear dynamics” when he does not appear to hold his own to the same standard .
 Gavin Kroenig’s most forceful critiques address our methodological approach, which we discuss in our joint response . We also discuss in a joint response to the criticism of our approach .
 Gavin also notes that the outcome of the Cuban missile crisis could also be described as a Soviet victory . Gavin says the outcome was also described as an 'Soviet victory'
 If so, then the crisis would constitute a lesser coercive success for nuclear states than it might initially seem, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says the crisis is more consistent with our theory .
 For reasons explained in our article , this is exceedingly difficult to do . For reasons, this is extremely difficult to . do . for reasons .
 The United States merely had to convey that it would retaliate if it were attacked first . By contrast, the U.S. only had to say it would respond if it was attacked .
 Khrushchev faced an inherent bargaining disadvantage, irrespective of the nuclear balance . The Soviet Union faced a nuclear war with the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 In the end, many officials in Washington dismissed Khrushchev’s threats as bluster . In the beginning of the 1960s, many in Washington thought they were bluff .
 One might surmise that Khrushchev failed because he was up against a nuclear-superior U.S. The United States was a strong deterrent, says historian John Avlon .
 See Gavin, “What We Talk about When We Talk About Nuclear Weapons,” 22, note 74 . Gavin: “We talk about nuclear weapons when we talk about them.”
 The theory and evidence we presented in our article support the less alarmist view of nuclear proliferation, we say . The theory, evidence and evidence supports the 'less alarmist' view .
 Our analysis of these cases will be included in our book with the working title Nuclear Weapons and Coercive Diplomacy . The book will be titled "nuclear weapons and coercive diplomacy"
 By the early and mid-1980s, scholars had access to the ExCom minutes, but much other relevant documentation remained classified . Much of the material remained classified until the 1980s .
 Paul Lettow’s book, Ronald Reagan and His Quest to Abolish Nuclear Weapons , is one excellent example . Reagan and his quest to abolish nuclear weapons is one of the world's greatest challenges .
 Power and Purpose in American Statecraft from Harry S Truman to George W Bush , chap. Power and purpose in U.S. Statecraft . .
 One can learn much more about Soviet policies if one does travel to Moscow and read Russian . Obviously, one can learn a lot more if one travels to Moscow .
 There are small-n problems involved in studying why states develop nuclear weapons, such as Iran . But extensive qualitative work is all the more important, and rewarding .
 At times, Saddam spoke of the need to eliminate Israel, but in general he focused on achieving more limited gains . At times he spoke of a need for Israel to be eliminated, but he focused more on achieving limited gains, he said .
 Saddam Hussein's idiosyncratic tendencies were not limited to his views of nuclear weapons . In Saddam’s case, these idiosyncrasic tendencies were also shown in Iraq . Saddam's views on nuclear weapons are not only limited to nuclear weapons, he says .
 Palkki, “Deterring Saddam Hussein’s Iraq: Credibility Assessments in Theory and Practice,” unpublished manuscript, 2013 . “Iraq and Libya” in Etel Soligen, Sanctions, Statecraft, and Nuclear Proliferation
 On these aspects of the crisis, see, for instance, John Lewis Gaddis, We Now Know, chapter 8 .
 There are exceptions, of course, most notably Mark Trachtenberg, Francis Gavin, and John Gaddis .
 Trachtenberg and Gavin are historians who work in political science departments . But at least two of these are exceptions that prove the rule .
 I should also note that I include some of my own earlier work on non-proliferation in this indictment . "I'm not a stranger to the world," he says .
 The first article represents a collaboration between a political scientist and a diplomatic historian . The second is a cooperative effort involving one scholar from the U.S. and one from China . The third is a cooperation effort involving a scholar from each country .
 Hand Tying and Sunk Costs in Extended Nuclear Deterrence,” 2012 Typescript. “Hand Tying” and “Sunk Costs” in extended nuclear Deterrence.”
 Press, Sagan and Valentino conducted a survey experiment in which U.S. respondents seem to exhibit no particular inhibition against advocating the use of nuclear weapons . The experiment appears to contradict the nuclear taboo .
 I will not claim that Thucydides had nuclear issues pegged 2500 years ago, as some claim about international security generally . Instead, I will say that he had a point about nuclear issues in mind .
 Schelling argues that nothing interesting has been produced in deterrence since roughly 1968 . Schelling says deterrence has not been successful since about 1968 . He argues that deterrence has been ineffective since 1968 .
 A similar phenomenon occurred in the effort to develop quantitative measures of democracy and democratization . The same phenomenon happened in the efforts to measure democracy and democracy .
 Intense debate over the details of index construction that had sustained diverse efforts in the 1980s and early 1990s subsided . Few actual empirical differences could be identified in the resulting applied research .
 The problem is perhaps reliance on authority rather than verification . I do not need to go into details here .
 The subtitle of the Lebow and Stein article is one of the most witty and evocative in international relations . The subtitle is "International Relations: International Relations"
 The differences between error and bias are a somewhat technical subject that I hasten to avoid in this setting . The differences are a bit technical and a bit of technical matter .
 I once pressed Jack Snyder that surely his view of politics meant that scholars, too, must make biased decisions . Snyder: "I once pressed him to explain why he had a biased view of the world"
 The distribution of wars by intensity follows a power law, a common feature of natural processes . War's intensity is distributed by intensity rather than intensity, a study finds .
 I thank Mark Bell, Christopher Clary, Erik Gartzke, Frank Gavin, Robert Jervis, Nick Miller, and Nick Miller for their comments and feedback .