 Jeffrey Goldberg says he was on vacation last month when the head of the Cuban Interests Section in Washington called to say Castro had read his article . The Atlantic national correspondent says Castro wanted him to come to Cuba . Cuba maintains an embassy in Washington, not an embassy, in Cuba .
 Goldberg asked Julia Sweig, a CubaU.S. policy expert at the Council on Foreign Relations, to accompany him . They spent portions of three days talking with Castro in Cuba .
 The 84-year-old ex-president wore full military fatigues and an olive-green cap while addressing university students last week . He had previously appeared in public in military shirt .
 Castro was seen in a red shirt, sweat pants, and black New Balance sneakers .
 Castro chided Ahmadinejad for denying the Holocaust . Castro has been a fierce critic of Israel . He has been critical of Israel, but he has also been a strong critic of Iran .
 Mr Goldberg asked Julia Sweig, a CubaU.S. policy expert at the Council on Foreign Relations, to accompany him . The pair spent portions of three days talking with Mr Castro .
 Sweig met with Castro and attended the dolphin show at Havana's aquarium . Atlantic blog was the first to reveal details of what they discussed .
 Mr Goldberg said their first meeting lasted five hours and featured appearances by Mr Castro's wife, Dalia; his son Antonio; and several bodyguards . Two of the bodyguards were held to steady him when he moved .
 Mr Goldberg saw Mr Castro in a red shirt, sweat pants and black New Balance sneakers . But Mr Goldberg said Mr Castro was wearing a different outfit .
 Castro chides Ahmadinejad for denying the Holocaust . Castro himself has been a fierce critic of Israel . He himself has himself been a strong critic of the country .
 "I knew of a bird that was a called a 'Jew,' and so for me, the Jews were those birds,"" Mr Goldberg quoted Mr Castro as telling him .
 According to Mr Goldberg, Mr Castro said, "I don't think anyone has been slandered more than the Jews"
 After undergoing emergency intestinal surgery in July 2006, Mr Castro has begun making near-daily public appearances to warn of a nuclear war pitting the U.S. and Israel against Iran and also featuring a Washington-led attack on North Korea .
 Two-hour program has the misfortune of playing against the World Series . Bumped to Saturday night because of the presidential debates on Thursday .
 Jennings has compiled information obtained from Soviet and Cuban officials . Jennings said writer/producer Sherry Jones compiled information from declassified documents and tapes . Jennings: "This is the first time we've seen this type of documentary"
 Our leaders were in the dark, but it turns out that, for the most part, they were not . "It's not surprising that our leaders weren't in touch with the world's leaders," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This month marks the 30th anniversary of the historic Cold War confrontation . Kennedy emerged a hero for forcing Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to back down over Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 The ABC special also shows that the threat of nuclear war lasted much longer than the 13 days in October that history records . The threat of war lasted 13 days .
 At 7:31m. on Oct. 1962, Maj. Maj. Gen. William Eisenhower was killed in a plane crash . Maj. Eisenhower was the only person to be killed in the country's first major shooting incident .
 Richard S Heyser's U2F reconnaissance jet entered Cuban territory to search for evidence of Soviet missiles . U2 jet entered Cuba to look for Soviet missiles in the hope of finding evidence .
 Heyser roared over the Isle of Pines at an altitude of nearly 14 miles . Approaching from the south to avoid detection, he reached a prescribed course over the province of Pinar del Rio .
 A highresolution camera loaded with two rolls of film, each nine inches wide and more than 5,000-feet long, whirred all the while . The camera is loaded with 2 rolls of camera, each 9 inches wide, and each rolls are 9 inches long .
 He spent just 12 minutes over Cuba, then headed for Orlando where another plane waited to ferry the film to Washington . The film will be sent to the U.S.
 The world was closer to nuclear war in 1962 than it has ever been, according to classified documents and talks between the surviving key players . Recent release of classified documents has revealed that the world was close to war .
 It began late the night of Oct. 31 in the California desert when he took off from Edwards Air Force Base . It was the first time he had been shot down .
 The Isle of Pines is now the Isle of Youth, which Cubans now call the island of youth . As he approached the island, he turned on the camera and continued over the next few days .
 Heyser's camera was turning up the first photographic evidence of offensive mediumrange ballistic missiles in Cuba . Unknown to the camera, the camera turned up evidence of the missiles .
 In 39 days, the Soviets had managed to turn a vacant field into completed missile sites . Somehow, in the intervening . days, they managed to . turn the field into a completed missile site .
 Pentagon blamed bad weather for the lapse in flights . Brugioni says military bumbling and intransigence was the real reason the missiles weren't discovered earlier .
 The film arrived under guard at NPIC, housed in a dreary building in northwest Washington, D.C. and analysts set to work . Brugioni's account of the missile crisis was published last year . The film arrives under guard .
 There had been U-2 overflights of Cuba since 1960, Brugioni says . The analysts were familiar with the island's topography, the palms and pine trees .
 It was the first clear indication that there were offensive nuclear weapons on Cuban soil . The Cuban government responded strongly to the threat .
 Analysts worked through the night, as CIA and military officials were informed of the find . The analysts worked until the night to make sure the find was discovered .
 Analysts discovered two missile launching sites and a related military encampment . Analysts also found two missile launch sites and an encampment of military encampments .
 As the crisis progressed, new reconnaissance missions would reveal 33 missiles . New reconnaissance missions revealed 33 missiles.
 The photo analysts also spotted six launchers for nucleartipped Luna rockets, which the U.S. called Frogs, Brugioni said .
 Lunas with a range of only 25 miles are considered tactical weapons that could be used to repel an invading force . Lunas can range from 25 miles to 25 miles and can be fired from a distance of 25 miles .
 There was always the presumption that there were nuclear warheads for the missiles on the island, but it was unclear how many . There were always the presumed that there was nuclear warheads .
 At a ground-breaking conference in Havana on the missile crisis last January, Gen. Gen. Carlos S. Carlos V. S. A. Cevallos spoke to reporters at the summit .
 It had always been assumed that no Soviet nuclear weapon of any sort could be fired without the authorization of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev .
 Gribkov's revelation changes the whole understanding of the missile crisis, and suggests that nuclear war would have been inevitable if Kennedy had given in to persistent pressure, especially from the U.S. military .
 Former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara said earlier this year that if U.S. forces had been under attack with tactical nuclear warheads, "no one should believe" the United States would have refrained from responding with nuclear warheads .
 Brugioni doubts Gribkov's assertion because of previous Khrushchev statements and the delicacy of the situation, he says . He doubts the assertion because he doubts previous statements .
 If U.S. troops had been fired upon by tactical weapons, there would have been a nuclear war, he says . But he agrees that if United States troops had faced a tactical weapons attack, it would have led to nuclear war . He says he believes the United States would have
 The Strategic Air Command, he said, had 7,000 megatons -equivalent to seven billion tons of TNT -of destructive power at its disposal in 1962 . In 1962, the Strategic Air . Command was at the top of the world's most destructive power .
 Florida, where U.S. troops gathered at air bases, ports and even South Broward's Gulfstream Park, would have been a Soviet target, he says . Florida would surely have been the target of a Soviet invasion of Cuba, too, he said .
 In the days after the missile crisis, Cuba felt alone, betrayed by the Soviets . The Soviets agreed to a U.S. demand to withdraw the missiles without consulting Castro . Cuba was unsure of where it stood and still fearful the United States might attack .
 It is isolated from trends toward free-market economic reforms and democracy that are sweeping the former Soviet bloc .
 There is no longer is a Soviet pro tector to buffer it from the United States . And there no longer . is a . Soviet pro-tector . The United States no longer has a pro-Russian presence in the region .
 Mikhail Gorbachev announced the withdrawal of a training brigade from Cuba last fall . The brigade's existence dates to the the 1962 crisis from Cuba . Castro felt deja vu last fall when former Soviet President announced the pullout .
 Castro wasn't consulted, and again it was what the U.S. wanted, he says . Castro was not consulted on the issue, he adds . Castro: "It's what the United States wanted"
 The Cold War has thawed, and the Berlin Wall has been knocked down and sold in pieces as souvenirs . The Berlin Wall was knocked down by the Cold War, but has now thawed .
 Castro, however, remains the Abominable Snowman in the Cold War icebox . Castro's name has never been changed since his arrest in 1961 .
 Cuba is considered the most hostile of enemies to the United States . United States officials admit the island is scarely a threat to U.S. security .
 There are no formal diplomatic relations between Cuba and the U.S. President Bush recently signed legislation to make the trade embargo even more stringent . The island economy already is in crisis .
 Cuban President Castro allowed the Soviets to install nuclear missiles on the island . Castro was fearful the U.S. would try a repeat of the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 .
 Blight is the main organizer of a series of historic 1987-92 conferences on the missile crisis . Blight also is apprehensive about how the Castro government might react if it sees no way out of its current economic and political problems .
 Castro repeatedly has sounded the missile crisis themes of resistance and survival at all costs . Castro has been in the spotlight as Cuba's economy falters . The Cuban leader has said he is prepared to deal with the crisis .
 Castro in one of his first speeches linking missile crisis to island's economic crisis . Castro: "This is the lesson that inspires us in the face of new challenges and which will live on"
 It wastes few opportunities to remind its people of its hostile neighbor to the north . And it wastes little opportunity to remind them of its hostility .
 Castro still says under special circumstances a U.S. invasion is possible . While a lot is hype, Castro says a United States invasion could be possible . Castro: "under special circumstances''
 Brigades have been organized all over the island to carve out tunnels along the coast purportedly for use during an attack . The tunnels are believed to have been carved out of the island's coast for use .
 Castro always has found the ''yanqui'' threat useful in times of crisis when national unity is imperative . Castro always finds the threat useful when he is in crisis .
 A reconstruction of the surface-to-air missile that shot down the plane now stands in a sugar cane field, seemingly in the middle of nowhere . The missile was shot down by the U.S. Air Force in 1991 .
 The town fathers in Banes, near that old SAM site, still seem to be reacting as if the events in question had happened only yesterday, says Blight . Blight says the town fathers seem to still react as if they were reacting only yesterday .
 Castro still counts on that memory 30 years later as he struggles to hold the island together . Castro still is counting on that . 30 years after Castro's death, Castro is still counting on .
 Castro expresses his fear that an Iranian/Israeli/US showdown could get out of control . Castro says he fears that an Iran-Israeli/U.S. showdown could become out-of-control . Castro: "I'm not sure what's going on here, but I'm
 Castro wrote to Khruschev, the Soviet premier, at the height of the crisis, in which he recommended that the Soviets consider launching a nuclear strike against the United States if the Americans attack Cuba . Castro said the letter was a reference to a letter he wrote of the letter .
 Kennedy Administration officials looked back in relief and horror at how close the world had come to an uncontrolled nuclear exchange . But whenever he started revealing such a changed outlook, it is a significant complement to the views of the Kennedy Administration .
 The full dispatch from Havana is very much worth reading, as presumably will be the second online installment; and the upcoming print magazine account . Jeff Goldberg's promised omnibus reply to supporters and critics of his original article contending that Israel is planning to bomb Iran is also worth reading .
 For the first time, Soviet officials publicly explained why their country instigated the Cuban missile crisis . The Soviets agreed 13 days later to a U.S. demand that the missiles be sent back to the Soviet Union .
 Students of the crisis have long been mystified by why the Soviets risked a nuclear showdown for the sake of missiles in Cuba - a showdown that brought the world to the nuclear precipice . Students are mystified why the Soviet risked a showdown with the U.S.
 In extraordinary American-style news conference, two Soviets gave fresh answers to some old questions . In an extraordinary U.S. style press conference, the two Soviets give fresh answers .
 Soviet Union admits misjudgments and accidents on the Soviet side contributed to the crisis . In the latest example of the Soviet Union's new policy of greater openness, they admitted that misjudgements and accidents contributed .
 McNamara, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and speech writer Theodore Sorensen. McNamara. Bundy. Bundy . McNamara . Bundy . Bundy: "McBundy, Bundy, McNamara and McNamara are great friends"
 Sergei Mikoyan's father was a top adviser to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev during the crisis . He says he only begun to believe this week that U.S. was not planning an invasion of Cuba in 1962 .
 Khrushchev wanted the missiles installed to protect Fidel Castro's revolution, Mikoyan said . Khrushchevs wanted the missile system installed in order to protect the Castro family . Mikoyans: "It was a very important mission for the country"
 The Americans sitting at the conference table with him were astonished . The Americans sat at the table were astonished. He said: "The Americans sitting in the United States were astonished."
 The other Soviet at the table said that Khrushchev had another motivation -he saw the missiles as a step toward nuclear parity with the U.S. The United States had overwhelming superiority in that area .
 Khrushchev's speech writer, Fedor Burlatsky, remembered his boss saying: "The Americans surround us with many bases, especially bases in Turkey near our border"
 Burlatsky, who spoke English fluently, said Khrushchev also underestimated his adversary, President Kennedy . President Kennedy also underestimated the Soviet Union, he said .
 The Soviets believed they could quickly install the missiles before America noticed . The Soviets thought they could easily install missiles before the US noticed .
 The Soviets have had their share of bureaucratic bungling, Burlatsky acknowledged . But the missile sites were not camouflaged, he said .
 American U-2 spy planes got incontrovertible evidence of the missiles before the Soviets finished building them . As a result, American spy planes were able to find the missiles .
 Kennedy announced a naval blockade of Cuba, taking the Soviets off guard . A week after the photographic evidence was in hand, on Oct., 1962, Kennedy announced the blockade .
 Five days after the blockade was announced, an American U-2 was shot down over Cuba by a Soviet surface-to-air-missile . The crisis took on greater gravity when the U.2 was downed by the Soviet missile .
 The downing of the U-2, which brought the two countries to the brink of nuclear destruction, was an accident, Mikoyan says . Mikoyans says the downing was a "accident" that brought the U.2 downing an aircraft .
 Mikoyan said there were doubts about whether it was a Soviet or a Cuban who was responsible for the attack . He said doubts were raised about whether the Soviet or Cuban were responsible .
 "There was no command to do so from the supreme commanders,"" said Mikoyan, now editor of a magazine on Latin America in Moscow . "There were no commands from supreme commanders""
 Seymour Hersh published last weekend that Soviets and Cubans engaged in armed combat at one of the missile bases at the time of the crisis . Mikoyan dismissed the suggestion of a story by Seymour Hersch published last week that the two countries engaged in combat .
 The Castro government uses the Spanish word for worm, gusano, to describe Cuban exiles . The word is used by the Castro government to refer to ex-cubais .
 Khrushchev accepted Kennedy's ultimatum 12 hours after it was given because he had no choice, Burlatsky said . Kennedy had been given a 12-hour deadline for the Soviet Union to leave the country .
 Khrushchev believed that if he rejected it, the U.S. would attack the island, he would attack it . The Soviet Union wanted to keep the island under control .
 Khrushchev could claim a victory in a U.S. promise not to invade Cuba . If he accepted it, he could claim to have won a victory . The Cuban government refused to accept it .
 Bundy: U.S. has lived up to that promise, which never was formalized . Bundy, the former national security adviser, said the United States has done so far . Bundy: "The United States is living up to the promise" Bundy: The United States will continue to
 Bundy said the U.S. retained the right to invade if Cuba threatened hemispheric security . Bundy would not define what a threat Bundy said was a threat .
 ''top secret'' four-page memorandum also reflected concern that President Kennedy's administration was prepared to go it alone in waging a nuclear response to any Soviet move against Berlin .
 The memo, released last month by the National Archives, summarized a meeting on Nov., 1962, involving Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, Foreign Secretary Lord Home and Maj. Lord Home .
 The British discussion came just two days before the United States ended its blockade of Cuba . The U.S. ended its embargo of Cuba on Friday .
 Khrushchev announced that the missiles would be removed in October . The crisis moved toward resolution on Oct. 11, 1962 . Khrushche announced the removal of missiles from the Soviet Union .
 Strong, who had good contacts within the Kennedy administration, had been in the U.S. from Oct. to Oct. 2013 . Strong was in the United States for more than a year .
 "Strong thought that the U.S. government were prepared for their action in Cuba to escalate into the nuclear,'' memo said .
 It stated Macmillan planned to raise the issue with Kennedy during their next meeting .
 There is no indication whether Macmillan did subsequently raise the issue with Kennedy . There is also no indication if he did raise it with the British PM .
 Strong was a reliable source on the reported U.S. plan of a bomber strike against Soviet sites . Britain, the United States and the Command of Nuclear Forces questioned whether Strong was reliable source .
 There is no mention of first strike with missiles, Scott says . The assertion ''was curious because the Americans had a significant number of missiles themselves,'' he says .
 The following day, President Khrushchev agreed to United States demands for the removal of the missiles . The next day, he agreed to U.S. demands that the missiles be removed .
 Cuban missile sites are being developed at a rapid pace, White House says . Cuban missile development is under way to achieve a full operational capacity as soon as possible .
 Spokesmen recalled President Kennedy's statement on Monday that further U.S. action would be justified if preparations continue . The statement was restricted to details of this development .
 The determination of the President to eliminate this Soviet threat to the Western hemisphere has obviously hardened. President Obama's determination to eliminate the Soviet threat is obviously hardened .
 A military force, with sufficient ships and aircraft, is now poised in Florida for any action that the President may order . The military force has sufficient ships, aircraft, and aircraft to support any action he orders .
 There are strong indications that the order for some kind of intervention will be given during the weekend . The order for intervention is expected to be given at the weekend, sources say .
 There is no evidence to date that there is any intention to dismantle or discontinue work on these sites . There are no plans to dismantle the sites, however .
 British, French and West German ambassadors attended a briefing at the State Department yesterday .
 The new urgency that was obvious at the White House and State Department clearly showed that a decision had been reached, or at any rate was about to be reached .
 President Kennedy's objective has gone beyond maintaining the blockade and insisting that the bases be removed . President Kennedy wants to remove the bases from Cuba . The blockade has been in place since 1961 .
 It is now the urgent necessity to prevent the bases from becoming fully operational. Instead, it is now an urgent necessity for the bases to be fully operational .
 State Department officials said the U.S. did not propose to stand by idly while bases were prepared for firing . State Dept. officials said it was not a matter of whether bases should be ready for fire .
 There was no hope of persuading the Soviet Union to remove them, and it was difficult to see how the U.S. could avoid intervening .
 All of President Kennedy's top advisers favored launching an air strike against missile sites in Cuba . Documents to be made public this week .
 Documents show only the president favored ending the crisis through a diplomatic trade . The deal involved removing U.S. missiles from Turkey from Turkey in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba .
 The John F Kennedy Library in Dorchester plans to release the documents . The documents are transcripts of the sessions held by the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The day before Khrushchev announced that he would remove the missiles from Cuba, the Soviet leader .
 The transcripts debunk myths that have been built around the missile crisis during the past 25 years . According to those who have seen them, the transcripts debunk a number of myths . The transcripts are available on CNN.com and YouTube .
 Most critical is the myth that Kennedy ""won"" the faceoff by being tough and uncompromising . Most critical of the myth is that Kennedy won by being uncompromising and tough . Kennedy was tough, uncompromising, but not uncompromising enough .
 A second myth is that Kennedy and his advisers managed the crisis through consensus . Kennedy and advisers managed to do so through consensus, a second myth says . A third myth says they managed to manage the crisis by consensus .
 Kennedy solved the problem by acting on a judgment that went against the consensus . Kennedy solved it by acting against consensus, not against consensus .
 The transcripts show that had Kennedy accepted the judgment of his advisers, there might have been war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The transcripts also show that if Kennedy accepted his advisers' judgment, there would have been a war .
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a letter proposing to trade U.S. missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba . The deal included a pledge not to invade Cuba and a Soviet pledge to invade Turkey .
 All of Kennedy's top advisers at three ExComm meetings held that day argued against the idea . The alternative was either an invasion of Cuba or an air strike against the missile sites .
 ExComm meeting, Paul Nitze, now Reagan's chief arms-control adviser, spoke up against the idea . Nitze: Soviets' next step would be to demand that the U.S. remove all nuclear weapons from Western Europe . He says Soviets would then demand that U.
 McGeorge Bundy, national security adviser, and Roswell Gilpatric, deputy secretary of defense, said no such deal should be discussed until after the Soviet missiles had been pulled out .
 George Ball, the undersecretary of state, speaking for his entire department, said the idea would upset the Turks so much that it should not even be raised with them . Ball: The idea should not be discussed with the Turks .
 Robert F Kennedy, the president's brother and the attorney general, said the administration must make it clear that the Turkish and Cuban missiles were entirely different issues .
 Robert S McNamara, the defense secretary, pointed out that the missiles belonged to Turkey and that only the nuclear warheads were under United States control .
 Kennedy Library released sanitized ExComm meeting records in sanitized form . Kennedy Library releases official summary records of ExComm meetings .
 Some of the records were released five years ago, some just this month . Some were released as recently as this month, some were released just this year .
 If the missiles in Cuba added 50 percent to Soviet nuclear capability, then to trade these missiles for those in Turkey would be of great military value . The missiles were added to the Soviet arsenal in Cuba .
 The summary records indicate that at a 2:30m. meeting at the State Department, held without President Kennedy, his brother, Robert, ""urged that we buy time now in order to launch an air attack Monday or Tuesday,"" the 29th or 30th . The summary
 At a 4m. meeting back in the White House, President Kennedy once again raised the merits of a missile trade . The soon-to-be-released transcript of the meeting will be released .
 All of the chiefs favored invading Cuba on Monday the 29th . Maxwell Taylor, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, reported that all of the chief chiefs favored invasion .
 Namara and other advisers were willing to attack Cuba, knowing that this risked U.S.-Soviet war in Europe, rather than agree to remove from Turkey missiles that the administration was planning to get rid of anyway . In other words, according to the summary records -and, evidently,
 Johnson has remained virtually silent throughout the deliberations .
 Ball's informal solution was finally what the Kennedy administration did to mollify Turkish bitterness over withdrawal of the missiles . Ball: The Kennedy administration mollified Turkish bitterness by withdrawing missiles from Turkey .
 ExComm meeting on Oct. 31 show that Kennedy was not entirely averse to the use of force . Kennedy was in charge of the National Guard at the time of his death .
 Earlier in the day, an American U-2 spy plane had been shot down over Cuba . The plane was shot down by Cuban authorities .
 Kennedy said if U.S. reconnaissance planes were fired on again the next day, he would order an air strike against the surface-to-air missile site responsible for the action . Kennedy said he would strike the missile site if it was used again .
 In other words, if the crisis had continued for another full day, a war might have been triggered . If the crisis continued, the crisis might have triggered a war .
 Judge temporarily blocks the sale until a hearing scheduled for next week . United States District Court Judge Robert Ward temporarily blocked the sale . The hearing is set for next Monday .
 Hundreds of protesters marched peacefully to the Capitol on Monday to oppose U.S. funding for the Colombian military . They recited a pledge against vandalism, violence and even running or swearing . Protesters say they will not run or swear .
 Four days of demonstrations wrapped up in Washington, D.C., with dueling proPalestinian and pro-Israeli picketing outside a Jewish lobbying group's convention .
 Protesters object to U.S. aid to Colombian military in its anti-guerrilla war and to a United States Army school that trains Latin American soldiers . Some of those soldiers have gone on to commit human rights abuses, protesters say .
 Agency checking pedals on Taurus and Sable cars . Some drivers hit accelerator accidentally when trying to slow down . Ford Taurus, Mercury Sable are too close to gas pedals .
 The investigation involves 402,651 cars from the 2000 and 2001 model years . The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration is looking into the safety issue .
 NHTSA opened the inquiry in March and included it in a monthly report of investigations released Monday . The inquiry was opened in March .
 Living organ donations outpace those from the dead for the first time . Organ donations from the living outnumber donors who are dead . Donations from the live outnumber those from dead for first time, a record high last year .
 More than 6,400 people gave away a kidney or a piece of their liver . With waiting lists growing, waiting lists are growing .
 For more than a decade, the numbers of organs donated by the living have been growing more quickly than those given after death . Patients have turned increasingly to families or friends for their organs .
 In 2001, living donors increased by 13. percent, on top of a 16. percent increase a year earlier, government says . Living donors rose by 13 percent in 2001, government said Monday .
 California Police Chief Bernard Parks resigns, won't sue for 2nd term . Parks says he will step down sometime next week . He says he'll step down next week after being denied second five-year term .
 Parks, whose term ends in August, said he didn't want ""the citizens of this great city to incur any economic loss"" as part of a lawsuit . Parks says he doesn't want citizens of the city "incurring any economic . loss"
 Parks' departure follows an ugly rift with Mayor James Hahn, who was sharply criticized by members of the black community for refusing to support another term for the chief, who is black . Hahn was criticized for not renewing Parks' term as chief .
 Hahn relied heavily on African-American support in last year's mayoral election . Hahn relies heavily on black voters in his mayoral bid .
 Hahn wants police chief more willing to implement reforms and community policing programs . Hahn has said he wants more community policing to be done .
 City and police union officials have criticized Parks for his inflexibility on issues such as discipline and discipline . Parks has been criticized for being inflexible on those issues and on police discipline .
 President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed on a limited nuclear test-ban treaty . The treaty outlawed atmospheric testing . It was a limited test ban treaty .
 They installed a red phone hot line that allowed them to communicate more effectively . They also installed a hot line to communicate with each other in order to communicate .
 Maultsby a U-2 spy plane pilot and one of the top five fighter pilots in the world at one time took off from Eielson Air Force Base .
 He was on a mission for the Atomic Energy Commission to check the atmosphere over the North Pole for signs of Soviet nuclear testing . The mission was part of a mission to find out if Soviet nuclear tests were ever conducted .
 Maultsby made a navigational error and ended up over the Chukotka Peninsula, in northeastern Russia . He made a return trip to the island, but ended up in a different location .
 Ordinarily the mistake would have been unremarkable, but it was amplified by the events of the preceding days . Ordinarily, the mistake was unremarkable .
 The United States and Russia squared off after the United States demanded Russia pull its nuclear weapons out of Cuba and Russia adamantly refused . The U.S. and Russia had squared off over the issue .
 Soviet officials picked up Maultsby's blip on their radar and could have taken it as a sign of attack . Soviet officials could have picked up the blip as a signal of attack on the UK .
 Maultsby and a team of F-102s that came to his aid and guided him out quickly left, Schaller said . But they did not respond because they didn't respond, he said . The F102s left the scene quickly after the incident .
 The U.S. discovered Soviet missile sites in Cuba were armed, and a U-2 was shot down over Cuba . That same day, the United States discovered Soviet ballistic missile sites were armed .
 In a 1992 television interview, Maultsby said he didn't realize he had entered Soviet airspace . He said he entered the Soviet airspace in 1992 .
 The crisis fizzled to a close later that week as Khrushchev backed down and made plans to dismantle missile sites . The MiGs only followed the American planes to the border .
 He had barely flown a dozen of those missions when he was shot down over Korea in 1952 . He had only flown about a dozen missions before being shot down .
 Maultsby ejected after electrical problems in his F-80 as well as enemy fire . He ejected as his plane was speeding downward . He was hit by enemy fire, electrical problems and was killed in the crash .
 He began running toward the cover of a nearby hill, but a dozen Chinese soldiers quickly surrounded him and took him prisoner . He was taken prisoner by Chinese soldiers .
 He spent 22 months in a prisoner-of-war camp before he was freed . He spent the next 22 months spent in a POW camp before being freed .
 Maultsby went on to serve in the Nellis Air Force Base Fighter Weapons Team . Officials considered him one of the top five fighter weapons gunners in the world .
 He then flew with the Thunderbirds, the Air Force demonstration team, from 1958 to 1960 . He was a member of the demonstration team from 1958-1960 .
 Maultsby eventually became inspector general for combat readiness, supervising NATO forces from 1974 to 1977 . He was the head of NATO forces during that period .
 Maultsby received 18 decorations for valor and service over his more than 30 years of duty . He received the Purple Heart, Silver Star, the Legion of Merit, the Distinguished Flying Cross and the Air Medal .
 He is survived by his wife of 49 years, Jeanne; sons Chuck II and Kevin of Tucson and Shawn of Colorado Springs, Colo. He is also survived by sons Kevin, Kevin and Stevie, of Tucson; and grandsons Chuck, Stevie and Chuck .
 The Ariz o na Daily Star Cit at ion at ion L Anne Newell, 'Colonel Newell' Newell .
 The founder and editor of George magazine is there as a journalist, a spokeswoman said . A spokeswoman for George magazine said the magazine founder is in the United States as a reporter .
 The Cuban missile crisis came to a head Oct. 1962, when President Kennedy established an air and sea quarantine to prevent Russian nuclear missiles from being delivered to Cuba . President Kennedy set up an air, sea quarantine .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev ultimately agreed to dismantle the missile sites . The sites were eventually dismantled by the Soviet Union .
 Barbara Mandrell is giving up music to pursue acting . She made her last performance with a concert at the Grand Ole Opry House in Nashville, Tenn.
 Mandrell, 48, sang Sleeping Single in a Double Bed and played the saxophone, guitar and steel guitar .
 Quinn, Medicine Woman, Touched by an Angel and Baywatch, has a recurring role on Sunset Beach . Quinn also appeared in Medicine Woman and Touched By an Angel .
 Dowager Queen Ingrid of Denmark underwent surgery to repair a broken hip . Dowager queen Ingrid had surgery to fix the broken hip of her own .
 The 87-year-old Ingrid Ingrid, mother of Queen Margrethe II, fell Thursday in her private quarters . She is the mother of the queen of Sweden . Ingrid fell in her own quarters .
 Ingrid stepped out of the limelight when her husband, King Frederik IX, died in 1972 . She stepped down from the spotlight after the death of her husband .
 A panther bit a trainer last week on the set of The New Swiss Family Robinson . Stacy Keach's double was bitten by a panther on set of the show .
 Terry Moore treated for bites on his leg and a cut on his hand . Terry Moore was treated for bite marks on his legs and hand . The double, Terry Moore, also had bite marks in his leg .
 Moore, 44, has worked with Baer since the 2-year-old cat was 3 months old . Moore has been working with the cat since it was 3-months-old . Moore: Baer has been a good friend and owner of the cat's life .
 His journalistic career included many years with the Associated Press and ABC News . He also worked with ABC News and Associated Press .
 In 1962, President Kennedy disclosed the existence of offensive missile sites in Cuba . President Kennedy said the United States would retaliate against Moscow, not Havana .
 Two days later, Mr Scali was contacted by Alexandr Fomin, a KGB official in Washington . Fomin was a personal friend of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . He was a close friend of the Soviet Premier .
 Fomin outlined a proposal for the Soviets to dismantle the Cuban missile bases provided the U.S. government pledged not to invade Cuba . The proposal was rejected by the Soviets .
 The two nations were able to settle the crisis diplomatically with Mr Scali's continued assistance . The crisis was resolved with the help of Scali .
 ABC planned to disclose the account after Kennedy's assassination, but the Los Angeles Times and Newsday published the story first .
 Gribkov was in Cuba at the time of the crisis . He says the Soviets had given authority to the local commander to fire missiles in the event of an invasion .
 Robert S McNamara told his colleagues that Gribkov's disclosure had changed his assessment about how dangerous the missile crisis actually was, Brenner said .
 McNamara told the gathering, Brenner said, that there was no question that Kennedy would have ordered nuclear retaliation on Cuba . Brenner: "There is no question" that the president would have gone nuclear retaliation .
 McNamara and other participants were en route home on Monday and were unavailable for comment . McNamara: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it's a very sad thing"
 Lloyd Webber has taken a step towards unravelling the truth behind the man who was convicted as a pimp but went to his death protesting that he was a patriot who had served his country . It flopped on the West End stage but now, six years later, Lloyd Web
 The impresario has released a cache of documents from the scandal, including a previously unseen letter . Ward sent to Harold Wilson, the future Labour prime minister, claiming that he was an intermediary during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 .
 The handwritten letter was sent on November 1, four days after John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev pulled back from brink of war . It was sent by the U.S. president and Soviet leader four days later .
 Wilson passed the letter on to Harold Macmillan, the Conservative prime minister . Wilson passed on the letter to the Prime Minister of Wales .
 Kennedy said he would stop Soviet ships carrying weapons reaching Cuba . Kennedy demanded that the missiles were removed from Cuba in October .
 Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader, urged Khrushchev to launch a nuclear strike against America . On October 26, Fidel Castro called for a nuke strike against the U.S.
 Ward wrote to Wilson on headed notepaper with the address of his consulting rooms . John Profumo, secretary of state for war for war, conducted his liaison with 19-year-old Christine Keeler .
 Police had his home and office under 24-hour watch and he was desperate to clear his name . But they are tainted as a historical record because of the police presence . The police were under 24 hours watch and the police were desperate for his innocence .
 Wilson referred to Ward's letter in a 20-minute meeting with Macmillan held on May 27, 1963 . The letter was referred to by Wilson in a meeting with the British government .
 Ward wrote to Wilson as he awaited bail from Brixton prison on June 13, 1963 . Ward wrote Wilson one more time as he waited to be released from prison .
 Russian chargé d'affaires was greeted by a tirade of recrimination that took up six pages of notes . He gave further details of the peace talks .
 Jonathan Haslam, a historian and expert on the Soviet Union, said Ward ""had a charismatic effect on the people around him"
 Britain's "missed opportunity" has been described as a 'misunderstood' by the Russian president . Britain's failure to take advantage of the situation is described as 'a missed opportunity'
 It is possibly incidental that the status of this country could have enormously risen and that we could have had the credit that now goes to Washington or in fewer minds to Moscow. It is possible incidental that it could have happened, he says .
 Ward offers to help mediate between the superpowers over Berlin . Ward: "It will, in my opinion, be sorely needed and can be exercised only by this country"
 Ward is not a member of any political party or other organisation . Ward's motives are not to blame for Ward's actions . Ward says he is not interested in politics .
 I must ask you not to make public any of this — it is far too serious for political capital. It is a serious matter of serious concern, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 JFK and Nikita Khrushchev faced off in a nightmare game of nuclear chicken . The truth about what really happened off the southern tip of Florida is revealed in a new documentary .
 The dramatic action sheds a whole new light on those dread-filled days that November, when the world looked like it would be covered in mushroom clouds . Director Matthew Vaughn and his team should be thanked for their work .
 "Of course, history books will have to be rewritten, but, hey, that's life," says CNN.com.com .
 This was also the time, it should be noted, when James Bond was combing nearby Caribbean waters for Dr. James Bond .
 First Class tries to explain how Professor X, Magneto, and all those mopey mutants came to be . First Class has some fun trying to explain Professor X and Magneto .
 Charles Xavier is a budding geneticist who picks up babes by complimenting them on their ""groovy"" genomes . Charles Xavier (James McAvoy) is graduating from Oxford, a budding brainy geneticist .
 Erik Lehnsherr is a concentration camp survivor determined to track down the Nazi sicko who exploited his magnetic mind powers . He is a survivor of concentration camp survivors determined to find the sicko .
 Kevin Bacon plays Sebastian Shaw, the sinister Teuton . Kevin Bacon is an evil gleam in his eye and an evil smile .
 "Send millions of Jews to their death only whetted this guy's appetite for destruction," he wrote .
 Raven , the blue-skinned beauty who becomes Mystique; and Hank , the science whiz who becomes Beast . Cassidy , whose sonic scream gives him the moniker Banshee, and January Jones, all vintage . January Jones .
 Oliver Platt and Rose Byrne play CIA agents trying to figure out what's up with these weirdos . The film stars them as CIA agents who try to help with the exposition .
 Vaughn who seemed considerably less encumbered with his previous superhero outing, Kick-Ass keeps things afloat . For a time, Vaughn seemed less burdened than his previous film .
 McAvoy and Fassbender are serious actors, and seem to be having a serious good time inhabiting these extraordinary Marvel Comics creations . The film is set in New York City, New York .
 With James McAvoy, Michael Fassbender, Jennifer Lawrence, January Jones, Kevin Bacon, Oliver Platt, and Kevin Bacon . The film is set to be released in September 2015 .