 A suggested course of action re the contingency one of our surveillance 1. Paul H Ni tze . A suggestion for a solution to the crisis of surveillance .
 Time permitting we should lay an appropriate base of public understanding of the current situation, as a foundation for future action . Time permitting, the U.S. should lay a base of understanding of current situation .
 As soon as we have confirmation that the ships carrying Soviet mi ssi les have actually departed Cuban waters, the public should be informed that the Soviets have carried ou( only a portion of their obligations pursuant to the Kennedy-Khrushchev exchange of letters .
 They have not made it possible for the UN effectively to verify the dismantling and removal of all weapons systems in Cuba capable of offensive use, and have concurrently denied the legitimacy of United States surveillanc e in the absence of effective UN verification . The U.S. has also denied the
 Together with the Cuban regime, they appear to be frustrating the development of effective safeguards against the reintro rii.ft inn f offensive weapons systems .
 We should then communicate to Russiai standing of the original exchange of commitments, warnings to them wi th respect th respect tc interference with surveillance with surveillance, and inform them that, unlesj they will g < jve us prompt and specific assurances that our planes will not be interfered with
 We would announce to the public that one of our planes had been shot at or destroyed and indicate the nature of the position we were communicating to the Soviet lihion . Simultaneously, we would announce the location of the planes we were in contact with the Soviets .
 After the elapse of sufficient time for the message to the Soviet Union to have reached Moscow and for them to have instructed their people in Cuba, we should resume surveillance flights . The U.S. government says surveillance flights should resume .
 DOD DIR 5200.10 TOP SECRET Cop y/ J o f 30 Cop i e s Page 1 of 2 Pages limit.
 If it becomes necessary to artt^ a*c j the specific action taken wn ,,M A V"" defend °""r surveillance planes interference. If . it becomes . necessary to . defend against . interference .
 The unique identification numbers assigned to the documents are listed m the top nght-hand corner of the microfiche header .