 After World War II the Cold War began and caused tension throughout the world . The Cold War was the result of the conflict between the U.S. and Russia .
 After WWII, Germany and its capital Berlin was divided into four parts controlled by Great Britain, the United States, France, and the Soviet Union . The Berlin Airlift June 1948 – May 1949 was the largest airlift of all time .
 To gain total control of Berlin, the Soviet Union set up a blockade to the part it did not control, West Berlin . West Berlin was part of West Berlin, part of the Soviet Berlin .
 The U.S., Great Britain, and France sent over 2 million tons of food and fuel by planes for the next year . U.K., UK, France, Canada, France sent food, fuel by plane .
 The Berlin Wall was built in 1961 to prevent people from leaving East Germany . The government constructed a concrete wall with barbed wire on top .
 Following World War II, Germany was divided, creating Soviet East Germany and West Germany . The Berlin Wall was built on top of the Berlin Wall in 1989 .
 Berlin, located inside of East Germany, was also divided into East and West zones . Berlin was located in East Germany and was divided into West and East .
 Joseph McCarthy was a U.S. senator from the state of Wisconsin in 1961 . He was a member of the Wisconsin Senate . McCarthy is a former senator from Wisconsin .
 Ten western European countries along with the U.S. and Canada formed an alliance to resist the threat of Communism . April 1949 . The United States and Canada joined the alliance .
 They signed the North Atlantic Treaty and agreed to come to each other’s defense to prevent communist attacks . The treaty was signed by the two nations .
 "It takes action to support the values of democracy, individual liberty, rule of law, and peaceful resolution of conflicts"
 At the end of WWII Korea was divided into North Korea and South Korea . The Korean War 1950-1953 Korean War was the first Korean War .
 Kim Il Sung, the leader of North Korea, sent his powerful army into South Korea in 1950 . In 1950, the North Korean leader invaded South Korea .
 The United Nations responded quickly offering help from several countries to South Korea . U.N. responded quickly and offered help quickly to the South Korean government .
 Korean War June 25, 1950 – July 27, 1953 . After WWII, Korea was divided . Korean War began in 1950 .
 North Korea invaded South Korea in 1950 to try to unify Korea as a Communist country . In 1950, South Korea was invaded by North Korea to try and unify South Korea .
 The dividing line between the two countries changed during the war, but ended up back at the 38th parallel when the war ended . South Korea fought back with the help of the United Nations in Korea .
 The Soviet Union wanted to compete with the U.S. in building long range missiles . The Soviets wanted to build long range missile technology .
 President J.F.K. set up a blockade of Cuba and told the Soviet Union to remove the missiles . The Soviet Union was forced to remove missiles from Cuba . The blockade was imposed by the U.S. government in Cuba .
 The Soviet Union agreed to remove missiles and the United States agreed not to invade Cuba . After 13 tense days, the Soviet Union and the U.S. agreed to pull missiles from Cuba .
 Vietnamese communists known as Vietcong tried to take over the South Vietnamese government . The Vietcong were known as the Vietcong, which fought for power in Vietnam .
 President Nixon withdrew troops in 1973 and South Vietnam fell in 1975 to North Vietnam . North Vietnam fell to the North Vietnam in 1975 . President Nixon withdraws troops from Vietnam in 1973 .