 91 years old, 91-year-old Sen. Ted Cruz is president of the U.S. House of Representatives . Sen. Cruz has been in charge of the National Guard for more than a decade . Cruz Cruz has won a series of awards for his work in Iraq .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent destinations . Submit photos of your favorite travel destinations by clicking here for more information .
 83 years old, 83-year-old was born in the U.S. House of Representatives in Washington, D.C., in 1996 . President George W. Bush was elected to the presidency of the United States in 1998 .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit www.cnn.com/travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent destinations . Visit http://www.cnn.com/travelworld for more information about upcoming destinations .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent destinations . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots of America's
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 176 people died in 176 incidents in 176 countries in 2012 . 176 people were killed in 176 separate incidents, including one of the most violent incidents in history .
 172,000 people live in 172 countries around the world each year . The U.S. House of Representatives will host a series of events in Washington, D.C. for the first time .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of snapshots of life in the U.S. Visit http://www.cnn.com/travel next week for a new gallery .
 113 people died in 113 U.S. hospitals during World War II . 113 people were killed in the Holocaust, including 11 children .
 196 people died in 196 U.S. incidents, including 9/11 bombings, were killed in 1996 . 196 people have been killed in 196 incidents, according to CNN.com .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of snapshots of life in the U.S. Visit http://www.cnn.com/travel next week for a new gallery .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next week for a new gallery of snapshots of the world's most beautiful beaches . Visit http://www.cnnnn.org/
 174 years old, 174 people live in the U.S. House of Representatives in Washington, D.C., on Capitol Hill, Washington, DC. 174 people have been killed in Washington state. 174 were killed in the Vietnam War .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of snapshots of your favorite destinations in the U.S. Call the National Suicide Prevention Hotline at 1-800-273-8255 .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit www.dailymailonline.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of
 175,000 people live in 175 countries around the world each year . The U.S. House of Representatives will host a series of events in Washington, D.C. for the first time ever .
 83 years old, 83-year-old was born in the U.S. House of Representatives in Washington, D.C., in 1996 . President George W. Bush was elected to the presidency of the United States in 1998 .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit http://www.dailymailonline.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of snapshots of your favorite places in the U.S. Rep. Mitch McConnell's "America's First Lady" gallery of photos . Visit CNN.
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters in New York City . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 113 people died in 113 U.S. hospitals during World War II . 113 people were killed in the Holocaust, including 11 children .