 U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency is a major arms control agency . The agency was created by President Barack Obama in 1994 .
 McCormack approved $1.1 billion in aid to Latin America in 1961 and 1962 . The aid was hoped to result in political and social reforms guaranteeing greater stability .
 On March 16, 1961, the Senate approved the convention providing for United States membership in the Organization for Economic Development . The convention provided for the U.S. membership .
 Early that fall legislation was enacted consolidating earlier laws on educational and cultural exchange programs . It was enacted early that fall .
 Congress also sought to direct U.S. foreign policy through passage of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1962 . The act prohibited aid to Communist countries, and those providing assistance to Cuba .
 Congress drafted four laws, during Kennedy's first two years in office, to cover special vocational programs which would be coordinated by the same State vocational agencies already having responsibility for the programs .
 The Area Redevelopment Act of May 1961 authorized special job training for workers in economically depressed areas . The Act was passed by Congress in 1961 .
 The Manpower Development and Training Act of March 1962 sought to retrain workers with obsolete skills . The Act was passed by Congress in 1962 .
 The Public Welfare Amendments of July 1962 provided special community training for people dependent upon public assistance . The training was part of a special training program for those on the receiving end of public assistance.
 Trade Expansion Act of October 1962 made special training available for workers who had lost their jobs because of foreign competition .
 President Kennedy's signature on the Area Redevelopment Act of May 1, 1961, established a multimillion dollar program to assist in the financing of Mike Mansfield industrial and rural redevelopment .
 The Public Works Acceleration Act of September 1962 provided $900 million for immediate acceleration of job-creating Federal and local public works projects in areas of high unemployment . The bill was passed by Congress in 1962 .
 The 87th Congress raised the minimum wage to $1.25 an hour, broadened social security benefits, established the Communications Satellite Corporation and authorized a $100 million loan to the U.N.
 The Twenty-fourth amendment, outlawing the use of poll taxes as a means of preventing citizens from voting in Federal elections, was sent to the States for ratification late in August 1962 . In addition to the amendment, the Twenty-four amendment outlaws poll taxes .
 This new amendment went into effect on January 23, 1964, with the ratification by South Dakota . The amendment was ratified by the South Dakota legislature .
 The Kennedy Administration justified growing U.S. involvement in Vietnam as necessary to halt the spread of communism . The Kennedy administration justified growing . U.N. involvement was justified to halt communist .
 The prevention of the spread of communism in Vietnam, Laos, and every other country in Southeast Asia was vital to U.S. security . Under the ‘domino principle,’ the prevention of Communism in Vietnam and Laos was vital .
 May 2, 1961, a cease-fire was declared in Laos, with the pro-U.S. faction losing ground to the pro2 Soviet faction . The U.S.-led government of Laos agreed to support a collation government led by Souva .
 In South Vietnam, there is growing dissatisfaction with the government of Ngo Dinh Diem .
 During 1961 the Viet Cong sharply increased guerrilla, subversive, and political warfare, and continued to control major portions of the population in the countryside . The Viet Cong also increased guerrilla and subversive warfare in 1961 .
 The gains of the Viet Cong insurgency were not yet perceived as serious enough to threaten the immediate collapse of the Diem government . U.S. officials began to feel that eventually the government would collapse . The gains were not immediately felt as serious .
 Two U.S. helicopter companies arrived in Vietnam on December 11, 1961 . They provided direct United States military support to Vietnam for the first time .
 In 1962 the government of South Vietnam launched the Speaker of the House strategic hamlet, with the intention of fortifying a network of rural villages to oust the Viet Cong and prevent re-infiltration . John W McCormack was killed by the U.S. in 1962 .
 Eight U.S.-made planes, piloted by Cuban rebels, bombed three Cuban airbases on April 15, 1961 . Eight planes bombed the air bases in Cuba on that date .
 1,400 anti-Castro Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba two days later . Two days later, a force of more than 1,000 exiles arrived in Cuba . The Bay was the site of the first American invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 In less than three days the invasion was crushed and all survivors captured . All survivors were captured and captured .
 On April 24, President Kennedy issued a statement accepting full responsibility for the invasion . President Kennedy accepted responsibility for invasion .
 Kennedy accepted the resignations of CIA director Allen Dulles and his chief deputy Richard M Bissell, Jr., who had directed the operation . Kennedy accepted Dulles' resignations .
 Nikita Khrushchev installed Sam Rayburn as Speaker of the 1st Session of the Soviet Union in Cuba, only 90 miles from the United States . The plan would have nearly doubled Soviet nuclear striking capability against targets in the US .
 In July and August military shipments and specialists poured into Cuba . The Cuban government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in Cuba .
 Ball publicly disclosed the full extent of the Soviet military build-up in Cuba known at that time . Ball: The Cuban military build up in Cuba was the largest in the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 On October 15, U.S. intelligence analysts conformed that the Soviets were building a medium-range missile base in Cuba . The base is believed to have been built by the Soviet Union .
 On October 22, President Kennedy said the Soviet Union was preparing a series of offensive missile sites in Cuba with the purpose of providing nuclear strike capability against the United States and other Western hemisphere countries .
 The President has directed a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba . The President announced that he directed the quarantine .
 Khrushchev stated that captains of Soviet vessels bound for Cuba would be instructed not to obey orders of U.S. naval vessels . The decision was made on October 23, 1962 .
 Khrushchev proposed that the Soviets withdraw weapons from Cuba on the condition that the U.S. withdraw the blockade and agree not to invade Cuba . Two days later the Soviets agreed to withdraw weapons on condition of a U.N. withdrawal of Cuba's blockade .
 The next day a single Soviet ship resumed its passage towards Cuba . President Kennedy accepted Khrushchev’s proposal . The following day, the single ship continued its passage .
 The U.S. expected that a military confrontation would occur . Nonetheless, the U.K. expected it would happen .
 U.S. Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967, Committee on Armed Services. ProQuest Congressional, CMP-1979FOA-0039 United States Vietnam Relations .
 1961 opened in the midst of a recession, with hopes that economic recovery would ensue . ProQuest Congressional, CMP-1971-ASH-0003 Economic Trends and Conditions 1961 opened .
 Nearly 7% of the labor force was unemployed and almost onefifth of manufacturing capacity lay idle . Almost one fifth of the manufacturing capacity in the U.S. was idle .
 A persistent deficit in international payments had weakened confidence in the dollar, officials said . The US dollar has been hit by a persistent deficit of international payments .
 Government response in 1961 and 1962 included measures intended to improve the structure and functioning of the economy . Measures included new programs to redevelop chronically depressed areas, retrain the unemployed, increase social security benefits for the aged and the unemployed .
 The unemployment rate stood at 6.1% and confidence in the dollar had been restored . The economy had been hit by a surge in confidence and the dollar has been restored.
 During 1962 the unemployment rate continued to drop and stood at 5.6% by the end of the year . The unemployment rate was 5.5% .
 John F Kennedy, John F Economic Report of the President, Jan. 1962, House, Jan., 1962, 87th Congress, 2nd Session . Kennedy, President of the U.S. John F. Kennedy, was assassinated in 1963 .
 Lyndon B. Johnson's Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress, January 1963, House, Jan., 1963, 88th Congress, 1st Session . ProQuest Congressional, 12497 H.J.doc.
 No citizen would be denied the right to vote by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax . Provided that no citizen was denied the . right to . vote by . reason of failing to pay poll tax .
 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a consultative body, consists of the United States, Canada, and 18 European nations . Established the OEDD, which includes Canada, the U.S. and Canada, in 1973 .
 Constitution of the United States of America, Analysis and Interpretation of the U.S. Constitution . Constitution of United States. America. Constitution of America. America .
 Select Committee to Study Government Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities . Select Committee will study Government operations with respect to intelligence activities . Committee will also examine Government operations in the United States .
 Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Eighty-Seventh Congress, First Session, 1961, Vol. 1, 1961 . The Committee is currently in its first session .
 Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee 1962, Vol. 1962, was held before the committee . Executive Sessions was held at the Foreign Relations' Committee .
 John H Glenn Jr. Jr. was the first man to fly from the Soviet Union to the United States in 1961 . Glenn was a member of the Glenn Air Force, which launched the first manned manned flight in 1961. Glenn died in 1968 in a crash on December 18, 1968 .
 Address of the President of the United States delivered before a joint session of the Senate and the House of Representatives relative to urgent national needs . Address . Speech . Speech of the House and Senate of Representatives .
 ProQuest Congressional, CR-1962-0904 Subcommittee to Investigate Administration of Internal Security Act and Other Internal Security Laws . The subcommittee is investigating the administration of internal security laws .
 Authorized to borrow $300 million from the Treasury for a revolving 9 fund to finance industrial and rural redevelopment loans and public facility loans . Authorized the President to appoint an Area Redevelopment Administrator, to serve under the Secretary of Commerce .
 Also appropriated monies for technical assistance, vocational retraining, and subsistence payments to trainees . Also appropriated .
 Raised minimum wage in stages from $1 an hour to $1.25 an hour . Extended full wage and hour coverage-also in stages-to about 3,624,000 previously exempt workers .
 Authorized an additional $900 million a year for the National Interstate Highway program . Authorized to spend more than $1 billion a year on Interstate Highway . Also authorized to spend $1.5 billion on new roads and bridges in the U.S.
 Authorized $2 billion in new funds for urban renewal and $55 million for urban planning . Authorized funds for development of mass transit facilities and ""open spaces"" in cities . Authorizes $2.2 billion new funds .
 Expanded community facilities loans aimed at financing basic sewage, gas and water service in small communities . Also authorized about 100,000 new public housing units, boosted funds for construction of farm housing and housing for the elderly .
 New experimental programs providing Federal loan insurance against losses on long-term commercial loans made for construction and rehabilitation of moderate income housing . Also initiated three new experimental programs .
 Broadened the President's authority to finance the costs of sending Americans abroad and bringing foreigners to the U.S. for a wide variety of educational, scientific, and cultural purposes . The President also expanded his authority to fund the costs .
 Also created a new non-immigration alien category of ""exchange visitors"" with special visas and amended tax law to the benefit of exchanges . Created a new category of "exchange visitors"
 Peace Corps was established by executive authority in March 1961 to enlist young Americans as technological instructors and helpers in the less developed countries . Peace Corps provides skilled manpower for international development projects .
 Established an independent United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency to conduct research, prepare policy recommendations, conduct disarmament negotiations, and plan for 10 establishment of inspection and control systems .
 Provided for a 15-member General Advisory Committee and authorized an appropriation of $10 million to the agency . Provided for 15-members of the committee and authorized a budget for the department .
 Authorized a new Federal program to train workers to help alleviate unemployment and provide skilled personnel in certain industries . Authorized to train people to help ease unemployment and to provide skills to certain industries.
 Under the program the Secretary of Labor and the States were responsible for helping to determine manpower needs, selecting candidates for training, and placing trained persons . Under this program the secretary of Labor was responsible for determining manpower needs .
 Broadened welfare aid to those considered to be the most needy, while undertaking a campaign to reduce the need for aid through programs of rehabilitation, training, and self-care for the needy .
 Increased federal reimbursements to the States for rehabilitative services to public assistance clients from 50 to 75 percent of the total cost . Increased Federal reimbursements for rehabilitation services increased from 50% to 75% of the cost .
 Authorized appointment by the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare of a 12-member Advisory Council on Public Welfare . Council on public welfare was created in 2009 .
 Authorized appropriations totaling $4,572,000,000 included $600 million for the Alliance for Progress in each of the fiscal years 1963-1966 . No funds, except $100 million in fiscal 1963, could be used for other than dollar-payable loans .
 Authorized an appropriation of $900 million for immediate acceleration of job-creating Federal and local public works projects in areas with long-term high unemployment . Authorized to accelerate public construction projects in those areas with high unemployment. Authorized $900m to accelerate construction projects .
 The U.S. should promote a pattern of United Nations financing that will avoid any future large-scale defects . The United States should also promote a vigorous program for collection of delinquencies on annual assessments .
 State to submit to Congress not later than January 31, 1963, report on long-term financing . Also instructed to submit report on steps taken by U.N. General Assembly on financing . U.S. must also submit report to Congress in January .
 Amended the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to sharply strengthen Federal safety controls on drugs . Authorized the standardization of drug names, and clarified and strengthened existing inspection authority .
 Authorized the President to reduce duties by 50 percent between July 1, 1962 and June 30, 1967 . Authorized to remove duties on entire categories of goods when the U.S. and members of the European Economic Community together accounted for 80 percent or more of the total free world trade
 Authorized $1118,550,000 for Federal and Federal-aid highways in fiscal 1964 and $1,165,000,000 in fiscal 1965 . Authorized for $1.118,500,000 to be spent on highways in 1964 and 1965 .
 In addition authorized supplemental funds for fiscal 1963 of $10 million for forest roads and $6 million for public lands highways . $850,000 to complete construction of Nicaragua's Rama Road, $32 million to complete . construction of the Inter-American Highway, and $800,000
 Authorized the President to name of Group of . incorporators to establish the Communications Satellite Corporation . Authorized . the Corporation to establish a private commercial communication system and to arrange for an initial stock offering .
 15 directors-three by the present, and six year to be elected annually by public stock holders and by communication carriers . Provided for the subsequent choice of 15 directors, three by the time the present .
 Gave the President broad responsibility for aiding the corporation in the rapid development of a Satellite System . Directed the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to provide satellite launching and others technical services on a reimbursable basis .