 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Cuba's request to place nuclear missiles on the island to deter future invasions . In response to the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961, the Soviet leader agreed to the request .
 An agreement was reached during a secret meeting between Khrushchev and Fidel Castro in July 1962 . Construction of a number of missile launch facilities was started later that summer .
 The 1962 midterm elections were under way in the U.S. and the White House denied charges that it was ignoring dangerous Soviet missiles 90 miles from Florida . The White House had denied charges .
 Air Force U-2 spy plane produced clear photographic evidence of medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic missile facilities . These missile preparations were confirmed when an Air Force .
 The United States established a military blockade to prevent further missiles from reaching Cuba . The U.S. established the blockade to stop further missiles reaching the island .
 After a long period of tense negotiations, an agreement was reached between U.S. President John F Kennedy and Khrushchev . The agreement was signed by U.K. President Kennedy in 1961 .
 Publicly, the Soviets would dismantle their offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union, subject to United Nations verification, in exchange for a United States public declaration and agreement never to invade Cuba again without direct provocation .
 The United States agreed to dismantle all U.S.-built Jupiter MRBMs, which had been deployed in Turkey and Italy against the Soviet Union . Secretly, the United States also agreed that it would dismantle all the Jupiter missiles . The Jupiter missiles were deployed in Italy and Turkey and
 All offensive missiles and Ilyushin Il-28 light bombers were withdrawn from Cuba in 1962 . The blockade was formally ended on November 20, 1962 .
 The negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union pointed out the necessity of a quick, clear, and direct communication line between Washington and Moscow . The U.S. and Soviet Union's negotiations pointed out a need for a quick communication line .
 A series of agreements sharply reduced U.S.–Soviet tensions during the following years . The agreements were made during the Cold War .
 Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba led to U.S. action against Soviet Union . U.N. action in response to Soviet missile deployment in Cuba . Missiles were reported in Cuba in the 1950s .
 October 23, " United States Imposes Arms Blockade on Cuba on Finding Offensive Missile Sites; Kennedy Ready for Soviet Showdown" 9.9. 9.10.10 . 9.11.11 . 11.9 .
 Khrushchev Suggests a Summit Meeting with the U.S. and Russia . Thant Bids United States and Russia Desist 2 Weeks . Khrushchchev suggested a summit meeting with the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev agreed to talks on Thant Plan, but not accepted by Kennedy . October 26, "Kennedy Agrees to Talks on Thants Plan, Khrushvich Accepts It; Blockade Goes On"" 9.9. 9.10.10 .
 October 27, "" United States Finds Cuba Speeding Build-Up of Bases, Warns of Further Action; United Nations Talks Open"" 9.9. 9.10.11.11 .
 October 28, "" United States Gets Soviet Offer to End Cuba Bases, Rejects Bid to Link It to Those in Turkey"" 9.9. 9. 9 . 9. 10. 10 . 10. 5. 5 .
 Kennedy Accepts Khrushchev Pledge to Remove Missiles Under United Nations Watch . Kennedy accepted Khrushchems' pledge to remove missiles from Cuba . Kennedy was the first president of the Soviet Union to reach an accord with the United States .
 Media representations 11 See, 12 Notes 13 References 14 Further reading 14. Media representations are based on images from the Internet .
 Such an involvement would also defy the Monroe Doctrine, a United States policy limiting U.S. involvement in European colonies and European affairs . The Monroe Doctrine held that the Western Hemisphere was in the United States sphere of influence .
 The failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961 was launched under President Kennedy by CIA-trained forces of Cuban exiles . The U.S. had been publicly embarrassed by the failed invasion .
 U.S. covert operations against Cuba continued in 1961 with the similarly unsuccessful Operation Mongoose . United States continued to engage in covert operations in Cuba .
 Khrushchev's impression of Kennedy's weakness was confirmed by the President's response during the Berlin Crisis of 1961, particularly to the building of the Berlin Wall . In addition to the Berlin crisis, Kennedy's response to the West Berlin Wall was confirmed .
 General Edward Lansdale described plans to overthrow the Cuban government in a top-secret report . The report was addressed to President Kennedy and officials involved with Operation Mongoose .
 When Kennedy ran for president in 1960, one of his key election issues was an alleged ""missile gap"" with the Soviets leading . One of Kennedy's key election themes was the alleged 'Missile gap' in 1960 .
 In fact, the United States led the Soviets by a wide margin that would only increase . The U.S. led the Soviet Union in the early years of the Cold War .
 Khrushchev increased the perception of a missile gap when he loudly boasted to the world that the USSR was building missiles ""like sausages"" whose numbers and capabilities were nowhere close to his assertions .
 The United States had a considerable advantage in total number of nuclear warheads at the time . The U.S. had the technology required for their accurate delivery .
 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was persuaded by the idea of placing Soviet intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba . Despite the misgivings of the Soviet Ambassador in Havana, Alexandr Ivanovich Alexeyev argued that Castro would not accept the deployment of these missiles .
 Khrushchev faced a strategic situation where the United States was perceived to have a ""splendid first strike" capability that put the Soviet Union at a huge disadvantage . The United States perceived to be having a 'splendied first strike'
 The poor accuracy and reliability of these missiles raised serious doubts about their effectiveness . The missiles were launched in the 1980s and 1990s, the U.S. government said .
 A newer, more reliable generation of ICBMs would only become operational after 1965 . The new generation would only be operational in the mid-'60s .
 These missiles could hit American allies and most of Alaska from Soviet territory . But not the contiguous 48 states of the U.S. The missiles could not be fired at the United States .
 Khrushchev wanted to bring West Berlin into the Soviet orbit . The West Berlin was part of the American/British/French-controlled democratic enclave within Communist East Germany . The Soviet missiles were deployed to Cuba .
 Khrushchev made West Berlin the central battlefield of the Cold War . For this reason, among others, West Berlin was a central battlefield .
 If the U.S. tried to bargain with the Soviets after becoming aware of the missiles, Khrushchev could demand trading the missiles for West Berlin . If the United States tried to trade the missiles with the Soviet Union, the missiles would go to West Berlin instead .
 Since Berlin was strategically more important than Cuba, the trade would be a win for Khrushchev . The trade would have been a victory for the U.S. since the war .
 Khrushchev was reacting in part to the threat of obsolescent Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles which the United States had installed in Turkey during April 1962 .
 The Cuban leadership had a strong expectation that the U.S. would invade Cuba again . They approved the idea of installing nuclear missiles in Cuba . The Cuban leaders approved the plan .
 Fidel Castro objected to missiles deployment that would have made him look like a Soviet puppet, but was persuaded that missiles in Cuba would be an irritant to the United States and help the interests of the entire socialist camp . However, according to another source, Fidel Castro objects to the missiles deployment
 Deployment would include short-range tactical weapons that would provide a ""nuclear umbrella"" for attacks upon the island . Further, the deployment would also provide a "nuclear umbrella" for attacks .
 Khrushchev felt that a U.S. invasion of Cuba was imminent . To lose Cuba would do great harm to the communist cause, especially in Latin America, he said . Like Castro, he felt that an invasion of the United States was imminent, he added .
 Khrushchev said he wanted to confront the Americans with more than words . The Soviets maintained tight secrecy, writing their plans longhand, which were approved by Rodion Malinovsky .
 All of the planning and preparation for transporting and deploying the missiles were carried out in the utmost secrecy . Only a very few were told the exact nature of the mission .
 Even the troops detailed for the mission were given misdirection, told they were headed for a cold region . They were outfitted with ski boots, fleece-lined parkas, and other winter equipment .
 Anadyr was also the name of a river flowing into the Bering Sea . The name of the capital of Chukotsky District and a bomber base in the region .
 All these were meant to conceal the program from both internal and external audiences . The program was meant to be hidden from the public, including from the outside .
 Specialists in missile construction under the guise of ""machine operators,"" ""irrigation specialists"" and ""agricultural specialists"" arrived in July .
 Marshal Sergei Biryuzov, chief of the Soviet Rocket Forces, led a survey team that visited Cuba . The Soviet Union visited Cuba in 1959 .
 He told Khrushchev that the missiles would be concealed and camouflaged by palm trees . The missiles would have been camouflaged with palm trees, he said .
 The Cuban leadership was further upset when in September the United States Congress approved United States Joint Resolution 230 . The resolution expressed Congress's resolve to prevent the creation of an externally supported military establishment .
 Cuba denounced a major military exercise in the Caribbean, PHIBRIGLEX-62, which Cuba denounced as a deliberate provocation . Cuba denounced the exercise as proof that the United States planned to invade Cuba . The U.S. announced the exercise on the same day .
 On September 11, the Soviet Union publicly warned that a U.S. attack on Cuba or on Soviet ships carrying supplies to the island would mean war . The Soviet leadership believed Kennedy would avoid confrontation and accept the missiles as a fait accompli .
 On September 7, Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin assured U.S. Ambassador to United Nations Adlai Stevenson that the USSR was supplying only defensive weapons to Cuba .
 The Soviet Union had no need or intention to introduce offensive nuclear missiles into Cuba . On September 11, the Soviet Union announced that it had no intention of introducing offensive missiles .
 As early as August 1962, the United States suspected the Soviets of building missile facilities in Cuba . Khrushchev told Kennedy that under no circumstances would surface-to-surface missiles be sent to Cuba . The U.S. suspected that the Soviets built missile facilities .
 Intelligence services gathered information about sightings by ground observers of Russian-built MiG-21 fighters and Il-28 light bombers . During that month, ground observers reported sightings of Russia-built fighters .
 On August 10, he wrote a memo to President Kennedy in which he guessed that the Soviets were preparing to introduce ballistic missiles into Cuba . The memo was sent to the president .
 With important Congressional elections scheduled for November, the Crisis became enmeshed in American politics . The crisis was the focus of American politics in the 1980s .
 On August 31, Senator Kenneth Keating warned on the Senate floor that the Soviet Union may be constructing a missile base in Cuba .
 General Curtis LeMay presented a pre-invasion bombing plan to Kennedy in September . LeMay charged the Kennedy Administration was covering up a major threat to the U.S. Air Force . The Cuban government complained to the United States government .
 The missile could deliver a megaton-class nuclear weapon . It was a single-stage, road-transportable, surface-launched, storable liquid propellant fueled missile that could .
 The missiles in Cuba allowed the Soviets to effectively target the majority of the continental United States . The planned arsenal was forty launchers .
 U.S. intelligence received countless reports, many of dubious quality or laughable . Most of the reports could be dismissed as describing defensive missiles .
 Large trucks passing through towns at night carrying very long canvas-covered cylindrical objects that could not make turns through towns without backing up and maneuvering .
 U.S. had been sending U-2 surveillance over Cuba since failed Bay of Pigs Invasion . U.2 surveillance had been on Cuba since the failed Bay Of Pigs invasion in 1961 .
 U-2 flights over Cuban airspace restricted by U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy on 10 September .
 During this period, no significant U-2 coverage was achieved over the interior of the island . During the period of the period, there was no significant coverage of the interior .
 At the end of September, Navy reconnaissance aircraft photographed the Soviet ship Kasimov with large crates on its deck . The crates were the size and shape of Il-28 light bomber fuselages .
 In September 1962, analysts noticed that Cuban surface-to-air missile sites were arranged in a pattern similar to those used by the Soviet Union to protect its ICBM bases . The DIA lobbied for the resumption of U-2 flights over the island .
 Due to pressure from the Defense Department, the authority was transferred to the Air Force . Although in the past the flights had been conducted by the CIA, the CIA had been involved .
 On October 15, the CIA's National Photographic Interpretation Center reviewed the U-2 photographs and identified objects that they interpreted as medium range ballistic missiles . President Obama notified .
 Oleg Penkovsky, a double agent in the GRU working for CIA and MI6, was identified by a Russian double agent working for the CIA . This identification was made, in part, on the strength of reporting provided by the double agent .
 Penkovsky provided technical and doctrinal details of Soviet missile regiments . He provided no direct reports of the Soviet missile deployments to Cuba . NPIC analysts correctly identified missiles on U-2 imagery .
 The CIA notified the Department of State and at 8:30 pm EDT, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy chose to wait until the next morning to tell the President . That evening, the CIA notified . The next morning, the President chose to tell him .
 President Kennedy tape recorded all of EXCOMM's proceedings . Sheldon M Stern, head of the Kennedy library has transcribed some of the proceedings .
 The United States had no plan in place because U.S. intelligence had been convinced that the Soviets would never install nuclear missiles in Cuba . The plan was based on a belief that the Soviet Union would not install missiles in the country .
 Offer Castro the choice of splitting with the Russians or being invaded . Offer Castro choice: Split with Russia or split with the U.S.
 This Game Tree models how the two actors would have considered their decisions . The Game Tree is based on the choices made by both actors and their actions .
 Kennedy also believed that United States allies would think of the United States as ""trigger-happy cowboys" who lost Berlin because they could not peacefully resolve the Cuban situation . Kennedy also thought that United Americans could think of the U.S. as "trigger happy cow
 President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara in EXCOMM meeting . ExCOMM meetings were held at the White House in Washington, D.C.
 The EXCOMM then discussed the effect on the strategic balance of power, both political and military . The ExCOMM also discussed the effects of the Russian-Ukrainian alliance .
 The United States already had approximately 5,000 strategic warheads,:261 while the Soviet Union had only 300 . The U.S. already had about 5,200 strategic warheads .
 Kennedy had explicitly promised the American people less than a month before the crisis that if Cuba should possess a capacity to carry out offensive actions against the United States, the U.S. would act . Kennedy had said in a speech that the United Cuba had a capacity to
 On October 18, President Kennedy met with Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrei Gromyko, who claimed the weapons were for defensive purposes only . The weapons were used in the Soviet Union .
 President did not reveal that he was already aware of the missile build-up . Not wanting to expose what he already knew, and wanting to avoid panicking the American public, he didn't reveal it .
 On October 22, 1962, a second helicopter crashed into the Gulf, that also was from HSS-2 stationed on the Essex . The second helicopter was also crashed in the Gulf .
 The details of the deaths of October 19, 1962 have never been provided to the families affected . The details have been never provided to those affected .
 There are numerous rumors that exist from bad storms, Soviet interference with the flight, or a one way suicide recon mission .
 Army units in the United States would have had trouble fielding mechanized and logistical assets . The U.S. Navy could not supply sufficient amphibious shipping to transport even a modest armored contingent .
 U.S. Navy P-2H Neptune of VP-18 flying over a Soviet cargo ship with crated Il-28s on deck during the Cuban Crisis .
 The Kennedy administration did not think that the USSR would be provoked to attack by a mere blockade . According to international law a blockade is an act of war, according to the Kennedy administration .
 Kennedy obtained approval of OAS for military action under hemispheric defense provisions of Rio Treaty . Since it would take place in international waters, Kennedy obtained the approval of the action .
 reservations about the plan continued to be voiced as late as the 21st . The paramount concern was that once the blockade was put into effect, the Soviets would rush to complete some of the missiles .
 U.S. could find itself bombing operational missiles were the blockade to fail to force Khrushchev to remove the missiles already on the island . The United States could now find itself .
 Ambassador Kohler briefed Chairman Khrushchev on the pending blockade and Kennedy's speech to the nation . In Moscow, he briefed the Chairman on the upcoming blockade .
 Before the speech, U.S. delegations met with Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, and French President Charles de Gaulle to brief them .
 Address on the Buildup of Arms in Cuba . Address on building up of the buildup of arms in the country .
 Clip is part of a new series of short films featuring Sir Alex Ferguson . You can download the clip or download a player to play the clip in your browser .
 The heavy cruiser USS Newport News was designated flagship for the blockade . The destroyer escort USS Leary was Newport News's destroyer escort .
 A cable drafted by George Ball to the U.S. Ambassador in Turkey and NATO and NATO notified them that they were considering making an offer to withdraw what the United States knew to be nearly obsolete missiles from Italy and Turkey in exchange for Soviet withdrawal from Cuba .
 Turkish officials replied that they would ""deeply resent"" any trade involving the U.S.'s missile presence in their country . Turkish officials said they would  resent any trade involved in the trade involving missiles .
 Walter Lippmann proposed the same thing in his syndicated column . Two days later, on the morning of October 25, he proposed the idea in his column .
 In West Germany, newspapers supported the U.S.'s response, contrasting it with the weak American actions in the region during the preceding months . West Germany's newspapers were supportive of the response .
 The photos were taken by the CIA, but they were later found to be authentic . The CIA accepted the validity of the photographs, but the photos were later rejected .
 Khrushchev warned that the U.S.'s ""outright piracy"" would lead to war . At the time, the crisis continued unabated, and on the evening of October 24, the Soviet news agency TASS broadcast a telegram to President Kennedy .
 Khrushchev sent a telegram to Kennedy which was received at 10:52 pm EDT . Said the Soviet Union views the blockade as ""an act of aggression" and their ships will be instructed to ignore it . However, this was followed by the telegram which said the blockade was
 Adlai Stevenson shows aerial photos of Cuban missiles to the United Nations . United States alert level raised in 1962 . U.S. alert level was raised in response to missile threat .
 B-47 medium bombers were dispersed to various military and civilian airfields, and made ready to take off, fully equipped, on 15 minutes' notice . For the only confirmed time in U.S. history, while B-52 bombers went on continuous airborne alert, the B-
 Twenty-three nuclear-armed B-52s were sent to orbit points within striking distance of the Soviet Union so that the latter might observe that the United States was serious .
 At 7:15 am EDT on October 25, the USS Essex and USS Gearing attempted to intercept the Bucharest but failed to do so . Blockade challenged at 7:30 am EDT .
 The tanker did not contain any military material, they allowed it through the blockade . The tanker was allowed through a blockade by the Turkish government .
 The commander of the blockade effort ordered the USS Joseph P Kennedy Jr. to intercept and board the Lebanese freighter Marucla . Later that day, at 5:43 pm, the commander ordered the . USS Kennedy Jr . to intercept the . freighter .
 The Marucla was cleared through the blockade after its cargo was checked . This took place the next day, and the blockade was lifted .
 At 5:00 pm EDT on October 25, William Clements announced that the missiles in Cuba were still actively being worked on . Clements: The missiles are still actively working on . The missiles will be deployed in Cuba .
 CIA report said there had been no slow-down at all . This report was later verified by a CIA report that suggested there was no slowdown .
 During the day, the Soviets responded to the blockade by turning back 14 ships presumably carrying offensive weapons . The blockade was the largest in the history of World War II .
 The next morning, October 26, Kennedy informed the EXCOMM that he believed only an invasion would remove the missiles from Cuba . Crisis stalemated . The next day, Kennedy told the EXcomM that an invasion was necessary .
 He was persuaded to give the matter time and continue with military and diplomatic pressure . However, he was persuaded that he would continue to press the issue . He eventually agreed to give up on the matter and give up .
 The USSR had shown no indication that they would back down and had made several comments to the contrary . The USSR showed no indication of backing down, despite several comments from the government .
 The U.S. was in the early stages of preparing for an invasion, along with a nuclear strike on the Soviet Union in case it responded militarily, which was assumed . The United States had no reason to believe otherwise and was preparing for invasion .
 At 1:00 pm EDT on October 26, John A Scali of ABC News had lunch with Aleksandr Fomin at Fomin's request .
 Fomin asked Scali to use his contacts to talk to his ""high-level friends" at the State Department to see if the U.S. would be interested in a diplomatic solution . Fomin noted that ""War seems about to break out"" and asked for the United States
 The deal would contain an assurance from the Soviet Union to remove the weapons under UN supervision . Castro would publicly announce that he would not accept such weapons in the future, in exchange for a public statement by the United States that it would never invade Cuba .
 The United States responded by asking the Brazilian government to pass a message to Castro that the United States would be ""unlikely to invade"" if the missiles were removed . The U.S. responded to the request by asking that the message be passed to Castro .
 Letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 26, 1962 . State Department started receiving a message that appeared to be written personally by the Soviet Union leader .
 The long letter took several minutes to arrive, and it took translators additional time to translate and transcribe it . The letter was signed by the president of the United States .
 S-75 Dvina with V-750V 1D missile on a launcher . I have no doubt they would lose such a war. —Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara .
 Castro sent a telegram to Khrushchev that appeared to call for a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the U.S. in case of attack . Castro was convinced that an invasion of Cuba was soon at hand, and on October 26, he sent the telegram .
 Castro also ordered all anti-aircraft weapons in Cuba to fire on any U.S. aircraft . In the past they had been ordered to fire only on groups of two or more . The Cuban president also ordered anti-US aircraft to be fired on any aircraft .
 At 6:00 am EDT on October 27, the CIA delivered a memo reporting that three of the four missile sites at San Cristobal and two sites at Sagua la Grande appeared to be fully operational .
 The Cuban military is under order not to initiate action unless attacked . They also noted that the Cuban military continued to organize for action, although they were under orders not to .
 At 9:00 am EDT on October 27, Radio Moscow began broadcasting a message from Khrushchev . The message was broadcast by Radio Moscow at 9:30 am EDT .
 The message offered a new trade, that the missiles on Cuba would be removed in exchange for the removal of the Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey . The deal would see the missiles removed from Cuba removed from Turkey and Italy .
 He suggested relaying this information to the USSR via U Thant at the United Nations . He also noted that they had not made the USSR aware of the blockade line .
 Ettore Bernabei, the general manager of RAI-TV, gave the message to one of his most trusted friends . Arthur M Schlesinger Jr. was the president of the Italian broadcaster RAI TV .
 The United States regarded the Jupiter missiles as obsolescent and already supplanted by the Polaris nuclear ballistic submarine missiles . Unknown to the Soviets, the U.S. regarded Jupiter missiles obsolescent . The Jupiter missiles were already replaced by Polaris nuclear missiles .
 At approximately 12:00 pm EDT, the aircraft was struck by a S-75 Dvina SAM missile launched from Cuba . The missile was fired from Cuba at a Cuban airbase .
 The decision to fire the missile was made locally by an undetermined Soviet commander acting on his own authority . The stress in negotiations between the USSR and the United States intensified .
 At 4:00 pm EDT, Kennedy recalled members of EXCOMM to the White House . He ordered that a message immediately be sent to U Thant asking the Soviets to suspend work on the missiles while negotiations were carried out .
 General Maxwell Taylor delivered the news that the U-2 had been shot down . During this meeting, general Maxwell Taylor gave the news of the shooting .
 Emissaries sent by both Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to meet at the Yenching Palace Chinese restaurant in the Cleveland Park neighborhood of Washington D.C. on October 27 .
 Kennedy suggested they take Khrushchev's offer to trade away the missiles . Kennedy suggested that they take the offer away from the missiles.
 Robert Kennedy had been meeting with the Soviet Ambassador in Washington to discover whether these intentions were genuine . Unknown to most members of the EXCOMM, Robert Kennedy met with the ambassador in Washington .
 The new plan called for the President to ignore the latest message and instead to return to Khrushchev's earlier one . The new message was issued by the President .
 Kennedy was initially hesitant, feeling that Khrushchev would no longer accept the deal because a new one had been offered, but Llewellyn Thompson argued that he might accept it anyway . Kennedy was reluctant to accept the offer, but Thompson argued .
 White House Special Counsel and Adviser Ted Sorensen and Robert Kennedy left the meeting and returned 45 minutes later with a draft letter to the White House . The White House says the letter will be signed by the president .
 The group argued that the letter should be underscored with an oral message to Ambassador Dobrynin stating that if the missiles were not withdrawn, military action would be used to remove them .
 Dean Rusk added one proviso, that no part of the language of the deal would mention Turkey, but there would be an understanding that the missiles would be removed ""voluntarily"" in the immediate aftermath .
 Fomin claimed that an invasion was only hours away . He urged Scali to tell the State Department that no treachery was intended . Fomin stated that a response to the United States message was expected from Khrushchev .
 U.S. establishment understood that ignoring the second offer and returning to the first put Khrushchev in a terrible position . Within the United States establishment, it was well understood .
 Robert Kennedy later recalled the mood, ""We had not abandoned all hope, but what hope there was now rested with Khrushchev's revising his course within the next few hours"
 Robert Kennedy noted there was little expectation it would be accepted . However, as Robert Kennedy said, there were little expectations it was accepted .
 The decision to launch these required agreement from all three officers on board, but one of them, Vasili Arkhipov, objected and so the launch was narrowly averted . The decision was made by the three officers involved in the launch, but the decision was not reached .
 U.S. U-2 spy plane made accidental ninety-minute overflight of Soviet Union's far eastern coast . U.2 made accidental overflight on the same day as U.K. made unauthorized overflight to Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev also received a letter from Castro – what is now known as the Armageddon Letter – interpreted as urging the use of nuclear force in the event of an attack on Cuba . The Armageddon Letter was interpreted by Castro as urging use of nukes against Cuba .
 On October 27, after much deliberation between the Soviet Union and Kennedy's cabinet, Kennedy secretly agreed to remove all missiles set in southern Italy and in Turkey, the latter on the border of the Soviet Soviet Union, in exchange for Khrushchev removing all missiles in Cuba .
 There is some dispute as to whether removing the missiles from Italy was part of the secret agreement . Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs that it was . When the crisis had ended McNamara gave the order to dismantle the missiles in both Italy and Turkey .
 At 9:00 am EST, a new message from Khrushchev was broadcast on Radio Moscow . The message was broadcast at 9 a.m. EST on October 28, 1962 .
 Remove the 15 Jupiters in Turkey and Russia will remove the rockets from Cuba . Russia will also remove the 15 rockets from Turkey and remove the missiles from Cuba. Russia and Turkey will remove them from Turkey .
 The Soviet premier had made the offer in a public statement for the world to hear . The offer was made in public statement to the world .
 Kennedy had deployed the Jupiters in March of the year, causing a stream of angry outbursts from the Soviet premier . Kennedy's deployment of the Soviet Union forces in March caused an angry outburst from the premier .
 President Kennedy addressed the United States via radio and television broadcasts regarding the dismantlement process of the Soviet R-12 missile bases . The bases were located in the Caribbean region .
 On November 22, 1962, Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan told Castro that those rockets with the nuclear warheads were being removed too . However, the Soviets changed their minds, fearing possible future Cuban militant steps, and the rockets were removed .
 The last United States missiles were disassembled by April 24, 1963, and were flown out of Turkey soon after . Robert Kennedy informally proposed that the Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be removed ""within a short time after this crisis"
 Kennedy-Khrushchev Pact effectively strengthened Castro's position in Cuba, guaranteeing that the United States would not invade Cuba . The practical effect of the pact was that the U.S. would not attack Cuba .
 The withdrawal of Jupiter missiles from NATO bases in Southern Italy and Turkey was not made public at the time . Khrushchev appeared to have lost the conflict and become weakened . It is possible that the Soviets had no intention of resorting to nuclear war if they were out-gunned by
 The perception was that Kennedy had won the contest between the superpowers and Khrushchev had been humiliated . Kennedy had the perception that he had beaten the Soviet Union leader .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev took every step to avoid full conflict despite the pressures of their governments . This is not the case as both sides avoided full conflict in the early 1960s .
 Khrushchev held power for another two years . The nuclear-armed Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile was launched in 1962 . Khrushchchev was still in power at the end of the war .
 The United States secretly agreed to withdraw these missiles from Italy and Turkey . The U.S. agreed to pull them from Italy, Turkey and Italy .
 Khrushchev went to Kennedy thinking that the crisis was getting out of hand . Kennedy thought it was too soon to get out of control . Kennedy was trying to keep the crisis under control .
 The Soviets were seen as retreating from circumstances that they had started . The Soviets retreated from the circumstances that had been started .
 Khrushchev's fall from power two years later was in part because of his ineptitude in precipitating the crisis in the first place . The Politburo was embarrassed at both his eventual concessions to the U.S. and his incompetence .
 Cuba perceived the outcome as a betrayal by the Soviets, given that decisions on how to resolve the crisis had been made exclusively by Kennedy and Khrushchev . The outcome of the crisis was seen as the result of a decision by the Soviet Union .
 This caused Cuban–Soviet relations to deteriorate for years to come . On the other hand, Cuba continued to be protected from invasion .
 DeFCON 3 status was returned to DEFCON 4 on November 20, 1962 . The worldwide U.S. Forces DEFCon 3 status returned to DeFCon 4 status on November 21, 1962.
 Major Anderson's body was returned to the U.S. and he was buried with full military honors in South Carolina . Major Anderson was the first U.2 pilot to die in a U.K. mission .
 MATS Boeing C-135B Stratolifter delivering ammunition to Guantanamo Bay Naval Base stalled and crashed on approach on October 23 . Seven crew died when the plane crashed in a crash on approach to the base .
 Historian says Khrushchev pressured Castro to accept missiles . Schlesinger Jr. told National Public Radio in 2002 that Castro did not want the missiles, but Khruschev had pressured Castro .
 Schlesinger believed that when the missiles were withdrawn, Castro was angrier with Khrushchev than he was with Kennedy . Castro was not completely happy with the idea but the Cuban National Directorate of the Revolution accepted them to protect Cuba against U.S. attack .
 In early 1992, it was confirmed that Soviet forces in Cuba had received tactical nuclear warheads for artillery rockets and Il-28 bombers . Although Castro was infuriated by Khrushchev, he planned on striking the U.S. with remaining missiles .
 Castro stated he would have recommended their use if the U.S. invaded Cuba . Castro stated that he would not have recommended the use of the weapons despite knowing Cuba would be destroyed .
 An argument broke out among three officers on the B-59, including submarine captain Valentin Savitsky, political officer Ivan Semonovich Maslennikov, and Deputy brigade commander Captain Vasili Arkhipov .
 Khrushchev determined that because the Americans had not listed the missiles on their list of demands, keeping them in Cuba would be in the Soviet Union's interests . The U.S. did not list their demands on the list, but Khrushche decided to keep them .
 Anastas Mikoyan was tasked with the negotiations with Castro over the missile transfer deal . The deal was designed to prevent a breakdown in the relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 While in Havana, Mikoyan witnessed the mood swings and paranoia of Castro . Castro was convinced that Moscow had made the agreement with the U.S. at the expense of Cuba's defense .
 Mikoyan convinced Castro that despite Moscow's desire to help, it would be in breach of an unpublished Soviet law to transfer the missiles permanently into Cuban hands and provide them with independent nuclear deterrent .
 He alerted the citizens of the United States that the Soviet Union had broken its previous promises . The Soviet Union was building missile delivery equipment in Cuba, he said .
 He told the citizens these missiles would have range up to 2,000 miles . He told them they would be able to travel up to a distance of up to two,000 .
 President Kennedy directly attacked the Soviet Union in his speech . President Kennedy blamed them for starting the current crisis . Kennedy also blamed the Soviets for the collapse of Yugoslavia .
 Kennedy further stated that any missile fired into the western hemisphere would be seen as an attack against the United States . Kennedy also stated that an attack on the U.S. would have been seen as a missile attack . Kennedy: Any missile fired at the western part of the world would be
 The Soviet Union challenged the United States's blockade of any weapons being shipped to Cuba . The U.S. refused to allow the Soviet Union to send weapons to Cuba in the 1950s .
 They asserted that Cuba could make any defensive arrangements they wanted . They said it was Cuba's right to make any arrangements they want .
 Moscow warned President Kennedy that the U.S. naval quarantine could lead to thermonuclear war . Moscow would prepare suitable measures to enhance its combat measures, Moscow said .
 Moscow asked the United Nations Security Council to meet and discuss the violation of the United States Charter and the U.S.'s threat to peace with its blockade . Moscow has asked the UNSC to meet to discuss the violations of the Charter .
 Moscow called United States Ambassador Foy D Kohler and gave him a 2,500 statement in response to President Kennedy's speech on the day prior . Moscow called the U.S. Ambassador to give him the statement .
 It informed the United States that they would resist dismantling missiles in Cuba . It also issued a ""serious warning"" to the U.S. The U.N. warned that it would not dismantle missiles in the country .
 There was speculation that the Russians were trying to approach the blockade first with a ship carrying innocent cargo . The U.S. administration refused to comment on the matter .
 Khrushchev's call for a meeting suggested that Moscow was willing to negotiate . The diversion of Russian ships and the call for talks suggested that the talks could begin soon .
 Sources inside the Kennedy Administration hinted that the U.S. was prepared to consider negotiations with the Soviet Union if the United States retained freedom of action . The Kennedy Administration said the United. States was prepared .
 President Kennedy agreed to talks between the U.S. and U. Thant acting Secretary General on arrangements that could be made for the Cuban crisis . Khrushchev accepted the plan, but the Cuban blockade continued .
 Khrushchev also accepted Mr Thant's negotiation proposals where the U.S. would suspend its blockades of Cuba for three weeks if the Soviet Union stopped shipping missiles to Cuba . The United States also agreed to suspend blockades in three weeks .
 At the United Nations' meeting both the U.S. and Soviet Union ambassadors relayed their acceptance of a meeting in the interests of peace . The United States and the Soviet Union agreed to a meeting .
 President Kennedy agreed to meet with Mr Thant, but did not mention to the United States's people the call for the temporary suspension of the U.S. blockade .
 The Administration stated that this progress must be stopped immediately . The Administration said it would not allow it to continue .
 Khrushchev agreed to temporarily divert all Russian ships away from the United States blockade surrounding Cuba . U Thant had gotten Premier Khruschev to agree to divert ships from the blockade .
 President Kennedy issued a statement to Mr Thant stating that the American ships would do everything they could to avoid all contact with Russian ships outside the blockade zone .
 President Kennedy revealed Khrushchev had offered an acceptable solution for the Cuban crisis . President Kennedy said they would pull away from the Cuban bases .
 President Kennedy called for Khrushchev to stand by an offer made in a private negotiations session that happened over night . President Kennedy wrote to the Soviet Union in a letter to the Soviets .
 This offer would remove all the Soviet missiles from Cuba under the United Nations supervision . The U.N. would remove the missiles under the supervision of the U.S.
 President Kennedy ignored Khrushchev's proposal to eliminate all Soviet missile bases in Cuba if the U.S. removed all of its missile bases . Kennedy ignored a proposal from Premier Khruschev to eliminate Soviet missile sites in Cuba .
 President Kennedy offered to halt its blockade if the U.N. were to oversee the removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . In an effort to persuade Premier Khrushchev to work with his offer, he offered to stop the blockade .
 Premier Khrushchev pledged to have the Soviet Union stop work on missile cites in Cuba and to remove them and ship them back to Soviet Union while under inspection by United Nations representatives . The United Nations inspectors inspected the missile cites and ordered them removed .
 The American popular media, especially television, made heavy use of the events of the missile crisis and both fictional and documentary forms . The U.S. popular media used the events in a fictional or documentary form .
 Sheldon Stern finds that a half century later there are still many ""misconceptions, half-truths, and outright lies" that have shaped media versions of what happened in the White House during those harrowing two weeks . Sheldon Stern: "There were still many misconceptions, half truths
 According to William Cohn, television programs are typically the main source used by the American public to know about and interpret the past . Cohn: TV programs are used to inform the public about events in the past and present .
 Soviet media proved somewhat disorganized as it was unable to generate a coherent popular history . The Soviet media was disorganized in the Soviet media as it struggled to create a coherent history .
 One contradiction pervaded the Soviet media campaign was between the pacifistic rhetoric of the peace movement that emphasizes the horrors of nuclear war, versus the militancy of the need to prepare Soviets for war .
 Thirteen Days, Robert F Kennedy's account of the crisis, was released in 1969 . It became the basis for numerous films and documentaries .
 The music video for My Trigger by Miike Snow is based loosely on the crisis . My Trigger is based on the events surrounding the crisis in Ukraine .
 McNamara mistakenly dates the shooting down of USAF Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 on October 26 . McNamara also mistakenly dates shooting of Major Anderson's aircraft .
 The Kennedys Thirteen Days RFK Bobby RFK Must Die . Ethel Skakel Kathleen Kennedy Kathleen Kennedy Joseph P Kennedy Joseph F Kennedy Jr. RFK must die . RFK: "RFK Must Die"
 David Kennedy Jr. Joseph P Kennedy Sr. Joe Kennedy Jr., Jr. Joe P Kennedy III, Jr. John Kennedy Jr.'s father, Joe Kennedy Sr., died at age 50 . Michael Kennedy was the Kennedy family's first president .
 Content is available under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike license . Use this license to help people around the world share your photos and videos .