 Republicans nominated Nixon Former Vice President as well as communisthunter 2. 2. Nixon nominated Nixon as President of the United States in 1972 .
 Kennedy asked Lyndon B Johnson, a Senator from Texas, to be his Vice President 3. Kennedy asked LBJ to be Vice President . Kennedy nominated Kennedy Kennedy for the presidency .
 A televised debate is believed to have made the difference in the election, in which Kennedy “looked’t better than Nixon 4.4 . A debate debate is thought to have helped make the difference between Kennedy and Nixon .
 Kennedy first ran for a seat in the House of Representatives . He was reelected two times 3 times . Kennedy was elected to the Senate in 1994 .
 In 1952, Kennedy decided to run for the Senate in 1952 . Kennedy’s Administration 1. B Kennedy was a member of the Senate .
 He also secured the passage of the Trade Expansion Act which cut tariff rates up to 50% 3.3.5.5 . He secured the . passage of . the Trade . Expansion Act .
 Kennedy and McNamara pushed a policy of flexible response . They wanted to have a variety of options ready to apply to any potential situation that arose . This did not mean adding more nuclear weapons .
 He was the first president to ask Congress to approve money for the space program . He asked for more than $22 billion for Project Apollo, which had the goal of landing an American man on the moon before the end of the decade .
 "Concerned with Cold War issues and wanted to continue the policy of containment 7.7. Concerned with Cold . War issues," she said .
 Historically, Vietnam was first controlled by the Chinese, the French, and the Japanese . France controlled Vietnam again in the post-WWII era . France struggled to maintain influence over Vietnam .
 Geneva Conference declared a cease-fire and spilt Vietnam at the 17th parallel into North and South aa. The Geneva conference declared a ceasefire and ended the conflict .
 Because they wanted to prevent the spread of communism in Vietnam due to the Cold War and the domino theory B Vietnam 1. Vietnam 1 . Because they . wanted to . prevent the . spread of . communism in . Vietnam .
 Eisenhower advised Kennedy to advance the plans for an invasion of Cuba . The plan was to invade Cuba through the Bay of Pigs 2. Just before Eisenhower left office he broke diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 The U.S. planned to land CIA trained and armed Cuban exiles in Cuba in an attempt to overthrow Castro’s government . The Bay of Pigs invasion was a disaster for which Kennedy took full responsibility for which he took responsibility for .
 Hopes of ‘thawing’ the Cold War were dashed by Khrushchev’s threat that the Soviets would conclude a peace treaty with East Germany and thus cut off Western access to West Berlin . The Berlin Wall 1. E Berlin Wall was built in 1961 and
 The East Germans constructed the Berlin Wall with help from the Soviets . The wall was to prevent the emigration of East Germans to West Germany . This was not how the Soviets advertised their reason for constructing the wall .
 A major Cold War confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union—closest we ever were to nuclear war 2.0.0 . The United States and Soviet Union faced each other in the Cold War era .
 Following the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Soviet Union increased its support of Castro’s regime . In the summer of 1962, Khrushchev installed ballistic missiles in Cuba 3.5 years later .
 President Kennedy declared that any missile launched from Cuba would warrant a full-scale retaliatory attack by the United States against the Soviet Union . Kennedy imposed a naval blockade/quarantine on Cuba .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles and dismantle the missile sites . Kennedy agreed to end the naval quarantine of Cuba (and…remove some missiles from Turkey) 6. Kennedy also agreed to remove some of the missiles in Turkey .
 The United States and Soviets could speak to each other if any future crises were to occur . Led to the development of the “hotline” where the U.S. and Soviet Union could speak . G Other Programs 1.
 The Supreme Court had ruled in 1954 that segregation in public schools would no longer be permitted . Many schools, especially in southern states, did not obey this decision . There were also still still racial segregation on buses, in restaurants, movie theaters, and other public places .
 Interracial group of CORE members organized a Freedom Ride on buses traveling through the South . Riders encountered opposition in Alabama as they were attacked and their bus was torched .
 The NAACP and SNCC focused on Albany, Georgia to continue nonviolent resistance and the sit-in movement . E Martin Luther King, Jr. was assassinated at the hands of the NAACP in 1968 .
 Birmingham, Alabama was also a focus of the Civil Rights Movement . King was arrested here and wrote the very famous “Letter from Birmingham Jail” 2.
 Kennedy pressed Congress for civil rights legislation to establish equality for blacks . F March on Washington 1.1.1 . Kennedy pushed Congress for legislation establishing equality .
 This brought Lyndon B Johnson, an entirely different man, into the White House . B Johnson as President 1.1.1 .
 He had risen through the party ranks to become a polished professional negotiator by the time he was Kennedy’s Vice President .
 He literally got right in his opponents’ faces to discuss key issues . Famous for using what was called the “Johnson Treatment,” in the Senate .
 As a former Senate Majority Leader Johnson was a skilled legislator and developed a good relationship with Congress . Johnson was also a skilled politician and had a successful career in the Senate .
 D. Johnson’s Domestic Programs—The Great Society 1. Johnson is easily elected . Johnson was easily elected to the post in 1964 .
 The book The Other America brought up the issue of poverty (40 million Americans were in poverty) 2. Johnson declared a “war on poverty” 2.
 His domestic programs and policies became known as the Great Society . Think of it as an attempt at a “New Deal” in the 1960s . His programs focused on education, medical care for the elderly, immigration reforms, and civil rights 3 .
 The Higher Education Act and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 provided federal aid to schools . Head Start was developed for young children . The Child Nutrition Act added breakfast to school lunch programs . The Education Act was passed in 1965 .
 In February 1964, Johnson moved another Kennedy tax cut through Congress: $10 billion tax cut . This helped increase consumer spending and GNP soared 6.6% .
 2. Sought to continue what Kennedy had started although previously he had not supported the civil rights movement 2. He had previously been opposed to the movement . He had not been a supporter of the movement for years .
 One of the first pieces of legislation that Johnson pushed through Congress was the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . It banned racial discrimination in public accommodations in the U.S. Also outlawed discrimination based on color, nationality, religion, and gender .
 A New Direction in the Fight for Civil Rights A From Nonviolence to Violence 1. A New direction in the fight for civil rights . A From nonviolence to violence 1.1.
 Malcolm X was more forceful than King and felt it was time for African Americans to stand on their own feet and defend themselves against white domination . He popularized the Nation of Islam (and the idea of black nationalism, separatism, and self-improvement) ii. More and more
 Blacks should do things for themselves rather than rely on the charity of white politicians bb . Blacks should not rely on white politicians for their charity, bb says .
 By the mid 1960s, racial tensions had gone beyond sit-ins and Freedom Rides 2 . By the time they were at the height of the civil rights movement, tensions were high .
 A combination of a lack of rights, poverty, and unemployment led to violence 3.3.5% violence . A lack of human rights, unemployment, and lack of political will lead to violence .
 Earl Warren was chief justice of the Supreme Court from 1953-1969 . Considered impactful as the John Marshall Court was . Decision focused on protecting individual rights 2.
 The was became “Americanized’ in 1965 when United States ground troops arrived in Vietnam . By June 1965 75,000 United States troops were in Vietnam 4.5 million Americans were in the country .
 The U.S. fought a war of attrition in an effort to wear down the enemy by killing as many men as possible . The terrain made it difficult to find the Viet Cong and led the United States to fight it .
 By 1966 there were approximately 400,000 U.S. soldiers in Vietnam and this number would reach 500,000 by 1968 . By 1968 6.7 million American troops were in Vietnam . 6.5 million Americans were killed in Vietnam in 1966 .
 Nasty chemicals were used during the war such as napalm and Agent Orange 7 . Agent Orange was used in Vietnam during the Vietnam War .
 The war mad LBJ extremely unpopular as the United States became more and more involved . He decided not to run for reelection in 1968—that is how bad it was .
 Demonstrations, marches, and even some civil rights leaders spoke out against the war 3 . Civil rights leaders speak out against war 3.
 The war had gone on too long, cost too much money, and caused too many deaths 4.5 million people . War had gone too long and cost too many money, it had caused too much .
 Students for a Democratic Society protested heavily against the war . They believed in a participatory democracy in which people take part in making decisions that affect their lives .
 Those that practiced nonconformity were a part of the counterculture 2.0.0 . Those that performed non-conformities were a bit of the 'counterculture 2'
 The most prevalent group were the hippies . They focused on ways of achieving personal fulfillment and rejected traditional elements of life . Wore flowered or unusual clothing many used marijuana or LSD .
 Betty Friedan wrote The Feminine Mystique which brought equal pay for equal work to the forefront . It also focused on the “problem that had no name” Women felt unfulfilled as housewives and their husbands did not understand this at all . Women felt that their husbands