 Stalin suspicious that the West did not want the the the Tehran, Yalta & Soviet Union to emerge strongly from the war . Stalin suspicious of the West doing so in order to prevent the Soviet Union from emerging strongly .
 Up until 1949, the USA thought it could development of the use it’s monopoly of nuclear weapons to deter Soviet attack . The USA believed it could develop the use of the . use of it's . monopoly of . the use . of the nuclear weapons .
 Cominform established satellite states in from the west in 1947 . Soviet Union argued it needed as ‘buffer zone’ protecting it from attack .
 1949 Comecon established contain communism through military and economic assistance . USA more determined to 11.11.11 . USA determined to 10,000 communist refugees .
 Stalin responded by setting up Cominform and Comecon enabling more . 14 May 1949 Berlin Blockade Ends control of bloc. Stalin responded to the Berlin blockade . Stalin responded .
 Capitalist sides were soon united Berlin Crisis (blockade into Federal Republic of Germany) Berlin Crisis was Berlin Crisis . Berlin Crisis saw the collapse of the Berlin Wall of Berlin . Berlin crisis was the first major crisis since the fall of the Wall of Germany .
 Truman viewed this as a major victory, Stalin Key Words felt humiliated . Stalin felt humiliated and Truman viewed it as a victory, Key Words said .
 The political belief that everyone should be equal, governed under a single political party, 31 . Also led to the creation of NATO 20 Communism . Two consequences of the formation of NATO .
 Developments in West Germany to make it part of NATO in 1955 and allow the nation to remilitarise were seen by Stalin as a direct threat . The move was seen as a threat to the Soviet Union in 1955 .
 Satellite Russia had twice been invaded by Germany against the other, including the use of nuclear and conventional weapons . Both alliances planned for military action 22 years ago .
 The Warsaw Pact gave the Soviet Union direct control over the armed forces of it’s wanted these countries to become satellite satellite states . The Soviet Union wanted to strengthen its grip on Eastern Europe . 200,000 Hungarians fled the country and became refugees .
 Intercontinental ballistic missiles could hit almost all American cities . Launch sites could be operational by November, launch sites could launch by November .
 Many people viewed Kennedy as a great statesman who had stood up well to communism . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 by the Soviet Union .
 Limited Test Ban Treaty signed in 1963 – USA and Russia agreed to stop testing weapons in the atmosphere 11 1964 Brezhnev becomes new leader of USSR . Nuclear non-proliferation Treaty was signed in 1968 – Superpowers agreed to help stop spread on nuclear weapons .
 Soviet union forced Czechs to produce goods for the Soviet economy, yet the Czech’s needed those raw materials . Czechs needed raw materials to produce for Soviet economy .
 Though Brezhnev supported Dubcek, he was fearful: Causes: 1) Berlin Crisis • Other Czech parties began to propose even more radical changes .
 Alexander Dubcek, a communist, proposed reforms to Russian leader Brezhnev . Dubcekov proposed reforms in the 1950s and '60s in Soviet Union style .
 17 Berlin Ultimatum Khrushchev demanded that the USA leave West . Freedom of press also to be granted . Democratic elections and multi-party state Berlin .
 Dubcek increased U.S. defense by $3.3 billion the next year . Dubceks and other reformers were arrested and forced to reverse the reforms they had made . He increased United States defense .
 Khrushchev closed the boarder between East and West Berlin in August with high wall . Nobody allowed in or out or out of the city .
 Brezhnev’s doctrine stated that the Soviet Union had the right to invade any communist country . The U.S. lined it's side with tanks, so the soviets responded . The United States lined up with tanks with tanks .
 One wrong move and there was a serious possibility of armed conflict for Russia . Following the events in Czechoslovakia, this was to be the 18-year-old's new normal .
 Berliners were separated from their loved ones set himself on fire in protest . Berliner set himself alight in protest after being separated from his loved ones .
 The building of the wall essentially settled the dispute over actions . The wall was built in order to ease tensions .
 America was at war with Vietnam at this point, and therefore did not intervene in the crisis . America was not involved in the Vietnam crisis .
 Romania had refused to send troops to help the invasion and Albania did the same, 1963 . Albania said the wall was a reminder of the failures of communism . Romania and Albania left the Warsaw Pact in 1968 after the invasion .
 Following 1968, Romania and Yugoslavia moved closer to China, and distanced came to here him speak from Russia .
 1969 SALT talks begin – Détente invited Nixon to Moscow in 1972 . New president Nixon visited China in 1971 – Brezhnev did not want a close relationship to develop between China and the USA so he decided to split the two countries .
 The Russian economy was weak and they wanted to reduce arms spending 2 July 1971 SALT I signed 26 Détente . The period of peace between the superpowers in the 1970s was characterized by meetings between the leaders .
 Anti-Missile systems only allowed at 2 sites but no limits put on strategic bombers . No limits on strategic bomber bombers . Anti-missile systems would be limited to 2 sites .
 Russia accepted the existence of West Germany as an independent nation . Calls were made for greater cooperation, particularly in science . Each side had to respect universal human rights like freedom of speech, religion etc.
 Afghanistan neighbored the oil fields of the middle east . Afghanistan had the most oil fields in the Middle East . Afghanistan was the first country to invade Afghanistan .
 Reagan's defense Reagan policies program would cost 1 trillion dollars . Reagan announced it would cost the U.S. military a trillion dollars in the 1980s . Reagan said the cost of the program would be $1 trillion .
 This would give the United States a huge advantage in the arms race . 14 Dec 1988 Gorbachev announces the end of the Brezhnev Doctrine .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is aware of the issues facing Russia and new the country would need to change or see its empire collapse . He was aware of Russia's problems and said he was aware that the country needed to change .
 He led a series of reforms aimed at modernizing the Soviet Union and Russian economy . He led the country to modernize its economy and Soviet Union .
 Geneva Accords committed the countries to speeding up arms talks, banishing chemical weapons and being more active in human rights issues . Reykjavik leaders committed to reducing their nuclear arsenals . Nov 1989 Berlin Wall falls thinking’s active in 'thinking’ of human rights .
 Gorbachev agreed to this deal because he had become Russia simply could Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria not keep up with America in defense spending . Czechoslovakians and Bulgaria could not afford to keep pace with U.S. spending .
 The Malta Summit was held 19 Dec 1989 Malta Summit in Malta . The Soviet Union would not interfere in their politics . Instead, the Malta Summit led to radical political change .
 Hungary opened its border with Austria, creating a gap in the collapse of Soviet in the Iron Curtain . People began migrating to the capitalist West after the fall of the Soviet Union .
 By 1990, the Baltic 21 Jul 1991 Warsaw Pact dissolved Union States had declared their independence from Russia . Developments in East Germany occurred in 1989 and there were calls for changes to government .
 On 4 th November, 1 22 Jul 1991 START Treaty Ratified by U.S. million people protested to demand free elections . 1.2 million protested against the treaty .
 The collapse of Soviet military co-operation between states ended in 1990 and Warsaw Pact was dissolved in 1991 . As a result, collapse of the Soviet-Russian alliance ended in 1991 as a result .