 Use the chart below to list the different proxy wars fought by the U.S. and the Soviet Union . As you read the chart, use the chart to show the history of the proxy wars .
 The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide . Lesson 3: Superpowers also affected ‘hot’ wars, or those that actually involved fighting .
 World War II had destroyed European supremacy among the nations of the world . World War I had destroyed the continent's supremacy among nations .
 As the Cold War conflict grew stronger, European nations were divided into two armed camps . European countries were divided between the two sides of the war .
 They were forced to depend upon one or the other of these two major powers . The British Empire is now the world's most powerful state of power .
 The rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union brought the world to the brink of nuclear war . The U.S. and Soviet Union fought to avoid nuclear war in the Cold War .
 These two nations seemed to hold the survival of the world in their hands . The two nations were seen as holding the world's survival in their own hands .
 The United States and the Soviet Union fought a series of proxy wars in the Cold War . The U.S. and Soviet Union were engaged in a war of proxy war .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union were armed with powerful nuclear arsenals . Both the U.S. and Soviet Union had powerful nuclear weapons arsenals.
 Both nations were willing to support opposing sides in local wars in other countries . However, both nations supported opposing sides of local wars .
 The two nations considered this support as part of the ongoing struggle between their two worldviews . The two countries considered it part of an ongoing struggle .
 The United States began with NATO in Europe and continued to build alliances in other parts of the world . The U.S. has been involved in NATO operations in Europe, Africa and elsewhere .
 The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization was formed to stop Communist aggression in the East . It was formed in response to Communist aggression .
 Central Treaty Organization included Turkey, Iraq, Iran, Pakistan, Great Britain, and the United States . The Central Treaty Organisation was formed in 1953 .
 The Soviet Union and the United States sent military support to prevent the other side from expanding its influence . The Soviets and the U.S. were involved in the fight against the West .
 Also, the Cold War proxy conflict on the small island of Cuba almost turned into a major nuclear war . Also, also, the 1950s proxy war on the Cuban island almost turned to a major war .
 Class: Date: The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide: Lesson 3 . Lesson: "Lesson 3"
 U.S. President Harry S Truman saw this as yet another example of Communist aggression and expansion . Truman saw it as an example of the Communist aggression against the United States .
 President Obama gained the approval of the United Nations and sent troops to repel or force back, the North Korean invaders . The U.S. troops were sent back to North Korea in 1953 .
 Eisenhower adopted a policy of massive retaliation, or fighting back in a big way, in the mid-1950s . As a result, the administration of President Dwight D Eisenhower adopted the policy of fighting back .
 President Eisenhower explained as the reason for this that the freedom at risk in Asia was as important as the freedom people had in the West . President Eisenhower said that Asia's freedom was at risk as the West's in the world .
 Class: Date: The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide: Lesson 3 . Progress: Check your knowledge of the Cold War in advance .
 Cold War confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union reached frightening levels during John F Kennedy’s time as president . The Cold War was the height of the Cold War .
 In 1959 a left­wing revolutionary named Fidel Castro overthrew the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista . In 1959, Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban revolution against Fulgencia Batista.
 U.S. viewed this Soviet-supported regime so close to the mainland as a security threat . United States viewed this . as a . security threat.
 If this happened, the conditions might lead to a nuclear war between the two superpowers . The conditions might be similar to that of a nuclear strike .
 One hundred and fourteen people died, and the rest were captured by Castro’s troops . The rest of the dead were captured .
 In 1962, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev began to place nuclear missiles in Cuba . Then, in 1962, the Soviet leader began to put nuclear missiles there . The missiles were placed in Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 The missiles were a clear response to the placement of U.S. nuclear weapons in Turkey . They were launched in response to a threat posed by the United States to Turkey .
 Khrushchev commented that the U.S. was worried about Soviet missiles that were 90 miles across the sea from the United States when United States missiles were basically on the Soviet border . The United States was worried that Soviet missiles would be 90 miles away from the US .
 Class: Date: The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide: Lesson 3 Cuba . Lesson: Reading on the Cold War is reading Essentials .
 30 years later in 1992 a high-ranking Soviet officer revealed just how close it had come to war . In fact, 30 years after the war, the Soviet Union and the U.S. were close to war again .
 Short-range rockets armed with nuclear devices would have been used against U.S. troops if the United States had invaded Cuba .
 At the time, people realized that the world could have been destroyed in a few days by a nuclear war . The world could be destroyed in days by nuclear war, people thought .
 Class: Date: The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide: Lesson 3 . Lesson: Both sides agreed to hold elections in two years .
 If the Communists succeeded in South Vietnam, all the other countries in Asia that were freeing themselves from colonial domination would fall like dominoes to communism . South Vietnam would be one of the last countries to fall under communism .
 American forces had the advantage of massive superiority in equipment and firepower . The U.S. forces were in control of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Americans, especially college students of draft age, soon responded with an antiwar movement . Americans responded with a movement against the war .
 The growing destruction caused by the conflict has been repeatedly televised . The Syrian conflict is the result of the conflict in Syria .
 Richard M Nixon ran on the pledge, or promise, to stop the war and bring the American people together . Former vice president Nixon ran for the presidency in 1968 and 1969 .
 The Paris Peace Accords allowed the United States to withdraw its forces from the U.S. It was part of the Paris Peace Agreement .
 Within two years after U.S. withdrawal, Communist armies from the North forcibly reunited Vietnam . The North and the South Vietnam were reunited .
 The North Vietnamese Communists gained control of Vietnam, but the domino theory proved wrong . North Vietnamese Communist Party was overthrown in Vietnam .
 This clear disagreement put an end to the Western idea of a single form of communism directed by Moscow . The disagreement put a clear disagreement between Moscow and the West's view of communism .
 By the end of the Vietnam War, a new era in American-Soviet relations began to emerge . The U.S. and the Soviet Union became friendly relations .
 Class: Date: The Cold War: Reading Essentials and Study Guide: Lesson 3 Answer Key 1 .
 All three were formed by the U.S. to stop or prevent Soviet and Communist expansion and aggression .
 Eisenhower started a policy of massive retaliation against the Soviet Union . He formed United States military alliances with other countries . The U.S. military alliances were formed with other nations .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if the U.S. agreed not to invade Cuba . The United States would not have invaded Cuba if it did not want to .
 The United States and the Soviet Union took opposing sides in the Vietnamese conflict . The U.S. and Soviet Union were involved in the Vietnam conflict .