 During early 1962, Cuba requested nuclear weapons from Khrushchev, and got ones able to hit the East Coast of much of the Americas . Cuba requested the weapons, and they were able to target the East coast of the U.S. and Europe .
 It openly acknowledged this fact, getting rage from America and allies . The U.S. and allies are outraged at the move .
 America threatened to use nuclear weapons on Cuba, Venezuela and even innocent Mexico . The threat was made by the U.S. government of Cuba and Venezuela .
 The USA soon posts nuclear weapons in Chile, Argentina and Puerto Rico in a hurry . The U.S. will soon be posting nuclear weapons .
 The missile crisis was getting unbearable for both sides, and Kennedy was urged to trigger a limited nuclear war in Latin America . Kennedy's decision to launch a nuclear war was made in response to the crisis .
 Kennedy had once evacuated some Texans before . Kennedy had considered this idea before, for he had evacuated some of them before .
 In Soviet Union many party members wanted to destroy the USA once and for all . Meanwhile in the Soviet Union, all patriotic, wanted the U.S. to destroy .
 President Kennedy ordered an evacuation in the South and prepared a battle plan for a nuclear advance into Latin America . After an 80-day standoff, on 17th Sept 1962, on . 17th September 1962, Kennedy ordered evacuation in . the South .
 He identified Cuba, Venezuela and one extent, Mexico as major targets . Venezuela, Mexico and Cuba are major targets, he said .
 On the 23rd, after the South people were evacuated and the East Coast evacuations were half-finished, the First Nuclear War started . The South was evacuated, the East was evacuated .
 The Nuclear War Santa Clara was the first target struck by American troops in Floridan bases . The first target was the nuclear war Santa Clara .
 A number of Cuban cities and bases were hit and quickly afterwards, missiles were launched towards Venezuela and Mexico . Soon, a number of Havana-bound Cuban cities were hit .
 The Americans considered their missiles too precious to waste on military bases, and Cuba and Venezuela launched their own missiles . The U.S. considered the missiles too valuable to waste, and the missiles were too precious .
 A total of over 30 million died in the first two waves of attacks across the Americas . Over 30 million people were killed during the first wave of terror attacks .
 Chavez and Castro were killed before Soviet silos could alert them . Castro and Chavez had been killed before the silos alerted them . The two men were killed by the Soviet Union .
 It has ordered a large deployment into Eastern Europe, North Korea, and China . It has also ordered a deployment into eastern Europe and North Korea . The U.S. has been in touch with North Korea and China since 2009 .
 Iran was told to be anti-American and hit Middle Eastern and North African targets . Iran was also told to hit targets in the region and the Middle East and North Africa .
 On the 27th, hundreds of missiles were launched at Western Europe, Thailand, Turkey and Australia . Hundreds of missiles have been launched in Western Europe and Thailand .
 Iran used all of its missiles, at Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Riyadh, Cairo, Jerusalem, Istanbul, Baghdad, Calcutta, Mumbai and so on, in the initial attack . Iran used the missiles in the first attack on the West .
 The U.S. sends a large batch of 35 missiles to the West Coast, which are mostly intercepted, although one hits San Francisco . One missile hit San Francisco, which is intercepted, but one hit San Diego, California .
 Over 50 million die in the Soviet attacks, and more will in the counterattack next hour . More than 50 million died in the attacks in the last hour .
 Khrushchev hides in a bunker, but the chaos in Moscow makes him feel ashamed and he commits suicide . He commits suicide after being made ashamed by the chaos .
 Party officials direct immediate attack on East Coast . Generals and party officials take control .
 Kennedy, too, dies of the powerful impact of five nuclear missiles, in his bunker . Washington, DC is hit out of a sudden and Washington, D.C. is hit . Kennedy also dies .
 With the death toll at about 130. million dead, including many leaders, the world starts to descend into chaos . The war's death toll is estimated at around 130 million people . With many leaders dead, many of the world's leaders are also dead .
 NATO Counterstrike and Soviet Second Strike NATO prepared a counterattack drawn up by the surviving world leaders . NATO counterattack was drawn up in the wake of the collapse of the Soviet Union in June 1991 .
 Many remaining nuclear, biological and chemical weapons were launched soon, to the remains of the USSR and its allies . Together on 4th October 1962, they launched many remaining nuclear weapons . Many of the remaining nuclear and biological weapons launched soon .
 Biological weapons strike survived surviving Japan, South Korea, North Korea and China . North Korea, China and North Korea have been hit by biological weapons strike .
 The deaths are considerably less than some doomsday scenarios, but the ""last strike"" that comes will be deadly . The last strike is not a doomsday scenario but the "last strike" is deadly .
 Biological weapons, chemical weapons, untreated diseases, fallout and climatic changes kill about 300,000 instantly . Biological weapons and untreated diseases kill around 300,00 instantly .
 Many countries in the world are destroyed, and the world descends into chaos, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Many countries are destroyed and chaos descends to chaos, he says .
 Nuclear Nuclear Community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted . The Nuclear Union is a nuclear reactor in the U.S.