 U.S. intelligence discovered evidence of a general Soviet arms build-up on Cuba, including Soviet IL–28 bombers . President Kennedy issued a public warning against the introduction of offensive weapons into Cuba in September 1962 .
 Some advisers argued for an air strike to destroy missiles, followed by a U.S. invasion of Cuba . Others favored stern warnings to Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 The letter was the first in a series of direct and indirect communications between the White House and the Kremlin throughout the remainder of the crisis .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff announced a military readiness status of DEFCON 3 . U.S. naval forces began implementation of the quarantine and plans accelerated for a military strike on Cuba .
 On October 24, Khrushchev responded to Kennedy’s message with a statement that the United States “blockade” was an “act of aggression” and that Soviet ships bound for Cuba would be ordered to proceed . The U.S. "blockade
 During October 24 and 25, some ships turned back from the quarantine line . Others were stopped by United States naval forces, but they contained no offensive weapons and so were allowed to proceed .
 U.S. reconnaissance flights over Cuba indicated the Soviet missile sites were nearing operational readiness . The United States reconnaissance flights indicated the sites were near operational readiness.
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message the evening of October 26, which meant it was sent in the middle of the night Moscow time . White House staff scrambled to assess the validity of this "back channel"
 Kennedy and his advisors prepared for an attack on Cuba within days as they searched for any remaining diplomatic resolution . Kennedy prepared for attack on Cuban island within days .
 It was determined that Kennedy would ignore the second Khrushchev message and respond to the first one . Kennedy was determined to ignore the first message and responded .
 Despite the flurry of direct and indirect communications between the White House and the Kremlin, the two leaders struggled to clearly understand each other’s true intentions . The world hung on the brink of possible nuclear war in the 1950s .
 Both superpowers began to reconsider the nuclear arms race and took the first steps in agreeing to a nuclear Test Ban Treaty . Second, having approached the brink of nuclear conflict, both superpowers agreed to the treaty .
 Nikita Khrushchev reached a secret agreement with Cuban premier Fidel Castro to place Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba to deter any future invasion attempt . The agreement was made in July 1962 .
 U.S. intelligence discovered evidence of a general Soviet arms build-up on Cuba, including Soviet IL–28 bombers . President Kennedy issued a public warning against the introduction of offensive weapons into Cuba .
 U.S. U–2 aircraft took several pictures of sites for missiles under construction in Cuba . Despite the warning, the pictures were clearly showing sites for medium-range and intermediate-range missiles .