 All pages were written by intlnews, otherwise known as “Leftist Critic.” The wonderful, wonderful SovietHistory Wiki . All pages are written by “leftistcritic.com .
 Please spend some time reading this FAQ so this subreddit does not overfill with questions that can be easily answered . The Reddit user is using this guide to help people understand the community .
 If your question is not answered in the FAQ, please use the search feature . Use the questions below to help you understand our answers .
 If you still have not found an answer, then feel free to post your question . If you have a question, then post it here .
 The idea of this wiki is based off one written by marxism-feminism , a mod on CommunismlOl's subreddit . Also, please check out the sidebar and other resources as needed .
 This subreddit covers the early years of the Soviet government from 1917-1922 when it was under attack by fourteen countries in an imperialist assault known as the Russian Civil War . This subreddit is a subreddit dedicated to the Russian government .
 Some people could call this period the years of the Bolshevik government since the Soviet Union did not formally come into existence until December 1922 . The Soviet Union was formed in 1922 .
 For the sense of consistency, this period can be called the first Soviet government . However, the Soviet government can be seen as the first to have been consistent .
 Links or posts do not have to be from radical sources, but can be from bourgeois sources, such as media outlets or scholars, if deemed necessary . If necessary, they should be linked to the radical left, if necessary .
 An example would be a set of pictures from a magazine, like Wired, let's say, but would be acceptable as it is still a part of Soviet history . An example of this would be an example of a magazine .
 Any posts from the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism on the Marxist Internet Archive will be deleted immediately . The archive will also be deleted .
 LeftistCritic, a good comrade, had begun compiling a history of the Soviet Union, starting in 1917 with the Bolshevik government . It is still in development, but Leftist Critic had started compiling a book .
 A comrade had begun an online journal, called Soviet History, reprinting a section of the Great Soviet Encylcopedia on United States history . The journal is mentioned in another page of this wiki .
 We are referring to the Great October Socialist Revolution or the October Revolution in 1917, not the bourgeois February Revolution the same year . The October Revolution was the October 1917, 1917, and the February 1917 February Revolution .
 The Soviet Union was only officially in existence from 1922 to 1991 . Since the history of the Soviet state reaches back to 1917, it is worth acknowledging that as well .
 Lenin was head of government from 1917-1918 of the Russian Republic . Head of Soviet Union from 1922 to 1924 of the Soviet Union . He was also head of Soviet Federative Socialist Republic from 1918 to 1924 .
 He was also Chairman of the Council of Ministers from May 1941 until March 1953 . He served as Chairman of Council of Minister from March 1953 to May 1941 .
 After Lenin died in 1924, Stalin took more of a leading role in Soviet affairs . After Lenin's death, Stalin became a leading figure in the Soviet Union .
 He served as the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet's Presidum from May 1960 to July 1964 and June 1977 to November 1982 . He served in that position from October 1964 until November 1982, .
 He was also Chairman of the Supreme Soviet's Presidum from June 1983 until February 1984 . He was head of the KGB from May 1967 until May 1982 .
 He would serve in that position from February 1984 until March 1985 . He would also serve as Chairman of the Supreme Soviet's Presidum from April 1984 until April 1984 .
 He was the first President of the Soviet Union from March 1990 until December 1991 . He also was the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet from May 1989 until March 1990 . He was also the first Soviet President .
 Russian army brought a big deal of tanks, trucks etc to Invangorod... for display for the local people . 100th anniversary of the Red Army was 100 years ago today .
 Many came from Narva town which is in Estonia (and in European Union) just by crossing a bridge across the river which divides two countries . Narva is in Narva, Estonia, and in the European Union . Many came to Narva by crossing the bridge across a bridge which
 Russian old believers live in a small village in the West-Siberian taiga . The taiga is deep into the taiga and has a population of around 1,000 .
 To get to their place you would need a helicopter lift or you can try going by the river which is a very trick way . You would need an experienced guide who knows the way to get there .
 Most of the Russian old believers live by very strict religious rules . Most of them are Russians old believers living by strict rules .
 The first state company, Dobrolyt, was founded, renamed in 1932 to Aeroflot . The first Russian state company was founded in 1932 . The company was later renamed Aeroflot .
 "The library has many books on the questions that interest you"" , 1920s. The library has . many books about the questions you . interest you"
 How the Old Intelligentsia Was Drawn into the Building of Socialism , 1975 . How the old Intelligentia was drawn into the building of socialism .
 From the 1917 Russian Revolution to the Revolution of Our Times, 2017. From 1917 Russian revolution to the revolution of our times . 2017 .
 Stalin's important report to the 17th congress in 1934 . Stalin’s important report in 1934. “Buryat-Mongolia”, a collection of speeches from representatives of this little known Soviet Socialist Republic of the Soviet Union .
 Anna Louise Strong, The Soviets Expected It. To the West!” , 1942 . “To the West!"” – 1942 .
 An Eye-Witness Account by Soviet Correspondents and Red Army Commanders , 1943, over seventy pages . Over seventy pages. Over 70 pages .
 The reception was attended by several hundred representatives of various Jewish organizations . Several hundred representatives from various Jewish groups attended .
 1,750,000 Jews who succeeded in escaping the Axis since the outbreak of hostilities were evacuated by the Soviet Government from Eastern Poland and subsequently occupied .
 She has given life, asylum, bread, and shelter to a vast Jewish population . She has also given life and asylum to many of the world's Jewish communities .
 To make them known to every Jew in the U.S. is a task of supreme importance for the Jewish Council for Russian War Relief .
 Palestine cannot alone solve the problem of the Jews of Europe . But even so, Palestine can't alone solve it, says the author .
 Thirty-two nations were convened at Evian by Franklin D Roosevelt to give help to refugees . Only the Dominican Republic offered asylum for a substantial number of refugees .
 We still look to the Western Hemisphere, many of whose lands are underpopulated . Nevertheless, we still look at the Western hemisphere, which has a large population .
 There is a land where anti-Semitism is a crime against the State . Human beings are actually given an equal chance in life, whatever the color of their hair or skin, the shape of their noses, the slant of their eyes .
 Soviet sniper Roza Shanina was shot by Soviet sniper in 1944 . Stalin wasn't a dictator, he was a dictator .
 Soviet forces were the first to approach a major Nazi camp, reaching Majdanek near Lublin, Poland, in July 1944 . The camp was located in Majdaneka, near Lublina, Poland .
 Germans tried to hide the evidence of mass murder by demolishing the camp . The camp was destroyed by the rapid Soviet advance of the Germans .
 Camp staff set fire to large crematorium used to burn bodies of murdered prisoners . But in the hasty evacuation the gas chambers were left standing .
 Soviet soldiers found over six thousand emaciated prisoners alive when they entered the camp . Over 6,000 prisoners were found alive when Soviet soldiers entered camp . The camp was one of the largest camps in Soviet history .
 In the following months, the Soviets liberated additional camps in the Baltic states and in Poland . In addition to the liberated camps, the Soviet-occupied camps were liberated in Baltic and Poland .
 Soviet forces liberated the Stutthof, Sachsenhausen, and Ravensbrueck concentration camps . Shortly before Germany's surrender, Soviet troops liberated the camps . The concentration camps were liberated by Soviet forces .
 A commentary on its publication of its publication, “Nazi-Soviet Relations.39-1941"" , 1948. A commentary by the author of this article .
 What would Europe look like if the Soviets hadn’t defeated Hitler? 2015 . 2015. 2015 .
 Conspiracy, infiltration of the state apparatus, and “Aesopian language” 8.8. 8.9.9 . 8.10.9: Conspiracy and infiltration of state apparatus . 9:9:10:10.10: 10:11:11.10
 The dialectic of the revolution and the genesis of abstract universalism 15. 15. The revolution was the beginning of the universalist revolution, and the end of universalism .
 17.17.17 is a new drive for “Soviet democracy” to “Saint Bartholomew’s night’
 Semipalatinsk Test Site, 29 August 1949, was a Soviet Union test site . It was the first time the Soviet Union had a test site in Russia .
 Stalin spoke at the Plenum of the Central Committee of the CPSU in 1952 . Stalin's final speech was published in October 1952 . Manton, The Soviet Union Today, is published by Manton .
 Origins of the Cold War (not a Soviet work, but related) • Solomon M Schwartz, Labor In The Soviet Union . USSR, ""Soviet Economic Development since 1917"" , 1953 .
 A Textbook issued by the Economics Institute of the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.R. of the United States .
 The resolution that remained the official Soviet assessment of Stalin until the Gorbachev period . Stalin's assessment of the Soviet Union remained official until the end of the Cold War period .
 Maurice Dobb, Soviet Economic Development since 1917 since 1917, 1966. An English Translation of Dobb's work was published in 1965 and 1966 . Dobb also wrote a book on Soviet economic development since 1917 . Maurice's book was translated in 1965 .
 Muhammad Ali at the Red Square . Muhammad Ali was a member of the Soviet Working Class in the Soviet Union . Ali died in 1968 .
 The Struggle for the Leninist Strategy and Tactics in National Liberation Movements . Leninist strategy and tactics in national liberation Movements. Leninists . Leninists. The struggle for Leninist . Strategy and tactics .
 Many women hold high executive posts in public life, especially in cultural and health activities . Many women are in charge of cultural, health activities in the United States .
 In the laws regulating domestic life, the woman's rights are in every respect the same as those of the man . In the UK, women's rights in the domestic life are equal to those of men .
 The wife's property is her own, and marriage settlements which affect her property rights are invalid . The wife is entitled to her own property rights . Marriage settlements are invalid in the UK .
 A wife does not have to follow her husband to another place of residence . A wife doesn't have to leave her husband's home in order to follow him .
 Stalin and women evokes salacious details of Stalin’s somewhat active life as a young man . Stalin left a number of offspring across Russia .
 He came to see the importance of socialism for women in the 1930s . Far less known is the way he came to think about the role of women in socialism .
 On many occasions, he addressed women’s congresses, let alone framing the Constitution of the USSR to address explicitly equality of the sexes . He framed the constitution of the Soviet Union to explicitly address equality .
 Women in the U.S.R. are accorded equal rights with men in all spheres of economic, state, cultural, social and political life . Women in America have equal rights in the political, economic and social spheres of life .
 The possibility of exercising these rights is ensured to women by granting them an equal right with men to work, payment for work, rest and leisure . State protection of the interests of mother and child, prematernity and maternity leave with full pay .
 They often struggled to live up to ideals expressed and often acted hypocritically, as Alexandra Kollontai points out . But you can't fault the ideals .
 The USSR is usually written out of the history of feminism as with so many other matters. Needless to say, the USSR is often written out . The USSR was one of the most successful countries in the world .
 Stalin addressed a gathering of collective farm women shock workers . Stalin addressed the gathering as the constitution was in its final stages of being formulated . Stalin spoke at the gathering in Moscow .
 Comrades, what we have seen here today is a slice of the new life we call the collective life, the socialist life . Comrade: "Comrades ... what we've seen here is ... the new . life we called the collective . life," he said .
 We have heard the simple accounts of simple toiling people, how they strove and overcame difficulties in order to achieve success in socialist competition . We have also heard how they overcame difficulties .
 We have heard the speeches not of ordinary women, but, I would say, of women who are heroines of labour . Only heroes of labour could have achieved the successes they have achieved, she said .
 "I have seen many labouring men and women. Here am I, already 56 years old, I've seen many things in my time," he said . He said: "Here am I already 56, already . I have seen a lot of labouring people and women."
 The story goes that after the first collectivisation wave, in 1933 Pasha organised an all-female tractor brigade in the Donetsk region .
 It exceeded its quota by 129%, producing more than any other team in their region . It exceeded their quotas by 129% and produced more than anyone else .
 She was invited to the Kremlin, elected to the supreme soviet of the USSR, organiser of even more women’s tractor teams, winner of the Stalin Prize in 1946 ... still, she preferred to drive tractors .
 As this article puts it, she became a symbol what might now be called Soviet feminism . But by now such feminism was almost half a century old . She was a symbol of Soviet feminism, which was almost 50 years old .
 There is even some rare footage of Pasha at the Kremlin, with Stalin and the others . There is also footage of him with Stalin .
 A lifetime working with tractor fuels and oils destroyed her body’s ability to clear the toxins, so she died at 46 . Her body was unable to clear it from the toxins .
 A lesser known aspect of the Russian Revolution is the flourishing of... nudism . The Russian Revolution was inspired by the rise of nudism.
 Ida Rubenstein played naked on stage after the revolution in Russia . Rubenstein was a famous actress who played naked during the revolution .
 A movement called ‘Down with shame’ would walk the streets in Soviet cities, catch trams, go about their daily lives wearing nothing but a red sash .
 A White Army newspaper joked in 1919 that the price of suits must have skyrocketed, since so many people were going around naked . The White Army said in 1919 the cost of suits had skyrocketed .
 At international nudist conferences in the 1920s, delegates from the Soviet delegates far outnumbered those from other countries . The Soviet delegates were delegates from Russia and other Soviet countries .
 Over the summers, rivers, beaches and lakes witnessed millions of old people, children, families, and singles in the prime of their life gathered to play naked .
 Lenin visited a nudist beach in Austria during his exile before the Revolution . Lenin was impressed with the beach's facilities .
 It was not so much the naked bodies everywhere, but the emphasis on healthy living . The focus of this week's show was to focus on healthy eating .
 Lenin was as many noted a muscular man with a love of outdoor activities, nudism was a natural extension of that passion . Lenin was also noted a love for outdoor activities .
 Both he and Krupskaya were regularly tossing their clothes in a corner and diving into the nearest river, lake or sea completely starkers . Soon enough they were regularly diving in the nearest rivers and lakes .
 Lenin’s favoured phrase, ‘tearing off the fig-leaf,’ takes on a whole new meaning . I’m not sure whether they also hiked and rode their bicycles naked .
 Of course, one can enjoy the breeze much more when naked, even while chatting away from all and sundry . Of course .
 It mattered not where they were, they would swim naked in Longjumeau or in Pornic on the French coast, or in Stjernsund in Sweden . Or in Munich, Munich, Poronino or in the Vistula River in Krakow .
 Other Bolsheviks were Anatoly Lunacharsky, Nikolai Bukharin, Alexander Bogdanov . Among them were Nikolai Bukharin and Anatoly Lunacharskarsky .
 As one of those early communist nudists observed, ‘In nudity class distinctions disappear. As one . early communist . nudist . observed, 'In nudity . class distinctions . disappear. In nudity, class . distinctions disappear .
 Nudism was a particularly strong feature of the USSR, as also in East Germany . The USSR and East Germany were particularly strong in nudity .
 Lenin was, of course, a nudist, along with Krupskaya and many of the Bolsheviks . Lenin was also a nudeist .
 All conveniently air-brushed out in a way that would make even Stalin jealous . All conveniently aired out in the way you would make Stalin jealous of .
 Alexandra Kollontai: revolutionary, Bolshevik, People’s Commissar for Social Welfare . First female ambassador to Norway in 1923 . Founder of 'Women's Department' in 1919, champion of gender equality .
 The Soviet “Emancipation” of Muslim Women in Pan-Islamic Perspective , 2012 article by bourgeois scholar. The Soviet 'Emanchipation’ of Muslim women in pan-Islamic perspective .
 Alexandra Kollontai was involved in European socialist and feminist movements . She contributed to the transnational feminism movement . She was a member of the Socialist Party in Europe .
 Kollontai for a long time was not seen by historians as a feminist and was little known among historians of feminism in American historiography . For a long period, historians were not seen as feminists .
 Her feministic approach to social problems is well-established and she is considered one of the greatest Marxist Russian feminists .
 Kollontai is still placed by historians into the context of Russian history . However, the historical approach to the author's feminism still rooted in Russian and Soviet narration .
 This paper aims to reveal the impact of Kollontai's impact in transnational feminism . It aims to show the impact on transnational feminist movements .
 The paper claims that Kollontai's ideas on gender, sexuality, and women's rights were universal and not as strongly politicized as the scholars of his heritage and Russian feminism considered before . The paper also claims that .
 Such transnational dimension of Kollontai's feminism will help in better understanding the history of Euro feminism . It will give an opportunity to understand Soviet history in a broader context .
 Alexandra Kollontai was born in 1872 to a wealthy aristocratic family of Domontovich in St Petersburg, Russia . She was the daughter of a Russian aristocrat and later a prominent socialite .
 Alexandra was raised by English governesses in early childhood, and later educated by tutors from France and Germany . By the time she was ten Alexandra spoke five languages . She was raised in England by governesses .
 After Kollontai received her higher education in Switzerland, she traveled through Europe, where she participated in different socialists’ gatherings .
 Before the Revolution of 1917 Kollontai lived in Europe and there she became a prolific writer on the questions of sexuality, women's political rights, and women's roles in the family .
 Alexandra Kollontai is usually mentioned along with Vladimir Lenin's wife Nadezhda Krupskaya as one of the founders of Zhenotdel (Women's Rights and Education division of the Soviet government) or as a Soviet ambassador .
 Kollontai is known as an author of the glass of water theory . However, she is still known among the public in Russia .
 For many years Kollontai was little known among Soviet and Russian historians of feminism because of her own intention to be in a shadow of more famous revolutionary politicians lik e Lenin and his wife Krupskaya . Historians tended to depict her mostly as a Soviet diplomat and communist,
 Soviet historians only spoke of her as a Soviet diplomat and intentionally underestimated her as feminist and writer . She was known for her work as a diplomat and for her writing .
 Kollontai's works on fe minism are little known, as well as practically unknown for the general audience . In this way, in Russian historiography, he was practically unknown .
 Independent voices of feminism were not heard in the USSR until the 1980s . Independent voices were heard only in the Soviet Union until the end of the Soviet era .
 Clements also speaks about the reasons why the question of women's rights was downtrodden in Imperial Russia . Poverty of peasants and lack of free time for working women were among the reasons for the issue .
 Kollontai was a prime example of an upper-class woman who educated herself in politics and philosophy . Clements notes that for upperclass women society allowed some independence .
 Kollontai herself was quite skeptical about the notion of feminism, since she districted herself from ‘bourgeois feminists,” who, according to her, identified themselves as the enemies of men . The author was skeptical of feminism .
 Kollontai believed that only through socialist revolution could working women and men obtain freedom . The socialist revolution was a socialist revolution .
 Kollontai had never used such feminist terms as “sexism’s or “male chauvinism” typical for Western feminists and gender studies scholars in the 1960s and 1970s . Moreover, he had not used such terms as "sexism" or
 Kollontai didn”t share Lenin”s rejection of a sexual question as a topic for Marxist writers . However, he did not share the rejection of such a topic of discussion in Marxist literature .
 She was not scared to openly criticize individualism, ignorance, and egoism in the relationships between men and women . She was critical of individualism and ignorance .
 Alexandra Kollontai's works were written between 1913 and 1926 . The three sources used for the research of the transnational dimension were written by Alexandra . Three sources were used for research of transnational dimensions .
 First, she depicted her childhood, the cultural and social environment she was raised in, and her later acquaintance with European socialists . First, her autobiography , where she depicted . her childhood .
 Kollontai's pre-Revolutionary essay ‘The New Woman’ will be analyzed in order to track her feminist ideas that were not only applicable for the Russian reality, but for other countries as well . Second, the essay “The New Women” will be
 In addition Kollontai's article “Make Way for the Winged Eros” will be analyzed in order to show how even her Sovietfocused texts were applied to other contexts . In addition to the article, the article ‘Make Way’ will also be analyzed .
 Kollonta's attitude toward women's rights, her involvement in the Western feministic movement, and her own transnational feministic dimension will be demonstrated through textual analysis of her autobiographical work .
 From the very first chapter the reader can see how deeply Kollontai was preoccupied with the questions concerning women""s liberation movement .
 In the beginning of her autobiography Kollontai only touched upon some facts of her childhood and early life . In the . beginning of the autobiography, she only touched on some facts about her childhood .
 More important for Kollontai's narration was to connect the facts from her personal biography with understanding the freedom and how the freedom of women""s freedom developed .
 Through the facts of Kollontai's life and especially in the way she described quiet ordinary events, like getting married at the age of 19, it can be seen how early in life Kollonai was struggling for her personal freedom . Her views of marriage were contemporary and more
 Kollontai's life decisions were not mixed with Marxism or communistic ideology, and it can be well seen how they were driven by feministic ideals, and not by socialist philosophy . The autobiography itself was written during 1926 .
 Kollontai refers to her decision to get married as a ‘struggle’ which is concordant with the ideology of Western suffragists . She refers to herself as a "struggle" to get a married .
 Kollontai touched upon one of the central points in the ideology of Western feminism marriage and how women's roles in it were changing . He touched upon the central point of the feminism marriage .
 She described how her marriage to Vladimir Kollontai, an engineer student, was more or less happy for the first three years . She said she was happy for three years, but she was not happy for many more .
 Kollontai used a word "cage" to explain her growing desire to participate in Russian political events, socialistic circles of Russian intellectuals, and to fight for women's rights and social justice in Imperial Russia .
 Starting from 1893 until 1896 were the years when Kollontai""s life drastically changed . The years of 1893 and 1896 marked the beginning of his career in Russia .
 She became an “enthusiastic follower of Darwin,” and in this way materialistic conception of history became her field of interests . She became a materialistic thinker and a materialist thinker .
 At the time she started sympathizing with the revolutionary movement in Russia, which became more popular among working class people, as well as aristocrats by the end of the nineteenth century .
 Kollontai's early life and pre-revolutionary activities were finished by 1908, when she was arrested and immigrated to Germany as a political refugee . She was arrested by the Russian Revolution in 1908 and later moved to Germany .
 She briefly touched upon her life with Vladimir Kollontai, her separation from him, and nurturing her son .
 She characterized in detail her political activism, for example, opening the first Working Women"s club in 1907 in St. Louis .
 Alexandra Kollontai wrote about her passion for politics and her fight for women's rights . Alexandra's passion was to write about her early life as a politician .
 Her autobiography focused Kollontai's early devotion to the universal ideals of social justice . It also revealed her attitude to the problem of women's emancipation in her personal life .
 Alexandra Kollontai's revolutionary activity and desire to fight for social justice and working women's rights was influenced by German Marxist feminists Clara Zetkin and Rosa Luxemburg . She was inspired by the likes of Zetkins and Luxemburg, who were both feminists .
 Her European life and political experience shaped Kollontai's international feministic approach . Her European experience shaped her approach to feminism .
 Kollontai was partially excluded from Russian political activity . While living in Germany, France, Austria, Austria and Great Britain, Sweden, and Norway, he was not allowed to participate .
 She recalled to her earlier interest in women's rights, however . Her focus shifted from social justice in general to the question of justice for women in any country .
 From 1908 until 1917 she organized women's strikes around Europe, as well as prolifically demonstrated herself as a writer . Different essays and pamphlets along with her bigger works were published in German, English, and French and only translated into Russian after the Revolution .
 She visited the USA for five months in 1915 for lectures about international socialists . She delivered lectures in German, French, and Russian .
 Kollontai's relatively short autobiography speaks in favor of the international focus of her writings . Not only the international travels themselves, but the fact that she had put them in her autobiography speaks out in favor .
 Kollontai's international approach to studying and answering so-called “women's question’s question” is demonstrated by her comparative studies of legislative systems of different European countries .
 She mentioned that she ‘studied this question’ of maternity welfare in England, France, and Scandinavian countries .
 Almost all of her writing and political activity before her return to Russia in 1917 was connected to the question of women's rights and their comprehensive representation in European laws .
 The rhetoric of Kollontai""s biography was influenced by her dedication to fight for women""s rights around Europe . Her biography was inspired by the dedication to women"s rights .
 Socialism, Marxism, communism, and her Russian roots seemed to have waned, or at least just overlapped, by her involvement in the European feminist movement . Her past involvement in revolutionary movement in Russia in Russia seems to have faded, or just been overlapped .
 The significance of Kollontai's Autobiography of A Sexually Emancipated Communist Woman for understanding an international dimension of her feminism can hardly be overestimated . The significance should not be underestimated .
 This work has always been crucial for the historians of Russian revolutionaries and biographers of Kollontai as a source of the information on her life, especially her life in exile in Europe .
 Kollontai's internationalism was considered into consideration by historians . Nevertheless, in American historiography research which touched upon this work was lacking close textual analysis .
 Kollontai's autobiography is a valuable source for the historians of Western feminism . It demonstrates how her involvement in the European movement for women's rights grew into her international feministic ideology later . Kollonai""s autobiography is valuable source of historians of feminism .
 It is important to trace not only internationalism of Kollontai's feministic ideas, but also their transnational dimension . Ideas were universal and could generally be applied to any woman in the world, regardless of her nationality, says author .
 In order to do so, Kollontai""s work “The New Woman” will be analyzed further . The work is being analyzed further in order to find out why .
 Kollontai's 1913 essay “The New Woman” was her earlier manifesto of transnational feminism . 1913 was the year of her most active work among European women . The New Woman was her most popular essay in 1913 .
 The essay was initially written while Kollontai lived in Germany and travelled a lot to France at the same time . It was originally written while he was living in Germany .
 It was first published in German where she was living in exile . The intended audience was German and French people both men and women .
 "The New Woman" remains one of Kollontai's most famous works among Western scholars of women and gender studies . Later it was translated in Russian and was very much appreciated by Russian intellectuals .
 It was little researched by Russian scholars, who only looked at Kollontai as the Soviet politician and ambassador .
 In her statement Kollontai did not mention nationality or political views of a woman who can be called ‘the new woman” She referred to the “general human interests” which is more transnational than European or Russian, applied to any human being .
 Kollontai's argument is that the new woman exists regardless of nationality or politics of the country she lives in reveals her transnational feministic approach to the question of women's rights .
 The single woman is the one who “strengthens through the exercise of her will;"" she is “demanding,” she “seeks for and enjoins esteem for her personality;” demanding “respect for her “ego;
 Kollontai's attempt to define the new woman is a brilliant example of the transnational feministic ideas in her writings . The new woman's attempts to define her is an example of transnational feminine ideas .
 She did not write anything about the new woman's nationality, her place in the social hierarchy, her wealth, education level, or political views, if there were any .
 The notion of independence here in “The New Woman’s essay helps to complete the picture Kollontai had drawn. The notion .
 The word independence itself has universal meaning, so the fact that Kollontai used it only clarifies her transnationalism . She used the word independence to make her point that it is universal .
 In addition Kollontai put her transnational feministic ideology in a contemporary framework . In addition to the transnational . ideology in . a contemporary . framework .
 Kollontai said that nowadays women participate in industrial life and it is not viewed as a deviation . Only at the very end of her essay she added a social dimension to her research .
 She did not argue that modern women of working class is a standalone group of the new women, and did not refer to any country where working women live in particular .
 The words “working women” in her essay did not reflect upon her socialistic background and revolutionary ideology, but speak in of her perception of modern women in general, who in order to become independent personally have to work .
 Kollontai demonstrated herself being not only internationalist, but more transnational feminist . She demonstrated herself as an internationalist .
 She made an attempt to be an independent writer at the time when women and gender studies did not exist as a standalone scholarly area . A notion of ‘transnational feminism’ was not used by historians and writers at all .
 To fully understand the transnational dimension of Kollontai""s writings it is important to look at her essay written in 1923 “Make Way for The Winged Eros” which initially was intended for the Soviet people men and women, but appeared to be implicitly influenced by K
 Kollontai spoke about the differences between ‘wingless eros’ and “winged eros:” where the first one is physical sex and the second one is sex rich with emotions . A vivid example of such work was “Make Way for the
 This work is important for understanding Kollontai's transnational dimension . This work was important to understanding the transhuman dimension of Kollonai .
 Even though she included a general timeframe, she did not put any geographical, social, economical, or cultural frames for these events . She did not include a specific timeframe .
 Even when she writes about Soviet people""s sexual relationships, her mindset geared toward universal values, she writes .
 The sentence, mentioned above, if taken out of context of Kollontai's writing, could be applied to any European country at the first part of the twentieth century where women became emancipated .
 Kollontai""s “Make Way for The Winged Eros” was the work focused on Soviet culture . The work was initially intended for the Soviet audience .
 The work appeared to have two layers of understanding a Soviet, demonstrable and more obvious layer, and a hidden international one . However it was written in a way that the work appeared in a . way of understanding the work . However, the work seemed to have a . more obvious and
 Kollontai wrote about a “new morality” without specifically referring to the country where that ‘moralism’ developed . He wrote without mentioning the country .
 The three principals of the “new morality” were proclaimed to be made for the proletarian class in the USSR . They can be seen as being generally applied to people who were not only in the Soviet Union but also communists .
 This paper has established how the literary heritage of Alexandra Kollontai can be applied to a broader cultural context . The examples from her works indicate her transnational feministic ideas . Conclusion: This paper concludes that the examples of her work indicate her ideas transnational .
 Kollontai's ideas on the question of equality of men and women were transnational in their nature . He was a political activist, Marxist, socialist and prolific writer .
 This paper has shown both international and transnational aspects of her writings which have not been acknowledged enough in the historical and feminist literature . This paper shows that this has not been recognised enough in feminist literature and history .
 In addition the paper has demonstrated how Kollontai""s works need to be researched more assiduously by scholars of feminism . More historical research needs to be done in order to highlight her activity in fighting for women"s equality before 1917 .
 The transnational dimension of Kollontai”s works requires to revise the history of Western and transnational feminism . It provides a new perspective on the Russian and Soviet history of the 20th century . The author’s works require to revise history of feminism .
 Kollontaf's socialistic feminism and her dedication to Marxist philosophy is a sign of the universality of her ideas about gender, sexuality, and women""s rights . It is especially important for historians of the USSR and scholars of transnational feminism to look at her socialist feminism
 The real achievements of the Bolsheviks are usually written out of any history of feminism, since as we all know, it is really a Western phenomenon . Of course, the real achievements are usually left out of the history .
 The catch is that the likes of Kollontai, Zetkin and others did l ik e to be known as feminists, since they saw it a distinctly bourgeois phenomenon . The catch was that they did not want to be called feminists .
 There has not been in the history of mankind a single great movement of the oppressed in which women toilers have not participated. Women toilers are toilers. There has never been in history of the . oppressed in . history of women's movements, writes Emma Watson .
 Women toilers, the most oppressed of all the oppressed, have never kept away from the high road of the emancipation movement, and never could have done so . The most oppressed women toilers have never been away from  emancipation movement .
 As is known, the movement for the emancipation of the slaves brought to the front hundreds of thousands of great women martyrs and heroines . The movement for emancipation of slaves brought hundreds of millions of great female martyrs to front .
 In the ranks of the fighters for the emancipation of the serfs, there were tens of thousands of women toilers .
 The revolutionary working-class movement, the mightiest of all the emancipation movements of the oppressed masses, has rallied millions of women to its banner . It is not surprising that the revolutionary working class movement, which is mightiest in all the emanciparian movement, is rallying millions to its
 International Women’s Day is a token of the invincibility of the working-class movement for emancipation . It is a harbinger of its great future and is a symbol of the movement for women's emancipation .
 If the working class pursues a correct policy, they can and must become a real working-class army, operating against the bourgeoisie . The working class must and must be a real army, they must operate against the bourgeois, they say .
 To forge from this reserve of women toilers an army of working women and peasant women, operating side by side with the great army of the proletariat, such is the second and decisive task of the working class . To forge a working class army of women and peasants is the work of the
 International Women’s Day must become a means of transforming the working women and peasant women from a reserve of the working class into an active army of the emancipation movement .
 Stalin gives an address to the first all-union congress of collective-farm shock brigaders . Stalin deals with the processes of admitting individual peasants into collective farms .
 Some farms were wary of accepting individual peasants who may not have been so keen on collectivisation . Some such farms were reluctant to accept individual peasants .
 Two years ago I received a letter from a peasant woman, a widow, living in the Volga region . The widow is a widow and a widow of a Russian peasant living in Volga, Russia .
 She complained that the collective farm refused to accept her as a member, and she asked for my support . She asked for her support .
 I received a reply from the collective farm stating that they could not accept her because she had insulted a collective-farm meeting . The collective farm said that they had refused to accept her .
 It turns out that she is now working in the collective farm, not in the last, but in the front ranks . The collective farm is a collective farm .
 A couple weeks ago, I saw a really interesting clip on Twitter that showed students in the Soviet Union learning to program using pen and paper . The clip was posted on Twitter .
 My mom has often told stories about how she learned to program the same way, and I shared the tweet . I shared it with my mom .
 Marie Hicks, a tech historian, reached out and asked if my mom would want to write about her experiences . She did. Marie Hicks wrote about her mom's experience in the tech world .
 In 1976, after eight years in the Soviet education system, I graduated the equivalent of middle school . I graduated from middle school to middle school in 1976 . I have been in Russia for eight years .
 I could go for the equivalent of a blend of an associate and bachelor’s degree, with an emphasis on vocational skills . Or, you could get an associate degree with a bachelor's degree, or an associate . Or you could be a bachelor with an associate, bachelor's or
 There was a restrictive quota for Jews applying to the five-year college program, which almost certainly meant that I, as a Jew, wouldn’t get in . I went with the second option, mainly because it was common knowledge in the Soviet Union at the time that there was
 Nizhniy Novgorod Industrial and Economic College is a Russian university . The school is based in the city of Novgorhod, Russia, and is located in Russia's capital, Moscow .
 Since I got good grades in math and geometry, this looked like I’d be able to get in . Since I was a good student, I decided to apply for the school in New Jersey .
 It also didn't hurt that my aunt sewed several dresses specifically for the school’s chief accountant, who was involved in enrollment decisions . "It also didn’t hurt that her aunt, a very good seamstress and dressmaker," she says .
 From the almost sixty students accepted into the program that year, all of them were female .
 "I understood that this was a trend. Later, after I started working the Soviet Union, and even in the . U.S. in the early 1990s, I understood this was the trend," he says .
 I’d say that 70% of the programmers I encountered in the IT industry were female . 70% were female programmers, according to the author .
 We started what would be considered our major concentration courses during the second year of university . We started these courses during our second year. We are now focusing on the future of the university .
 Programming was the main course, and we spent the most hours working on it . But programming was the most important part of the show's programming .
 Students who forgot their pencils were sent to the main office to ask for one . This method was so important that students who forgot to use it were asked for a replacement .
 "It was extremely embarrassing, and we learned quickly not to forget them," says Drexler . "It's extremely embarrassing," he says of the embarrassing incident .
 We would learn from simplest commands to loop organization, function and sub-function programming, multi-dimensional array processing, and more . We would use these commands to learn from simple commands to loops organization .
 After mastering the basics, we would take exams, which were logical computing tasks to code in this specific language . We would then learn how to use the language and code .
 AP was one of the few computer languages with Russian keywords . AP was AP, which was a programming language with AP . AP is AP's programming language, which has Russian keywords in it .
 You had to type your program in entering device which was a typewriter connected to a huge computer . The device was connected to the huge computer and was connected by a huge typewriter attached to a computer .
 The programs looked like step-by-step instructions, and if you made even one mistake you had to start all over again . If you made any mistakes, the programs had to be re-written .
 A solution for a linear algebraic equation usually would take 10 12 steps . To code a solution for such an equation usually takes around 10 steps . A solution to such a problem usually takes 10 steps or 12 steps to solve .
 Our teacher used to go for one week of “practice work and curriculum development,” to a serious IT shop with more advanced machines . Every once in a while, he would go for a week of practice work at the IT shop .
 At the time, heavy computing power was in the ES Series, produced by Soviet bloc countries . At that time, computers were powered by Soviet-blacked computers .
 She would bring back tons of papers with printed code and debugging comments for us to learn in classroom . She would also bring back lots of printed code for students .
 After two and half years of rigorous study using pencils and paper, we had six months of practice . After two-and-half years, we were able to use pencils for six months .
 Most of the time it was one of several scientific research institutes existed in Nizhny Novgorod . The institute was a scientific research institute in the city .
 Most of the girls from my class took computer operator jobs, but I did not want to settle . 'I wanted to be a computer operator, not a computer worker,' she says . 'Most girls from her class went to computer operators, but she wanted to go to college,' she
 I wrote a lot about my first college because now looking back I realize that this is where I really learned to code and developed my programming skills . Now looking back, I realized that this was where I learned a lot of programming skills at college .
 After this course I could read technical documentation in English without issues, I could now read technical documents without issues in English . The course also taught me how to read and understand technical documentation .
 My final university degree was equivalent to a U.S. master’s in Computer Science . I was a graduate in computer science at the University of Cambridge .
 In total he worked for about seven years in the USSR as a computer programmer, from 1982 to 1989 .
 I started out writing programs on special blanks for punch card machines using a Russian version of Assembler . I started writing programs for punch cards using a special Russian version .
 To maximize performance, we would leave stacks of our punch cards for nightly processing . We would use them to maximize performance . We are happy to provide a high-quality picture quality .
 Initially, there were not enough terminals and “machine time” was evenly divided between all of the programmers during the day . “Machine time’s” is evenly divided among programmers during that time .
 The terminals started to appear in the same room where programmers were. Then, the terminals started appearing in the room . The terminals appeared in the next room .
 "I did not know then, but I picked profession where things are constantly moving," she says . She says she is proud of her career and is proud to be a successful woman .
 The most I’ve ever worked with the same software was for about three years, he says . The most he’s ever worked . with the software was three years ago, when he worked with it for three .
 I had to quit my job two years before to avoid any issues with the Soviet government . I had had to . quit my . job two . years before . The Soviet government had to stop any issues . with the government .
 Every programmer I knew had to sign a special form commanding them to keep state secrets . "Every programmer I know had to . sign a . special form," he says. "exceptional" form .
 To refresh skills and become more marketable, I had to take programming course for six months . To refresh my skills and to become marketable I had a six-month course .
 The main differences between USA and the USSR was the level at which computers were incorporated in every day life . The main difference between the two countries is the level of computers being incorporated in everyday life .
 Some of the reasons were planed organization of economy, politicized approach to science . Some of those reasons include the politicization of the economy .
 Cybernetics was considered “capitalist’s discovery and was in exile in 1950s . Cybernetic was considered "capitalist” discovery and in exile from 1950s. Cyberneticism was considered 'capitalist' discovery .
 In the United States, computers were already widely in use, and even in consumer settings . In the U.S., computers are already widely used .
 In Russia as I was starting my professional life, it was considered more of a female occupation . In Russia, it is considered more than a woman .
 These choices included majors l ik e construction engineering and mechanical engineering . Students chose between engineering and construction engineering .
 Average salary for software developer in Moscow is around $2IK annually, versus $10K average salary for Russia as a whole . Average salary in Russia is $10,000 per year .
 Although I constantly have to learn new things, I’ve never had to worry about being employed, he says . "I’m never worried about not being employed," he says of his career . "It’s never been a problem for me," he adds .
 “Stalin hated gays” is something I’ve seen posted online numerous times by trots and anarchists . Indeed, ‘Stalin’s hatred of gays’ has been posted online many times, including on the internet .
 Such an accusation is by, its very nature, decontextualized and misleading . In any event, such an accusation of innocence is by the nature of the accusation . The accusation is, by the very nature of, is by contrast, is not true .
 Soviet legal and medical opinion on homosexuality was no different than what was accepted in the world at large . Homosexuality was a psycho-sexual disorder, a form of mental illness, according to the Soviet legal opinion .
 There were arguments made that attempted to tie homosexuality to fascism especially considering that many of Hitler’s Brownshirts were homosexual .
 The science of human sexuality was in its infancy for all of Stalin’s life, he says . The science was in the infancy for Stalin's life, and the science of sex was still unknown .
 It was only in 1975 that the American Psychological Association itself ceased to classify homosexuality as a mental disorder .
 To expect that Stalin, and Soviet Russia in the 1930s, would foresee the advances in medical and psychological science that would occur forty years in the future is either naive or malicious .
 It should be noted, by comparison, that the GDR had a much more open and positive policy with respect to homosexuality .
 Sexology studies in Germany were more advanced in Germany than in any place else in the world . This can be explained by the fact that studies in sexology were in Germany more advanced than elsewhere .
 This too has to be seen in historical context, as part of the deepening of scientific knowledge, as well as the spread of such knowledge throughout society in general .
 By 1987, GDR law stated that “homosexuality, just lik e heterosexuality, represents a variant of sexual behavior,” according to the law . By 1987 law, the GDR said that homosexuality was a “variation of sexual behaviour”
 Today, there is not a single communist worthy of the name who does not whole-heartedly support gay rights . "Today, there are not a few communists who do not fully-back gay rights," he said .
 Soviet legislation does not recognize so-called crimes against morality . Soviet legislation doesn't recognize 'crimes against morality' as crimes .
 "Once again, the important thing here is the level of scientific understanding and the extent of that knowledge has been spread throughout society at large," he says .
 Germany had the longest history of psychological and medical research on human sexuality . Germany had a long history of medical and psychological research on sexuality .
 Many German Communists were not only supportive of gay rights, but were pioneers of sexual liberation . Many of them were pioneers in sexual liberation, and were pioneers .
 Markus Wolf would later become the head of foreign intelligence for the GDR . The CIA would call him “the man without a face” because they didn’t possess a photograph of him .
 “Lenin decriminalized homosexuality” is a much beloved trotskyite trope that they love to throw at Marxist-Leninists . Furthermore, ‘Lenin decriminalizing homosexuality’ is a popular trotskyites trope . It is also a favorite trotlyite trope .
 Once the old criminal code had been repealed after the October Revolution, the antihomosexual article also ceased to be valid . Nevertheless, the article was still valid even though it was repealed after October Revolution .
 The absence of formal statutes against anal intercourse or lesbianism did not stop the prosecution of homosexual behavior as a form of disorderly conduct . Homosexual behavior was prosecuted in the U.S. for disorderly conduct in the 1930s .
 After the 1922 Penal Code was published there were in that same year at least two known trials for homosexual practices . Two known trials were held in that year for homosexuality .
 The official stance of Soviet medicine and law in the 1920s was that homosexuality was a disease that was difficult, perhaps even impossible, to cure . Homosexuality was difficult to cure, perhaps impossible, according to Sereisky .
 The Tsarist criminal code was declared null and void, the anti-homosexual statutes along with all the others . Tsarist criminals were declared null-and-void in the wake of the Great Depression .
 The 1922 and 1926 Soviet criminal codes did not mention homosexuality . Anti-homosexual laws remained on the books in the Islamic republics and Georgia .
 The intent and extent of the law was far different from what anti-Stalin and ‘left anti-communist” propaganda would have one believe . But, the intent and . extent of . the law is far different . from what ‘Left anti-Communist�
 Fleeing from hunger, they moved to the capital of the USSR from the village near Odessa . The family was forced to flee from hunger in the Soviet Union in order to survive .
 Vasily's parents sent him to grandparents when he was 7 years old . Vasily was sent to live with grandparents at the age of 7 .
 They couldn't even think their son to get into the German occupation as much as three and a half years . They couldn’t even think they . think their . son would get into German occupation .
 Another soldier gunner ordered the boy to return the unearned gift . The boy was ordered to return it to his father .
 The father and mother after the rear work with chemicals have become disabled, and ruined . The parents have been left disabled and ruined by the work done with chemicals .
 For example, together with his friends climbed into food trucks and stole products from food trucks . He and his friends were able to steal food from food truck trucks .
 After leaving the walls of the school with a gold medal, Vasily could not decide whom to become . Vasily said he wanted to become a professional footballer .
 He wanted to get a prestigious education, becoming, for example, a journalist . On the other hand, he wanted to become a journalist, he said .
 The love to the scene was instilled by a famous Soviet director Sergei Stein, who directed the film .
 In his amateur drama studio Lanovoi mastered the basics of the profession . He also mastered the basic skills of acting in amateur drama .
 In company with him were Valery Nosik and Vera Vasilyeva and prima operetta Tatiana Shmyga . The Russian Satire Theater is famous for its satirical theater productions .
 Vasily Lanovoi entered the Shchukin Theater School without questions asked . Vasily and Vasily are trained actors in the Russian theater .
 The production was awarded the Grand Prix at the All-Union competition of amateur, and Vasily, as a key figure, handsome, received five hundred rubles as prize money . Vasily received the prize money for the production .
 In 1971 he was recognized as the best actor of Soviet cinema . Lanovoi played Red Guard Ivan Varavva so enthusiastically that in 1971 he won the award for his role in the film .
 Lanovoi carried himself catching up with a freight train with flowers in his hands, ran across the rooftops of wagons, and rode a horse . By the way, all the tricks in the frame were in the film .
 Once he acted as a hero outside the frame saved Alina Pokrovskaya, when her horse suddenly rushed to the precipice . And once he saved her life, he also saved her horse from the cliff .
 Aristocrat of Soviet cinema Vasily Lanovoi was appreciated by both the audience and critics, and also officials . The film was shot in the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 "Very simple man, almost rustic. That he lives in one room with sick parents and two sisters, very simple man," he said .
 For roles, both visibly lost weight, from what have become even more attractive . The pair appeared to have lost weight from their roles .
 For a while, the actors, and most viewers, were hoping love awaken in them . For a time, they were hoping it would happen in them, but it did .
 The second wife of Vasily Lanovoi became Tamara Zyablova TV stage director and actress, who was 5 years older . She was married to a stage director who was five years older than him .
 The film crew found a ship, bought fabric, sewed the sails and sailed from Sevastopol to Koktebel . The crew of the film crew sewed their sails to the sails .
 After the double loss, the actor became indifferent to everything, except work . The actor was indifferent to all but work .
 Vasily gave his third wife actress Irina Kupchenko the chance to become a father . Vasily's third wife Irina gave him the opportunity to marry her .
 Both sons were indifferent to the profession of actors . To the great relief of their parents, both sons were able to succeed .
 Sergey has left this world suddenly 9 October 2013 at the age of 37 years . Sergey has died suddenly at age 37 years old . He is survived by his family and friends .
 The memory of his son continues in his daughter and granddaughter of Vasily Lanovoi and Irina Kupchenko Anna . He died at the age of 92 .
 In the era of perestroika Lanovoi virtually disappeared from the screens . In the 1990s, he appeared in films for the first time in his career .
 In his native Shchukin School he has gone from lecturer to head of the Department of scenic speech . He has also gone from the lecturer to the head .
 In the late nineties in the creative biography of the actor once again came a streak of light . The actor's career spanned the 1990s and 2000s, but he has since found success .
 In the past, Aristocrat of Soviet cinema Vasily Lanovoi didn't often play the cynical fans of vile intrigues .
 Stalin on the dialectic of a totalising proletarian culture : Fredric Jameson used to argue for what may be called a dialectic . of totalisation . Jameson argues for the totalisation of proletarian culture . Stalin .
 In some cases, a universal master narrative actually fosters a diversity of voices, which in some way gain the possibility to speak, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Some cases of master narratives actually foster the possibility of diversity," he says .
 Jameson was countering the postmodern ban on master narratives, but I am interested in another dimension of this dialectic, which relates to Stalin . I'm interested in the dialectic of Stalin, and I think it relates to the Stalin era .
 The socialist revolution has not diminished but rather increased the number of languages, he says . It awakens to new life a number of hitherto unknown or little-known nationalities, he writes .
 He goes on to weaken his insight a little, suggesting some mutual benefit between proletarian culture and local cultures .
 He says the process is dialectical, with each side engaging in the process . But he tries to get across the point that each side, or, rather, many sides engaging, is engaging . The process is a dialectical process, he says .
 Some forms of the universal, in this case the proletarian universal, actually enable diversity rather than stifling it . More to the point, some forms of . the . universal, such as the . proletarian universal . Universal, actually enables diversity rather . than stifled it .
 Of course, if you no longer buy into the universal in question and opt for another, such as when an enemy appears on the doorstep, then you fall outside the process .
 We are perhaps most used to the Cultural Revolution in relation to China the extraordinary decade of revolutionary upheaval that is still to be fully assessed for its drawbacks and benefits . The Cultural Revolution is still a decade of upheaval that still hasn't been fully assessed .
 The term 'cultural revolution' actually goes back to Lenin and Stalin, where it has a distinct meaning . However, the term ‘cultural revolution’ actually goes from Lenin to Stalin .
 The cultural development of the working class and of the masses is the chief lever for improving the state and every other apparatus . The development of literacy is the basis of all culture, but primarily the cultivation of the ability to take part in the administration of the country, is the main lever for
 This involved creating literate cultures where none existed before . Often this involved creating new literates cultures . This was the first time people had been able to read and write .
 Scripts were created, grammars written, people taught for the first time to read and write their own language, literature written, and a new intellectual and political leadership fostered . Scripts created and grammarars written .
 The affirmative action program also included strict punishments for racist statements and acts for scattered minorities which included the Jews . The Jewish community was punished for racist acts .
 All of this was predicated on the core socialist idea that the party and then the government should foster rather than repress different languages and cultures .
 The ‘national question’ was in many ways structured and determined by the issue of language . Indeed, the 'national question' was shaped by language, says David Cameron .
 For Babel, linguistic unity is desired and multiplicity is a seeming curse . For Pentecost unity is the source of unexpected diversity . For Babel unity is sought and diversity is not a problem .
 The human effort to build a city with a tower into the heavens makes God realise the immense potential of human power . Soon enough, the human . effort to . build a . city with . a tower . into the sky makes God . realise the . immense potential .
 Acts 2 may seem to provide a long-range resolution of this confusion of tongues . The account of Pentecost in Acts 2 appears to provide an explanation .
 The multiplicity of tongues, ‘as of fire’, appeared on the heads of the apostles, appearing on their heads . Here, they enable a united understanding of the new gospel of Christ .
 Multiplicity is a way of understanding the same message, which may be spoken in many tongues . Multiplicicity is therefore a way to understand the same messages, which can be said in many languages .
 One cluster of such policies may be described as Babelian, or rather pre-Babelian . The policies of the U.S. government may have been pre-babelian.
 The desire is for one language, which existed before the divinely instigated confusion of tongues and scattering of peoples, says the author . "The desire is to have one language," he says .
 Genesis 11 understood as yet another Fall story, or another facet of the story of the Fall that begins in Genesis 3 . Such a desire is predicated on the assumption that multiple languages are signs of the fall .
 Far better is a universal language that would overcome the strife and discord of many tongues . Far better than is the universal language, it would overcome strife, discord, many tongues, he says .
 Walter Benjamin’s search for the perfect, Adamic language that does not seek to communicate . Esperanto proponents of Esperanto and tsarist policy makers afraid of native languages . Nazi refusal to acknowledge minority languages in Germany and Austria such as the Sorbians and Slovene Carinthians
 Socialists are clearly Pentecostalists, in in favour of multiplicity and diversity . Socialists believe in diversity and plurality of people .
 What is needed is to cover the country with an extensive network of schools functioning in the native languages . Schools need to supply them with staffs of teachers who know native languages, he says .
 What is needed is widely to develop the press, the theatre, the cinema and other cultural institutions functioning in the native languages . What is really needed is the development of the press and the theatre in indigenous languages .
 Cultural revolution is therefore the Pentecost of languages and peoples . Cultural revolution means cultural revolution is also the birth of languages, peoples .
 As for how many languages Stalin knew, that is still a matter of debate . Stalin knew many languages, but it's still a mystery .
 The hammer and sickle on the coat of arms of the USSR is one of the most recognized symbols of Soviet power . The secrets of the hammer and the sickle are revealed in The Secret of the Hammer and Sickle .
 Freemasonry, Hinduism, and ancient Aryan and Slavic mythology are all found in the two crossed implements on the Soviet emblem .
 The hammer and sickle that decorated the coat of arms of the USSR is probably the most recognizable symbol of Soviet power and of the ideology of the state .
 The hammer was chosen for its traditional association with workers in European countries . The hammer is chosen because it is traditionally associated with European workers .
 Lenin's famous slogan about the unity of the proletariat and peasants was supposed to illustrate Lenin’s famous slogan . Together with an agricultural tool, it was meant to illustrate the slogan . Lenin's slogan is supposed to show unity of peasants and the proletariat .
 In April 1918 the final version of the emblem was approved a design by the Moscow artist Yevgeny Kamzolkin . The final version was approved in April 1918 by a Moscow artist .
 In summer 1918 the Fifth Session of Soviets officially adopted the symbol . The symbol was adopted in summer 1918 .
 It is interesting to note that Kamzolkin was not even a communist and, furthermore, he was a deeply religious man from a wealthy family . He was deeply religious and not communist .
 The artist was a member of the mystical artistic Society of Leonardo da Vinci for more than 10 years . He perfectly understood the meaning of the symbols .
 The hammer and sickle are associated with the Masonic symbol of the hammer and chisel . The sickle and hammer are the same symbol as the chisel and the sickle . It is the symbol of a chisel, a hammer and a sickle, and the hammer is the
 In European religious symbology, the hammer is associated with aggressive male force, physical as well as deadly . The hammer is a symbol of male aggression in the world .
 In China and India it is the symbol of the destructive triumph of the forces of evil . In India and China it is a symbol for the evil forces that have destroyed society .
 It is now difficult to say what meanings Kamzolkin insinuated into his drawing . The artist's work was published in 2007 .
 Muscovites hinted at the dictatorial methods of the Bolsheviks . The fact is that it sounds like “with a throne” [put together and inversed, the words for hammer and sickle create the word prestolom .
 In Christianity, the sheaves and the harvest are equated with the human souls that the Harvester,e.e. the Lord, will gather after the end of the world .
 During the Middle Ages death was depicted not with a scythe but specifically with a sickle . It is interesting to note that during the Middle Age death was shown with the sickle instead of a scry .
 The pagan pantheons of various Indo-European and Slavic peoples feature a goddess called Mara or Morana . Morana traditionally held a sickle in her left hand, traditionally held by Mara .
 In Hinduism the goddess of death Kali, sister of Shiva, holds a sickle in her left hand . Kali is the sister of the Hindu god of death Shiva, who is worshipped in Hinduism .
 The eagle on the coat of arms of revolutionary Austria also holds a sickle in its left claw . Curiously, the sickle is l ik ewise placed on that side on the Soviet crest . The sickle was placed on the left claw of the eagle on Austria's coat
 The Hammer and Sickle plant was one of the largest steelmaking and metallurgical factories in Moscow . It had belonged to the French merchant Jules Goujon prior to the revolution . The factory was renamed Hammer & Sickle .
 There even used to be a special golden medal called the Hammer and Sickle . It was developed by Stalin’s personal architect and designer, Miron Merzhanov, who designed the medal .
 Lenin and Stalin were myths, invincible supermen in whose honor songs and poems were composed, films made, and gifts sent from all over the world . Lenin and St. Stalin were mythic supermen, immortal supermen .
 ‘The Myth of the Beloved Leader’ exhibition opened at the State Historical Museum on Red Square . Many of these items are now on show for the very first time at an exhibition .
 Exhibition has gathered exhibits that have been lying in warehouses for more than 20 years . Many of the exhibits had never been exhibited in Russia before . The exhibition has been held in warehouses around the world for over 20 years.
 They were shown in Sweden, in Germany, in other countries, but not in Russia . Russia is the only country in the world where they were shown .
 Works that did not meet these were rejected at the highest level, says Lyubov Lushina, historian and one of the creators of the exhibition .
 The actual appearance of Stalin small in stature, with traces of smallpox on his face did not inspire due reverence . Stalin was a small man in stature and was small enough to fit in a small frame .
 The real biographies of the leaders were not as heroic as they would have like them to be, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Stalin’s picture of a girl feeding a lamb with a bottle of milk, which he cut out of his favorite magazine Ogonyok... these did not fit the carefully cultivated image of heroism . Stalin cut out the picture of the girl feeding her a lamb from a magazine he cut
 People were to treat these leaders as icons, avatars of a new religion that the Soviet authorities had invented . The leaders were to be treated as icons and icons, according to Soviet authorities .
 The Bolsheviks fought fiercely against the Orthodox faith, seeing in it a competitor . The Orthodox faith was seen as a competitor in Russia .
 The “holy place is never empty” as icons and the cross had been outlawed, they had to come up with something new with Soviet symbols . The ‘holy place’ was never empty as icons were outlawed .
 The five-pointed red star became the new “cross” The new ‘icons” were Lenin and Stalin . The five point red star was the new 'cross’
 A closed book meant sacrament, while an open one meant the path of truth . A book was a sacrament, and a book was meant to be a sacrament .
 In this there is a striking similarity to the representation of saints on icons . In this case, the depiction of saints is similar to that of saints in icons .
 Among the gifts presented to Stalin Stalin there is even a triptych featuring the six “ages” of the leader .
 It was probably for this reason that it was forbidden to show the wooden bust of Lenin depicting him laughing, which can also be seen at the exhibition .
 Lenin was sent gifts from all over the world, from Japan to Madagascar . Clare Sheridan, niece of Winston Churchill, made a bust of the Soviet leader herself .
 There is also the Chukchi legend of the hero Lenin, carved on a walrus tusk . There are also portraits of him made of thousands of grains, of bird feathers, foal wool, poplar fluff, wire, amber, sugar and beads .
 A prisoner, serving time for forgery, created a portrait composed of texts of Lenin’s quotes . The portrait was created by a prisoner in prison for forging .
 Or maybe there was another reason he might have been released earlier for such an ideological act . Maybe there was also another reason for him to be released .
 Stalin received so many gifts that in 1949, on the 70th anniversary of his birth, they were exhibited in three museums . Stalin's gifts were exhibited at three museums on the anniversary of the birth .
 There were gorgeous silkscreens sent by Mao (Stalin hung them in the hall of his summer cottage) A leather briefcase made from an entire Brazilian crocodile, and a collection of vintage pipes .
 The real Stalin could hardly make an advantageous impression against the background of the fictional Stalin, whose portraits hung on all the walls . Stalin himself did not attend the exhibition of his presents .
 Stalin stopped in front of a picture in which he was depicted inspecting a cavalry parade in 1919 . Once, attending an exhibition dedicated to the 15th anniversary of the Red Army, Stalin stopped .
 “Though there are few of us, we have fervent hearts, and our minds crave knowledge,” write some young communists .
 Trade declined by 50%, heavy industry came to a virtual standstill, unemployment went as high as 33% and so on . Heavy industry was hit hard by the recession, unemployment was 33% . Trade declined 50% and heavy industry was at a standstill .
 The USSR was not part of the ‘world’ and ‘globe’ at the time . Obviously, for such accounts the USSR was . not . part of . the world .
 The first and second five-year plans had an extraordinary effect, industrialising a ‘backward’ economy in a way that makes every other industrial revolution pale by comparison by comparison .
 Agriculture was mechanised and collectivised, and output, employment, and standard of living grew by staggering proportions . Agriculture became a major industry boom in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Many at the time prophesied the imminent economic collapse of the Soviet Union 'mediaeval fossils to whom facts mean nothing' others were willing to give honour .
 Russia is forging ahead while all too many of our factories and shipyards lie idle . Approximately 3,000,000 of our people despairingly seek work. Russia is forge ahead .
 Jokes have been made about the five-year plan, and its failure has been predicted . The failure of the plan is predicted .
 All of which leads me to ponder whether there was not a connection between that Depression and the huge and disruptive processes underway in the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was in the midst of a massive Depression in the 1930s .
 Such a massive shift in a place l ik e the USSR was bound to have an effect globally . The Soviet Union was ruled out of existence in the early 1980s .
 Stalin's rethinking of Marxist theories of human nature was crucial for Stalin’s rethinking . Stalin's 'rethinking' of the 1930s was crucial to his rethinking Marxist theories . Stalin was fascinated by industrialisation and collectivisation drives in Russia .
 During those intense periods of extraordinary reconstruction literally unleashing the forces of production in a way not seen before, many who were wildly enthusiastic about the process .
 This was the time of the ‘foi furieuse’, of Stakhanovism, of mass enthusiasm and emulation . This was a time of ‘fierce enthusiasm’ and ‘imitation’ for the French .
 There were also many losers, since it was a profoundly disruptive time . But there were also some losers, as well as many losers . "There were many losers," says CNN's John Sutter .
 This is when what I would like to call a ‘materialist doctrine of evil’ really comes into its own . This is where the 'materialist doctrines of evil' really come into their own. This is the case of 'materialism'
 People look for the class enemy outside the collective farms, says the author . They look for persons with ferocious visages, with enormous teeth and thick necks, and with sawn-off shotguns in their hands .
 Anti-Soviet elements in the countryside are in the main “quiet,” “smooth-spoken” people . The present-day kulaks and kulak agents are in Russia's countryside . The main ‘quiet’ and ‘smooth
 There is no need to look for them far from the collective farms . They are occupying posts as storekeepers, managers, accountants, secretaries, etc.
 It is inherently anti-communist, as it ends up praising perestroika and condemning Stalin, but still has good information nonetheless .
 In 1934 the Soviet Government established the Jewish Autonomous Region, popularly known as Birobidzhan, in a sparsely populated area some five thousand miles east of Moscow . The region was established by the Soviet government in 1934 .
 Birobidzhan was part of the Kremlin's effort to create an alternative to Palestine . Designated as the national homeland of Soviet Jewry, it was designed to create a national alternative .
 The Kremlin's efforts to create a socialist Jewish homeland in Birobidzhan are explored in a new exhibit . The exhibit explores both the Kremlin's attempts to create and reasons for the failure of the experiment . The exhibition includes photographs never seen outside of the Soviet Union .
 The story of the Soviet Zion sheds light on a host of important historical and comtemporary issues regarding Jewish identity, community, and culture . The Soviet Zion shed light on the issues of Jewish identity .
 In a remote region in the Russian Far East, there is a Jewish enclave that has existed for over sixty years . Jewish enclave has existed in the region for over 60 years .
 The territory highlighted here was designated the Jewish Autonomous Region in 1934 . This is the story of the region's pioneers, a group with little experience in agricultural development .
 Birobidzhan, formerly Tikhonka, is the capital city of the Jewish Autonomous Region . It was formerly known as TikhOnka .
 Most Jews living in Tsarist Russia eked out a meager existence, and were required to reside within the empire's western and southwestern provinces, the Pale of Settlement . Joseph Stalin, Stalin, 1913 .
 After the 1917 Bolshevik seizure of power, most of the 2. mi llion Jews lived in small towns and cities within the Pale of Settlement, and made their livings from petty trade, small-scale handicraft production .
 Jews were hard hit by the collapse of the economy due to the combined impact of world war, revolution, civil war, and pogroms . Between 1914 and 1921, Jews were hit hard by the impact of the economic collapse of 1914-21 .
 Soviet propaganda poster asserts that the one-room Jewish primary school produces a slavish attitude and leads to shopkeeping, the prayerhouse, and enmity among peoples .
 The Soviet school prepares healthy people, capable of building the socialist order in which agricultural labor, factory work, and brotherhood among peoples are primary objectives . In contrast, the Soviet school prepared healthy people .
 Communist officials hoped to refashion the occupational profile of Jews by transforming them into farmers . Communist officials in the 1920s hoped to transform Jews into farmers.
 The government wanted this experiment in social engineering to weaken popular anti-Semitism . It wanted to promote the integration of Jews into the emerging socialist society .
 The Kremlin promoted Jewish agricultral colonization in Crimea, Ukraine, and Belarus . The Kremlin also promoted Jewish agriculture in Crimea .
 By 1930, 46,560 Jewish families, or approximately 231,000 people, lived in such colonies throughout the Soviet Union . By the end of the 1930s, there had been 231,500 Jewish families living in the USSR .
 The region known as Birobidzhan was designed as the official territory for Jewish land colonization . The region was designed by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in 1926 .
 The mostly marshy territory, approximately twice the size of New Jersey, had been annexed by Russia in 1858 . Russia annexed the largely marshy region in 1859 .
 Some 27,000 Russians, Cossacks, Koreans, and Ukrainians were already living in the region when Jewish settlement began .
 A Jewish family works outside their home in the late 1920s or early 1930s . Came as peasants .
 Their underground home, known as a zemlianka, was a mud hut with sod and thatch built over a hole in the ground . The family's underground home is a mud home with sod, thatch and thatched over the hole .
 Jews from Minsk interested in moving to Birobidzhan apply at a KOMZET (Committee for the Settlement of Jewish Toilers on the Land) office, circa 1928 . Jewish migrants slept out-of-doors until tents arrived and barracks were erected .
 KOMZET was the government organization in charge of recruiting and supervising the agriculture settlement of Jews . The organization was responsible for recruiting, supervising and supervizing the agriculture .
 Jewish settlers arrive at the train station in Tikhonka, a small village along the route of the Trans-Siberian Railway . Jewish settlers arrived at the station in the small village .
 Tikhonka grew rapidly after 1928 and was renamed Birobidzhan several years later . Chief point of disembarkation for people moving to the region .
 Birobidzhan and Palestine by I Sudarskii underscored the Soviet Government's conviction that the newly selected territory in the Soviet Far East was a viable alternative to Palestine . The Soviet Government was convinced that the new territory was an alternative .
 The Kremlin hoped to score propaganda points in the international arena by establishing the first Jewish homeland in the modern era . The Kremlin hopes to score .
 OZET commissioned posters to advertise its lotteries to raise funds for Jewish agricultural settlement throughout the Soviet Union . Primary emphasis was placed on the J.A.R. by 1930 .
 The posters were designed by Mikhail Dlugach , a well-known and respected member of the Soviet artistic community .
 The harsh realities of life in Birobidzhan in the early years of colonization contrasted starkly with the promises and public pronouncements of the government, which did not provide decent housing, food, medical care, and working conditions .
 In many instances, Jewish agricultural colonists found they were given land unsuitable for cultivation because it had not been surveyed and drained . In many cases, the land was not surveyed or drained .
 In other cases, the fledgling collective and state farms lacked basic necessities such as potable water, barns, livestock, tools, and equipment . The state farm collective and collective farms lack basic necessities, such as water and barns .
 People unbearably suffered from mosquitoes...but we knew, the future is ahead . The future is going to be very different .
 Kremlin granted autonomous administrative status to the Birobidzhan region in 1934 . The region was designated the Jewish Autonomous Region . It is now Russia's second-largest city .
 The decision signaled the government's official recognition of the area as the national territory of Soviet Jewry . The decision was made in 1953 .
 Supporters of Soviet Union hailed the formation of the J.A.R. as a sign of the freedom and rights enjoyed by Jews under communism . Supporters of the Soviet Union said it was a sign that Jews were allowed to have freedom under Soviet communism .
 Kremlin spearheaded publicity campaign to publicize Birobidzhan experiment . Kremlin also wanted to raise funds and encourage migration to the region .
 OZET (Society for the Settlement of Jewish Toilers on the Land) dubbed an airplane the ""Birobidzhanets" and had it traverse Belarus and Ukraine as part of a publicity stunt to raise funds .
 During its two-week trip in 1933, the ""Birobidzhanets"" covered some five thousand kilometers, distributing pamphlets and other propaganda . During the trip, they covered some 5,000 kilometers .
 The Jewish autonomous region grew by leaps and bounds during the 1930s . Grew by leaps . bounds . The Jewish . autonomous region is now an autonomous state .
 By 1939 nearly 109,000 people lived in the region, though only 18,000 of them were Jews . By 1939, nearly 100,000 Jews were living in the area .
 The city of Birobidzhan boasted 30,000 residents by the end of the decade . The city was booming in the 1990s and 2000s .
 Banner was a gift from the workers of Kharkiv to the Jewish Autonomous Region in 1935 . Banner was given on the first anniversary of the region's existence as an autonomous region . Banner is one of the most famous banners in the world of Soviet Russia .
 From the late 1920s until the mid-1930s, over a thousand foreign Jews moved to the Jewish Autonomous Region . Building socialism Via Panel 18 .
 Starting in 1935, all foreigners wishing to settle in the Jewish Autonomous Region had to pay $200 to KOMZET (Committee for the Settlement of Jewish Toilers on the Land), which covered all expenses while they traveled .
 Jews had family roots in Russia and were disenchenchanted with life in Europe and the Americas . Many of these Jews had been disenchanted by life in the Americas.
 Foreign Jews who settled in the Jewish Autonomous Region were attracted by the mystique of tilling the land, engaging in physical labor and building socialism .
 The Birobidzhan Project was well known among world Jewry . The project was the brainchild of a Jewish family . It was the first Jewish group to take part in the project .
 Supporters of the Jewish Autonomous Region organized committees to publicize awareness of the region and raise funds . Supporters organized committees for the region .
 The collection never found its way to the Jewish Autonomous Region, and the fate of the works of art is unknown .
 A group of Jewish artists from Chicago issued a portfolio of 14 lithographs celebrating the Jewish Autonomous Region .
 Morris and Rose Becker moved from California to the ICOR Commune in Birobidzhan in 1931 .
 Morris and Rose fervently believed in socialism and Zionism . They pinned their hopes on the Soviet Zion . Morris believed in Soviet Zionism .
 After several years of living in the commune, the Beckers became disillusioned with the Birobidzhan experiment . The Beckers lived in a commune for several years .
 Morris died of pneumonia while preparing to bring the children back to America . Morris died within a year of bringing the children home to America.
 Their children, Mitchell and Elizabeth, remained in the Soviet Union after their parents' deaths . Their children remained in Russia after their deaths .
 Yiddish was used by the Soviet's government to foster the region's specifically Jewish nature . The Soviet government used the language to promote the Jewish nature of the region .
 The region established Yiddish schools, newspapers, and cultural institutions . The region was established in the 1920s .
 The regional government printed street signs, railway station signs, and postmarks in both Yiddish and Russian .
 In 1935 the government decreed that all government documents, including public notices, announcements, posters, and advertisements, had to appear in both Yiddish and Russian . In 1935 all government papers had to be written in Yiddie and Russian.
 Yiddish was intended to serve as the bedrock of a non-religious, Soviet Jewish culture and community . The language was introduced via Via Panel 23 in the USSR .
 Kremlin believed that the use of Yiddish as the national secular language of the Jews would make the Jewish Autonomous Region the new center of Soviet Jewish life .
 The Kaganovich Jewish Theater was named after prominent party leader Lazar Kaganov, who was Jewish . The theater is named after the party's Jewish leader, who died in 1953 .
 The theater was established in 1934, when members of the Moscow State Jewish Theater arrived in the J.A.R. along with musicians, technical personnel, and costumes .
 Jews who migrated to the Jewish Autonomous Region shied away from farm labor . Most Jews gravitated to jobs with prior experience such as retail and service sectors .
 By 1939 less than one quarter of the Jews living in the region engaged in agricultural pursuits . By 1939, less than a quarter of Jews living there were engaged in farming .
 Atheism was a major component of the Kremlin's official policy . Atheism is a major part of Russia's anti-Muslim policy .
 Leadership of the Jewish Autonomous Region held a series of lectures designed to undercut the appeal of Jewish Religion .
 This notice from the 1930s was posted throughout the region and listed a series of lectures and other events that were held in factories and workers' clubs at Passover .
 The lectures covered such topics as the incompatibility of socialism and religion . The lectures included topics such as religion and socialism .
 The bloodletting of the purges unleashed by Stalin and the secret police between 1936 and 1938 directly affected the inhabitants of the Jewish Autonomous Region . The purges were directly affected by the inhabitants .
 No reliable estimates exist regarding the number of Jewish Autonomous Region residents who fell victim to the purges .
 In all probability, thousands of people were arrested, sent to labor camp system, or executed . Thousands of people may have been arrested or sent to the burgeoning labor camps .
 The political leadership of the region was particularly hard hit by arrests and executions . Political leaders were arrested and executed in the region .
 Khavkin survived his interrogation by the secret police and managed to emerge alive from the gulag after Stalin's death in 1953 . He managed to survive his interrogation and escape from the Soviet gulag in 1953 after Stalin died .
 Khavkin's wife was accused of trying to poison prominent party leader Lazar Kaganovich with homemade gefilte fish during his 1936 visit to the Jewish Autonomous Region . She was also imprisoned after being accused of attempting to poison the party leader with homemade fish .
 With the onset of the purges, the Kre ml in gutted all projects that promoted Yiddish and Jewish culture in the Jewish Autonomous Region . Supposed failure Via Panel 28 .
 The Birobidzhan experiment failed, but responsibility for the failure does not belong solely to the Kre ml in . The experiment failed to find a solution to the failure of the experiment, scientists say .
 Yiddish and the Jewish Autonomous Region did not figure prominently in the minds of those seeking to get ahead . Young Soviet Jews were assimilating at a rapid pace, assimilating .
 The effort to create a new Jewish identity devoid of religious heritage and traditions proved to be a difficult task .
 By the end of the 1930s, the settlement of Jews in the region came to a standstill . The settlement in the area was largely Jewish .
 Most non-Soviet observers concluded that the experiment in building a Soviet Zion had failed . The experiment had failed, and most non-Russian observers concluded it had failed.
 The trauma of the Second World War breathed life again into the Jewish Autonomous Region, as it did into Soviet Jewish society in general . Ironically, the trauma of World War II also breathed life into the region .
 In 1945 the government revived the idea of Jewish migration to the region in order to address the problems confronting Soviet Jews in the wake of the war . In 1945, the government once again revived .
 Between 1946 and 1948, perhaps as many as 10,000 Jews moved to the Jewish Autonomous Region of Spain .
 Estimates indicate as many as 30,000 Jews were living in the region by the end of 1948 . Estimates indicate that as many . as many of the region were Jewish .
 The American Birobidzhan Committee was a Communist front organization . It was formed in the 1930s . The committee was a front organization for the Communist Party .
 After the Second World War, it actively promoted the cause of the Jewish Autonomous Region by raising money and sending food and clothing .
 Albert Einstein was honorary president of AMBIJAN . Albert Einstein served as honorary president . The support of prominent public figures, such as Albert Einstein, lent AMBIjAN credibility .
 The figure of 25,000 Jewish settlers to the Jewish Autonomous Region since the end of the war was an exaggeration . The figure is an exaggeration.
 The concentrated effort to populate the Jewish Autonomous Region with Jews occurred as the Kre ml in relaxed its grip on Soviet society and permitted a resurgence of Jewish cultural life .
 Artists and writers were confined by the ideological straightjacket constraining them since the 1930s . Despite this revival, artists and writers are confined to the ideological strajacket .
 Supposed "murderous effort 1 shows the inherently anti-communist nature of this project" Supposed to be a murder-suicide effort .
 In 1948 Stalin launched a murderous campaign to destroy all Jewish intellectual and cultural activity in the Soviet Union . The Jewish community was wiped out of existence in Russia .
 He and others feared the perceived political disloyalty of Soviet Jewry after the establishment of the State of Israel . They were motivated by unrestrained antiSemitism .
 Jewish officials and cultural figures were arrested and imprisoned . In the Jewish Autonomous Region itself, prominent Jewish officials were arrested, imprisoned .
 30,000 books from the Judaica collection of the public library were burned . In perhaps the most serious attack, some 30,00 books were burned in the attack on the library .
 Anti-Semitic assault in Stalin's last years delivered a mortal blow to the Birobidzhan experiment . The anti-Jewish assault was a major blow to Stalin's experiment .
 Whatever promise the Jewish autonomous region held in the minds of both foreign and Soviet Jews had evaporated by the time of Stalin's death in 1953 . The region's promise to be an autonomous region was evaporated in 1953 after Stalin died .
 The post-Stalin era did not bring any substantial changes to the Jewish Autonomous Region . Jewish life remained sterile, and Jewish life in the region remained sterile .
 The continued existence of the Jewish Autonomous Region served the Kremlin's purposes, presumably as proof of the regime's commitment to allow Jews national and cultural rights . Nonetheless, the continued presence of the region served Kremlin's needs .
 The advent of perestroika and glasnost' in the mid-1980s encouraged local officials and Jewish activists to revive Jewish life in the Jewish Autonomous Region . Perestoika enters Via Panel 34 .
 During the first half of the 1990s, Yiddish was again offered as a subject in several schools, including the Birobidzhan Teachers' College . During the 1980s and 1990s the language was taught in schools .
 Sunday schools were opened and public celebrations of Jewish holidays became commonplace . Jewish holidays were commonplace in the 1930s .
 Of the current population of over 200,000 in the Jewish Autonomous Region, no more than a few thousand are Jewish . No more than one in the region is Jewish . Of the population there are only a few hundred Jews .
 Hundreds are leaving the region every year for Israel and other places . In addition, hundreds of people are also moving to the region .
 Most Jews in the Jewish Autonomous Region feel isolated from their Jewish heritage . Like many Jews elsewhere in the former Soviet Union, most Jews feel isolated . Most Jews are Jewish in the region .
 There is no sign that the official designation of the Jewish Autonomous Region will be taken away . Still, there is still no sign of removing the designation .
 There is no indication that the Jewish community of the Jewish Autonomous Region, no matter how small, will lose interest in recovering its Jewish heritage . Nor is there any indication that there will be no interest in returning to its roots in Spain .
 More than seventy years of communist rule did not extinguish all forms of Jewish identity . More than 70 years of Soviet-occupied Russia did not completely extinguish Jewish identity, Jewish leader says .
 State of affairs in Birobidzhan today strongly suggests that the future of Jewish life in that region is bleak . Yet the state of affairs .
 The hopes and aspirations that so many of the original Jewish settlers placed in the Birobidzhan experiment remain unfulfilled . The hopes, aspirations that . so many . many of . the original . Jewish settlers . placed in . the experiment remain a mystery .
 Birobidzhan film was created in 1934 in the eastern USSR . Documentary was aired in 2009 aired on RT . Jewish Autonomous Region was formed in 1939 .
 Birobidzhan: An Experiment to Create a Soviet Jewish Homeland . Far East Jewish Community Chairman Passes Away . Far Eastern Research Center for Jewish Culture and Yiddish .
 A Yiddishland in the Far East . Emigration to Israel empties 'homeland' for Jews contrived in Stalinist era (CNN article, anti-Communist)
 The Sad and Absurd Story of Birobidzhan, Russia's Jewish Autonomous Region, is anti-communist book . The book is published in Russia's anti-Communist book, The Sad And Absurd Stories of the Jews .
 I did not intend to say what had to be said, but previous speakers have said it well and to the point . "I didn't intend to. because the previous speakers ... have said all that had been said," he said. "I'm not going to say anything. I
 You shock brigaders have no doubt that the collective farms are on the right path, says the shock brigade . The collective farms have been in a long line of success in the world of collective farming .
 There are still not a few among the peasants, even among the collective farmers, who have doubts about whether the collective-farm path is the right one .
 People have bent their backs to the kulaks and landlords, to the usurers and speculators . Indeed, for hundreds of years people have lived in the old way, have followed the old path, have bent .
 "It cannot be said that that old, capitalist path was approved by the peasants," says Maoist leader . Maoist Maoist: "It is not said that the old capitalist path is approved"
 No one had actually proved that it was possible to live in a different way, in a better way . But that old path was a beaten path, the customary path, and no one had proved that .
 It's time to abandon the old path, it is time to begin living in a new way, in the collective-farm way . It is time not as everyone lives in bourgeois countries in a bourgeois way, but cooperatively, says the author .
 At all events, the new path is not the customary path, it's not the beaten path, not yet a fully explored path . The new path may not be the usual path, but it is not a beaten path .
 These are doubts that are now troubling one section of the labouring peasantry . These are the doubts that have now troubling some of the labourers .
 The question I have just put cannot be described as an idle one. Hence, the question I've just put is not a idle one, it's not a very idle one .
 Some comrades think that the transition to the new path, to the collective-farm path, started in our country three years ago . The collective farm path is a key part of the transition, comrades say . Some comrades say it started in their country three .
 Of course, the development of collective farms on a mass scale started in our country three years ago, says the president . The development began in 2010, when the first collective farm was established .
 The transition, as we know, was marked by the routing of the kulaks and by a movement among the vast masses of the poor and middle peasantry to join the collective farms . The transition was marked .
 In order to start this mass transition to the collective farms, certain preliminary conditions had to be available . Without these conditions, the mass collective-farm movement would have been inconceivable . But in order to begin the transition, certain conditions had been available, the author says .
 It was necessary to drive out the landlords and the capitalists, to take the factories and the land away from them and declare these the property of the people . The factories and land should be declared property of people .
 Thirdly, it was necessary to curb the kulaks and to take machines and tractors away from them, says the PM . "It is necessary to ... take machines, tractors and other machines away," he says .
 Fourthly, it was necessary to declare that the machines and tractors could be used only by the poor and middle peasants united in collective farms . The machines were banned from being used by the peasants .
 Finally, it was necessary to set up a new tractor industry, to build new factories for the manufacture of agricultural machinery, to supply tractors and machines .
 Without these preliminary conditions, there could have been no question of the mass transition to the collective-farm path that started three years ago . The collective farm movement has been in existence for three years .
 In order to adopt the collective-farm path it was necessary first of all to accomplish the October Revolution, to overthrow the capitalists and landlords, to take the land and factories away from them and to set up a new industry .
 It was with the October Revolution that the transition to the new path, to the collective-farm path, started, started . The revolution was the birth of the collective farm movement in Russia .
 This transition developed with fresh force only three years ago because it was not until then that the economic results of the October Revolution made themselves fully felt, says the president .
 All revolutions were one-sided revolutions, but those were not, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The October Revolution was one of the most successful revolutions, he says .
 One form of exploitation of the working people was replaced by another form, but exploitation itself remained . The exploitation of working people has never been replaced by a new form, the author says .
 One set of exploiters and oppressors was replaced by another set of exploited people, but exploited people still remained . One of the world's most powerful men and women are still exploited by the majority of the population .
 Only the October Revolution set itself the aim of abolishing all exploitation and of eliminating all exploiters and oppressors . Only the revolution set itself to abolish all exploitation, only to eliminate all exploitation .
 The revolution of the slaves eliminated the slave-owners and abolished the form of exploitation of the toilers as slaves . The revolution ended slavery in favor of the slave owners .
 In their place it set up the serf-owners and the form of exploitation of the toilers as serfs . The toilers were exploited by the serfs, but in their place was the exploitation of toilers .
 Under the slave system the ""law"" permitted the slave-owner to kill his slaves . The ""law" permitted the slaves to be killed by their owners .
 Under serfdom the ""law"" permitted the serf-owner ""only"" to sell his serfs . The ""law" permitted the owner of a serf to sell the serfs, and the owner could not sell his own serfs.
 The revolution of the peasant-serfs eliminated the serfowners and abolished the form of exploitation through serfdom . The revolution ended serf ownership of serf owners .
 In their place it set up the capitalists and landlords, the capitalist and landlord form of exploitation of the toilers . But in their place they set up themselves, the capitalism and landlords set up .
 Under the capitalist system the ""law"" permits ""only"" of the toilers being doomed to unemployment and destitution, to ruin and death from starvation . Under the capitalism system the  toilers are doomed to  destitution and ruin . Under capitalism the toiler is doomed to ruin
 It was only our Soviet revolution, only our October Revolution that dealt with the question, not of substituting one set of exploiters for another, but of eradicating all exploitation . All exploiters, all the rich and oppressors, old and new .
 The October Revolution was a preliminary condition and a necessary prerequisite for the peasants' transition to the new, collective-farm path . That is why the October Revolution is a prerequisite to the transition to a collective farm path .
 The October Revolution helped ehem to shake off the yoke of the landlords and capitalists, the usurers and kulaks, the merchants and speculators . They acted rightly, because the October Revolution . The revolution helped shake off yoke .
 It is all very well to drive out the oppressors, to curb the kulaks and speculators . It is also well to fight for the landlords and capitalists, says Ravi Patel .
 In order to become entirely free from the old fetters it is not enough merely to rout the exploiters, it is necessary also to build a new life . The labouring peasants must improve their material conditions and culture, writes the author .
 In order to achieve this, a new system must be set up in the countryside, the collective-farm system . The collective farm system is based on the collective farm .
 Under the old system, the peasants worked singly, following the ancient methods of their forefathers and using antiquated implements of labour . They worked for the landlords and capitalists, the kulaks and speculators . The peasants worked and lived half-starved while they enriched others
 Under the new, collective-farm system the peasants work in common, cooperatively, with the help of modern implements . They live without capitalists and landlords, without kulaks and speculators . They work with the object of raising their standard of welfare and culture .
 Under the old system, the government is a bourgeois government, and it supports the rich against the labouring peasantry . Over there, under the old . government, under this . system, under . the old government, it is bourgeois .
 Under the new, collective-farm system, the government is a workers' and peasants' government . It supports the workers and peasants against all the rich of whatever kind, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There are people who think that some sort of third path could be followed . There are some who think there could be a third path to the world's largest island .
 This unknown third path is most eagerly clutched at by some wavering comrades who are not yet convinced that the collective-farm path is the right one . This unknown path is being sought by some wobbly comrades .
 They want us to return to the old system, to . return to individual farming, but without capitalists and landlords, they say . They say they want individual farming to be individual farming .
 They ""only"" want us to permit the existence of the kulaks and other small capitalists as a legitimate phenomenon of our economic system, they say . Moreover, they ""only" want us to permit the presence of the small capitalists .
 Actually, this is not a third path, but the second path — the path to capitalism . "This is not the third path," says the author of the book .
 It means restoring kulak bondage, restoring the exploitation of the peasantry by the kulaks . It means giving the peasants power and restoring the peasants' exploitation .
 The restoration of the kulaks is bound to lead to the creation of a kulak power and to the liquidation of the Soviet power . The restoration will lead to formation of a bourgeois government, writes Alexander Vatanka .
 The formation of a bourgeois government is bound to lead in its turn to the restoration of the landlords and capitalists . And the formation of the bourgeois government will lead in turn to restoration of capitalism, he says .
 The so-called third path is actually the second path, the path leading back to capitalism . The third path, however, is the path to capitalism, he says . "The third path," he says, is actually leading to capitalism.
 Ask the peasants whether they want to restore kulak bondage, to return to capitalism, to destroy the Soviet power and restore power to the landlords and capitalists . Ask them if they want a return to Soviet power, they say .
 Just ask them, and you will find out which path the majority of the labouring peasants regard as the only right path . The majority of peasants regard the only path they have chosen .
 The labouring peasants did right to reject the capitalist path and take the path of collective-farm development . The Labouring peasants rejected capitalism and chose collective farming instead .
 It is said that the collective-farm path is the right path, but a difficult one . The collective farm path is said to be a difficult path for farmers, but it is a good path .
 The main difficulties are over, and those difficulties which now confront you are not worth talking about seriously . But the point is that the main difficulties in the UK are over . The difficulties are now over and not worth taking seriously .
 Your speakers have praised the workers of Leningrad, Moscow, Kharkov, and the Donbas . Your speakers here have praised workers of Moscow, Kiev, and Donbas, Russia .
 They said these workers have achievements to their credit and that you, collective farmers, have far fewer achievements . They said that these workers had achievements to them credit . They also said that collective farmers have far less achievements than collective farmers .
 For whole weeks not a piece of bread, let alone meat or other food, was distributed to the workers in 1918 . The workers were not given food for whole weeks, not even meat .
 The best times were considered to be the days on which we were able to distribute to the workers in Leningrad and Mos-cow one-eighth of a pound of black bread each, and even that was half bran .
 Two-year-old says she was in the hospital for two years . She was in hospital for a month or six months, but for two whole years . The hospital was forced to close its doors after a series of scandals in the 1990s .
 Workers bore it and did not lose heart; for they knew that better times would come and that they would achieve decisive successes . But the workers bore it, did not .
 Just compare your difficulties with the difficulties and privations which the workers have endured, and you will see that they are not even worth talking about seriously, says President Obama .
 The collective farms should have land fully secured to them and suitable for cultivation . What is needed, in the first place, is that land should be secured to the collective farms, says Ravi Agrawal .
 It is well known that the best lands have been transferred to the collective farms and have been durably secured to them . The best lands are well known to be transferred to collective farms . The collective farms have been hard secured to farmers .
 Collective farmers can cultivate and improve their land as they please without any fear that it will be taken from them and given to somebody else . The collective farmers can also cultivate their land without fear .
 What is needed, secondly, is that the collective farmers should have at their disposal tractors and machines . What is also needed is that farmers should be able to use their own tractors .
 Everyone knows that our tractor works and agricultural machinery works produce primarily and mainly for the collective farms . We are supplying them with all modern implements .
 What is needed, finally, is that the government should support the collective-farm peasants to the utmost, both with men and money . It should prevent the last remnants of the hostile classes from disrupting the collective farms .
 Name another country where the government supports not the capitalists and landlords, not the kulaks and other rich, but the labouring peasants . The government supports the peasants, not capitalists or landlords, as well as the rich .
 "There is not, nor has there ever been, another country lik e this in the world," says President Obama . "There are no other countries like this," he says of the US .
 Only here, in the Land of Soviets, does a government exist which stands for the workers and collective-peasant peasants, against all the rich and exploiters .
 You have all that is needed to extend collective-farm development and to free yourself entirely from the old fetters . Hence, you have all the necessary skills needed to develop collective-farms .
 Of you only one thing is demanded — and that is to work conscientiously . To distribute collectivefarm incomes accord ing to the amount of work done, distribute incomes according to the work done . Take care of collective farm property, take care of the tractors and machines .
 You will surely agree with me that to overcome these difficulties, i.e., to work conscientiously and to take good care of collective-farm property, is not so very difficult . You will certainly agree that working conscientially and taking good care is not very difficult.
 The more so that you are now working, not for the rich and not for exploiters, but for yourselves, for your own collective farms . The more . So far, you are working not for rich or for exploitation, but rather for yourselves .
 As you see, the collective-farm path, the path of socialism, is the only right path for the labouring peasants, says the Communist Party leader . The collective farm path is the right path to the peasants, he says .
 Our Immediate Task — To Make All the Collective Farmers Prosperous — is to make all the collective farmers Prosperous . Second question: "To make all of the collective Farmers Prosperate"
 One of our achievements is that we have helped the vast masses of the poor peasants to join the collective farms . We have helped them join us to join collective farms. We are proud to be able to do so, says the leader of the party .
 One of our achievements is that by joining the collective farms, the vast masses of the poor peasants have risen to the level of middle peasants . The collective farms have at their disposal the best land and the finest instruments of production .
 One of our achievements is that the vast masses of the poor peasants, who formerly lived in semi-starvation, have now, in the collective farms, become middle peasants, have attained material security . One of the country's biggest achievements is the creation of a collective farm .
 One of our achievements is that we have put a stop to the differentiation of the peasants into poor peasants and kulaks . We have helped the poor peasants to become masters of their own labour in the collective farms, to become middle peasants .
 The poor peasants were becoming poorer, were sinking into ruin and falling into bondage to the kulaks . The peasants were sinking in ruin .
 The middle peasants were trying to climb up to the kulaks, but they were continually tumbling down and swelling the ranks of the poor peasants, to the amusement of the kulkaks . They were constantly tumbling .
 The only ones to profit by this scramble were the kulaks, and perhaps, here and there, some of the well-to-do peasants . It is not difficult to see that the only ones who profit from the scramble were kulak .
 At the lowest estimate, 35 per cent of all the peasant households were poor-peasant households, compelled to bear the yoke of bondage .
 The economically weaker strata of the middle peasants, comprising more than half of the . middle peasantry, are dependent upon the kulaks . That is apart from the economically weaker . strata .
 By the expansion of collective-farm development we have succeeded in abolishing this scramble and injustice . We have smashed the yoke of kulak bondage, brought this vast mass of poor peasants into collective farms, given them a secure existence there .
 Not less than 20 million poor peasants have been rescued from kulak bondage, and have attained material security thanks to the collective farms . It means that not less than one llion of the peasant population have been saved from destitution .
 It is an achievement such as has never been known in the world before, such as no other state has yet made such a feat . It is the first state to have achieved such an achievement in its history .
 There you have the practical, tangible results of collective-farm development . The results are the results of the fact that the peasants have taken the collective farm path .
 "This is only our first step, our first achievement on the path of collective-farm development," farmer says . "But this is only the first step," he says .
 "It would be wrong to think that we must stop at this first step," she says . "It's not the first step, but it's the first achievement," she adds .
 In order to advance further and . defini tively consolidate the collective farms we must take a second step, we must . secure a new achievement . We must secure a . new achievement. We need to secure a New achievement.
 It is to raise the collective farmers, both the former poor peasants and the former middle peasants, to a still higher level . The collective farmers are to be raised to a new level of collective farming, the government says .
 Thanks to collective farms we have succeeded in raising the poor peasants to the level of the middle peasants . Thanks to the collective farms, we have been able to raise the poor to the levels of middle peasants.
 We must now succeed in taking another step forward, and help all the collective farmers rise to the level of prosperous peasants . We must succeed in helping all the former poor peasants to rise to a level of prosperity . We need to take a further step forward and take another step .
 We need only make better use of the machines and tractors, we need only improve the cultivation of the land, to increase the quantity of our produce two-fold and three-fold . We need to make more use of these machines and . tractors to increase our produce, says
 This will be enough to convert all our collective farmers into prosperous tillers of collective-farm fields . And this will be quite sufficient to convert some collective farmers .
 In order to become prosperous a peasant had to wrong his neighbours; he had to exploit them . He had to sell to them dear and buy from them cheap; to hire some labourers and thoroughly exploit them; to accumulate some capital and then, having strengthened his position, to creep into
 The prosperous peasants aroused suspicion and hatred among the poor and middle peasants . This, indeed, explains why . under individual farming, the prosperous peasants aroused suspicion, hatred among peasants .
 For collective farmers to become prosperous it is not all necessary now that they wrong or exploit their neighbours . Collective farmers should not exploit neighbours, farmers say . collective farmers need to be more prosperous, farmers argue .
 Private ownership of land and the renting of land no longer exist in our country . The machines and tractors belong to the state, and people who own capital are not in fashion in collective farms . And besides, it is not easy to exploit anybody now, says the author .
 Only one thing is now needed for the collective farmers to become prosperous is to work conscientiously, to make proper use of the tractors and machines . The collective farmers must also make use of draught cattle and cultivate the land properly .
 Against the exploiters, against those who do not work themselves, but compel others to work for them, and get rich at the expense of others . "The exploiters"
 Socialism demands, not loafing, but that all should work conscientiously . Socialism demands that they should work not for others, not for the rich and exploiters, but for themselves, for the community .
 If we work conscientiously, work for ourselves, for our collective farms, we will succeed in a matter of two or three years in raising all the collective farmers, both the former poor peasants and the former middle peasants, to the level of prosperous peasants .
 President Obama has made a few miscellaneous remarks about his administration .
 Lenin: "We old Bolsheviks are not people of the least account in the world, comrades. Yet we old Bolshevik are not . Yet we are not. We are not, comrades, comrades," he said .
 The question of women in the collective farms is a big question, comrades say . The question is, comrades. We need to talk to each other about the issue of collective farms .
 "I know that many of you underestimate the women and even laugh at them," she said . She said: 'I know you underestimate them. I know that you underestimate you. I'm sorry'
 The collective-farm movement has advanced a number of remarkable and capable women to leading positions. Primarily, the point is that the collective-farming movement is advancing women to top positions.
 Women have long ago ceased to be backward and have come into the front ranks. Look at this congress, at the delegates, and you will realize that women have long . ago ceased being backward and has come into front ranks, she says .
 It is our duty to bring the women in the collective farms forward and to make use of this force . It is also our duty not to let women in collective farms go away . It's the women's duty to take advantage of the power of the collective farm women, says Mrs.
 Of course, not so long ago, the Soviet government had a slight misunderstanding with the women collective farmers . The Soviet government also had a little misunderstanding with collective farmers. The government has a history of miscommunication with the farmers.
 The cow has been settled, and the misunderstanding has been removed . But now this business about the cow is settled, says the author .
 We have achieved a position where the majority of collective-farm households already have a cow each . The majority of the collective farm households are already having a cow .
 Another year or two will pass and there will not be a single collective farmer without his own cow . "There will be no cow in the collective farmer's fields," says the author of the book .
 We Bolsheviks will see to it that every one of our collective farmers has a cow, says Lenin . "We Bolsheviks" will see that every member of the collective farmers have a cow," he says .
 As for the women collective farmers, they must remember the power and significance of the collective farms for women . Only in the collective farm do they have the opportunity to be on an equal footing with men .
 Without collective farms — inequality; in collective farms - equal rights . In collective farms, equality is equal rights, inequality is inequality, inequality . Collective farms are the result of collective farms .
 Let our comrades, the women collective farmers, remember this and let them cherish the collective-farm system as the apple of their eye . Let's remember this, and let our comrades cherish this and cherish the system as an apple of the eye .
 A few words about the members of the Young Communist League, young men and women, in the collective farms . Young people and women in the Young Communists League . The collective farms are a collective farm .
 Among the peasants there are not a few old people, borne down by the burden of the past, burdened with the habits and the recollections of the old life. Among them, they are not only old people .
 They are free from the burden of the past, and it is easiest for them to assimilate Lenin's behests . Lenin's "dictatorship" is the easiest way they can assimilate his behests, writes David Frum .
 It is easiest for the youth to assimilate Lenin's behests, it is their mission to give a helping hand to the laggards and waverers . And precisely because it is easiest . for the . youth it is the mission of the youth . to help the . lagg
 The task is to study and study again the principles of Leninism. Hence, the task is . Hence, we must study and . study again . Leninism .
 Individual peasants do exist, and we must not leave them out of our calculations; for they are our collective farmers of tomorrow . Individual peasants are individual peasants, and they must not be forgotten .
 "I know that one section of the individual peasants has become utterly corrupt and has taken to speculating," he said . "I'm not surprised that some of the peasants are very corrupt and have become so corrupt," he added .
 The collective farmers accept individual peasants into the collective farms with great circumspection, and sometimes do not accept them at all . That, no doubt, explains why they accept individual farmers with circumspection .
 This, of course, is quite right, and there cannot be any objection to it . This is right, but it is not the first time it has happened in the UK .
 There is another, larger section of individual peasants, who have not taken to speculating and who earn their bread by honest labour . But there is also a larger part of the population who have no interest in speculating in the market .
 These individual peasants, perhaps, would not be averse to joining the collective farms . The collective farms are a form of collective farms in China .
 Farmers are hindered in this, on the one hand, by their hesitation as to whether the collective-farm path is the right path . On the other hand, there are bitter feelings now existing amongst the collective farmers against the individual peasants .
 "Of course, we must understand the feelings of the collective farmers and appreciate their situation," says the farmer . "We must understand their feelings," he says .
 "During the past years they have suffered not a few insults and jeers at the hands of the individual peasants," the mayor says . The mayor's family has been in a state of mourning for three years .
 But insults and jeers must not be allowed to have decisive importance here, says Simon Tisdall . "I don't want to be insulted and jeered," he says .
 He is a bad leader who cannot forget an offence, and who puts his own feelings above the interests of the collective-farm cause . He is the bad leader, who can't remember an offence and puts his feelings above his own interests .
 If you want to be leaders, you must be able to forget the insults to which you were subjected by certain peasants, says President Obama . "You must remember the insults," he says .
 Leaders, if they want to be true leaders, must be able to forget an offence if the interests of the cause demand it . There you have another example, showing that leaders must be .
 I am not opposed to the exercise of circumspection in accepting people into the collective farms . I'm not opposed . I am also opposed to ... circumspection, I said .
 I'm against barring the path to the collective farms to all individual peasants without discrimination . But I'm not against barring peasants from accessing collective farms without discrimination, he says .
 The collective farmers must not forget that not long ago they themselves were individual peasants . Not long ago, the collective farmers were collective peasants . They must remember that they were themselves peasants .
 The collective farmers of Bezenchuk have written a letter to the Canadian government . The letter was written by the collective farmers .
 It shows that among our collective farmers there are not a few experienced and politically conscious organizers and agitators in the cause of collective farming, who are the pride of our country . It shows . Among those involved in collective farming is not only experienced but politically conscious .
 The letter contains one incorrect passage with which we cannot possibly agree with . But this letter contains an incorrect passage, and we cannot agree .
 The Bezenchuk comrades describe their work in the collective farm as modest and all but insignificant work . They describe the efforts of orators and leaders, who sometimes make speeches of inordinate length, as great and creative work .
 The times have passed when leaders were regarded as the only makers of history, while the workers and peasants were not taken into account . Workers and peasants have not been considered in history's making history .
 The destinies of nations and of states are now determined, not only by leaders, but primarily by the vast masses of the working people, writes David Cameron . Cameron: "The destinaries of nations ... now determined primarily by workers, not by leaders"
 The workers and peasants are building factories and mills, constructing mines and railways, building collective farms and state farms, creating all the values of life, feeding and clothing the whole world . They are the real heroes and creators of the new life .
 It is not good when people overrate their strength and begin to be conceited about the services they have rendered. It's not good to overrate your strength and start to be concerned about the services you have rendered .
 It is still worse when people begin to underrate their strength and fail to see that their ""modest"" and ""insignificant"" work is great and creative work that decides the fate of history .
 I would like the Bezenchuk comrades to approve this slight amendment of mine to their letter . "I would like to be able to get back in touch with them again. I would be happy to see them again," he writes .
 Fascist lies are accepted as the official truth, taught in Ukrainian schools and promoted by Ukrainian academics . Ukrainian academics are also promoting the fascist ideology in their country .
 The Holodomor, derived from “to kill by starvation,” refers to the phony genocide by famine in the Soviet Ukraine . The facts are based on the facts .
 It's a lie disseminated by Ukrainian nationalists and fascists, with no historical evidence. It’s a lie, it's a falsehood disseminated in Ukraine, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says it's not a historical truth, but a lie spread by nationalists .
 It originated in the Ukrainian diaspora, a population led by veterans of Ukrainian Nazi forces . It was led by Ukrainian Nazi veterans .
 While the famine of 1932-33 took a terrible toll, it was only one of a long series of catastrophes . The famine was one of the worst of the 1930s and '30s famine in the world .
 Russia and Ukraine had experienced famine every two to four years for a millennium — yes, for a thousand years, at least — and devastating famines every decade or so . Ukraine and Russia have experienced famines in the past two centuries and a century .
 There were serious famines in 1920-1923, 1924-5, 1927-8, and again in 1932-33 . The country was hit by a series of famines during the Great Depression .
 The Soviet leadership, Joseph Stalin included, did not understand the extent of these famines for some time . Stalin included the Soviet leadership .
 They sent tractors and “political departments” to organize agriculture . They also sent tracters and "political departments" to organize farming .
 About 10 percent of the population of Ukraine died from the 1932-33 famine, roughly the same percentage as in 1920-23 . About 10 per cent of Ukraine's population died in the famine, about 10 percent in 1933 .
 The 90 percent who survived brought home the harvest and stopped the famine — with significant Soviet aid . 90 percent of the survivors brought back the harvest . Soviet aid helped stop the famine .
 Farming was reorganized on a large-scale and increasingly mechanized basis . The collectivization of agriculture took place mainly in 1930-31, mainly in Poland .
 Collectivization was the greatest humanitarian triumph of the 20th century . Collectiveization was a humanitarian triumph, the author says . Collectivism was the most humanitarian triumph in history .
 World War II and the worst drought in centuries was caused by the devastation of the drought . The drought affected all of Europe and much of Asia, and affected much of the continent .
 Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists and the Ukrainian Insurgent Army were trained by Germany’s Nazis . The Organization of Ukraine Nationalists was trained by the Nazis in the 1930s .
 The Nazis entered the USSR with Adolph Hitler’s troops and participated in mass murders of Jewish and Polish workers and communists . They entered the Soviet Union with Hitler's troops and killed Jews and Communists .
 Stepan Bandera led the more hard-core fascist wing of the OUN and eventually consolidated control over Ukraine’s nationalist forces . Stepan led the hard-line fascist wing .
 In 1941, the Banderist leadership declared an “independent” Ukraine state, which was in reality a satellite of Nazi Germany . The Banderists declared an "independent" Ukraine state .
 The Ukrainian Insurgent Army was formed in part from the 14th Waffen-SS Division (storm troopers), an all-Western Ukrainian Nazi SS division . The 14th SS Division was formed from the all-Ukrainian SS Division .
 In short, both of Ukraine’s foundational historical myths — or, more accurately, lies — have a Nazi origin . Both of Ukraine's historical myths, or or not, have been made up by the Nazis .
 Russian-speaking workers in eastern Ukraine are affected by these lies as well . Russian-language workers in the region are affected as well as those in Ukraine .
 Now the open fascists are becoming prominent in the new Ukrainian government in Kiev . The open fascists have become prominent in Ukraine's new government . The Kiev government has been accused of being fascist in Ukraine .
 This isn't surprising, since fascist lies have been propagated and taught in Ukraine for the past 15 to 20 years . This isn’t surprising, it’s not surprising, as fascist lies are propagated in Ukraine . It's not surprising that fascist lies were propagated
 Like the pre-revolutionary Czarist regimes, the Soviet government exported grain . The question of grain exports is still a mystery .
 While the USSR was exporting it was also allocating much more grain to seed and famine relief . The USSR also allocated much more of its grain to grain and seed relief .
 The government accumulated some three million tons in reserves during this period . It allocated two million tons from that to famine relief .
 There was simply not enough food to feed the whole population, even if all exports had been curtailed, as they were . However, there was simply too much food for all of the population, as it was .
 The Soviet government used these procurements to feed 40 million people in the cities and industrial sites who were also starving . This is further evidence that the harvest was small .
 About 10 percent of the population of Ukraine died from famine or associated diseases . About 10 per cent of Ukraine's population died from the famine or related diseases .
 The vast majority of the survivors were peasants, army men of peasant background or workers of peasant origin . 90 percent survived, but 90 percent of them were peasants .
 The surviving peasants had to work very hard, under conditions of insufficient food, to sow and bring in the 1933 harvest . Surviving peasants worked very hard to bring in a harvest .
 The Soviet government’s large-scale relief campaign which, together with their own hard work, enabled the peasants to produce a large harvest in 1933 .
 The so-called “Holodomor’s or “deliberate” and “man-made” famine interpretation is not simply mistaken on some important points . It is not the first time the famine was deliberately deliberate .
 Its proponents misrepresent history by omitting evidence that would undermine their interpretation . It's not the first time that history has been misrepresented by historians .
 Later in life, he came to see the importance of socialism for women . Far less known is the way he became an advocate of socialism .
 His speeches at earlier women’s congresses may have been somewhat patronising, but here the issue of socialism and women gains clear expression .
 The campaign, of course, remains the butt of much anticommunist ranting, with assertions that it ’caused’ the famines of the 1930s .
 The furious process of industrialisation in the 1920s had to do so in a new way . To begin with, the furious process had to change the way it was done .
 The whole industrialisation process had to rely on internal, or socialist accumulation . So the whole industrialised process must have been based on internal accumulation .
 The government decided to set higher prices for manufactured goods, as a type of super-tax that would flow back into industry . The government set the price of manufactured goods to be set at $1,000 per cent .
 Prices on agricultural goods were set lower, even if there were occasional shortages . Prices were also set lower for agricultural goods, even though there were shortages .
 Obviously, this went directly counter to the supposed ‘iron law’ of supply and demand . Obviously, it went directly against the supposed 'iron law of supply .
 It led to not a little speculation by the kulaks, or wealthy farmers, among others . Obviously, it led to speculation by wealthy farmers .
 Most importantly, it produced the first layer of economic contradiction . Most importantly it produced an economic contradiction in the United States .
 Second layer was between industrial change and the rate of agricultural change . The second layer of change was between the industrial and agricultural changes .
 The furious pace of industrialisation left agriculture far behind, so that an ever larger gulf opened up between them . Agriculture was left behind by the industrialisation of the past and agriculture was far behind .
 The ‘super-tax’, or ‘scissors’ approach would not hold out forever in such a situation, so something had to be done in relation to agriculture . The 'Super-tax' approach was not holding out forever, so the 'scissors'
 Stalin toyed with the idea that the small farmers should be fostered, since their approach had been tested over centuries . Stalin said small farmers had tested their approach over centuries and should foster them .
 The government opted for the very Left approach of collectivisation as a way of dealing with the growing contradiction between industry and agriculture . But in the end, he and the government opted .
 As some have suggested, the collectivisation drive was the most difficult task since the conquest of power . Stalin’s Works also point out that collectingivisation was the hardest task of the Stalinist .
 In short, it really was an other revolution, a massive undertaking never quite seen before, achieved in a breathtakingly short period of time . Not without a few unexpected side-effects, it was a revolution in the world .
 Stalin reflects on such revolutionary changes in a letter to Gorky from 1930 . In this context, Stalin writes: "I am happy to have the opportunity to change the world's view"
 It cannot be the case that now, when we are breaking the old relations in life and building new ones, that the youth should represent a homogeneous mass of people who sympathise with us, that there should be no differentiation among them .
 In such a “racking turmoil,” we are bound to have people who are weary, overwrought, worn-out, despairing, dropping out of the ranks and, lastly, deserting the camp of the enemy .
 It means people will be paid according to the labour they have provided . It is the first time people have been paid based on the amount of their labour .
 Different pay scales means different pay scales in terms of skills, type of labour, and contribution to the overall good of the socialist project .
 It also means that one should take responsibility for one’s labour and stay in the same job for a while . It is also a good idea to stay at the top of your own job and take responsibility .
 Communism is like socialism in that it does not fall into the trap of individualist equalitarianism in relation to labour . Yet, communism does fall into an individualist equalitarianism in relation to labour .
 Obviously, the abilities differ, as do the needs depending on one stage in life . Whether one has children or not, whether one is sick or healthy or healthy, the needs depend on the person .
 A slightly different image of the man who is charged with callously slaughtering millions, drooling while doing so . The man drooling as he callsously slaughters millions of millions .
 A little later, in an address to graduates from the Red Army training centre, he tells this famous story to illustrate his point . He tells the famous story in a speech to illustrate the point .
 You, Mr Wells, evidently start out with the assumption that all men are good, Wells said . Wells, Wells, wrote in a letter to the author of the book .
 I cannot yet appreciate what has been done in your country, I only arrived yesterday, says President Obama . I can't yet appreciate the things I have done in my country, says Obama .
 "I have already seen the happy faces of healthy men and women," says the doctor . "I know that something very considerable is being done here," he says . But he says he knows that something is still being done .
 It would be a good thing to invent a five-year plan for the reconstruction of the human brain . The human brain obviously lacks many things needed for a perfect social order, says Dr. David Cameron .
 It may be called the vision of the future commune, based on the massive collectivisation drive of the late 1920s and 1930s . The commune is based on a massive collectivistisation drive .
 In between the lines, we may catch a glimpse of the idea that communism is a state of becoming rather than being, although he does tend to the latter .
 The future commune will arise on the basis of a more developed technique and of more developed artel, the commune says . The commune is based on an abundance of products, rather than a lack of technique .
 Natural Disaster and Human Actions in the Soviet Famine of 1931-1933 . Mark B Tauger. The Soviet famine was the largest famine in Soviet history .
 The 1932 Harvest and the Famine of 1933 were the worst of the famine in Soviet history . Mark Tauger is the author of a book on the Soviet famine in 1933 .
 I have now read carefully Terry Martin’s The Affirmative Action Empire . Terry Martin has now read closely Terry Martin's The Affirmed Action Empire. I have also read Terry's book about the gay community .
 It has its shortcomings, especially in the theoretical area, thereby missing some of the complexities and dialectical tensions at work . It has been criticised for its lack of understanding of the subject matter .
 Martin does not use this to develop a Marxist theory of the state based on actual practice, but then he is not so interested in Marxist theory . Martin's book is published by Simon Tisdall at the University of Cambridge, Cambridge .
 Interviewers did not ask direct questions concerning ethnic conflict . Interviewers didn't ask directly questions about ethnic conflict.
 Russians, Ukrainians, Jews, Georgians, Armenians and Armenians, Kalmyks and Tatars . Respondents were asked to list the ‘distinguishing characteristics’ of Russian, Ukrainians and Jews .
 Many of the respondents replied that there were no ethnic differences whatsoever . To the astonishment of the interviewers, many of the interviewsers said there were none .
 The interviewers pressed their case, but the respondents determined that there were two very different issues at stake . Interviewers pressed the case, and the respondents decided that there was no difference between the two .
 Second, respondents inferred an interest by the interviewers in popular prejudice in the Soviet Union . Second, the respondents inferred that the interviews were made by interviewers of Soviet-era Russia .
 Many respondents connected the absence of popular prejudice and conflict to state policy . Even more, many of the respondents connected it to state policies . The survey was conducted by CNN iReport .
 In response to the question concerning ‘distinguishing characteristics’, a dozen respondents asserted that the absence of open national prejudice was due to severe punishments for racial-hate speech .
 You cannot tell somebody that he is a Ukrainian and brag that you are a Russian or you would be arrested . You cannot brag about being Ukrainian or Russian . You would also be arrested if you bragged about being a Russian, he says .
 It is strictly forbidden by law to offend any member of any nationality, regardless of whether he is a Russian, Ukrainian, White Russian, or anything else . It is also forbidden to offend anyone from any nationality .
 If you cussed out a member of a minority group, there was serious trouble . If you called out a minority member, you could face serious trouble.
 If you call a Jew a ‘zhid’, he can go to the police and you will get a prison sentence . If a Jew calls a 'zhid' he will be sent to prison, he will face a jail sentence .
 A Russian proverb, ‘An untimely guest is worse than a Tatar’, is a Russian proverb . A primary school teacher told a personal story of how she almost lost her job after using it .
 These positions were voiced in context of immediate memories of Nazi racial theory and practice . Bear in mind that these positions were also voiced in the context of memories of the Nazi racial practice .
 The materialist doctrine of evil, if not a thorough revision of Marxist theories of human nature . And that they arose from the same period as the extensive purges of the 1930s part of my investigation of the practical contributions to the materialist doctrines of evil .
 President Obama has been accused of being a corrupt politician in the past, but his record shows that he is not . His record-breaking achievements in the U.S. show that he has been a successful businessman . He has been in the spotlight for more than a decade .
 Those who wish to make the accusation have to rely on hearsay secondand third-hand snippets from passing conversations . Those within and without the USSR who were not favourably disposed to Stalin .
 'Once such a position is ‘established’, it is then possible to read some of his actions and written comments in such a light. And once such a . position is . established, it will then be possible to . read some . of his . actions and . written
 For instance, the ‘anti-cosmopolitan’ campaign of the late 1940s becomes a coded 'anti-Semitic' campaign . The ‘Anti-Semitism’ of the 1940s was a coded campaign. For example, the anti-Semitism of the 1930s was
 Many doctors in the Soviet Union were Jewish; therefore the attack on doctors was anti-Semitic . However, the only way such an assumption can work is that many doctors were Jewish . The only way to work is to assume that many were Jewish, and therefore attack on them is anti-
 Even more doctors were Russian, but for some strange reason, the plot is not described as anti-Russian . Equally, even more Russians were involved in the plot . The plot was described as 'anti-Russian' by some Russian doctors .
 Even hearsay indicates that Stalin was opposed to the deep-rooted anti-Semitism of Russian culture . Unfortunately for Stalin’s accusers, even hearsay .
 During the anti-cosmopolitan campaign of 194849 which was actually anti-capitalist in the wake of the Second World War it became the practice in some journal articles to include, where possible, the original family names in brackets after the Russian name .
 If one assumes, even subconsciously, that Hitler and Stalin were of the same ilk, then it follows that Stalin too must be an anti-Semite . Stalin also must have been anti-Semitic, writes David Frum .
 Apart from the sheer oxymoron of an anti-fascist fascist, this assertion seems very much l ik e the speculative thought bubble that becomes ‘true’ through a thousand repetitions . Apart from that, it seems that this assertion is very much the same as an anti
 "I prefer to follow a rather conventional approach, instead of relying on hearsay, gossip and speculation," he says . I prefer to use a 'conventional' approach, not hearsay and gossip .
 "That approach is to pay attention to his written statements and actions. That approach is paying attention to the written statements, actions."
 Stalin deals extensively with the Jews and the Bund (The General Jewish Workers’ Union of Lithuania, Poland, and Russia). He points out that dispersed minorities such as the Jews would be given the full range of protections, in terms of language, education, culture and freedom of conscience,
 This would become his standard position, reiterated time and again and contrasted with the tsarist autocracy’s fostering of pogroms . ‘This would become the standard position.’
 Yiddish, Jewish institutions and the significant presence of Jews at all levels of government . It was also reflected in extensive programs among Jews, including the fostering not without problems and failures .
 In 1931, he described anti-Semitism as an ‘extreme form of racial chauvinism’ that is a convenient tool used by exploiters to divert workers from the struggle with capitalism . And in 1931, in response to a question from the Jewish News Agency in the U.
 This was no empty boast, as those who accuse Stalin of anti-semitism seem to assume . Stalin was not anti-Semitic, as many who accuse him of it seem to think, he said .
 It may be surprising to some, but one of the key tasks of the NKVD was to counteract waves of residual anti-Semitism . The NKVD's task was to counter waves of anti-Semitic anti-Jewish sentiment .
 Yes, one of the jobs of the infamous secret police of the USSR was to root out anti-Semitism . Yes, the job of the notorious secret police was to find out what was anti-Semitic .
 The ‘affirmative action’ program of the Soviet Union was enacted in Stalin’s capacity as Commissar for Nationality Affairs . The territories of identifiable ethnic minorities were established, with their own languages and forms of education .
 As for dispersed minorities, even within such regions, they were provided with a stiff framework of protections, including strong penalties for racial denigration .
 They too in a program of indigenization should be able to use their own languages, operate their own schools, law-courts and soviets, and have freedom of conscience in matters relating to religion .
 By the mid-1930s the Jews too were identified as a ‘nation’ with territory, having the Jewish Autonomous district in Birobidzhan . Indeed, by the 1930s, the Jews also had territory, with territory .
 It was the first move towards Jewish territory in the modern era . It eventually failed, but it was first attempt to take Jewish territory .
 Anti-religious campaigns led to a profound transformation in Jewish institutions and culture . Jews who were not religious but proud of contributions to Soviet society . The 'sovietisation' of Jewish culture produced Jews with contributions to society .
 Equality of rights of citizens of the U.S.R. is an indefeasible law . Equality of right in all spheres of economic, state, cultural, social and political life, is indefeasibility law, it is said .
 Any direct or indirect restriction of the rights of citizens on account of their race or nationality is punishable by law . Any advocacy of racial or national exclusiveness or hatred or hatred and contempt is punishable .
 The church in the U.S.R. is separated from the state, and the school from the church . In order to ensure to citizens freedom of conscience, the church in . the . state is separated . from the government, the school and the church are separated .
 Freedom of religious worship and freedom of anti-religious propaganda is recognized for all citizens . Freedom of religion and anti-religion is recognized in the U.S. Constitution .
 Article 124, which Stalin included in the face of stiff opposition, eventually led to the rapprochement between Stalin and the church during and after the Second World War . Incidentally, article 124, was included in Stalin's decision .
 The church petitioned for churches to be re-opened, religious personnel to be admitted to jobs, and religious candidates ran in the 1937 legislative elections . The church also petitioned to re-open churches and for religious candidates to be allowed to run .
 Citizens of the USSR are equal before the law, without distinction of origin, social or property status, race or nationality, sex, education, language, attitude to religion, type and nature of occupation, domicile, or other status . Citizens of Soviet Union are equal without distinction,
 The equal rights of citizens of the USSR are guaranteed in all fields of economic, political, social, and cultural life . Equal rights of Soviet citizens were guaranteed in the Soviet Union .
 Exercise of these rights is ensured by according women equal access with men to education and vocational and professional training . Equal opportunities in employment, remuneration, and promotion, and in social and political, and cultural activity, are ensured .
 Citizens of the USSR of different races and nationalities have equal rights . Citizens of different nationalities were citizens of the Soviet Union . Citizens were allowed equal rights to equal rights in Russia .
 Any advocacy of racial or national exclusiveness, hostility, or contempt, are punishable by law . Any direct or indirect limitation of the rights of citizens or establishment of direct, indirect privileges on grounds of race or nationality are punishable .
 In its initial articulation it was the first affirmative action constitution in the world . It was an early version of the constitution that was first to have affirmative action .
 Stalin once again comments on fascism, in the context of Hitler’s recent seizure of power in Germany . In his report to the seventeenth congress of the CPSU, Stalin comments again on fascism .
 Some think that war should be organised by a ‘superior race’ against an ‘inferior race,” primarily against the Slavs . Others think that only such a war can provide a way out of the situation, for it is the mission of the �
 Let us assume that this queer theory, which is as far removed from science as the sky from the earth, is put into practice . We assume that it is put in practice .
 Ancient Rome looked upon the ancestors of the present-day Germans and French in the same way as the representatives of the “superior race” now look upon the Slav races .
 It is well known that ancient Rome treated them as an “inferior race,” as “barbarians” and destined to live in eternal subordination to the “superior race” of today . Ancient Rome had some grounds for this, which
 The non-Romans united against the common enemy and brought Rome down with a crash . The upshot was that the non-romans, i.e., all the “barbarians,” united against a common enemy .
 A federation assumes disparate groups that then slowly merge together to form a state, like the U.S. or Switzerland . A federation assume disparate groups then merge together, like Switzerland or the United States .
 The catch with the situation in the Soviet Union was that such disparate groups did not exist, except for a brief time after the ‘civil war’ that followed the October Revolution . Such disparate groups didn't exist until after the 'civil war'
 Many still want to apply the term ‘empire’ or ‘colonial power’ to the USSR, since these are their own frameworks . There are many still who l ik e to apply . to applying the term 'empire' or 'colonial power'
 It sought to impose its imperial will on subject peoples much like the tsarist autocracy that it overthrew, if not seek world domination . Or it exploited the ‘border lands’ for the sake of raw material and therefore a colonial power .
 The Soviet government was extraordinarily careful to avoid repheating the patterns of the tsarist empire, which involved suppressing the many nationalities that made up the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was extremely careful not to repheath the patterns .
 For Belorussians, Latvians and Georgians, nationalism was a positive movement . It was seen as one with the socialist project . For them, particularly the BelorUSSians, Latvia, Georgians and Belarusians .
 A nation-state is impossible to think now without Benedict Anderson’s ‘imagined community’ argument . Benedict Anderson: A nation state is impossible now without the 'imagined state' argument .
 The nations in question were not predicated on ethnicity and they included both minority and majority nations . However, the problem with that term is that the nations were not based on ethnicity .
 In light of this situation, the Soviet Union itself was not a nationality, not a nation, and not the nation-state . The Soviet Union was "not a nationality" in light of the situation, and therefore not a state"
 For Terry Martin, this was the ‘imagined community’ of the Soviet Union . Terry Martin: This was the 'imagined' community of the USSR .
 The Soviet Union was not a nation-state but a multi-national socialist state, he says . But he suggests that the Soviet Union wasn't a nation state but a socialist state .
 In this way it provides one model as to how a socialist state formation might develop . It provides one example of how the socialist state might develop.
 The fact that this model deeply influenced China in the 1950s also suggests that China has also developed into a multi-national state, albeit with its own inflections since then . The model was deeply influenced by the Chinese state in 1950s .
 The Socialist North, Revolutionary Perspectives in the South, and Unification , 1970. The Socialist South, 1970. Unification .
 Nkomo was imprisoned and official Black opposition banned in 1962 by the white colonial government . Official Black opposition was banned by the colonial government in 1962 .
 China, for their part, was active in aiding liberation in the country, seeing as a way to counter ‘Soviet hegemonism” and “Sovietism’ with their support as part of their anti-superpower and anti-Soviet agenda . China was active
 The Soviets still backed the moderate Nkomo over Mugabe, who was more radical and Marxist . Mugabe was a more radical Marxist and Marxist leader .
 Mugabe's call to run his own organization was partially due to Mugabe’s call . Nkomo was willing to rely on aid from the Cubans and Soviets . Mugabe was able to rely heavily on the Soviets and Cubans .
 The Soviets also felt this aid was important since they saw China’s aid in this struggle as ‘hostile’ Even if that meant supporting someone less radical, it was important, the Soviets said .
 Despite Cuba's support for Zapu broadly, they did help the military wing of Zanu, which also received military training in Mozambique . It is also worth pointing out that that despite Cuba’s support for the Zapu .
 Mugabe visited the Soviet Union in 1978, but remained loyal to Nkomo . Even as the Soviets began to “warm up” to Mugabe, Mugabe remained loyal .
 Nkomo had thousands of men armed with armored vehicles and MiG fighters in Zambia . He disregarded advice of his socialist advisers by continuing the war .
 Mugabe tried to create a socially democratic state, rather than a socialist one, helping the Chinese gain markets for their companies . Mugabe's government is helping Zimbabweans gain access to their markets .
 Kennedy brought the world the closest it has been to “global holocaust,” and holding the world hostage for over two weeks after which Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove nuclear missiles from Cuba . As Lance Selfa puts it, Kennedy .
 US planners were afraid that the former Portuguese colony of East Timor of which the pro-independence group FRELITIN declared independence for the island would become ‘Cuba in the Indian Ocean’ so they supported and backed an invasion and occupation by the brutal anti-communist
 The Cuban assistance to the Angolans would have been almost impossible if the Soviets had not given much of the logistical support despite the fact that it was ultimately the Cuban forces that changed the tide . The Cuban forces helped change the tide in Angola .
 Joseph Stalin strongly supported the creation of Israel in 1947 because he hoped the Jewish state would be a Soviet ally in the Middle East . Stalin hoped that Israel would be an ally of the Soviet Union in the region .
 When things didn't work out between Moscow and Tel Aviv, the Soviet Union became hostile and turned into a staunch Arab ally . The Soviet Union later became a staunch ally of Arab nations .
 In 1947, the situation in the Middle East was very tense, with bombs and violent clashes every week . The situation in 1947 was very tense, with bombings, violent clashes each week .
 Great Britain had been administrating Palestine since 1920 . It wanted to terminate the mandate and let the ex-colony go free . Great Britain was in charge of Palestine .
 independence would lead to more bloodshed and war . Still, it was clear that independence would result in more bloodshed .
 Arabs didn't want a Jewish state in Palestine and threatened to “throw it into the sea,” if one was created . Arabs didn’t want a Palestinian state, threatened to throw it in the sea if it was created, he says .
 Jews, who had just suffered the horrors of the Holocaust, were ready to fight to establish their homeland . But the Jews were not ready to give up their homeland.
 One of the main allies in the Independence War of 1948-1949 would be unexpected . Still, they needed diplomatic and economic support, and needed diplomatic support .
 Stalin ** preferred to work with the Zionists . Since Arab regimes were often pro-British, Stalin worked with them . He worked with Arab regimes in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Britain was a Soviet ally in World War II and now a geopolitical rival . Great Britain was also hated by Jewish settlers .
 In 1946, Zionist militants bombed Jerusalem’s King David Hotel, where the British administration was housed, killing 91 people . 91 people were killed in the hotel bombing .
 Driving out the British was a goal shared by the Zionists and the USSR, though for different reasons . The USSR and Zionists were united to drive out British forces .
 After Great Britain’s mandate was terminated, the Palestinian issue passed to the U.N. The United Nations had to find a solution to the Palestinian problem .
 Great Britain didn't support the idea of creating an independent Jewish state . The USSR and the U.S. opted for a two-state solution, which in turn was strongly opposed by Arab states . The two main powers in the postwar order, the US and the USSR, opted for
 This contravened the Arab viewpoint that the creation of Israel was unjust, says the author of the book . It contravenes the view that Israel's creation of the country was unjust .
 The USSR was the first country to officially recognize Israel, two days after it declared independence . Israel declared independence on May 14, 1948 .
 The U.S. officially banned weapon supplies to the Middle East . Israel was also banned from supplying weapons to the Mideast region .
 Moscow sent arms to the Zionists, though unofficially and through other countries, such as Czechoslovakia . Unlike the Americans, however, it was not the first time the Soviets sent arms .
 Russian-Israeli relations deteriorated soon after Golda Meir raised the issue of emigration of Soviet Jews to Israel . Meir, Israel’s envoy to Russia, raised the emigration .
 The official Soviet position was that all Soviet Jews, like all Soviet people in general, were extremely happy and didn't need any Promised Land . All Soviet Jews were very happy, according to the official position . The official position of Soviet Jews was that they were happy .
 Israeli politicians couldn’t accept this, and they soon turned to the United States as their main ally . Israeli politicians turned to U.S. for their support in the wake of the Arab Spring .
 Starting in the early 1950s and until the Cold War’s end, the USSR supported the Arabs in their conflict with Israel . Also, starting in the 1950s, the Soviet Union supported the Arab Arab conflict .
 Attempt to relegate Marxs, Lenins, and Trotsky's positions on the Jewish Question to ""relativism" with regards to Jewish nationalism/Zionism is an attempt to throw mud in the water .
 In the ultimate communist stage NO RELIGIOUS or NATIONALIST affiliations exist to separate people . No religious or nationalist affiliations exists to separate them, says the communist leader .
 The fundamental notions of Marxism and its science discuss the evolution of societies in historical materialist progression . Materialist progression to shed the primitive biases of racism, chauvinistic nationalism, and religious separation . Marxism and science discuss evolution of society .
 The very concept of a nation state in Europe was the founding of a feudal Europe where racial and linguistic differences were encouraged to separate the peasants in order to facilitate their exploitation . As Samir Amin would say, the concept of the nation state was founded by the feudal Europe .
 Mao Tso Tung said a pragmatic Marxism not a dogmatic application of the Western model . Keeping in mind that the Arab homeland necessitates a pragmatic Marxist approach . The Arab homeland needs to be a model for the future of the Arab nation .
 Apart from the absurd declaration that anything post-Lenin is ""Stalinist,"" an idea promoted by Trotskyists, this goes into reasons why people could dislike, hate or despise Stalin . Just for context, here is a list of reasons why Stalin's enemies could dislike or hate Stalin
 None of these comrades, quoted below, despise Stalin, in fact they work to disprove myths about him . But their writings could give a clue into why people wouldn't lik e Stalin .
 During the ""Stalinist era" the soviet economy had a far less market-based approach than during and after the Khrushchev era . During the 'Stalinists' era the economy was far less market-based and less economy-based .
 During and after Khrushchev's reign commodity production on a semi-capitalist basis became more and more prevalent . During the 1950s and 1960s, commodity production became more prevalent in Russia .
 Marxists see this as the basis for the USSR's stagnation and eventual collapse . Some Marxists say this was the basis of the Soviet Union's stagnation .
 One of the big debate issues faced by the USSR was whether to adopt ""Socialism in One Country" which was basically a response to the situation the USSR found themselves in after their revolution was successful but all the other ones failed .
 SIOC is often contrasted with Trotsky's conception of Permanent Revolution however they are not really opposites so much as theories addressing different things but that conflict in some ways . SIOC and Permanent Revolution are different theories that address different things .
 "The problem is balancing it while doing everything in your power to support a world revolution," says Julian Zelizer .
 Another debate faced during this time was whether to extend the New Economic Policy...or to collectivize farms . The debate was also over whether to continue the New economic Policy .
 Under the NEP some peasants had private property (which was a demand of peasants in the revolution) and aspects of a market mechanisms were allowed . The NEP was created under the rule of state socialism .
 This meant that the countryside had its own class struggle going on between wealthier land owners and middle/lower peasants . This led to problems with production among other issues, including food production .
 A common criticism of Stalinism is that the way of implementing this was too harsh and reckless . Stalinism was harsh, reckless, and the way it was implemented was reckless, says the historian .
 Many members of the party were imprisoned, exiled, or executed, in which many members were imprisoned or executed . There is a degree of truth to this in my opinion but I must say that it is often exaggerated, he says .
 Volkogonov found that there was about 30k persons condemned to death by military tribunals during this purge . 30k people were executed in this purge, according to him .
 There was close to 800k people condemned to death from 1930-1953 with close to 700k of them being during the purge . 700k people were executed during that period .
 The discrepancy between these fugues is because the KGB numbers include common criminals . The discrepancy is due to the fact that common criminals are included in the fugues .
 An American working in the USSR, John Littlepage, wrote a book about how some of the CP officials would purposefully approve and alter designs that would not work because they wanted Stalin's 5-year plan to fail .
 The Kulaks wanted their land and feudal like positions back that would burn fields and kill farm animals . There was also the Kulaks who wanted their lands and feudal positions back .
 The context of these acts of continued insurgency and sabotage comes on the hills of the breakdown in the direction the growth of the country . The context is that the country is experiencing a breakdown in its growth .
 "This was a crazy repressive system that was needed because you where fighting a civil war. This was needed," says George W. Bush .
 Trotsky and his camp wanted to go ahead with the revolution and international communism . Trotsky wanted to restore War Communism and restore War communism, he said . Trotsky's camp wanted the revolution to be carried out, he added .
 They wanted to push the peasants into collectivization...and full soviet control . The peasants wanted to be given full control of their land .
 The ideal was to create an example of socialism and that workers in America, France, etc would rise up and come to the aid of Russia . Workers in Britain, France and France would come to Russia's aid, he said .
 Bukharin was originally weary of the NEP because he felt that only full restoration of capitalism will build the material wealth needed for socialism to be able to come about . He felt that the restoration of capitalist capitalism would be necessary to achieve socialism .
 Most people in the USSR believed that Bukharin was the real threat to Stalin . There is some evidence that he was conspiring to overthrow Stalin in a party coup .
 The Stalin camp is the one that won out in party elections and in the use of violence, says CNN's John Defterios . Stalin camp won out party elections, he says, in the party elections .
 In elections the Bukharin people united to elect him but many latter turned their back once the Trotsky camp was marginalized . In elections he was elected to power but many later turned back .
 Trotsky lost the vote 700,000 to 1,000 but not all 700k supporters are Stalin supporters . Trotsky was defeated by a single vote in the 1930s . The vote was held in the Soviet Union in 1930s and 1930s, but not everyone supported him .
 Also discipline and the legal system was not always controlled by the center, nor was the center consistent on legal matters . The center was criticized for not being consistent with discipline and legal decisions .
 One week the center might be demanding denunciations, but the next week it might demand that political statements against Stalinism by dissatisfied workers be given a pass . The center might also be demanding that statements by dissatisfied people be given pass .
 Stalinism really wasn't the iron fist of one dictator and the extension of his whims or the wholesale massacre of opposition . So Stalinism wasn't a dictator, it was a dictator who extended his whims and extended his power .
 "Not everything that was defined as a counter-revolutionary crime, far from it," he says . Not everything that's critical was defined by the French Revolution as a crime, he adds .
 I do think, however, that way too much was defined as a counter-revolutionary crime . "I do think that way . too much is defined as counter . revolutionary crime," he says .
 IMO the definition that Stalinism set for ""crimes against the people"" was much too broad and applied without regard to factuality in many individual cases . IMO: The definition of 'crimes' against people was too broad .
 This has allowed a myth to develop about how Stalin was a devious, all-knowing totalitarian monster or demi-god, who's psychotic paranoia murdered millions of innocents . This has led to a myth that Stalin was devious and all-powerful dictator .
 Stalinism did have enormous problems and some injustices, but they should be judged systemically and with an eye to the facts . Stalinism has enormous problems, but it should have been judged systemally and with a view of the facts, he says .
 Yezhov mostly served as the attack dog for the First Secretaries under Stalin, the same people who pushed for the Purges in the first place . He was the first to push for the purges .
 There is a tendency to demonize Yezhov, but I don't think he was some sort of a monster . Yezkov was not a monster, he says, but he was a good man, he adds .
 Stalin was just a bureaucrat who meticulously carried out orders he received from Stalin . Stalin was a Stalinist, but he was not a dictator . He meticulously carried orders he got from Stalin, according to his orders .
 At some point Yezhov probably went a bit further than it was required from him, but he should share the blame for that with Stalin . Stalin and all Politburo members should be responsible for that, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The NKVD made him the main scapegoat and executed him and all other NKVD officers who were involved in purges in 1937-1939 . He was executed by the NKVD in 1939 .
 I think Yezhov and his men bear more responsibility for the excesses of the Purges than Stalin . I think he bears more responsibility than Stalin for the deaths of Stalin's men .
 The USSR became more powerful rather than the withering away of the state, it became more bureaucratic . The Soviet Union was very bureaucratic, and rather than being a powerful state, the state became a powerful force .
 This is not due to one great man becoming corrupt, but due to the material conditions that surrounded the Soviet Union . Now this is not the case, but because of the . material conditions surrounding the Soviet . Union .
 For it's state to wither away, would open itself up to the dangers of foreign invasion . For the sake of the country, it would be open to foreign invasion. For the benefit of the British people, the country should not be allowed to die .
 For it to strengthen would ultimately result in a degeneration and deformation of what it set out to be and result in capitalist restoration . For example, it would result in the collapse of capitalism and the loss of capitalism .
 Soviet Union inherited famine, a country destroyed by war, and a lack of industrialization . The Soviet Union was plagued by the west and the threat of war, it inherited famine .
 Had Trotsky come to power, or Lenin lived there would still have been that class struggle that ultimately led in the restoration of capitalism . Lenin lived in the revolution that led to the overthrow of capitalism.
 We cannot forget the conditions they faced, while at the same time not excusing their actions . So the blame may lie with the individuals, but we cannot forget that they faced .
 My analysis is that Stalin’s USSR was socialist if any state has ever been. My analysis says that Stalin's USSR was socialism if any of us ever was .
 I consider state capitalism to be state ownership of the means of production, but where labor-power is still a commodity, a bourgeoisie extracts surplus power, and the laws of motion of capitalist production dominate the economic logic of the social formation .
 Stalin’s Russia did not fit this definition . With these criteria, I would say that Stalin's Russia does not fit the definition of Stalin's .
 It was a genuine Dictatorship of the Proletariat; it was a socialist state . Rather than a dictatorship of the proletariat, the state was a Dictator of Proletarians .
 "I think sometimes we conflate control of the means of production with day-to-day operation," she says . "I don't think it's a good thing to say, but it's important to say yes," she adds .
 Just because managers exist, this doesn’t indicate capitalism or fundamental control by some sort of ruling class, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 Stalin’s Russia saw rapid increase in living conditions, housing, literacy, healthcare, life expectancy, etc. etc. Stalin's Russia was one of the most prosperous countries in the world . Stalin's Soviet Union was founded in 1918 .
 Structural unemployment was virtually non-existent, and as we know, a reserve army of the unemployed is crucial for capitalists . The reserve army is crucial to capitalists, and it's vital for them to keep a reserve of unemployed .
 Soviet Russia faced a perpetual labor shortage as they sought to industrialize . In fact, Soviet Russia was faced with a labor shortage .
 The economy grew every year , indicating the absence of overproduction crises . The economy grows every year . The country's economic growth has been seen as a model for the future .
 The commanding heights of the economy of the Soviet Union were collectively owned . The economy was centrally planned, and the economy was collectively owned by the Soviet government .
 There's really no evidence for any sort of ruling class exploiting workers, it’s mainly propaganda . There's no evidence that the ruling class is exploiting workers. There’�s really no . evidence for exploiting workers .
 Another ethnic group that suffered mass expulsion was the Russaki, or Russian-Germans . The Russaki were also expelled from Germany .
 Population transfer triggered by Nazi Germany's violation of Molotov-Ribbentrop in 1941 . The population transfer was triggered by a violation of Soviet-controlled Ribbentrop .
 A decree from the Supreme Soviet Presidium precipitated the removal of 1. million RussianGermans . Most were relocated in Siberia and parts of Central Asia .
 The fear of a so-called ""fifth column" in the country was the driving force behind Soviet actions in this case . The fear was behind the actions of the Soviet government .
 In 1943 and 1944 Karachays, a Turkic-speaking people of the North Caucasus region, were accused of collaborating with the occupying German army . Karachay was accused of working with the German army during the Second World War .
 In November 1943, 68,938 persons were transferred to Kazakhstan and Kirghizia . The majority of those transferred were women and women .
 In his biography of the Man of Steel, Ian Grey writes that along with other Russian Muslims, the Karachai displayed pro-German sympathies, at least to some degree .
 In the Karachai region, the bulk of the Muslim Mountaineers accorded the Germans a more genuine welcome than in most other occupied areas . The bulk of those in the region are Muslim .
 On December 27, 1943, NKVD chief Lavrentiy Beria commenced the deportation of Kalmyks, a Buddhist people living in southern Russia near the Volga river basin . The Buddhist people were living in the region of southern Russia .
 Around half deported to Siberia died before being allowed to return home in 1957 . Around half of the deported died before they were allowed back to Russia .
 The German army often made the cliched promise of independence to the ethnic groups it presided over . The army often promised independence to ethnic groups .
 Edvard Radzinsky writes in his 1996 Stalin that the Germans had promised independence to the Chechens, the Ingush, the Balkars, and the Kalmyks . The Chechens were promised independence by the Germans during their occupation .
 Members of these ethnic groups did sometimes collaborate with the Germans . Members of this ethnic group sometimes collaborated with Germans .
 In 1943 there were about 450,000 Chechens and Ingush in the Chechen Ingush Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic, an artificial merger of the two groups . The two groups were established in 1936 .
 In March of 1944, the deportation of 38,000 Balkars (Turkish people in the Northern Caucasus near Elbruz Mountain) began . The deportation began in March 1944, and the deportation continued until March 1944 .
 Between 20% and 40% of the Balkars transferred died from 1944 to 1956 . The Balkars were sent to Central Asia and died between 1944 and 1956 .
 The forced removal began only one month after the German army withdrew from the Crimean Peninsula . The German army had withdrawn from the Crimea one month earlier .
 In 1939 there were 218,000 Crimean Tartars and estimates that the proportional amount of military-aged men should be about 22,000, or 10% of the population .
 Uehling admits that there was a great deal of collaboration between Crimean Tartars and Nazi Forces . Nevertheless, he admits that the collaboration took place between the two sides of the war .
 As you can probably tell, in most cases, the State had a good reason for its population transfers .
 Ethnic groups often contained elements tied to foreign enemies l ik e Germany and Japan . The ethnic groups were often contained many elements of the German and Japanese .
 The USSR was collectively punishing these groups. But I do want to make it clear that the USSR was . The USSR did not punish these groups, it said. But it did punish them.
 As Furr says, it was not following the Enlightenment views of individual, as opposed to collective, punishment . Furr: "As opposed to individual, collective punishment, punishment was not the same thing."
 WWII was going on in the background, so maybe some of us can excuse the excesses .
 If you know your Soviet history, you should also know that many of the things Khruschev says in his ""Secret Speech"" are pure bullshit . If you are familiar with Soviet history you should know many of Khrusches' claims are pure nonsense .
 I don't reject the fact that there were mass deportations of certain ethnic groups, but contrary to Khruschev's supposition, these deportations were actually driven by military considerations, says CNN.com .
 After all, WWII was going on in the background, particularly in the rear of the Red Army . The Red Army was in the midst of WWII .
 Many bourgeois historians have done good work on the USSR, not every Sovietologist is Robert Conquest or Richard Pipes . Keep a close eye on the Soviet state of Soviet Russia .
 The first large-scale deportation of a specific ethnic group came in 1937, when about 175,000 Koreans living on the Chinese border were forcefully relocated to Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan .
 Furr responds by saying that if ""only the guilty"" were punished, the nation as a whole would split, and its survival would be threatened . Furr says only the guilty would be punished, and the nation would split .
 Young men were usually the demographic involved in conspiracies . If only they were deported, you could probably make an educated guess what would happen to the group .
 So instead of mass deportation, tactics were used to keep the groups intact . So instead, tactics of mass deportations were used instead of deportation .
 He sincerely believed that the Koreans in the Far East had spies for the Japanese in their midst . The Japanese believed the Koreans had spies in the midst of them .
 One Soviet report dated December 25, 1934 describes two Chinese spies sent by the Japanese being detained on their side of the border . The report was published in 1934 .
 On December 28, a Soviet border guard was shot at by four unknown men from the ""Manchu"" side . Four unknown men shot at the border guard on December 28 .
 Kuromiya contends that it isn't clear whether any of the ethnic Chinese and Koreans deported were actually spies . Still, despite all of this, he says it's not clear if any of those deported were a spy .
 History suggests that Japan very well may have used espionage tactics in both the Russo-Japanese War and the Siberian Civil War .
 Stalin's conversation with Fyushkov should lead to the conclusion that mass deportations were not based on racism or hatred for Japanese culture, but fear of black ops .
 Stalin was ineffective at putting into effect the proletarian dictatorship that Russia needed . Stalin should not have tried just yet to industrialize a nation already engaged in war . He should have been careful not to try industrializing Russia just yet, especially in an already engaged war .
 Instead of conducting principled struggle over line they would call out the secret police . Then rather than conducting . principled struggle . Then instead of conducting . struggle over . line, they would . call out . secret police. Then rather . than conduct . struggle . over line .
 This is an extremely complicated problem and I'm not really sure that anyone could have done a much better job, but the truth is that productivity was appallingly low for many decades . The use of violence became necessary in particularly dramatic situations, such as famines, wars or natural disasters
 Every time I read about this I cannot help but think that somehow it should have been possible to handle things a bit better . Eventually things started to work better (by the late 40s early 50s), and others learned a lot from all this experience .
 Stalin conflated to some extent the interests of the USSR with that of Socialism . Stalin conflated the Soviet Union's interests with those of socialism . The Soviet Union and Socialist Socialist Socialist Party were united in the USSR .
 I think this led in some cases to the Comintern pushing in the wrong direction, or making everyone do things that might make sense for the USSR but not for other Communist parties . The Comintern pushed in the right direction, and this may have led to some things being pushed by the
 Learning the reality about Stalin Varying Resources Ludu Martin's Another View of Stalin . Learn the facts about Stalin's life in the book .
 You may have all the firepower in the world, but it is the quality of ground troops that makes all the difference, he says . The quality of the ground troops is the key to success in Afghanistan, he adds .
 More bombs were dropped in North Korea in the early 1950s than in the whole of the second world war . The USA loves firing missiles and dropping bombs more .
 One wonders how long the U.S. war machine can keep on failing . The United States war machine is failing .
 As a footnote -1 am afraid I was wrong about Trump on the international scene . And as a footnote, I was afraid he was wrong on Trump's foreign policy .
 He is no different from the Bushes, Clinton and Obama, acting lik e drunken cowboys, trying to provoke one country after another . Obama, Bush and Clinton are no different, he says .
 Recently published is a new book by the stakhanovite, Domenico Losurdo, called: Western Marxism: How It Was Born, How It Died and How It Can Rise Again .
 Western Marxism was afflicted by a sort of myopia: it didn’t realize that the wind of the revolution was blowing from Russia to China and the Third World, joining with the national revolutions against Western imperialism . Western Marxism didn't realize that Russia and China were joining with national revolutions
 20th century Communism contributed to the disintegration of the global colonial complex rather than creating a radically new social system . At first the October revolution was viewed with hope, but it was seen with hope .
 An extraordinary result that Western Marxism failed adequately to understand or appreciate, he says . The West failed to understand and appreciate the result of Marxism, he writes .
 Losurdo puts these questions to the great authors of the 20th century Bloch, Lukacs, Adorno and Foucault and of today Agamben, Badiou and Zizek .
 This policy enabled arms, personnel and knowhow to support most of the anti-colonial struggles of the twentieth century . This policy was part of the global undermining of imperialist capitalism .
 It would be quite absurd to mention in the same breath the philosophy of Marxism and the “ideology” of the Third Reich, to mention a man of the stature of Joseph Stalin . Hitler, Goring, Hess, Goebbels, Himmler, Ribbent
 Stalin decisively claims Lenin’s heritage against the arrogant quirkiness of Trotsky . In his fascinating piece, ‘The Foundations of Leninism’, Stalin claims Lenin's heritage against Trotsky . Stalin decisively claimed Lenin was Lenin, but Trotsky was arrogant .
 Russian revolutionary sweep is antidote to inertia, routine, conservatism, mental stagnation and slavish submission to ancient traditions . The revolution is an antidote to  conservatism, conservatism and mental stagnation .
 Russian revolutionary sweep is the life giving force which stimulates thought, impels things forward, breaks the past and opens up perspectives . The revolutionary sweep stimulates thought and impels people forward, says author .
 Russian revolutionary sweep has every chance of degenerating into empty ‘revolutionary” Manilovism if it is not combined with American efficiency in work .
 American efficiency ... is an antidote to Manilovism and fantastic scheme concocting . American efficiency is antidote to “revolutionary” Manilovaism and “fantastic scheme concocted”
 American efficiency is that indomitable force which neither knows nor recognises obstacles; which with its businesslik e perseverance brushes aside all obstacles . Without which serious constructive work is inconceivable .
 American efficiency has every chance of degenerating into narrow and unprincipled practicalism if it is not combined with Russian revolutionary sweep . But American efficiency could degenerate into narrow . practicalism . If it is combined with revolutionary sweep, it could be a disaster for America .
 The first commandment: Don’t allow yourselves to be provoked by the counter-revolutionaries . Arm yourselves with restraint and self-control, save your strength for the coming struggle; permit no premature actions .
 Stalin: Time's Man of the Year -twice, 2014: The first was in 1939, although the reason was ambivalent: ‘Whether Europe’s new era will end in nationalist chaos, good or bad internationalism, or what not, the era will be new
 This Joseph Stalin did by dramatically switching the power balance of Europe one August night . This is what he did by changing the world's power balance in a single night .
 The man whose name means steel in Russian, whose few words of English include the American expression ‘tough guy’ was the man of 1942 . His name means 'steel' in Russian .
 Only Joseph Stalin fully knew how close Russia stood to defeat in 1942, and only Joseph Stalin knew how he brought Russia through . Only Joseph . Stalin fully . knew how . Russia stood . to defeat .
 He had become rather fond of the flavour of the cigarettes when he was a young trainee priest and revolutionary . Pipe tobacco at the time was cheap and rough .
 Moscow 'Java' factory was established by Samuel Gabai, from Kharkov, in the 19th century . The smokes were produced at the Moscow ‘Java’ factory .
 Gabai's idea was to produce a tobacco lik e no other, so he found a tobacco plant in Java, grew it in Herzegovina and then shipped it to Moscow . Gabai’s idea was that he wanted to make a tobacco no other .
 The products initially became favoured by the elite nobility and fledgling bourgeoisie . The products became popular with the aristocracy .
 Stalin, as the leader of the first worker’s state, was in a quandary . Stalin was in the midst of a crisis in the Soviet Union in the early 1930s .
 Since he couldn't tear himself away from the flavour of the tobacco, he decided to use it to fill his pipe . So he opted for the common man’s pipe .
 The elite origins of the tobacco were forgotten and it became indelibly associated with the man himself . Eventually, the elite origins were forgotten, and the tobacco was associated with him .
 Many others followed suit, among them the famous soviet composer, Mayakovsky .
 Herzegovina Flor sadly fell out of favour with the propagation of the ‘black legend’ of Stalin . Of course, with the propagating of the 'black legend' of Stalin, Herzegovaina Flor fell .
 Now produced in small amounts, although it is still notable for its rich aroma and high tar content . Now it is produced in a small amount of small amounts .
 Molotov falls in love with Stalin, 2014. Molotomov falls for love in a love story .
 Stalin tended to make long friendships, especially with those he could trust . Stalin was known for his loyalty to the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 Molotov, or Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Skryabin, later to take up many senior posts including that of Foreign Minister . One of Russia's most prominent diplomats, Molotsov, was a member of the Soviet Union in the 1930s .
 In his memoirs, Molotov notes that the young Stalin was ‘handsome’ to women . In the memoirs he notes that Stalin was 'handsome to women’s .
 Stalin’s poetry and song was a huge success in Soviet Russia . Stalin was known for his energetic and energetic personality . He was also known for being a poet and singer .
 Stalin emerged suddenly from behind a woodpile . Moments after Molotov arrived, Stalin emerged from behind the wooded pile . Stalin emerged behind the pile of wooded trees .
 Stalin on anti-religious propaganda: "To illustrate how tactlessly the peasants are approached sometimes" Stalin on how to be a communist and a Christian: How to be communist and Christian: Stalin on peasant wisdom .
 Some comrades are inclined to regard the peasants as materialist philosophers and to think that it is enough to . deliver a lecture on natural science to convince the peasant of the non-existence of God .
 Comrade Iosef was quite the orthodox socialist, it appears . Stalin's orthodox Erfurtian position was quite an orthodox socialist .
 What is scientific socialism without the working-class movement? — A compass which, if left unused, will only grow rusty and then will have to be thrown overboard . What is science socialism without a working class movement? – A compass .
 What is the working-class movement without socialism?—A ship without a compass which will reach the other shore in any case, but would reach it much sooner and with less danger if it had a compass .
 The vessel will speed straight towards the other shore and reach its haven unharmed . Combine the two and you will get a splendid vessel, which will speed .
 Russia was formerly regarded by the oppressed nationalities as a symbol of oppression . Now, after it has become socialist, it has been transformed into an emancipation symbol .
 Lenin is the name of the leader of the October Revolution, Comrade Lenin . Lenin is now the most beloved name pronounced by the downtrodden, oppressed peasants and revolutionary .
 In the past, the oppressed and downtrodden slaves of the vast Roman Empire regarded Christianity as a rock of salvation .
 On interpreting Marx: Spirit versus Letter: One of the more fascinating aspects of reading carefully through Stalin’s writings is what may be called the scriptural dynamic of spirit and letter . On interpreting Marxist: "One of the most fascinating parts of reading through Stalin's writings is the script
 Stalin is clearly on the side of the spirit in interpreting the texts of Marx and Lenin . Stalin is on the right side in interpreting Lenin and Marx texts, he says .
 Marx's thought applies to emerging capitalism, while Lenin’s thought is Marxism in the age of imperialism, says Lenin . Thus, Marx’ thought applies . Marx's Marxist thought is Marxist in the era of imperialism . Lenin's thought is Marx's view of emerging capitalism in the
 The SocialDemocrats became flurried and replied that they couldn’t decide the question of a revolt without a special conference . SocialDemocrats said they couldn't decide whether to vote for revolt without special conference.
 The sailors intimated that there was no time to lose, that everything was ready, and that if they did not get a straight answer from the Social-Democrats, the whole thing might collapse . If the SocialDemocrats did not take over the direction of the revolt, the revolt might collapse
 The sailors and soldiers went away pending instructions, and the Social-Democrats called a conference to discuss the matter .
 They took the first volume of Capital, the second volume, and then they took the third volume . They were looking for some instruction about the Crimea, about Sevastopol, about a revolt in the Crimea .
 Not a single instruction in all three volumes of Capital either about Sevastopol, Crimea, or about a sailors’ and soldiers’ revolt, the authors say .
 They turned over the pages of other works of Marx and Engels, looking for instructions, but not a single instruction could they find . They turned the pages over to find out what to do .
 The SocialDemocrats had to confess that under the circumstances they were unable to give the sailors and soldiers any instructions .
 Stalin’s early theoretical work on the national question may be read as an attack on culturism . The propensity to identify an intangible ‘culture’ (often with religious factors) as the basis for collective identity . This article argues that the key to Stalin's early theoretical
 His criticism is directed at a number of social democratic organisations at the turn of the twentieth century . But it also has pertinence for today due to the persistence of culturist assumptions .
 The first is to define ‘nation’ in order to sideline the culturist position, although his own definition of 'nation' is not without its problems . ‘Nation’ is defined by the definition of nation .
 The unity provided by a focus on the workers and peasants produces both new levels of cultural diversity and enables a stronger approach to ensuring such diversity . The unexpected result is that the unity .
 The approach undertaken pays careful attention to Stalin’s theoretical and philosophical arguments as they appear in his written texts . The approach to this article is careful to look at Stalin's theoretical, philosophical arguments .
 Stalin's strong state versus withering away of the state is one of the key points of the debate . A socialist state must be a strong state, says Losurdo .
 Losurdo shows how Marx and Engels actually recognised the need for the state to continue . The idea of its withering was a petty-bourgeois, anarchist aberration, he says .
 Stalin argued that until then a strong socialist state is needed to deal with its many enemies . As for Stalin, he argued that it may be very well in the context of global socialism, but until then .
 Springer Beijing will publish my book on Stalin later this year . From Theology to the Philosophy of Socialism in Power will be published by Springer Beijing . Springer Beijing to publish Stalin: From theology to Theology .
 Springer has the largest presence in China of any international press by a long way, publishing works by Chinese authors or Chinese-based authors . Springer has also published works by authors in China or by any Chinese author .
 Some years ago, I managed to acquire a set of Stalin’s works, from none other than a second-hand bookshop in Kansas .
 It used to be a left-wing, if not Marxist centre in North America . Yes, for many, many years ago . But it was a centre in the United States .
 The ‘Works’ were incomplete, ending abruptly in January of 1934 . But I soon found that the 'Works' were incomplete .
 Eventually, I tracked down the remaining volumes, published by Red Star Press in London . Eventually, he tracked down remaining volumes of the book .
 A new edition of Stalin’s works, Trudy, is in the process of publishing what may well be a full collected works by Stalin .
 I set to read Stalin, slowly and painstakingly, as I had done earlier with Marx, Engels, leading western European Marxists, and then Lenin . I had already read Marx and Engels, Engels and Lenin before .
 "For some reason, Stalin took me longer, even though he wrote a little less than the others," he says . "I wrote Stalin longer. For some reason," he writes. "I don't know why he took longer."
 My earlier hunch that Stalin may actually have something to offer the Marxist tradition was slowly being confirmed, but what that contribution might be took a lot more effort to find out .
 "It required working through the texts many times, seeking to discern the key ideas in light of the frameworks that I was developing," he says .
 Few had actually worked in such a way, with many simply dismissing Stalin and thereby not even giving him the benefit of serious attention . Few actually had actually dismissed Stalin and therefore not even given him the .
 "My starting point with a theological radar meant that I was even more alone," she says . "I'm not alone. My starting point is that I'm alone. I was alone."
 Many of my assumed categories were being broken down, forcing me to begin thinking again, rethinking everything in the process . More to the point, I began to realise that many of my assumptions had been broken down . I'm not sure what I'm doing, but I'm going to
 This was, after all, socialism in power, however one may interpret the term . This was after all the socialism in . However, it was not socialist in power .
 'Western' Marxists refuse to countenance the possibility that anything could be learnt from socialism in power . Socialist in power offers a century of immense experiences, stunning achievements, abysmal failures, but above all, an immense resource for reflecting on socialism after the revolutionary seizure of power .
 Chinese socialism attracts me so much, especially now with my immersion in Chinese socialism . Precisely this . this . reality attracts me . I'm so fascinated with the reality of Chinese socialism, especially in China .
 Stalin is one although not the only one of the theorists of socialism in power, whether people lik e it or not . Stalin is not only one but one of many theorists in power in power . Stalin's theory of socialism is that he is a socialist .
 As I point out in the book, it was written largely in the context of China, China, my second home . The book was written in China, which is where I was born .
 'Initially, I was not so enamoured with the place too large, too hectic, too much change all the time. Initially, I thought it was too much hectic,' she says .
 'After a few years, I realised why I l ik e the place so much, with all its flaws,' he says . But after a few . years, he realised why he lik e   the place .
 It is the strongest socialist state in world history, eclipsing now the Soviet Union . It is also the centre of the strongest country in the world .
 In the middle of Tiananmen square, the gate of heaven no less, lies the body of Chairman Mao . Chairman Mao's body was found in Tiananman square, in China's capital .
 It is like a magnet to me and I am working to understand what it means. I am trying to understand why it means . It is 'like a magnet' to me, I said. I love it.
 In an unexpected conjunction, the topics arose through carefully reading and reflecting on Stalin’s texts turned out to be topics that are very relevant for understanding Marxism in China .
 The intersection initially seemed fortuitous, but it eventually became clear that the common ground is socialism in power . "The common ground" in power is socialism .
 The creative influence of Stalin and the Soviet Union rose to a peak in the Yan’an period of the 1930s and into the 1940s .
 After the failure of earlier revolutionary efforts, the Chinese communists had an opportunity to study, reflect, discuss and write . The Long March gave them a chance to learn, reflect and write about their experiences .
 Apart from works by Marx and Engels, they had recourse to the developed positions coming from the Soviet Union . Apart from Marx, Engels, the Marxists were able to find a solution to their problems .
 Translations brought them works of Lenin and Stalin, as well as a number of key Soviet philosophers from Stalin’s era . Translators brought them the works of Stalin and Lenin .
 Chinese communists developed their own positions in debate with Soviet thought . It was this context that framed the significant materials delivered in lectures and written in Yan’an .
 Some of Mao’s most important theoretical works come from this time, continuing to influence the frameworks of Chinese Marxism today . Mao's theoretical works continue to influence Chinese Marxism .
 Many of the categories first broached by Stalin are taken and reworked in the writings of Mao and others . Mao's writings show that many of Stalin's ideas are reworked into Mao's work .
 Stalin so often excised from the history of Marxism, let alone Marxist philosophy, is the crucial link from Marx, Engels and Lenin to Mao and modem China . Stalin is a crucial link between Marx and Mao and the Communist Party of China .
 The book is predicated on the fact that Stalin was actually able to think . The book's title is based on the idea that Stalin actually thought .
 It may be surprising, but he is not often credited with this ability, let alone the ability to think dialectically . It's not surprising that he is capable of thinking dialectically, even though he is often credited for this ability .
 Stalin was either deluded and out of touch with reality or cynically in touch with . Many are those who have reiterated this curious dismissal, perhaps adding the hypothesis that Stalin was deluded .
 I must admit that I have come to agree with Kotkin and Van Ree on these points, overturning many of my preconceptions through patient and careful attention to Stalin's works .
 I have come to the position that Stalin must be studied carefully as part of the Marxist tradition . I have also come to . the position of Stalin must also be studied closely, says the author .
 No matter what one’s assessment of Stalin may be, it is an act of intellectual laziness to deny him, for whatever reason, a place in the tradition .
 Stalin's library was overwhelmingly Marxist and he made extensive notes in the works of Marx, Engels and Lenin . Stalin’s library was dominated by Marxist works .
 All of the key ideas developed by Lenin and Stalin can be found in earlier moments of the Marxist tradition . Even more, all of the ideas developed in the past can be traced back to earlier moments in Marxist history .
 Marxism is constantly developing, revising positions and developing new ones in light of changing circumstances . Marxism is a political tradition like Marxism, it is constantly evolving .
 In recent discussion in China, I have become more aware of different ways the Marxist tradition can be interpreted . In recent discussions in China he has become aware of . different ways of . interpreting Marxism .
 You can take any core feature, such as the dictatorship of the proletariat, the withering away of the state, the distinction between socialism and communism, and the nature of the socialist state .
 Marx uses ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ 11 times, where he means a coercive force of the state that crushes class opponents . For example, Marx uses the 'dictatorships of the . proletariat' 11 times .
 This is in tension with his treatments of the Paris commune, where he praises the diminishment of state power and its continuance only as apparatus . This is . In tension with . his . treatments of . the . commune .
 Lenin distinguishes between dictatorship of the proletariat and then the state’s withering . Lenin develops the argument further, distinguishing between two phases of the revolution .
 Stalin argues that it would take place only after global communism had been achieved and communism had become second nature which may take 1000 years or more . He pushes this into a distant future, but Stalin says it will only take place in the future .
 In Chinese Marxism, dictatorship of the proletariat becomes ‘democratic dictatorship’ in Mao’s hands and then ‘people’� with Deng Xiaoping, now as an inclusive category operating in terms of non-antagonistic contradictions . And in Chinese Marxism,. Mao�
 Marx distinguishes an initial stage of communism and a further stage . Only in the late notes, ‘Critique of the Gotha Program’, does Marx distinguish an initial phase of communism . Marx distinguish between the two stages of communist communism .
 Lenin distinguishes socialism and communism, with socialism still bearing many features, such as state, classes, law and so on . Lenin then distinguishes these as socialism and Communism . Lenin: socialism still bears many features such as class, class, law, law .
 Only with communism will the earlier prescriptions of Marxism begin to appear. Only with Communism will the previous prescriptions of Marxist theory begin to emerge . Only with communist communism, only with communism .
 Stalin takes this further, pushing communism into a very distant future . While socialism has a strong multi-national state, tensions between forces and relations of production continue . People are rewarded according to work, people are rewarded based on work, and equalisation has no place .
 A smaller number take this line, arguing that all of the ideas found in Stalin, Mao or Deng have precursors in the Marxist tradition . Some argue that Mao's ideas were influenced by Marxist ideas .
 Each stage of the tradition and each of its different branches constitutes a clarification of some idea or practice that was not so clear before . The tradition has been a long-running tradition for centuries, with many of its branches .
 Specific circumstances, cultural histories, political realities and so on produce new problems, which require new solutions . Obviously, specific circumstances and cultural histories produce new solutions, which need new solutions.
 As Lenin and Mao pointed out repeatedly, winning a revolution is relatively easy; infinitely more complex is the effort to construct socialism . Winning a revolution and constructing socialism is not easy, they say, but it's more complex .
 This is obviously connected with the fourth point, but plays a crucial role . This is connected to the first point, which is obviously important .
 I have been struck by the absence of any serious engagement with Stalin by the vast majority of the international Left . The absence of serious engagement by the Left has been noted throughout the world .
 All one need do is perhaps quote a line or two, refer to the Red Terror and forget about Stalin . Despite the fact that a huge amount of research continues by those who are certainly not on the Left .
 The present work assumes that Stalin was actually able to think, backed up by exceedingly careful interpretations of his writings and citations . The work is based on careful interpretations and citations of Stalin's writings .
 I must admit that I have come to agree with Kotkin on this point, overturning many of my preconceptions through patient and careful attention to Stalin’s works .
 This is also one of the conclusions of van Ree's important studies of Stalin’s political thought . van Ree: Stalin's political thought is a model of Stalin's thought .
 Stalin gave much thought to the problems thrown up by the ever-changing situation and that he did so by immersing himself in the Marxist classics . While I do not agree completely that Stalin developed a thoroughly tight-fitting and comprehensive doctrine to which he adhered, I do agree that
 Significant here is van Ree’s consideration of the role of Stalin's thought in popular conceptions, which I interpret as follows . van Ree: 'Stalin's thought is relevant to popular conceptions of the Soviet Union'
 Stalin has variously been charged with vulgar Marxist, dogmatism, mystification, ignoring reality and the peddling of illusions . Stalin was accused of obscuring reality and ignoring reality . Stalin has been accused of vulgar Marxist and dogmatistism .
 These charges turn on whether Stalin was out of touch or in touch with reality . Stalin was accused of being out-of-touch with reality, but he was not, he says .
 If the former, then his dogmatism was one with his illusions, but this suggestion struggles to make any sense of the events in the Soviet Union .
 It also fails to understand the remarkable consistency in Stalin’s thought and that of the other communists who worked with him . Stalin's thought was consistent with that of other communists .
 If he says one thing in Marxist terms but does the opposite, he becomes a hypocrite, cynic or sophist . If the latter, then he becomes the hypocrite or cynic, he is accused of a deliberate effort to conceal reality . Or a cynical effort to secure ever
 Stalin clearly believed what he thought and acted upon such positions . The problem is that Stalin acted on what he believed and acted on it .
 "All of these charges carry with them the assumption that one has no need to consider his actual texts and the thoughts developed therein. Ultimately, all of these . charges carry . with them, the . assumption that . one . has no . need to . consider the actual texts . and
 'Stalin must be studied carefully as part of the Marxist tradition,' says author . 'I have come to the position that Stalin must be watched carefully,' he says .
 The various responses from dismissals of Stalin's intellectual ability to the charge of sophistry function as efforts to excise Stalin from this tradition . Stalin was the subject of a series of questions about his intellectual ability .
 To this should be added a narrative of betrayal, or even a Fall from the truth of Marxism . To this we should also be added to the narrative of betraying the party, or a fall from Marxism .
 I am interested here in the charge that Stalin himself betrayed Marxism. I am also interested in whether Stalin betrayed Marxism . I'm interested in the charges that he betrayed Marxism, and I'm not sure if he did .
 Lenin is often made to distinguish him from Lenin, so that one may claim Lenin, dismiss Stalin, and then pick up another as the true heir of Lenin whether Trotsky, Mao, Ho Chi Minh, or Castro . This move often makes it difficult to distinguish Lenin from Stalin .
 Despite his missteps, he was crucial in fostering anti-colonial struggles and socialist revolutions elsewhere in the world, especially in China . I find this a curious move indeed, for it erases a major figure in that tradition .
 No matter what one’s assessment of Stalin may be, it is an act of intellectual laziness to deny him a place in the tradition of Stalinism .
 So I follow van Ree in assuming that Stalin was very much part of the Marxist tradition . So he follows van Ree's lead in assuming Stalin was part of that tradition .
 He notes that Stalin’s library was overwhelmingly Marxist . Stalin made extensive notes in the works of Marx, Engels and Lenin . Stalin's library was predominantly Marxist .
 "I am not comfortable with assumed orthodoxies, albeit with a twist," says author . Instead, he says he is comfortable with assuming orthodoxies with a 'twin'
 As Losurdo pointed out to me last year, we are not the heretics or the revisionists, but we are actually of the mainstream, he says . We are not heretics and revisionists. We are actually mainstream. We're not heretic or revisionists .
 As with Mao, one needs to appreciate the significant achievements made and criticise the mistakes . Mao's achievements are significant achievements and mistakes must be appreciated, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Mao, Stalin and the Bolsheviks made momentous breakthroughs and achievements, but also made egregious mistakes . Mao and Stalin were only sometimes conscious of the mistakes they made . Mao made some of the most egregious mistakes of his life .
 The Stalin book is both the end of 15 year project and it provides the seeds of a very new project in a Chinese situation . Which is another way of saying that the Stalin book .
 It is called ‘Socialism in Power’ and seeks to analyse the theoretical implications of the realities of a communist party in power and its efforts to construct socialism .
 Stalin’s early debates with the Georgian Mensheviks are the matters of dialectics, class, politics and philosophy . Stalin's early discussions with Menshevik included dialectics and class .
 All of them turn, it seems to be on the relationship between immanence and transcendence . All of these works turn on immanent and transcendent .
 Stalin's answer is that the question raises a false dichotomy, for it is both . Stalin’s answer is to the question: 'I don’t think Stalin is a dictator or a dictator' Stalin's answers are both, he says .
 On this matter, he follows Kautsky and Lenin very closely, but gives the answer his own sharp formulation . He says: "On this matter of Lenin's question: 'What do you think?'
 There exist two large classes, the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, and between them a life-and-death struggle is going on . Between them, the bourgeois and the proletic struggle is going on, says Mao Zed Zedell .
 Conditions of life of the bourgeoisie compel it to strengthen the capitalist system . The conditions of the bourgeois are to strengthen capitalism, says Marx .
 The conditions of life of the . proletariat compel it to undermine the . capitahst system, to destroy it . But the conditions of . life of . the proletariat compel . it to . undermine the capitahsts system, . to destroy . it .
 Socialist consciousness corresponds to the position of the proletariat, Socialist consciousness . Socialist consciousness corresponded to the positions of the world's proletariat, says Lenin .
 The proletariat accepts this consciousness, assimilates it, and fights the capitalist system with redoubled vigour . Hence, the proletariat accepted this consciousness and assimilated it .
 If there were no capitalism and no class struggle, there would be no socialist consciousness . If capitalism and class struggle were not class struggle there would have been no socialism consciousness .
 Kautsky says the masses of proletarians have neither the time nor the opportunity to work out socialist consciousness . The masses of . the . masses of proletarians, as long as they remain . . they remain 'proletarian'
 The vehicles of science are the intellectuals, including, Marx, Engels and others, who have both the time and opportunity to put themselves in the van of science and work out socialist consciousness . Marx and Engels were among those who have the time to work out socialism .
 Socialist consciousness is worked out by a few Social-Democratic intellectuals who possess the time and opportunity to do so . Clearly, socialist consciousness can be worked out in time of a few intellectuals .
 Social-Democracy introduces socialist consciousness into the working-class movement . It is here that Social-Democratic Democracy comes in and introduces Socialist consciousness .
 The argument deploys one of his first efforts at what maybe called a dialectic of immanence and transcendence . I am more interested in the form of the argument, for it deploys .
 Socialist consciousness arises from within and without, not in some queer conjunction, but in a mode that is dialectical . Socialist consciousness comes from within, without, and in a dialectical mode .
 They repudiated all action from above, and this gave rise to a controversy between them and Engels . Engels was a member of the Communist Party, but the party was not involved in it .
 The Bakuninists preached the very thing that the ‘minority’ are saying today . Bakuninism preached the same thing that today's "minority" is saying today.
 Engels ridicules this view and says that life has ruthlessly refuted this doctrine of the Bakuninists . Engels: "Life has mercilessly refuted" this doctrine, says Engels .
 It turns out, therefore, that the principle of the ‘minority’ — action only from ‘below” — is an anarchist principle . It does, indeed, fundamentally contradict Social-Democratic tactics, says the author .
 The view of the ‘minority’ that participation in a provisional government in any way would be fatal to the workers is an anarchist phrase, which Engels ridiculed in his day . Engels ridiculed the phrase in his time .
 It also turns out that life will refute the views of the ‘minority’ and will easily smash them as it did in the case of the Bakuninists . Life will refute views of a “minority,’s views,” says the author .
 The seeds of the the later valorization of the revolution from above in the 1930s in terms of collectivization of industry and agriculture . Here already lie the seeds .
 But even this would not have been possible without a massive impetus from below . This would not be possible without the help of the government .
 Ernst Bloch’s ‘non-contemporaneity’ of the present enables one to understand the reality of successful socialist revolutions . Bloch has become quite intrigued by the way he describes the ‘contemportaneity of non-contimporane
 These occurred of course in ‘backward’ countries outside ‘advanced’ capitalist ones Eastern Europe, Russia and Asia .
 Bloch famously developed this philosophical category in Heritage of Our Times to explain the rise of fascism in Germany . Bloch also developed the philosophical category to explain Hitler's rise in the country .
 For Bloch, a mode of production such as capitalism always contains pre-capitalist traces, which exist at different levels and modalities simultaneously in the present . Bloch: Capitalism always contains Pre-Capital traces .
 They are like a ‘cultural ground water’ which lies closer to or further from the surface, depending on the place . They lie closer to the surface of the water, which lies further or further away from it, depending upon the location .
 Here fascism finds room to arise, for it can construct such resistance in terms of its false myths and hopes, of the Blond Beast, of blood and soil . Fascism can construct its false mythos and hopes of the 'Blond Beast' of blood .
 Bloch’s real insight is that such non-contemporaneity also creates the possibility for socialist revolution, he says . Bloch: ‘Such non-competitiveness creates possibility for socialism . But Bloch is not the only person to blame .
 This is why one would expect socialist revolutions to happen in culturally, economically and politically ‘backward’ places like Russia and China . This is precisely why one of the reasons for the 'backward' places to stage a revolution .
 The meeting between the incomplete wealth of the past and the prevented future is more potent and revolutionary . Here is the meeting between an incomplete wealth and the preventable future .
 At the same time, the contemporaneity of non-contemporaneity also apphes after the revolution, if not in heightened form . The contemporaryity of the revolution also appears after it, as does the contemporaryity .
 Only a proletarian revolution can complete the bourgeois revolution, Marxists say . Marxists argue that only a proletarian protestian revolution can complete a bourgeois revolution .
 The bourgeois revolution was completed after October, precisely when the bourgeoisie was defeated . The October Revolution was completed and transformed the February Revolution of 1917, he says .
 Because we had the possibility of carrying the bourgeois revolution to completion, we had to carry out the revolution . Because of that, we could carry out that revolution, we were able to carry it to completion. Because we were carrying out the revolutionary revolution.
 The power of the proletariat alone is able to carry the bourgeois revolution to completion, he says . The revolution was overthrown by the bourgeoisie and replaced by the proletariat .
 It scarcely needs proof that without these preliminary conditions, which determined the fate of the October Revolution, we could not have won the support of the peasantry as a whole for the task of completing the bourgeois revolution, either in October .
 Stalin’s works in some detail, let me offer an impression of his perspective on what was often a very personal conflict . Since I have recently read through Stalin's works, I offer my impression of Stalin's perspective on the conflict .
 It was the beginning of what became a long political and, in many respects, personal struggle between the two . It was beginning of the long-running political and personal struggle .
 By the late 1910s, references to Trotsky begin to increase, but especially after Lenin’s death . Lenin's death in 1910s was especially notable .
 Or perhaps he is a ‘superman’ who stands above the Central Committee (Stalin 1924 -b, 14), taking offence at everyone . Or perhaps perhaps he stands . above the . Central Committee .
 By the mid-1920s, the struggle between them became more serious . All this is relatively light-hearted, but by the 1920s, it was more serious.
 By the 1930s Stalin had dispensed with the humour at Trotsky’s expense . Stalin has dispensed . with the . humour at the . 1930s . by Stalin .
 Trotskyism had become part of a fifth column, one with international bourgeois forces if not of fascism itself . Indeed, Trotskyism was part of the fifth column . It had become one with bourgeois forces, if not fascism itself, he said .
 It is full of duphcity and double-dealing, engaging in nothing less than terrorism against the Soviet state . It is engaging in something more than terrorism, says Vladimir Putin's spokesman .
 Lenin’s putative betrayal is more contested ground, with some seeing Lenin as a purveyor of distorted Marxism from the beginning . Others that Lenin betrayed the revolution after October 1917, or that Stalin was responsible for the betrayal .
 Lenin’s betrayal of himself is consistent with the role of Stalin in this case, says Stalin . Let me take the example of Lenin, for example, for this is consistent . Stalin was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Lenin envisaged the soviets as versions of the Paris commune . According to this story, Lenin held to some form of democratic position, envisaging the 'soviets' Lenin held a similar position to the sovets .
 The model may have been updated and reshaped a little in light of circumstances, but it held to ‘democratic participation’ by workers and peasants at local and national levels, open and free-wheeling debate within the communist party, and would form the basis of socialism after the
 What happened very rapidly was an authoritarian move, hollowing out the soviets in the name of the dictatorship of the proletariat, if not replacing the proletarian dictatorship with the party. However, what happened very quickly was a authoritarian move .
 Lenin moved from a ‘democratic’ commune model to an authoritarian approach . Lenin’s 'democratic' commune was a model for an authoritarian state of power .
 The only difference is where one draws the line, whether within Lenin’s own thought and practice or between Lenin and Stalin, is where the line is drawn . Lenin's thought is within Lenin's own thought or practice .
 Before a revolution, or perhaps for a while afterwards, the revolutionaries held to the ideal think of Lenin in particular, but also Mao . Mao. Lenin .
 It may have been force of circumstances, or a turn in the face of imminent failure, or simply a weakness of will . It may be force of circumstance, or the turn in face of failure .
 If Lenin or Mao did not do so themselves, then Stalin or Deng were responsible for overturning the socialist ideal and destroying it . And if Lenin or Deng did so themselves themselves, they were responsible .
 I have focused on European-derived, or ‘Western’ Marxism due to its preference for betrayal narratives and ideas of pristine origins . This is due to the preference for betraying narratives .
 In a forthcoming work, I propose to investigate Stalin through an unexpected approach: his intimate relation with religion . Stalin and Religion • Saint Iosif: Stalin and religion • .
 Stalin studied theology at the Tiflis Spiritual Seminary, the training college for priests in the Russian Orthodox Church . Stalin is unique among world communist leaders in at least one respect: he studied theology for five years .
 One of the best students, he was known for his intellect and phenomenal memory . He was also known for being known for having a phenomenal intellect .
 He was notably devout, attending all worship services and even leading the choir . And he was notably devoted to his faith .
 Few if any take the time to analyse what Stalin studied and how he did so . Yet, despite the importance of this theological study in forming Stalin’s mind and life, few if any analyse what he studied . Stalin studied the Bible, the Bible and the Bible .
 This chapter investigates closely Stalin’s studies, especially the theological content of his study with an eye on the themes that would emerge later in his thought . This chapter looks at the themes later in Stalin's thought, especially in his theological content .
 In the earlier years, he studied both secular and theological subjects, such as Russian literature, secular history, mathematics, church singing and biblical studies .
 Stalin annotated religious works in his library, and memorised long passages from the Bible . Stalin memorised passages from Bible and annotated works in library . Years later he memorised Bible passages in library in Soviet Russia .
 I am particularly interested in the continuity (rather than the discontinuity) between his theological knowledge and activism in which he increasingly engaged . But I'm particularly interested .
 Stalin left the college just before the final examinations in 1899, of his own will . Stalin left just before he left the school in 1899 . Stalin died in the arms of the Soviet Union in March 1918 .
 Stalin made a historic compact with the Russian Orthodox Church in the early years of the Second World War .
 Stalin allowed reopening of tens of thousands of churches and re-establishment of the church’s leadership hierarchy . In return for support of the war effort that eventually defeated Hitler, Stalin allowed the reopening .
 It is not for nothing that from this period the religious iconography of Stalin began . Rumours of a ‘mysterious retreat’ in 1941 were fuelled by rumours of a mysterious retreat .
 This chapter digs deeper into Stalin’s writing, beginning with his habitual pattern of biblical and religious allusions . Stalin's frequent pattern of Bible and religious references in Stalin's writing is explained .
 "Above all, I am interested in his poetic style, especially in light of his early publications of widely-appreciated poetry," he says .
 His later texts reveal subtle variations in the balanced sentences, his rhetorical if not homiletical ability, and his evocation of imagery, and the ability to tell a story most notably in the creation of the ‘political myth’ of the communist party and the victory of the October
 Multiple modulations of dialectics appear in Stalin’s works . Stalin's works include a series of works on dialectics .
 In this case, the resistance of the workers becomes the determining feature of the constantly changing tactics of the capitalists and the bourgeoisie . Initially on a national level but later in a world-historical form, it is later on a global level .
 The two major developments in dialectics are in terms transcendence and immanence, and in a dialectic of crisis . The two dialectic developments of crisis and transcendence are in the dialectics of crisis, the philosopher says .
 The former refers to relations between workers and the communist party, between theory and action, and between the party and the multi-ethnic state . The latter refers to the relations between the two sides .
 The latter dialectics of crisis emerges in a complex pattern, particularly in light of the civil war, sustained international opposition, and the dictatorship of the proletariat . The dialectic of crisis emerged in the 1930s, especially in the aftermath of the Second World War .
 The key to this dialectic is that the closer one’s gaol becomes, the more ferocious become internal and external opponents . The closer the one's gaol is, the most ferocious opponents, he says .
 The more grace is apparent, the more active do the forces of evil become, says the author . "The more grace we show, the less active do evil become," she says . "Evil forces are active when grace is evident," she writes .
 Crisis dialectics then leads to what I call a materialist doctrine of evil . Towards a Materialist Doctrine of Evil, I call it a 'Crisis dialectics'
 This doctrine, worked out more in practice than theory, profoundly challenges the Enlightenment-inspired assumption of inherent human goodness so characteristic of many socialist movements . It challenges the assumption that human goodness is inherent .
 It entails a recalibration of the crucial opposition of good and evil, now in terms of socialism and capitalism, of workers and bosses .
 The Red Terror is the practical manifestation of this doctrine, in which good and evil are internal, with the one generating more of the other . Good and evil generate more of each other, the author says .
 Stalin has been and continues to be as venerated and as reviled as Stalin . No other political leader has been . as . venerated or reviled . Stalin was one of the most powerful men in Soviet history .
 Vladimir Putin is reviled by some but revered by many others in Russia and internationally . He functions either in terms of the reductio ad Hitlerum or as the architect of a stunning victory in WWII and in the construction of socialism .
 This chapter argues that such polarisation has a religious dynamic as well as a political one, in Cold War and post-Cold War contexts . It argues that polarisation is a religious and political dynamic in both Cold War contexts and beyond .
 I also focus on the dynamics of this polarisation by relating it to theological issues, Lenin’s veneration, the crucial role in extra-economic compulsion in the construction of socialism . I also relate it to the relation with the dialectics of intensified crisis, and particularly the central
 Stalin has a strong position on democracy, socialist democracy that is socialist democracy . Stalin has strong views on democracy . But Stalin has been a strong supporter of democracy .
 The delegates ask sharp questions, relating to political parties, the press, religion and religion, the party, world revolution and so on . The delegates are asked about political parties and the press .
 Stalin asks some incisive questions, especially concerning the absence of a workers party in the United States . Stalin asks: Why is the U.S. not to have a Workers Party in America?
 The right to vote in the election of Soviets is enjoyed by the whole adult population from the age of eighteen, irrespective of sex or nationality . The bourgeois elements who exploit the labour of others and have been deprived of electoral rights are deprived of voting rights .
 In Western countries, people sometimes wax ironical over these conferences and assemblies and assert that the Russians in general like to talk a lot . In Russia, such as Russia, it has a reputation for its openness to the world's business .
 For us, these conferences and assemblies are of enormous importance, both as a means of testing the mood of the masses and exposing our mistakes . We think that exposing mistakes and honestly correcting them is the best way to improve the administration of the country .
 As many may have been aware, I am working towards a book called Saint Iosif: Stalin and Religion . The book is based on the work done by St. Iosf Stalin .
 Preparation entails a careful reading of his written works, from which I have posted from time to time . Preparation involves a careful read of his works, which I've posted from here to time.
 Few actually read Stalin these days, and yet he is, for good or ill, possibly the most important communist of the twentieth century . Yet he remains such a controversial figure, precisely because of his controversial figure . To his knowledge, few actually read him these days .
 My approach deploys both critical commentary, with careful attention to his intimate connection with religious thought, and it works with and develops a translation model for understanding the subtle connections between Marxism and religion .
 Unlike the vast majority of studies on Stalin, I do not attempt to locate the tyrant in yet another way, now in terms of religious and philosophical thought . Unlike most of the studies, I don't attempt to find Stalin in a new way of thinking .
 "I take seriously Stalin the thinker, seeking to understand instead of praise or condemn," says Stalin . He says he takes seriously Stalin's ideas and seeks to understand them instead of condemn .
 Such understanding extends to the very question of that polarisation, exploring the deeper reasons why he has been and continues to be venerated .
 This chapter functions as the background to understanding Stalin’s texts . Set the Scene: ‘The Priest’ and the Church .
 Stalin’s historic compact with the Russian Orthodox Church during the Second World War; and his theological study at the Tiflis Spiritual Seminary . Stalin's historic compact . during the . Second . World War . and his . theological study . at the . Tifli Spiritual Sem
 In return for support of the war effort that eventually defeated Hitler, tens of thousands of churches were re-opened and the leadership hierarchy was re-established .
 Rumours began circulating of Stalin’s 1941 ‘mysterious retreat’, leading to a tradition of iconography that continues to this day .
 These developments were not due to a need for religious nationalism or to foreign policy pressures in relation to religion . Good work on the political realities has been done , pointing out that these developments were . not . to religious nationalism .
 A brilliant student and notably devout, this deeply formative time had a lasting effect on his life . He was a brilliant student, notably devout .
 Stalin memorised long passages from the Bible, annotated religious works in his library, and refused to include anti-religious works . Years later, Stalin still memorised and annotated long passages of the Bible .
 These factors provide insights into his literary style, preference for biblical citations, and materialist doctrine of evil .
 In light of the background material, this chapter delves deeply into Stalin’s writing . This chapter explores the history of Stalin's writing .
 It begins by focusing on form, specifically on the style of Stalin's sentence production . Stalin’s style of sentence production is shown in this article .
 His style ranges from methodical analysis , through rhetorical if not homiletic subtlety, to poetic flights of imagery and the ability to tell a story most notably in the long process of creating the 'political myth' of the communist party .
 In order to account for this influence, I analyse patterns of biblical and religious allusions . I analyse his habitual patterns of Bible and religious references in his work .
 From the form of Stalin’s writing, I move to content and theory . From Stalin's writing, he moves to content, theory and content .
 In this chapter, I focus on the intricate interweaving of the ‘national question’ and religion . This chapter focuses on the intricacies of the 'national question' and religion.
 Stalin initially set out to counter the position of the Bund the General Jewish Labour Bund of Lithuania, Poland and Russia . Stalin was the preeminent theorist of the national question . The Bund was one of the most powerful Jewish groups in Europe .
 In order to counter divisive nationalism, the Bund sought a federated system that recognised the distinctive ethnic, cultural and religious nature of each group .
 Stalin developed a dialectical argument that was based on voluntary unity through autonomous diversity . Over two decades he developed a delicate dialectal argument that he developed over two decades .
 This entailed fostering languages, cultures, literature, education, religion and political leadership by local people . This included languages, culture, education and religion .
 Stalin saw crucial implications for anti-colonial struggles around the world . Stalin saw the implications for the anti-colonial struggle around the globe .
 Throughout these developments, the question of religion was never far away . The question of whether religion was ever far away was also raised .
 Practically, it appeared in the policies of allowing sharia law in Muslim-majority regions . Heavy penalties for anti-Semitism, especially in light of the many Jews in the Soviet administration .
 At a deeper level, the national question embodied Stalin’s own way of working through to a position that resembled that of the Bund . The Bund's position was similar to that of Stalin's own approach to national question .
 Dialectics may owe some debts to Hegel and Marx, but it also has a long pedigree in theology . It is a long-standing theory of the 'Modalities of Dialectic' and 'Modalism'
 Stalin develops dialectic of transcendence and immanence, with distinct translations from the theological shape of this opposition . More importantly, Stalin develops the dialectic . Stalin develops a theological position that is different from that of Jesus Christ .
 This applies to the relations between theory and action, but especially to relations between the communist party, and workers and peasants on the other . This is especially true in the case of the Communist Party and the peasants .
 The party may appear to be transcendent, but when one perseveres long enough, it becomes immanent with workers and peasants, it's immanent . The party is transcendent but it's not transcendent .
 The most significant and sustained form of the dialectic is one of crisis . The dialectic of crisis is the most significant form of a dialectic, the author says .
 At its heart is the idea that the closer one’s gaol becomes, the more ferocious become internal and external opponents . At the heart of the idea is the concept of the closer a gaol is, the most ferocious opponents become .
 The closer one becomes, the clearer becomes the division between either-or . And the closer one gets, the closer the closer .
 Stalin’s unique contribution to the theory of revolution itself is this argument . Stalin's unique contribution is Stalin's contribution to revolution itself, he writes .
 Important features of the doctrine include external and internal dimensions . The doctrine is based on external dimensions and external dimensions .
 Externally, the reality was a situation of constant threat, by the sustained international blockade against the new Russia . This included support of the white armies, systematic sabotage and spying, and enfolded into the Cold War .
 Stalin has been and continues to be as venerated and as reviled as Stalin . No other political leader has been . as . venerated or reviled . Stalin was one of the world's most powerful men .
 This chapter moves from analysing Stalin’s thought to assess how he has been understood . This chapter begins with a look at how Stalin has been seen in Russia .
 It argues that the polarisation over Stalin constantly translates categories between religion and politics in Cold War and post-Cold War contexts .
 Some in Russia reviled by some but revered by many others in Russia and internationally . Others reviled him as the architect of a stunning victory in WWII and builder of socialism .
 In order to understand that polarisation, I analyse the ‘foi furieuse’ of the new utopian project, which includes the foreign fascination with the new socialist experiment . The foreign fascination is a contrast in the many disappointments and eventual disillusionment with the project .
 Religious and political polarisation illustrates the translatability of religious and political terms, says David Frum . But his primary focus is how such polarisation shows how it can be used in politics .
 Veneration and demonization operate between both languages, with neither language claiming priority . Neither language claims priority in the world .
 The intersection between them creates the intensity of the polarisation . Indeed, the intersection between the two polarises creates the intense intensity of polarisation.
 One of the tricks of developing new positions within a tradition is to assert your fidelity to the tradition while building a new argument out of the old . The meaning of socialism in one country is to be defined as socialism in a country .
 In the struggle between Trotsky and Stalin, the tradition was named ‘Feninism’ Each of course claimed to be the faithful interpreter of that tradition . The tradition was known as 'Trotsky-Stalinism'
 On the matter of revolution, Trotsky argued that only a world-wide socialist revolution would secure socialism . Trotsky said that only the world could secure socialism if it were to be achieved .
 Stalin argued again interpreting Fenin for the viability of socialism in one country . The reality was clearly otherwise, so Stalin argued . Stalin argued that Fenin was a socialist .
 No, it actually drew on the image of a Tight to the nations’ from Isaiah 49 . The image was taken from the Bible's Isaiah 49.
 The pleasure of reading increases with age: the discovery of unexpected ideas by means of disciplined and sustained reading . The pleasure increased with age, the pleasure of engaging in sustained reading increases .
 In this case I refer to Joseph Stalin and the origins of the connection between Marxism and anti-colonialism . The origins of this connection are to Stalin's work on Marxism, anti-colonialism and post-colonialistism .
 CNN.com's John Sutter: "Here I can spell out only the outlines of what will become a much longer argument. Here I can only spell out the outlines" of what I can say here .
 As a preliminary note, we need to dispel the image popularised by the Trotskyites . The Trotskyites were popularised in the 1930s and 1940s, but they are not today .
 The sneering dismissal of a ‘mediocre provincial’ says more about Trotsky’s own vanity than it does about Stalin . Stalin was a very bright student, at both the church school he attended and the ‘Spiritual Seminary’ in Tiflis where
 At the seminary he also wrote poetry, which has entered the anthologies of great Georgian hterature . His poetry has entered an anthologized collection .
 Anyone who studies the poems is struck by the delicate balance and linguistic purity of the writing features that also show up in his later written work . Anyone . studying the poems will be struck by his later work .
 The experience of crude Russification in Georgia influenced Stalin most deeply on the national question . However, it was the experience that influenced him most deeply .
 At the seminary, Georgian was forbidden even in everyday talk among the students . Georgian is forbidden in everyday conversations among students at the school . Georgian was also forbidden in daily talk among students .
 All texts, literature, and instruction were in Russian with a national imperialist focus . All texts and literature was in Russian .
 "All this is easy enough when one is involved in an underground, revolutionary group. All this was easy enough," says former member of the group .
 As the new government began enacting its policy, he found that bourgeois-aristocratic governments began to claim autonomy . The new government found it had to deal with the new state .
 Any claim to autonomy and self-determination had to come from a government established by workers and peasants in Ukraine, Lithuania, Estonia, Belarus and so on . So he stipulated that any claim to autonomous status must come from an established government established in those countries .
 If one supports the emancipation of ethnic minorities within the USSR, then the same should apply to any colonised place on the globe . If you support ethnic minorities in Russia, it should also apply to the rest of the world .
 USSR’s policy, already from this time, of supporting anti-colonial struggles around the world. This insight lay behind USSR's policy, which included support for anti-colonial struggles . This insight was behind USSR‘s policy’, says historian .
 I cannot go into the detail and complexity of these issues here, such as the relationship with the international solidarity of the working class, the way socialism and nationalism come together in a new way in such formulations, the realities of a massive war effort, and so on .
 But I do need to ask how these insights have a bearing on post-colonialism . I do not know how this will affect the future of colonialism, but I do ask how it does .
 What we now call ‘post-colonialism’ has a longer history in the anti-colonial articulations of Marxism and the struggles it fostered . As any self-respecting account of the origins of post-colonialistism shows, what we now called 'post-
 Stalin developed most fully and in the context of the actual experience of constructing socialism the deeper logic of Marxist anti-colonialism . Yet, it was Stalin who developed the logic of Marxism anti-colonialism .
 The sensitivity to such issues may have arisen from his own intimate experiences in Georgia as a young man, he says .
 Trotsky "never did anything without a careful look in the mirror of history," he says . Trotsky never did anything before, he adds .
 Those of you who know me may recall an occasional comment, ‘Stalin’s day will come’, said half in jest . Those who know him may recall his 'Stalin's day' comment .
 To be sure, Stalin has not had a good time in the minds of those who write the history books . Stalin has had a bad time in Russia's history books, says historian .
 Madman, butcher, paranoid dictator, responsible for countless deaths, proponent of the personality cult . The only realistic contender with Hitler for the most evil man of the twentieth century .
 The right puts him forward as the logical outcome of communism . The left shies away, arguing he was an anomaly . The right says he was a communist .
 Lenin relinquished his desire for collectivisation for the sake of the ‘civil’ war and the need to get the Soviet economy kicking, as well as come up with the bare modicum of grain needed .
 Stalin issued an order in 1927 that collectivisation was to restart . The NEP was winding down in the late 20s, when it was winding up in the mid-20s .
 Grain production is falling short by about 20 million tons, needed to feed Russia itself . Grain production was falling short due to old peasant methods of agriculture that were becoming increasingly inefficient .
 Stalin ordered collectivisation to be enforced but it was ignored . The shortages got worse and kulaks stockpiled grain and pushed up the prices . The next year Stalin announced collectivising would be enforced . Stalin's order was ignored and the shortages continued to grow .
 In response, peasants burned crops and barns and killed their animals . The peasants burned their crops and animals in response to the attack .
 Stalin followed Lenin’s path for a short while, allowing small-hold production to continue . Stalin followed the path of Lenin and allowed it to continue in the 1930s .
 By the end of the year, 67% of farms were collectivised, but peasants continued to burn crops and stockpile .
 By 1939, 99% of Russian farms were collectivised, modernised and were using machinery . Meanwhile, by 1939, the majority of farms had been modernised by collectivising .
 The USSR was in a strong position to resist Hitler’s attack in 1941 . Along with the massive reorganisation of industrial production, this put the USSR in a very strong position .
 Stalin outfoxed the left opposition, taking over their policy with gusto . Now Stalin is outfoxing them and taking control of their policy, Stalin outwins them .
 Many Trots ended up getting behind Stalin on this one . They were left with no room to move, and many Trots got behind Stalin .
 Gorbachev opened the archives to foreign historians . We can thank the man with the fried egg on his forehead for this one, he says .
 Since then, they have been rewriting the history of World War II, since the Soviets kept far better records than anyone, since they kept better records . The Soviets kept a better record than anyone else .
 Three factors had influenced the understanding of the war . Up until then, three factors had been influencing the understanding .
 Western historians relied on what the German generals told them. Second, western historians relied upon what they believed, they said .
 Russian rabble, unarmed soldiers, machine-gun fodder and so on. Good move that one, since we got fables about the Russians . Good move, since there are fables of unarmed soldiers .
 They stressed Hitler’s mismanagement, the size of the Red Army, and that their supply-lines were too long . And they stressed Hitler's mismanagement and that the Red army was too short .
 The USA employed former Wehrmacht officers to provide them with information on the new Cold War enemy . Incidentally, the USA employed ex-Wehrmachies to provide information on its Cold War enemies .
 Franz Haider was Hitler’s chief of the Army General Staff from 1938 to 1942 . He was part of the effort to wipe out Jews, gypsies, gays and communists . One of them was a Nazi leader who lied about Jews .
 After the war, he was head of the project on the USSR in the U.S. Army’s Historical Division . He was also a member of the US Army's Historical Division.
 For his contribution, John F Kennedy gave him the Meritorious Civilian Service .
 War historians have been providing a completely different picture of Stalin during the war . While the Left has been focusing on politics and avoiding Stalin, the historians have provided a different picture .
 David Glantz, Mark Harrison, Nikolai Litvin, Anthony Beavor, Catherine Merridale, Rodric Braithwaite, Omer Bartov, Wolfram Wette, Christopher Browning, Saul Friedlander, Richard Overy, Evan Mawdsley, Geoffrey Roberts
 The Russians showed everyone how to beat a blitzkrieg with a meticulously planned defence . Russia's defence is meticulously planned, flexible and in-depth defence .
 By comparison, the British, American, Australian, Canadian etc contribution on the western front was a sideshow . The British, U.S. and Australian contributions on the Western front was the sideshow.
 Stalin didn't start off well, misjudging German attacks in 1941 and 1942, and launching ineffective counter-attacks . However, Stalin didn’t start well, trying to run the whole show himself .
 He sat back, puffed through a few pipes full and had a good think . Then he sat back and had some more to say . He sat down and thought about his thoughts .
 At the end of the war at the Yalta Conference (4-11 February, 1945), he had obtained information that the good Winston Churchill didn’t mind and tipple or three .
 Churchill was plied with grog, got plastered, and Stalin got a very good deal indeed . So Churchill got the best deal indeed. Stalin got the good deal. Churchill got a good deal .
 Well-organised, equipped, supplied and trained Red Army began winning battles, from Stalingrad onwards .
 The Germans waged increasingly sophisticated ‘deep operations’ - rapid, multiply-arms advances that pushed deep into the Wehrmacht’s rear, inflicting creative and utterly debastating defeats, much greater than any army in the war .
 He fostered and was part of a dynamic, flexible and innovative team, discussing, debating and planning each move .
 The usual story about the dreadful era under Stalin is that it was an economic disaster, that collectivisation led to massive famines and economic hardship . But the usual story of the dreadful Stalin era is that collectingivisation was a disaster, and that it led to famines .
 The recovery of Stalin was brought about by war historians rather than political analysts or even Marxists, who shy away from the man with the moustache lik e Australians from a visit of the English queen .
 The Financial Times' graph is not that it comes from a source not particulalry favourable to our man the Financial Times . What’s interesting about this graph is that it is from the source of a source that isn’t particularly favourable to us .
 War historians have wondered why the USSR was able to recover so quickly after Hitler’s devastating invasion . The USSR recovered quickly after the devastating invasion of the USSR in 1945 .
 Perhaps the answer lies here, in the deep reorganisation of industry and agriculture known as collectivisation . Collectivisation is a reorganisation in agriculture and industry .
 The Single Spark web site is sponsoring a collective investigation and reappraisal of Stalin, and the Soviet Union in his times . Volume 5, The Years of Hunger Soviet Agriculture 1931-1933 . Mao's Evaluations of Stalin .
 Mao himself made various evaluations and criticisms of Stalin over the years . Mao himself himself has been critical of Stalin in the past . Mao's criticism of Stalin is one of Mao's many criticisms .
 We are not assuming that these comments are what our own final appraisal of Stalin should be exclusively based on . Stalin's comments are not what we should be looking at . We will not assume that Stalin's views are what we think of him .
 The passage of time and the opening up of Soviet archives has given us the resources on which to base a more objective evaluation than was possible in Mao’s day . Time and opening of archives have given us more resources to base an objective evaluation .
 Mao's comments form a good initial orientation for us as we begin our investigations . Mao’s comments are a good first orientation for our investigations, but Mao's words are not the best of all .
 The excerpts below do not include every single reference to Stalin by Mao, but they do include all the references we have located which could be deemed to explicitly or implicitly evaluate Stalin in some significant way . The excerpts do not necessarily include all of the references .
 Most of these comments, however, were not meant to be all-sided evaluations of Stalin, and all of them are the products of their times . All of the comments are products of the times, and they are not meant for them to be .
 In most cases these comments below are excerpts from larger documents, but an attempt has been made to include enough of the context so that the remarks are clear . The comments are an excerpted from a larger document .
 The unattributed words in brackets are clarifying remarks that were inserted by the editors of the different editions of Mao’s writings . Unattributed words are clarified remarks that have been inserted by editors of different editions .
 The English source editions used are listed at the end of this document . The English version of this article is published in the UK and Australia .
 These editions contain only portions of a particular work . It is necessary to consult more than one edition of this edition .
 Some of Mao’s speeches are only known to us through notes that were prepared by listeners . Moreover, some of Mao's speeches have been only known through notes from listeners . The Maoist's speeches were only known by listeners who prepared them .
 Although these notes are generally pretty carefully done, there are in some cases different versions of the notes which do show considerable differences between them . Different versions of these notes do show some differences .
 As might be expected, there are also sometimes different translations of Mao’s writings into English .
 Some of Mao’s writings as officially published by the Chinese government have been expurgated or changed to reflect the political line of the CPC at the time they were published . Volume V of the Selected Works which was published after Mao's death has been expanted or changed .
 There are sometimes different ‘versions’ available of particular works by Mao, as will be seen below . Mao’s work is often translated as ‘Mao’ and ‘Korea’ by ‘Zara’
 In part II below we attempt a summary of Mao’s criticisms of Stalin by specific topic . In part I below we try to explain Mao's criticism of Stalin in detail .
 We should not regard their theories as dogma but as a guide to action,” —“On the New Stage” (Oct.-14, 1938), MRP6, 537.
 The political side was not related directly to the world condition of the revolutionary movement, but to the Soviet Union’s historic relations with Eastern Poland . The political aspect of the political side of the revolution was not directly related to the .
 The Soviet-German Pact, on the other hand, was not political but a strategic-military necessity . The pact was a strategic necessity, not political, it was a necessity .
 Stalin wanted to block Chamberlain’s effort to build a coalition against Russia . Stalin wanted it in order to block the effort . Chamberlain wanted it to block a coalition of Russia against Russia.
 Mao claimed Chamberlain had indicated to Hitler that he had to make a choice between fighting Russia or fighting England . Mao claimed that Chamberlain had clearly indicated that Hitler had to choose between Russia and England .
 If Hitler attacked Russia, Chamberlain was prepared to tolerate his occupation of Poland, Rumania, Yugoslavia, and the Baltic states . Chamberlain was also prepared to accept the occupation of Yugoslavia, Poland, Yugoslavia and Yugoslavia .
 Stalin was then compelled to seek his own agreement with Hitler . —Edgar Snow’s report of an interview with Mao, in “Interviews with Edgar Snow” (Sept.26), 1939), 1939).
 Snow says Mao fully supported Stalin’s decision to sign a non-aggression pact with Germany and to occupy eastern Poland . Snow also says Mao supported Stalin's decision to invade eastern Poland in order to avoid further bloodshed .
 It can be anticipated that this birthday will call forth warm and affectionate congratulations in the hearts of all those who are aware of this event .
 To congratulate Stalin means to support him, to support his cause and to support the cause of the Soviet Union . To support the orientation he points out for humanity is to support our own close friend .
 The great majority of humanity is suffering and only by following the orientation pointed out by Stalin, Stalin, can humanity be rescued from disaster . Only by following Stalin’s aid, humanity can be saved from disaster, he writes .
 Li Linfu of the Tang dynasty can only be classed as a friend of Tang dynasty leader . But such friends can only classed with Li Lin Fu, who died in 2011 .
 "The Soviet Union alone has helped us with our great resources," says President Obama . "It is not the first time that we have been able to find a solution to our problems," says Obama .
 The Chinese people’s love and respect for Stalin, and our friendship for the Soviet Union, are wholly sincere, says President Xi Jinping . "The Chinese people's love" for Stalin is genuine, he says .
 All those who suffer oppression will congratulate him. Provided only that they know who the man is who was born this day, provided they know what manner of man he is, then all those . He was born in 1918.
 Only those who do not suffer oppression but, on the contrary, oppress other people, first of all, the imperialists . Only those . do not . suffer oppression, they oppress others, first, all of them imperialists, he said .
 On the one side is imperialism, which represents the front of the oppressors. On the other is imperialism . On the second side, imperialism represents imperialism, it represents an oppressor . On this side, colonialism is a form of slavery .
 On the other side is socialism, which represents the front of resistance to oppression . On other side, socialism is the front line of resistance against oppression, the author says .
 Some people imagine that the nationalrevolutionary front in the colonies and semicolonies occupies an intermediate position, but its enemy is imperialism . It cannot do otherwise than call upon the friendship of socialism, and it cannot but belong to the revolutionary front of resistance to the oppressors .
 China’s diehards imagine that they can play the harlot and, at the same time, set up arches in honor of their own virtue, and resist Japan with the other . China's Diehards think they can fight communism with one hand, and resisting Japan
 "They call themselves the middle-of-the-road faction, but they will never achieve their aims," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: They call themselves "middle of the road faction"
 "If they do not repent, they will certainly end by going over to the side of counterrevolution," says Maoist leader . Maoist: If they don't repent they will end up going to the right side .
 Both the revolutionary and the counterrevolutionary fronts must have someone to act as their leader, someone to serve as their commander . Both sides must have one of their leaders, and one of them must be a commander .
 Among the whole human race, this man, Stalin, has appeared, and this is a very great event . Stalin, Stalin's appearance is a great event, says CNN.com's Jim Boulden .
 He sees to it that everyone has food to eat, clothes to wear, a place to live, and books to read . He also sees that everyone in the world have a place and a place they can live .
 He must lead a billion and more people to struggle against the oppressors and bring them to a final victory, he says . And in order to achieve this, he must lead .
 From the time that Marxism appeared on the scene, this old judgment was turned upside down, and this is a great contribution, says David Frum . Frum says .
 This principle was derived by the proletariat from its struggles, but Marx drew the conclusion . Marx said that Marx drew up the conclusion that the proletariat had to take responsibility for its struggles .
 In accordance with this principle, there were then resistance, there was struggle, and socialism was realized . "There was then resistance and struggle," says Lenin .
 Lenin produced a very clear, concrete, and living doctrine for the oppressed people of the whole world . He developed this principle, developed Marxism-Leninism, and produced a concrete, living doctrine . Leninism is a Marxist doctrine for oppressed people in the world .
 This is the complete doctrine for establishing a revolutionary front, overthrowing imperialism and overthrowing capitalism, and establishing a socialist society . The doctrine for overthrowing the capitalist state is that the revolution is to overthrow capitalism .
 Neither Marx, Engels, nor Lenin carried to completion the cause of the establishment of socialism, but Stalin did so . Stalin carried the cause to completion of the socialist revolution, Marx and Engels .
 Chamberlain’s mouth has been stopped, as have the mouths of those Chinese diehards . Chamberlain's mouth has stopped, and have those who support him stopped speaking . Chamberlain: ‘Chamberlain’’
 Since the victory of Stalin’s cause, he has aided us with many airplanes, cannons, aviators, and military advisers in every theater of operations, as well as lending us money, he says .
 The imperialists all have honey dripping from their tongues and swords concealed in their hearts, says Chamberlain . Chamberlain is a present-day Li Linfu, says historian .
 Mao prefaced these passages with the following quote: “The correct thesis that ‘the Chinese revolution is part of the world revolution’ was put forward as early as 1924-27 during the period of China’s First Great Revolution . Mao: ‘The Chinese revolution
 It is the best synthesis and summingup of the world communist movement of the past hundred years . It is a model of the integration of theory and practice, and so far the only comprehensive model in the whole world .
 Mao wrote: ‘I simply don’t believe that the nation will perish if the people stand up and struggle .” Mao remarked: “I simply . don't believe that . the nation would perish if . the people stood up and struggled .’ —UP
 When the war with Japan ended, we invited the Chinese comrades to reach an agreement as to how a modus vivendi with Chiang Kai-shek might be found . We invited them to find a way of reaching an agreement .
 Mao then continues: “History has developed in the direction pointed out by Stalin.” Mao then says: ‘History has . developed in . the direction pointing out Stalin. Stalin. Mao then goes on to say that history has developed . history has. developed in a direction
 The October Revolution has opened up wide possibilities for the emancipation of the peoples of the world and opened up the realistic paths towards it . It has created a new front of revolutions against world imperialism, extending from the proletarians of the West, through the Russian revolution, to the oppressed peoples of
 Soviets erred in their estimate of the PLA and believed it could not defeat the Nationalists . First of all, the Soviets had simply erred . The PLA was simply the PLA, and the PLA was not the best of the Soviet Union .
 Marshal Nie Rong-zhen comments that Stalin, lacking confidence in the military power of the Chinese Communists, ‘was somewhat like the ancient man of Qi who was worried that the sky might fall anytime.’ Stalin was ‘somewetly worried’ that the
 Stalin was apparently still trying to mediate an end to the civil war and keep China divided . On the other hand, not long before sending that cable Stalin was trying to end the war . Stalin sent the cable shortly before sending it to China .
 “This weapon is not a machine-gun, but Marxism-Leninism” —“On the People’s Democratic Dictatorship” , SW4, 412. ‘This is not the weapon of a machine gun, but a Marxist-Lenin
 The Russians made the October Revolution and created the world’s first socialist state . The October Revolution was created by the October 1917 .
 Under the leadership of Lenin and Stalin, the revolutionary energy of the great proletariat and laboring people of Russia, hitherto latent and unseen by foreigners, suddenly erupted . The Chinese and all mankind began to see the Russians in a new light .
 Then, and only then, did the Chinese enter an entirely new era in their thinking and their life . The Chinese entered an entirely different era of thinking and life .
 They found Marxism-Leninism, the universally applicable truth, and the face of China began to change . The face of the Chinese people was changed when they read out the truth .
 Before the October Revolution, the Chinese were not only ignorant of Lenin and Stalin, they did not even know of Marx and Engels . The Chinese were ignorant of Marx, Engels and Lenin .
 "If we dig into a subject for several months, for a year or two, for three or five years, we shall eventually master it," he said . "We shall eventually masters it. If we dug into a topic for a long time, we will master it"
 At first some of the Soviet Communists also were not very good at handling economic matters . The imperialists awaited their failure too too. At first, the Soviet Communist Party was very poor at handling matters .
 The Soviet people and the Soviet government have, on several occasions, assisted the Chinese people in their cause of liberation . Over a period of almost thirty years, the Soviet people have assisted the . Chinese people have been assisted by the Soviet .
 The Chinese people will never forget that in the midst of their ordeals they received such fraternal friendship of the Soviet people and the Soviet government . The Chinese are grateful for the friendship of Soviet people, the Chinese people .
 He has further developed the revolutionary theory of Marxism-Leninism . He has made extremely outstanding contributions to the cause of the world Communist movement .
 The Chinese people have become deeply appreciative of the importance of Comrade Stalin’s friendship . In the arduous struggle to resist their oppressors, the Chinese people are deeply appreciating of the friendship of Stalin .
 We wish well-being, strength, and prosperity to our great friend, the Soviet Union, under the leadership of Comrade Stalin .
 "We hail the great unprecedented solidarity of the working class in the world under the leadership of Comrade Stalin," the Communist Party said .
 This is an inestimable loss, not only for the people of the Soviet Union, but for the Chinese people, the entire camp of peace and democracy, and for peace-loving people through the world . This is the loss of the USSR, but also for peace loving people
 On behalf of the Chinese people, the Chinese government, and on my own behalf, I extend to you and to the people and government of the Soviet Union our deepest condolences . I extend . to you, the people of the . people and the people . of the Russian government, the
 Since the victory of the Chinese people’s revolution, Comrade Stalin and the people and government of the Soviet Union, have rendered generous and selfless assistance to the people of China, according to Stalin .
 Stalin's friendship with China will be remembered with gratitude by the Chinese people . Stalin had a great and profound friendship as that which Comrade Stalin had for the China people will be forever remembered .
 From March 7 to March 9, 1953, flags shall fly at half-mast throughout our country as a symbol of mourning . “2.2.3.4.5.6.9.7.7: “From March 7 . 1953” “Flags
 In this period of mourning, all factories, mines, enterprises, units of the armed forces, government organs, schools, and people’s organizations shall suspend all banquets and forms of entertainment .” —Central People's Government's Decree on Stalin's Death , WM
 "His activities have led the Soviet people and the working people of all countries to turn around the whole world situation," says Soviet leader Vladimir Putin .
 "The influence of this victory is daily spreading to every corner of the world," says President Obama .
 Comrade Stalin’s cause and his thought have gripped the broad masses of the people throughout the world . Stalin's thought has already become an invincible force, says Stalin . He says Stalin's cause will guide those people who have already achieved victory .
 The victory of socialist construction in the Soviet Union was not only a victory for the people of the . Soviet Union, but also a common victory for . the people . of the whole world . The victory is not only for the . people of Russia, but for the entire world, the
 First, this victory proved in the most real-life terms the correctness of Marxism-Leninism and concretely educated working people through the world on how they should advance .
 This victory ensured that during the Second World War humanity would have the strength to defeat the Fascist beast . Second, this victory ensured the strength of humanity would be able to defeat Fascism .
 The achievement of victory in the anti-Fascist war would have been inconceivable without the victory of socialist construction in the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was founded in the 1930s .
 The fate of all humanity was bound up with the victory of socialist construction in the Soviet Union and victory in the anti-Fascist war, Stalin . The glory for these victories should be attributed to our great Comrade Stalin .
 Stalin creatively developed Lenin’s theory concerning the law of the uneven development of capitalism and the theory that it is possible for socialism to first achieve victory in one country . Comrade Stalin creatively contributed the theory of the general crisis of the capitalist system; he contributed .
 Comrade Stalin also creatively developed Lenin’s theory of party-building . Stalin developed Lenin's theory of the party-builder . Stalin's theory was developed as a result of Lenin's theories .
 All these creative theories of Comrade Stalin’s further united the workers throughout the world . The victories in this struggle to reach unprecedented proportions, says Stalin .
 We Chinese Communists, l ik e the Communists of all countries, search for our own road to victory in the great works of Comrade Stalin . We Chinese Communist Party members search for their own way to victory .
 "We rallied around him, constantly asked his advice, and constantly drew ideological strength from his works," he said . We rallied around his work and constantly asked him advice, he said. "We are proud of his work," he wrote .
 Comrade Stalin was full of warmth for the oppressed peoples of the East, says Stalin . Stalin was warm for oppressed peoples, says the Russian leader .
 Stalin warmly loved the Chinese people and regarded the might of the Chinese revolution as incalculable . Stalin's warm-hearted love for the people was warmly expressed by Stalin, Stalin said .
 On the question of the Chinese revolution, he contributed his exalted wisdom . The Chinese revolution was a revolution in China, he said .
 "The sorrow that this misfortune has brought us cannot be described in words," says the family . "We are deeply saddened and deeply saddened by the loss of our son," she says .
 The Chinese Communists and the Chinese people will further intensify the study of Stalin’s teachings . The study of Soviet science and technology in order to build our country will continue, he said .
 This party has been our model in the past, is our model at present, and will still be our model for the future . This party will continue to be the party in the future, says Labour leader Nick Clegg .
 The Soviet Union has become so powerful, the Chinese people’s revolution has achieved such great victories . The movement of the peoples of various countries throughout the world against oppression and aggression has risen to such heights . We can say with complete certainty that we are not afraid of any imperialist aggression
 "All their despicable provocations will be to no avail. Any imperialist aggression will be smashed by us," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 The friendship between the peoples of the various people’s democracies, as well as with all the people who love peace, democracy, and justice in all the countries of the world is also built upon these great principles of internationalism and consequently is also unbreakable .
 Mao told Mikoyan the secret deals on Xinjiang and Manchuria were ‘two bitter pills’ that Stalin forced him to swallow . The next year he complained to Gromyko that ‘only imperialists’ would think of imposing such a deal on China .
 Mao came close to giving the game away in 1958, when he spoke of ‘two ‘colonies” , the Northeast and Xinjiang, where the people of third countries were not permitted to settle down’” —UP, 122.
 The bad things about Stalin and the Third International can be transmitted to the district committee secretaries as well as to the xian committee secretaries, writes the author .
 These were not written into the article out of consideration for the situation as a whole . It is not the first time we have included these comments in this article .
 An editorial footnote says by “bad things” Mao is referring to the criticisms made of Stalin by Khrushchev in his “secret” speech to the 20th Congress of the CPSU in February 1956 .
 The “article” referred to here is apparently “On the Historical Experience of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat” which appeared in the People’s Daily on April 5, 1956 . The article is said to have been published in 1956 .
 The many articles criticizing Stalin’s errors either don’t mention this issue at all, or mention it only very infrequently . Many articles that we have seen criticizing Stalin's errors either omit this issue . We are happy to point out that Stalin's mistakes were made in the
 It’s because on some questions his subjective did not correspond to objective reality, he says . It's because he's subjective, he's not objective reality . He says it's because his subjective views don't correspond with objective reality.
 Since some mistakes have occurred in the Soviet Union and those things have been much talked about, they have been exaggerated . Now there is the impression that mistakes of that kind are really terrible, he says .
 It is impossible for any nation not to commit any mistakes at all, and the Soviet Union was the first socialist country in the world, and has had such a long experience, it has had some mistakes .
 Although we hear that some things have been around for twenty years already, they are nevertheless still temporary and partial and can be corrected . We are still talking about how to fix these problems .
 The main current in the Soviet Union, its principal aspect, was correct. The main aspect, the majority [of its people], was correct, he said .
 Russia gave birth to Leninism, and after the October Revolution, it became the first socialist country . Russia was the first country to become a socialist nation .
 It built socialism, defeated fascism, and became a great industrial state . It was built socialism and defeated fascism . It also defeated fascism and became an industrial state. It is now a socialist state .
 Of course, we should study the advanced experiences, and not the backward experiences, says the author of the book . "Of course, ... we should ... not be studying backward experiences," he says .
 "We have always proposed the slogan of studying the advanced experience of the Soviet Union," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We always propose studying Soviet experience"
 Some people say that no matter what, even the farts of the Russians smell good; that too is subjectivism . Some say that even though Russia's farts smell good, even though it smells good, is subjectivistic .
 “There are some other questions, too, on which we disagree.” —Remarks about the Criticism of Stalin , WMZ2, 148, in full .
 Gomulka and some people in Hungary have picked up this knife to kill the Soviet Union, opposing the so-called Stalinism . The knife is used to kill Soviet Union .
 Communist parties of many European countries are also criticizing the Soviet Union . The leader is Togliatti, the leader of the Communist Party .
 The imperialists are also using this knife to kill people, says Dulles . Dulles, for one, picked it up and played around with it for some time .
 Khrushchev’s report at the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU stated that it is possible to achieve political power through parliamentary means . The CPSU said it was possible to become a power house in Russia .
 This is to say that other countries no longer need to emulate the October Revolution . The revolution was inspired by the revolution of the French Revolution in 1918 .
 Lenin's legs are gone, perhaps there's still a head left, or perhaps one of Lenin's two hands has been chopped off . Lenin’s legs were gone . Perhaps one of his two hands was chopped off, perhaps one was left .
 "Relying on the masses and taking the mass line are things we learned from them," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Relying on a mass line and taking on mass lines is a key to success, he says .
 This version of the speech, however, had many strong criticisms of Stalin removed from it . The speech was edited to remove many of the strong criticisms .
 The mass line, our political work, and the dictatorship of the proletariat have all been learned from the October Revolution, says the Communist Party of Russia .
 Lenin had focused on the mobilization of the masses, and organizing the worker-peasant-soldier soviet, and so on. At that time, Lenin had . focused on organizing the workers, peasants, workers and peasants . Lenin focused on mobilizing the masses .
 The problem lies with the latter phase of Stalin’s leadership after the October Revolution, writes Alexander Nekrassov . The problem is with Stalin's leadership in the 1930s, he writes .
 Although still promoting socialism and communism, he nonetheless abandoned some of Lenin’s things, deviated from the orbit of Leninism, and became alienated from the masses, and so on. Although was still promoting socialist and communist .
 We did suffer some disadvantages when we emulated the things of the later stages of Stalin’s leadership and transplanted them for application in China in a doctrinaire way . Therefore, we suffered some disadvantages .
 The Soviet Union still has some advanced experiences that deserve to be emulated, but there are some other in which we simply cannot be lik e the Soviet Union . Today, the Soviet U.S. has some of the most advanced experiences in the world .
 The socialist transformation of the capitalist industries and commerce, the cooperativization of agriculture, and the Ten Major Relationships in economic construction; these are all ways of doing things in China .
 Lrom: "We should primarily start with China’s circumstances, and with the special characteristics of the circumstances and the times in which we are situated. Lrom now on, in our socialist economic construction, we should . We should primarily . start with . China's circumstances,
 We must still propose the slogan of learning from the Soviet Union; just that we cannot forcibly and crudely transplant and employ things blindly and in a doctrinaire fashion . Therefore, we must still . learn from Soviet Union .
 Every country must have its strengths and weaknesses, and we intend chiefly to learn other people’s strengths . Similarly, we can also learn some of the things that are good in bourgeois countries; this is because every country has its strengths .
 A concrete expression of this is negation of contradictions, and to date, has not yet thoroughly eliminated the influence of this viewpoint of Stalin’s. Stalin's view of this has yet to be thoroughly eliminated, says the author .
 Stalin spoke materialism and the dialectical method, but in reality he was subjectivist . Stalin was a subjectivist, not materialist, but subjectivist and materialistist .
 He placed the individual above everything else, negated the group, and negated . the worship of the individual; in fact, to be more precise, personal dictatorships. The individual is a dictator, not a group, but a group .
 Stalin also spoke of the dialectical method, but in reality was metaphysical . Stalin spoke of dialectical methods, but it was metaphysical. Stalin's method was metaphysical, he said .
 The most fundamental problem of dialectics is the unity of contradictory opposites . We should say that the most fundamental . problem is that dialectics cannot be solved by a solution to the problem .
 It is because of his metaphysical that a one-sided viewpoint was produced, he says . Problems are looked at isolatedly and in a static way, he writes .
 In this way, with regard to a person, we would not be at one time that he is all good, without a single good point . In the same way, a person could not be all good at one point, and then at another time is all bad .
 It is because we have been able to proceed from the objective conditions in understanding and resolving all problems . In this way we are more comprehensive and we can avoid being absolutists. We are not absolutsists, but we are able to be more comprehensive .
 Communists are materialists; we acknowledge that it is the masses who create everything and are the masters of history . Only when the masses are united can there be strength, Communist leader says .
 The mass line has been forgotten in the Soviet Union since Lenin died . Lenin did not properly acknowledge or emphasize the significance of the mass line in the USSR .
 Of course, more recently, attention has begun to be paid to this, but the understanding is still not deep, he says .
 At one time, the divergence between Lenin and the Third International and the Second International was mainly along the lines that the Marxists emphasized the class struggle and the dictatorship of the proletariat . The opportunists were unwilling to acknowledge them .
 One excessively long paragraph in the report of this speech has been broken up into three paragraphs for readability .
 V “The fundamental policy and line during the period of Stalin’s administration were correct; methods employed against the enemy mustn’t be used against our own comrade.” —Comment on the Criticism of Stalin , WMZ2, 196 .
 The imperialists cooked up two major anti-Communist storms, and in the international Communist movement also there were two big storms of debate . Lollowing that, the imperialists cook up two big anti-communist storms . L.A. Lenin says: "The imperialists
 Some of the parties in Europe and America felt the impact of these upheavals and suffered considerable damage, but the damage sustained was relatively small . The damage sustained and the degree to which the parties . in the countries in the . East were affected by the events in the East was relatively
 I don't think these people are practicing MarxismLeninism; they do not analyze problems, and they are also lacking in revolutionary ethics . I don’t think they are practicing MarxistLeninism .
 Marxism-Leninism also includes revolutionary ethics of the proletariat . Marxism- Leninism is a Marxist theory of the revolution of the Russian Revolution .
 The Stalin problem involves the entire international Communist movement . The parties in all countries have become involved in solving the problem .
 Whenever a typhoon approaches, the ants will leave their holes before the rain comes . Ants will leave holes in their holes in preparation for the storm .
 When the typhoon of the CPSU’s Twentieth Congress approached, in China too, some ants left their holes . The typhoon is expected to hit the country on Sunday .
 Even Khrushchev had to change his tune, and they again swung back over to this side . Later, when the imperialists hit back with a few blows, they hit back, and a few blow were delivered .
 A tuft of grass on a wall, when the wind blows it sways to one side and then the other . Compelled by the general trend, they had no choice but to swing back . The grass on the wall is now a tuft-like a grass that sways
 "Their true intention was to swing over to the other side. To swing back was not their true intention," the author says . "To swing back is not the true intention"
 In this way they exposed themselves, the ants left their holes, and even the turtles have come out . The ants and turtles exposed themselves in this way, and the turtles came out .
 When Gomulka said big democracy, they too said that ‘they wanted] big democracy.’ They too said, ‘They wanted big democracy,' they too, they said .
 "Silence is not their true intention; they want to make a lot of noise," he says . Silence is not the true intention, he says, but it's the intention of making a lot more noise . "Their true intention is to make lots of noise. silence is not
 In China, too, a small number of ants wanted to leave their holes to engage in some activity .
 The people who were most staunchly supportive of Stalin in the past are precisely the most vehemently opposed to Stalin now . The people . who were . staunchly . supportive of . Stalin in . the past were precisely the people who are now opposed to him now .
 Some sway once or twice and then stop swaying, some will go on swaying forever . Some sway, some sway once and twice, but some sway forever . "Some sway once, twice or twice," some sway, then stop .
 Saplings, the stalks of rice, barley, corn, and the grass on the wall always sway when they see the wind coming . Only the big tree will not sway. Saplings always sway, but only the big trees .
 There are typhoons every year, but there is not necessarily a political typhoon every year . There are not necessarily political typhoons, says CNN's John Sutter .
 “My advice to the comrades here today is that if you understand materialism and dialectics, then you still need to supplement it by learning a bit about their opposites, idealism and metaphysics. See previous item for the same passage from version I .
 Kant's and Hegel's writings, Confucius, and Chiang Kai-shek’s books, ought to be read . Those things on the opposing side should also be read, he says .
 If you don't understand idealism and metaphysics and have not undergone a struggle against these things of the opposing side, your materialism and dialectics would not be solid . If you’re not a believer in idealism or metaphysics, you can’t understand ideal
 They read a few books written by Marx and proceed to talk about them accordingly; this is relatively monotonous . This is not the same thing they do about Marx . They read about Marx's work and talk about it .
 They all studied energetically and learned all sorts of contemporary and historical things . They counseled others to do the same. They also counseled other people to do same.
 The three component parts of Marxism were produced through the process of studying the things in bourgeois , studying German classical philosophy, British classical economics, and French utopian socialism, and struggling against them .
 For instance during his time German classical idealist philosophy was said to be a kind of reaction on the part of the German aristocracy to the French Revolution . For instance, during this time German aristocrats were said to have been reacting to the revolution .
 To draw a conclusion l ik e that is to totally negate German classical idealist philosophy. To draw  e that's to totally negothen German classical Idealist philosophy .
 Clausewitz negated German military science, saying that the Germans had been defeated, their military science was impractical, and Clausewitz’s book needn’t be read any more . Clausewitz said that the German army was defeated and that their science was practical .
 The first that he talked about was the relationship between things, as if all things were related for no reason . The first thing he said was that all things are related to no reason, he said . "The first thing that he said about was that everything was related to nothing," he
 "The relationship is actually between the two aspects of a contradiction," he says . The relationship is between the both aspects of the contradiction .
 "He only talked about the struggle between opposites, but not about the unity of opposites," he said . "I'm not going to be able to say yes, but I'm going to say 'yes'"
 Opposites struggle against each other, and at the same time they are united . They are mutually exclusive and also interrelated, and under certain conditions they transform themselves into each other .
 This is to say that these phenomena which are in fundamental opposition to each other do not have identity in the Marxist , are mutually exclusive rather than interrelated, and cannot transform themselves into each other under certain conditions .
 The thought of some people in the Soviet Union is just metaphysical and petrified l ik e that; they view things in either this way or that way and do not acknowledge the unity of opposites . Some people in Soviet Union are 'petrified' by the thought of such a
 We uphold the viewpoint of the unity of opposites and adopt the policy of letting a hundred flowers bloom, let a hundred schools contend . We adopt a policy of 'letting a hundred flower bloom and letting a 100 schools contend'
 At the same time that fragrant flowers are blooming, there will inevitably be poisonous weeds blooming too . The poisonous weeds are also blooming this year .
 There are two opposing views regarding the CPSU’s knocking off Stalin in one blow at the ‘Twentieth Congress’; one supports and the other opposes it. For instance, there are two . views on the 'twentieth . Congress' decision to knock
 “If opinions happen to coincide, after a month or two, new and differing opinions will again emerge.” —Ibid., 257. If opinions coincide, “after a month’s . two,” “new and differing . opinions will . again
 He hesitantly discussed contradictions between relations of production and forces of production under the socialist system . He said that if policies were incorrect or improperly regulated, problems would arise .
 He still did not present contradictions under a socialist system between the relations and the forces of production as an issue of overall significance . Even though he did not recognize that these contradictions are the basic contradictions that propel socialist society forward, he still did .
 We mustn’t think that the state is secure; it is secure and, at the same time, insecure . The state must be secure and insecure, he says . We must also think that we are secure, he adds .
 Good deeds and good people emerge out of comparison with evil deeds and evil people . Good deeds emerge from comparison with and struggle with evil people, good people struggle .
 Fragrant flowers emerge from the comparison with and struggle with poisonous weeds . They struggle to survive in the wild .
 Materialism emerges out of the comparison with and struggle with idealism . Materialism comes from the struggle between idealism and materialism. Materialism is a struggle for idealism to overcome materialism, the author says .
 Many people hate Chiang Kai-shek, but they don’t know what a bastard he really is, he says . Many people don't even know what he really was, he writes .
 We should also publish the collected works of Sun Yat-sen and Kang Youwei, says Mao Zed Zedong .
 To prohibit people from coming into contact with ugliness, error and fallacies, idealism, and metaphysics is a very dangerous policy . To banish people from interacting with uginess is a dangerous policy.
 It would cause people’s thinking to deteriorate and ossify, it would make them one-sided and incapable of facing the world or meeting the challenge of a rival show . It would make people incapable of dealing with the world, it is claimed .
 We Communists know too little about the opposite side, so we are comparatively monotonous and can hardly produce any persuasive statements. We know too much about the opposing side, says the Communist Party leader . We cannot produce any convincing statements.
 They all strenuously studied contemporary and historical matters . They also instructed other people to study in a lik e manner .
 He rejected German philosophy (Kant and Feuerbach) and because Germany was defeated in war he also rejected German military teachings . He rejected philosophy and rejected military teachings because of defeat .
 Stalin was in reality metaphysical , and he did not recognize the unity of opposites . Stalin was a metaphysical . He didn't recognize the . unity of . opposites. He did not .
 In the Dictionary of Philosophy they employed a metaphysical way of putting things . War does not turn into peace, nor does peace turn into war . The two things are separate and unrelated; they are not mutually transmutable . They only struggle, but there is no unity .
 Lenin said war was an extension of politics and a special means, and that peace was a result of war . Lenin said that war is an extension to politics, and peace is a result .
 These people had a lot of metaphysics in their minds and became rigid in their thinking, thus they committed political mistakes . These people were very rigid and had to be rigid in thinking, writes CNN.com .
 Whoever disagreed with the Soviet Union was called anti-Soviet. counterrevolutionary, the only death by execution . When others disagreed occasionally, they were ostracized. Counterrevolutionary .
 We wanted to sign a Sino-Soviet Treaty, but he didn’t want to sign; we wanted the Chinese-Changchun Railway back . We also wanted the China-Russia-China Railway back, but didn't want to give it up. We wanted the
 If we want to industrialize, then we must engage in agriculture . Therefore we must persuade cadres to go to the rural areas, says minister .
 Stalin emphasized accumulation too much, which had a impact on industry . Stalin's emphasis on accumulation had an impact on the industry .
 In short, we must make the cooperatives expand reproduction so that we can be assured of even greater accumulation . We must make this happen so we can ensure that we are assured of great accumulation .
 With philosophy there is always struggle; to discuss philosophy you have to struggle . With philosophy, "there are always struggle," he says. "With philosophy there are always struggles," he adds .
 Some people, when they discuss philosophy, only talk about one side . Some people talk about letting a hundred flowers bloom, not about getting rid of poisonous weeds . Letting fragrant flowers bloom is not about removing poisonous weeds, it's about letting fragrant plants bloom .
 The Soviet Union does not acknowledge the existence of opposites, and forbids by law . Many wrong things are hidden behind the front of socialism, he says .
 Lenin believed that merely talking about materialism could not solve problems . Lenin believed materialism was not a solution to the problems of materialism .
 One of the reasons why it has developed is because the Communist party has come into power . The Communist party is now in power in China, says the BBC .
 His criticism was not balanced and was very similar to a father scolding his son. So his criticism of his son is not balanced, he said . So he said: 'I'm not a father who scolds his son'
 He didn’t air his opinions only after collecting large quantities of materials, he said . He didn't air his views only after gathering large amounts of materials . He said, "I don't think it's a good thing to say 'yes'
 "Some of the things he wrote were good, others he wrote as if he were sitting on a hillock and picking up stones to hit people," he said . "Some things were good but others were bad," he added .
 "His merits surpass his demerits. Precisely for this reason he had both merits and demersers," he said .
 “He also has some dialectics, but not quite that much of dialectics.” — Conversations with Scientists and Writers on Contradiction among the People (Feb., 1957), WMZ2, 304.
 After the October Revolution, during the period when Stalin was in charge, for a long time he confused these two types of contradictions . Stalin confused these contradictions, he said, 'after the . October Revolution'
 Problems l ik e bad mouthing the government and criticizing the Communist party are in origin problems among the people, he says .
 There is the enemy criticizing us, the enemy being dissatisfied with the Communist party; and there are the people criticizing us . The two must be distinguished, says the Communist Party leader .
 Stalin for so many years did not make such distinctions, or rarely did . Stalin did not distinguish himself between Stalin and Stalin . Stalin was a dictator of the Soviet Union .
 The so-called 'leftists' exaggerate the contradictions between ourselves and the enemy . They are not really left, for they exaggerate contradictions between us and each other .
 These people excessively emphasize antagonistic contradictions between the enemy and ourselves . These people over emphasize antagonism between the enemies and ourselves, they say . This is not the case, it is the case that the enemy is the enemy, not ourselves .
 The policy was previously employed was the one brought back from the Western Paradise . The policy previously employed is the same as that used to be used by the British government .
 ‘Western Paradise’ was Stalin’s ‘ruthless struggle and merciless blows. Stalin was Stalin and was called ‘Ruthless Struggle and merciless blow. That 'Western Paradise' was Stalin . ‘ Western Paradise was Stalin,’ he wrote .
 In my opinion, there have been shortcomings, but if we compare ourselves with other countries, we have done relatively well. "If you compare yourself with other nations, you have done fairly well," he says. "There have been a few shortcomings in our country," he adds .
 "On the one hand, he eliminated genuine counter-revolutionaries," he says . "This aspect was correct. On the other hand, this was correct," he adds . "He eliminated genuine Counter-Revolutionaries"
 Historically, Marx and Engels said very little about this problem, and though Lenin referred to it, he only just referred it to it . Lenin only just refers to it in a few words .
 He said that in a socialist society antagonisms died away, but contradictions continued to exist . In other words the bourgeoisie had been overthrown, but there continued to be contradictions among the people, he said .
 Lenin said there were still contradictions among the people, he didn’t have time to analyze this problem systematically . Lenin said he didn't have time for analysis of contradictions .
 Lenin’s day there was as yet no possibility of investigating this problem in detail . It must be said that they can, but in Lenin's day there were no possibilities of investigating it in detail.
 "In my view there have been shortcomings, but in comparison with other countries we have done relatively well," he said . "In comparison, I think we are doing relatively well. In my view, there are shortcomings," he added .
 We have drawn a lesson from this; it’s not that we’re especially clever. We have learned from this, it's not that they're especially clever . We have a lesson: 'We're not especially clever,' he says .
 "Because the Soviet Union has been too left, we have learned something from that experience," says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We have learned from the experience of the former Soviet Union"
 During the period of the southern base areas, when we were still rather ignorant, we suffered losses . Every base area without exception used the same Soviet method. We suffered losses and every base area used the Soviet method, he says .
 "Not a single person was to be killed and the bulk [of offenders] were not to be arrested," the author says . "The bulk of offenders [were] not to have been arrested," he says .
 There are still shortcomings, errors, errors. Once in Beijing there were some improvements, though there are some improvements . Once in China, some improvements were made, but there are still some shortcomings .
 One side was the elimination of true counterrevolutionaries; that was the correct side. That was the right side. One side, one side was elimination of real counterrevolutionary. That's the right .
 "The other side was the incorrect killing of numerous people, important people," he says . The other side is the correct killing of important people, he says. "The correct killing was incorrect killing," he adds .
 An alternate translation of some of this passage is given above . “These are basic kinds of contradictions, namely, contradictions between the relations of production and the forces of production,” he says .
 Socialist society does not have exploiters . System of ownership is that of the whole people or collective . There are no private capitalists, no private landowners or private factory owners enterprise owners .
 We say Stalin was somewhat deficient in dialectics, but was without dialectics . Therefore Stalin, we say that Stalin was lacking dialectics. Therefore Stalin was deficient of dialectics but lacked dialectics in the Soviet Union .
 In People’s Daily editorial we said he partially but seriously turned back on dialectical materialism . In the People's Daily editorial, we said that he partially . But seriously .
 Under his influence a book was written, called A Concise Dictionary of Philosophy, written by two men . He influenced the work of philosophers .
 Stalin’s influence, in the context of discussing identity, refuted formal logical identity . Stalin failed completely to analyze clearly whether formal . logical identity and dialectical identity are the same thing or not .
 Then quoted Engels to say, Engels said there is no such identity, in reality everything exists in change . In objective reality, in objective reality there are no such identities, he said .
 He says things in opposition, mutually repellent opposites, cannot be said to have identity . Then he brought up some metaphysics; he says things must have identity, he says .
 For example, the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, these two classes in a single society, they have no identity, have only mutual rejection . They have only struggle, they say, and have only identity .
 After Stalin died, Soviet philosophers, the Soviet Union began to change on this question . The Soviet Union changed its stance on the issue of homosexuality .
 War is war, the bourgeoisie is the bourgeoisie, the proletariat is the proletariat . The so-called metaphysical outlook have no change, says the author . The bourgeois is the bourgeois, the proletarian is the proletarian .
 The bourgeoisie becomes the proletariat; the oppressed proletariat transform into the proletariat which rules the nation . The oppressed protestants transform into the proletariat which rules the nation .
 War turns into peace, peace turns into war, life turns into death, death turns into life . War turns to peace, war turns to war, and death turns to life .
 Stalin in his book on economics said socialism has contradictions, between productive forces and productive relations, and if are not handled well, they can become antagonistic . Stalin said socialism had contradictions, and Stalin said they can be antagonistic if handled well .
 I say his dialectics are bashful dialectics, are coy dialectics or could be called hesitant dialectics . I say he is bashful, coy or hesitant, or hesitant dialectic .
 The basic contradiction is the contradiction between relations of production and productive forces . As we look at this question now, we should recognize socialism contains contradictions . The question is whether socialism is socialism, whether it is socialism .
 The ideologies of the superstructure should serve the economic base, should match that of the political base . The ideologies should serve economic base; should match economic base .
 If while you are living you receive no criticism, after you are dead, people will still criticize you. After you are . You are still criticized you. People will still criticise you. If while . you . are . living you . receive no . criticism. If . you receive
 “After committing an error, one should always be criticized.” —Ibid., SSCM, 171. ‘After committing a mistake,” one should ‘always be criticized’
 To expose the cult of Stalin, to tear off the lid, to liberate people, this is a liberation movement . But his method of exposing is incorrect; hasn't made a good analysis, clubbing to death with a single blow .
 This provoked the worldwide currents of the latter half of last year, this year . On the other hand, it later also provoked the Hungarian and Polish incidents . The Polish and Hungarian incidents were also provoked .
 He had his incorrect side; although our published articles have not pointed at the Twentieth Congress, it actually talked about it . But he had his correct side, he said, although he had been incorrect .
 “About how the Stalin problem has not been handled appropriately; discussed our great-nation chauvinism....” —Ibid., SSCM, 178. “ ...” “ discussed how Stalin problem was not handled appropriately”
 The Third International had merits as well, for instance, helping various countries to establish a party .
 Later on, the dogmatists paid no attention to the special features of various countries . They blindly transplanted everything from Russia from Russia . Later on they paid no notice of special features .
 This dogmatism of his influenced China, making us fail in our revolution during a certain period. It influenced China's revolution during the period, he said . This dogmaticism made China fail in its revolution, he added .
 If we were to do things as he bade us, we would not have been able to carry out the revolution in the later stage, he says . "We wouldn’t be holding a meeting here," he adds .
 Stalin had both sides; he also had dogmatism— transplanting the Soviet Union in everything . Stalin had a side of both sides, he says .
 The things of the Soviet Union, both the mistakes and the achievements, are very worthy of being learned from . The Soviet Union's mistakes and achievements are worthy of learning from, writes David Frum .
 The slogan that we propose now is to learn from the Soviet Union’s advanced experiences . The slogan is ‘Learn from the . Soviet Union's advanced experiences’, the .
 Some things came over with the all the same, in the last seven years . However, even though it was not proposed, some things lik e that came over .
 The source of dogmatism comes from Stalin, the author says . “We can’t say that we were selective at all... because we have been critical of dogmaticism,” he says .
 He used the methods that are for dealing with the enemy to deal with the people, with contradictions among the people . He confused the two, he said, ‘He used the . methods that were for dealing . with the . enemy to . deal with . the . people .
 Kardelj was the Vice President of Yugoslavia . " must clearly distinguish the two types of contradiction," he said . "We must distinguish between the two kinds of contradiction"
 The first type of contradictions between ourselves and the enemy should not be mixed up with the second type, contradictions among the people . The first of the two types of contradictions is contradictions between the enemy and the people, he says .
 Lenin once pointed out that there are contradictions in socialist society, this is something Lenin once said . Lenin said there were contradictions in socialism, that contradictions persist .
 During the first years of Stalin’s leadership, domestic life in the Soviet Union was still lively and not very different from ours today . The period following the death of Lenin, the period following Lenin, was still quite lively . During this period of Stalin's leadership, life was still
 There, too, were different parties, different factions, and well-known personages such as Trotsky . There was also different parties and factions, including Trotsky .
 The first category, of contradictions between the enemy and ourselves, cannot be confused with the second category of contradictions among the people . The first and second category is of contradictions in the people, the author says .
 In the period immediately after Lenin’s death, Stalin was a relative liveliness and activity in the domestic life in the Soviet Union . In the beginning of the period, Stalin—in the . beginning, Stalin — in the . period immediately . after Lenin's death— was a
 They had all sorts of parties and factions, even some well-known people l ik e Trotsky . Some of the parties were factions, including Trotsky .
 'He played the role of a cheeky troublemaker and made trouble for us. Moreover, he played the . role of the cheeky . troublemaker', he said .
 There were also quite some other people in the society who were allowed to say all sorts of things, including criticizing the government . There were quite some people who were also allowed to criticize the government.
 "Things became very dictatorial. would not allow for criticism. Furthermore, things became more dictatorial," says former president George W. Bush .
 He was afraid of people who wanted to criticize, of letting a hundred flowers bloom, he said . He said: "He was afraid ... of people . wanting to criticize"
 At the slightest hint of suspicion, he would say that it was a counterrevolutionary and would have people arrested or executed . He would not tolerate the slightest suspicion of wrongdoing .
 This is to confuse the two types of contradictions, to mistake the contradictions among the people for contradictions between the enemy and ourselves . The contradictions among people are not the ones between the people and the enemy, he says .
 Your Comrade Xu Jiatun of Nanjing said many students came to submit petitions to him . Xu said many of the petitions were submitted to him by students .
 Provincial governor, Peng Chong, also said that they were very well disciplined . Their ranks, were very orderly, said Chong .
 When they got to his place, as soon as they got in the door, they yelled ‘Down with bureaucratism’ and wanted certain problems resolved . “Down with bureaucracy’s ‘down with bureaucracy,’ he said. ‘I’m
 In regard to these problems, as I see it, if these were brought in front of Stalin, I think a few people would have been arrested, and a few heads would surely have rolled . In the past, heads would have rolled in Stalin's regime .
 In fact there was not a single counterrevolutionary; were very good students . "In fact there were no counterrevolutionaries," he said . "They were very well students"
 There is indeed a bit of bureaucratism. Moreover, that problem ought to be resolved . Moreover, there is a problem of bureaucracy .
 This is probably a different version of the same speech as in the previous item, which would mean that either the date there or the date here is wrong . The date of the speech is probably different than that of the other .
 Mao referred to students who either returned from abroad, or students from overseas Chinese families, who were studying in China . Mao said the “overseas Chinese students” were students who returned or studied in China from abroad .
 Stalin did not acknowledge that there would be contradictions in a socialist society . Stalin, however, over a long period of time, didn't acknowledge that, in fact, he did not . Stalin acknowledged that, he said, "There will be contradictions"
 In fact, what Stalin did was to confuse the contradictions among the people with the contradictions between the enemy and ourselves . Stalin did this, he said, to confuse contradictions among people with those between the enemies and ourselves.
 He considered everyone who said bad things and gossiped as an enemy, and therefore unjustly wronged many people, he said . He considered gossiping and gossiping as a 'enemy'
 Stalin himself said that in socialist society there would be contradictions between the relations of production and the forces of production . Stalin himself himself said in the book ‘Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR,’ written in 1952, that in socialism, there would have been contradictions .
 Stalin said very little about the contradictions internal to socialist society, or the contradictions among the people, he said . Stalin said little about internal contradictions in socialist society . Even so, Stalin made little mention of the contradictions in society .
 “It was not until the Chinese scolded and the British lent a hand that it was done.” —Interjections at a Meeting during a Meeting During the Qingdao Conference .
 "Today there are contradictions, and in the future there will still be contradictions," says David Cameron . "Today's contradictions are today's today's contradictions," he says .
 When the cooperatives have all been transformed into state farms that pay wages, there will still be contradictions . There will be contradictions in the system, says David Cameron .
 The socialist system and the forces of production basically conform to each other, but there are still areas that do not conform completely . There are still shortcomings; to speak of perfect conformity is incorrect, he says . To speak of perfection is incorrect.
 Once Stalin mentioned complete conformity, problems emerged...” —Speech at the Third Plenum of the Eighth Central Committee , WMZ2, 692. “ Problems emerged” during Stalin’s speech .
 The key lies in what Mao thought of the relations of production in the phase of socialist transition . Mao's view of the relationship of production is key to understanding Mao's theory of socialism .
 Stalin appeared to be that in the Soviet system during the socialist phase, relations of production, as part of the ‘system’ of socialism are basically in conformity with the proletarianized forces of production . The position that Stalin took appeared to . appear to be . that in . the
 This becomes a criterion by which the conclusion can be drawn that through the transformation of the system the socialist transition has already been basically achieved . This becomes the conclusion by which . . . the conclusion . can be made that through . the transformation . system the . socialist transition is already achieved,
 What remains to be done would be to focus on developing the forces of production, on the one hand, and to deal with those remnants of the superstructure that are yet partially inconsistent with the sovietized system . On the other hand, focus should be on developing forces of .
 In Mao’s view, this, joined with the ‘revisionist’ idea that the primary contradiction was the one between the backward forces of production and an already advanced social system, would give rise to what is labeled as the wei shengchanli lun (
 Mao himself believed that the stage of socialist transition is a stage of revolution, not just a peaceful, material expansion and development . Mao believed that this stage of transition is not just peaceful, but a revolution . Mao: "The stage of socialism is a revolution"
 Mao believed the struggle was to be concentrated on the transformation of the relations of production . Mao believed that the struggle is to be focused on the revolution of capitalism . The struggle will be concentrated in this phase, Mao believed .
 Mao tended to see the relations of production as part of the economic base . Mao tend to see production relations as an economic base, Mao said . Mao's view of Maoism was that production relations are important economic relations .
 There was as yet an inconsistency (or contradiction) within the economic base itself that needed to be struggled over . Thus he believed that, owing to the continued bourgeois influence in society during the . stage of the socialist revolution and transition, there was . an inconsistency . in society .
 On the question of Stalin, we have contradictions with Khrushchev. First of all, on the question is Stalin, he says . We have contradictions, he writes .
 This is not a matter for their country alone; it is a matter that concerns all countries, says President Obama . "This is not an issue for the United States alone," says Obama .
 We hang Stalin’s portrait outside our Tiananmen, this is in accord with the wishes of the laboring people of the whole world,” he says . “This demonstrates our basic differences with Khrushchev," he says. “We hang Stalin's portrait
 Stalin’s achievements count for 70 per cent; his mistakes count for 30 per cent . Stalin's achievements count . Stalin, Stalin's mistakes count . His achievements count. 70% . His mistakes count. 30% .
 Stalin's achievements are primary while his shortcomings and mistakes are secondary . Stalin’s achievements are secondary to his mistakes and mistakes, he says . Stalin's achievement is primary, while his flaws and mistakes may be secondary .
 On this point we and Khrushchev hold differing opinions.” —Speech at the Conclusion of the Third Plenum of the Eighth Central Committee , version I, WMZ2, 707 .
 We used a very good method to attain our goal, and that is the method of consulting upholds the sense of principle and yet has flexibility . It is a unity of principle, and flexibility; it is the unity of principles and flexibility .
 "An atmosphere of consultation has now been formed, whereas in the last stages of Stalin that was impossible," he said . The atmosphere is now being formed, he added .
 It is not good to adopt a method of forcible imposition among the people, especially among comrades. It's not good for the people to impose a regime among them, especially comrades, says the leader .
 Mao was in the Soviet Union from Nov. to Nov. 1957; this excerpt is from one of several speeches he made while there . Mao was there from Nov., 1957; he was in Russia from November to November, 1957 .
 His achievements are primary, and shortcomings and mistakes are secondary . "His achievements are first, and his mistakes are second," he says .
 He did develop metaphysics and damage dialectics over a long period of time . However, he did develop some of the world's most famous theories .
 The personality cult was metaphysics; no one was permitted to criticize him . "No one would criticize him. No one should criticize him," he wrote .
 There were Lenin’s dialectics, Stalin there were many metaphysical viewpoints . There were also dialectics and dialectic dialectics in Lenin's writings, he says .
 Some viewpoints were enacted, and when they reached a point of extreme, they were bound to move toward their opposite, and bring back dialectics again . Some viewpoints may be enacted, but when they reach an extreme they will move toward the opposite, the opposite .
 I'm very happy that XXXXXX said, at the commemorative celebration of the fortieth anniversary of the October Revolution, that contradictions do exist in socialist society . I am very happy with XXXXXXXXXX saying that contradictions exist in socialism .
 I am very glad that the philosophical circles in the Soviet Union have produced many articles that discuss the internal contradictions in socialist society . The Soviet Union has produced numerous articles about internal contradictions, such as internal contradictions .
 Despite the identical title, this is a different speech from the one in the previous quotation . This is not the same quote from the previous one .
 "We must admit that our Soviet comrades’ style of work has changed a lot," he said . Now, he said, ‘We ‘must admit that . our Soviet comrade’s style of . work has . changed a little bit,’ he said.
 Those who don't conform to the objective condition must be criticized . Those who do not conform to that condition must also be criticized, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: 'Those who don’t conform to this objective condition are criticized'
 Marxism-Leninism handles things according to the conditions, and furthermore, it pays attention to objective effect . Marxism- Leninism is a Marxist-Leninist theory .
 It was because the Third International was dissolved; otherwise could not achieve success. It was due to the fact that it was dissolved, otherwise could have achieved success.
 Lenin refused to recognize the Second International that the October Revolution achieved success . Lenin's refusal to recognize Second International was crucial to success of the revolution, he says .
 The Second International was revisionist, and the Third International was very good at the beginning, but it became dogmatist later . The Second and Third International were revisionists, but later dogmatists .
 Among the leaders of the Third International, Stalin and Bukharin were not very good, he says . "Among those who were very good was Stalin and [Bukharin] Stalin," he adds .
 "That was a matter of the forces of production, not to the relationship among human beings," he said . "That's a matter not to matter of human beings. That was the case," he added .
 Stalin thinks Stalin thinks that is completely conducive to [the development of the forces of production] There are problems with that. Stalin thinks it's completely conducive [to] the development of [the forces of . production], there are problems that are there .
 In the future, there will be some contradictions between the system of collective ownership and the development of the production . The system will have to be developed to overcome the contradictions, he says .
 India increased steel production by three million tons in its first five-year plan, and we increased ours by four mi llion tons . When we compare our system with India, India increased its steel production .
 Our relations of production are basically conducive to the development of the forces of production, but there are still some shortcomings, he says . "There are still shortcomings," he said .
 Several decades from now, when the forces of production have developed, the law of value will become useless, and there will be no need for currency . —“On the Question of the Primary Contradiction in the Transitional Period” , WMZ2, 812.
 If we did so America would send troops to China and become directly involved in China’s Civil War, the South and North dynasties would reappear in China . America would be directly in the Civil War .
 America did not send troops to China and there were no South and North dynasties . America did . America didn't send troops . There were no . North and South Dynasties.
 If we really had followed his words surely there would be a situation of South and North dynasties? If we had followed him, we would have been in a South-North situation .
 To import Soviet codes and conventions inflexibly is to lack the creative spirit, says the author . "To import Soviet code and conventions in Soviet fashion is not to be creative," he says .
 After the October Revolution, while Lenin was still alive, while the class struggle was very acute and Stalin had still not come to power, they too were full of life . After the 1917 revolution, Lenin was alive, but Stalin still had not yet been in power .
 The origin of Ch’en Tu-hsiu-ism lay in foreign social democracy and our native bourgeoisie, says Tohu-hsu .
 During this period, though there occurred the mistakes of Ch’en Tu-hsiuism, generally speaking there was no dogmatism . During the period of this period there were no dogmaticism, though .
 At that time the Soviet Union had won victory over the Trotskyites, though on the theoretical plane they had only defeated the Deborin school . The Soviet Union won victory on theoretical plane, but only on a theoretical plane .
 The Chinese 'left' opportunists had nearly all been influenced while in the Soviet Union . The Chinese ‘left’ opportunists were influenced by the USSR .
 Of course, this is not to say that all those who went to Moscow were dogmatists . Of course this was not the case .
 Among the many who were in the Soviet Union at the time, some were dogmatists, others were not . Some were in touch with reality, others had no contact with reality but saw only foreign conditions .
 The Comintern at that time was Bukharin, Pikov and Zinoviev, while the head of the Eastern Bureau was Kuusinen . The head of  the Far East Department was Mif.
 Some Chinese comrades were influenced by dogmatism, and some Chinese comrades too . These were the conditions which enabled dogmaticism to develop, he says .
 Ch’en Tu-hsiu was the head of the CPC from its founding in 1921 until the disaster of 1927 when Chiang Kai-shek turned on and murdered thousands of communists . He was the leader of the Communist Party in China .
 When heroes and warriors appear on the stage they are made to look quite unlik e ordinary people . When heroes appear on stage they often look like ordinary people, they are not ordinary .
 The Chinese people had got so used to being slaves that they seemed to want to go on . They seemed to have been so happy to be slaves they wanted to live in China .
 When Chinese artists painted pictures of me together with Stalin, they always made me a little bit shorter, he says . "I blindly knuckled under to the moral pressure exerted by the Soviet Union," he adds .
 MarxismLeninism looks at everyone on equal terms, and all people should be treated as equals . 99.99. 99. 99 .
 Others wished to submit to this pressure and do away with the cult of the individual . Others wanted to do away from this pressure . The cult of individual is a cult, and the individual is not a cult .
 One is correct, such as that of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Lenin and Stalin, and the correct side of Stalin . One is wrong, such an example of Marx and Engels, and Stalin .
 A squad should revere its squad leader; it would be quite wrong not to . A squad must revere their squad leader, and it's quite wrong to not to. A squad leader is a leader and a leader should be respected .
 There is a cult of the individual in which there is no analysis, simply blind obedience . Then there is the incorrect kind of cult of an individual . There is also no analysis of the individuals, just blind obedience, he says .
 The question at issue is not whether or not there should be a cult of the individual, but rather whether the individual concerned represents the truth . The question is not if or not the individual represented the truth, but if he represents it .
 It was completely necessary to remove the lid, to break down blind faith, to release the pressure, and to emancipate thought . It was necessary to break the lid of blind faith and to release pressure, he said .
 People of any third country were not allowed to live in the North-East and Sinkiang . The two ‘colonies’ were the two 'colonies' that is the North and the South-East . People of all three countries were banned from living in Sink
 After the criticism of Stalin, the victims of blind faith had their eyes opened a bit . The victims of the blind faith were forced to open their eyes to the world .
 "We should apply analysis to him, and not have blind faith in him," he says . "In order that our comrades recognize that our . comrades . recognize that . the old ancestor also had his faults, we should . apply analysis," he writes .
 We should accept everything good in Soviet experience, and reject what is bad, says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We need to reject everything bad. We need to accept everything bad in Soviet history"
 "Now we are a bit more skilful in this, and understand the Soviet Union a bit better" —Ibid., 101. The Soviet Union is now a better part of the world .
 In the 1950 treaty Stalin insisted on the creation of joint-stock companies in Xinjiang to develop oil and metal production . The treaty was signed in 1950 .
 This continued the Soviet economic exploitation of the area that had already begun under the Nationalist regime . It continued to be continued under the Soviet exploitation .
 The USSR also kept control of two important military bases in Manchuria and de facto control of the Chinese Eastern Railway used to transport military supplies .
 A secret protocol to the 1950 treaty prohibited the Chinese from allowing citizens of any third country to participate in trade or industry in Xinjiang or Manchuria .
 China's Seventh Congress advocated going all out to mobilize the masses and build up all available revolutionary forces in order to establish a new China . China's 7th Congress was held in Beijing .
 During the quarrel with Wang Ming from 1937 to August 1938, we put forward ten great policies, while Wang Ming produced sixty policies . We put forward 10 great policies during the quarrel between Wang Ming and Wang Ming, which ended in 1938 .
 If we had followed Wang Ming’s, or in other words Stalin's methods the Chinese revolution couldn’t have succeeded . Wang Ming's methods would have prevented the revolution in China from being successful, he says .
 Unless you have a conquering spirit it is very dangerous to study MarxismLeninism . Leninism is a form of Marxism Leninism, he says .
 Stalin could be said to have had this spirit, though it became tarnished . Stalin's spirit was tarnished, but he was able to keep it alive .
 The Leninist foundation of his writing on linguistics and economics was relatively correct—basically correct—was relatively correct .
 Imitation foreign devils did not permit us to carry out the revolution . —Speech at the Conference in Hankou , quoted in UP, 298, 298.
 The term ‘imitation foreign devil’ comes from a novel by the famous revolutionary writer Lu Xun [Lu Hsun] where one Chinese individual who refused to allow others to revolt was called that .
 "It’s very enlightening, although there are still some inadequacies, because of the limitations imposed by conditions in times," he says . "There are still still many inadequacies," he adds .
 "They had little experience, so naturally their views were vague and inexplicit," the author says . "Their views are vague, inexplicit and inexplicably," he adds . "They were vague," he says, "but they had no experience"
 Talks at the Beidaihe Conference, SSCM, 441. Don't think the ancestors all fart fragrantly and fart no foul farts .
 The first three chapters contain much that is worth paying attention to . Much that is correct, but there are places where perhaps Stalin himself did not make things clear enough .
 In chapter 1 he says only a few things about objective laws and how to go about planning the economy, without unfolding his ideas . Or, it may be that to his mind Soviet planning of the economy already reflected objective governing principles .
 On the question of heavy industry, light industry, and agriculture, the Soviet Union did not lay enough emphasis on the latter two and had losses as a result . The Soviet Union had losses due to the lack of emphasis on agriculture and heavy industry .
 "They did not do a good job of combing the immediate and the long-term interests of the people," he says . "In addition, they did not . do a . good job" in combing interests of people, he says.
 "He wanted nothing but technology, nothing but cadre; no politics, no masses," he said . He wanted "nothing but technology" and "no politics," he added .
 "In industry they walk on one leg when they pay attention to heavy industry but not to light industry," he says . "They walk on . one leg," he adds. "And in industry they . walk on a leg"
 They did not point out the main aspects of the contradictions in the relationships among departments of heavy industry . Furthermore, they did not highlight the main problems in the relationship between heavy industry and heavy industries .
 They exaggerated the importance of heavy industry, claiming that steel was the foundation, and machinery the heart and soul . They said that steel is the foundation of the industrial revolution .
 Grain is the mainstay of agriculture, agriculture, steel of industry, and that if steel and is taken as a mainstay, then once we have the raw material the machine industry will follow along, the government says .
 To divide production into two major departments and to say that the means of production are not commodities—these points deserve study . To divide . production into . two major . departments and say that . means of . production are . not commodities .
 In Chinese agriculture there are still many means of production that should be commodities . In China agriculture, there is still many ways of production to be commodities.
 My view is that the last of the three appended letters is entirely wrong, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The last of three letters is 'wrong', says Sutter.
 It expresses a deep uneasiness, a belief that the peasantry cannot be trusted to release agricultural machinery but would hang on to it . The Chinese government has been criticised for not releasing agricultural machinery .
 On the one hand Stalin says that the means of production belong to state ownership . On the other hand Stalin said that the state of production belongs to the state . The state of the Soviet Union is the only nation to have a state of its own .
 For the two transitions Stalin failed to find the proper ways and means, it was a vexing matter for him . Stalin's failure to find a way to deal with the two transition periods was a problem .
 Commodity exchange laws governing value play no regulating role in our production . Commodities exchange laws do not regulate our production, say experts . We are happy to clarify that we are not subject to laws that regulate value exchange laws .
 This role is played by planning and by the great leap forward under planning, by politics-in-command . Politics in command is a vital part of planning and politics in command, he says .
 Stalin speaks only of the production relations, not of the superstructure, not the relationship between superstructure and economic base . Stalin spoke only of production relations not of superstructure but of the economic relations .
 Chinese cadres participate in production; workers participate in management . Workers participate in the production and management of production .
 Sending cadres down to lower levels to be tempered, discarding old rules and regulations . "All these pertain to the superstructure, to ideology," says President Obama . "It's a good idea to get rid of old rules, regulations and regulations," says Obama .
 He may speak of selfless labor, but in reality even an extra hour’s labor is begrudged . Even an hour's labor is not begrudgeged, he says .
 If there were no communist movement it would be hard to imagine making the transition to communism . If you were a communist, you would be able to make it to communist China .
 The concentrated manifestation of constructing socialism is making socialist, allembracing public ownership a reality, says Julian Zelizer . Public ownership is a key component of socialism, he says .
 Constructing socialism means turning commune collective ownership into public ownership . Constructed socialism means creating public ownership of communes into communes .
 Some comrades disapprove of drawing the line between the two types of ownership system, as if the communes were completely publicly owned . The communes are not communes, but communes themselves are communes that are shared by communes .
 One type of ownership is public ownership, as in the Anshan Iron and Steel Works . The other is commune-large collective ownership .
 Stalin was speaking of culture when he proposed the three conditions, the physical development and education of the whole people . Stalin's proposal was based on culture and education .
 “Raising wages and lowering prices are particularly helpful here, but the political conditions are missing” —Ibid., 133. Raising wages is particularly helpful in the U.S. “The political conditions for raising wages are missing.”
 The rate of development of the Soviet economy is not high enough, says Mikhail Gorvitch . The rate is faster than the capitalists’ rate, he says . The Soviet economy has not developed as much as the capitalists' rate .
 Relations between agriculture and industry, as well as between light and heavy industry, are not clearly explained . Relations between light, heavy industry and agriculture are not clear .
 Relationship between long-and short-term interests has not seen any spectacular developments . The relationship between the two parties has not been as strong as ever .
 They believe that technology decides everything, that cadres decide everything . They believe only of ‘expert,’ never of 'red’ Only of the cadres, never of the masses, never the masses .
 For us steel is the mainstay, the primary contradiction in industry, while foodgrains are mainstay in agriculture . Foodgrains is mainstay of agriculture, while steel is a mainstay for steel .
 On commodity production and the law of value he has a number of views that we approve of ourselves, but there are problems as well as well . He has a few of the views that he has that of himself, but also have problems as also .
 Fimiting commodity production to the means of subsistence is really doubtful . Fimited commodity production is really rather doubtful .
 Stalin did not discover a way to make the transition from collective to public ownership, he says . Stalin failed to find a way of making the transition between collective and public ownership . He says Stalin didn't find a solution to the problem .
 In connection with the law of value we must speak of planning and politics-in-command . Commodity production and exchange are forms we have kept, while planning is politics in command .
 "They speak only of the production relations, not of the superstructure nor politics, nor the role of the people," says the author of the book .
 This document seems to be a different report of Mao’s speech “Concerning Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR” The speech is excerpted from a different version of the speech .
 In this version there follows 33 specific comments on particular passages in Stalin’s pamphlet, most at least partly critical . The comments are made in this version of the pamphlet .
 The opening comments above are a fairly good summation of all these specific comments . The opening comment above is a pretty good summary of all the comments .
 This was because did not want uninterrupted revolution, but wanted to consolidate the socialist order . This was the reason for not continuing a revolution .
 The Russian peasants cannot be that selfish; they don’t want uninterrupted revolution . The peasants are not selfish, they are selfish, the Russian peasants are selfish .
 Russia has built up a socialist order, but this type of order cannot be consolidated . Russia's socialist order has been built up, but it has not been consolidated, he says .
 We disrupt a part of the socialist order; the supply system is what disrupts that order . —Talks at the First Zhengzhou Conference , Talk of Nov.th, SSCM, 444.th .
 Soviet socialism has collective ownership and ownership of the whole people . Soviet socialism is a form of Soviet socialism .
 Stalin’s transition to communism was hardly possible; there was no transition to the ownership by the whole people . Stalin did not promote the elements of communism at all, split heavy and light industry, and openly advocated putting but small emphasis on the production of consumer goods . He did not
 Various differences became greater. “ have to reread Stalin’s Economic Problems of Socialism and look at the Collection of Articles on the Problem of Bourgeois Right.” —Ibid., SSCM, 448.
 “Those doing agriculture must be hell-bent on doing agriculture.” —Ibid., SSCM, 469. “We are not going to be able to do agriculture. We are not able to afford agriculture. Those doing agriculture .” –Ibid
 I’m afraid at least a part can’t be abolished; Stalin, however, does not arbitrarily decide the question . —Ibid., SSCM, 473.
 Engels said one has to recognize objective law, master it, and apply it with full understanding . Engels: "One must master law and apply full understanding" Engels said .
 I think Stalin’s recognition was not complete either; in application there was no flexibility, and as to application with full understanding, in that was even more deficient . Stalin's recognition was also deficient, he says, in applying there were no flexibility .
 The Soviet Union has gone through twenty years and XXXX will have another twelve years . That is after thirty-two years they will eventually make the transition, and at that time collective ownership by the whole people will finally merge .
 For us, the criterion for the completion of the building of socialism will be the unification of the systems of ownership . For us we need to unify the system of ownership. For us it will be unification of ownership, we said .
 "We take the achievement of ownership by the whole people as the primary criterion. We take ownership of ownership of the entire people as a primary criterion," says the government .
 By this criterion, the Soviet Union has not completed the building of socialism . The Soviet Union still has a long way to go, but it has not yet completed socialism, he says .
 The two systems of ownership being referred to here are cooperatives and state ownership . State ownership is a system of ownership that includes cooperatives, state ownership, and cooperatives .
 I think one has to leave this question of the abolition of classes in suspense, and that it’s best not to proclaim it hastily . The question of abolishing classes is in suspense .
 The bourgeoisie are permitted to enter the people’s communes, but they must still wear their bourgeois hats . Fixed interest is not abolished. The bourgeoisie must wear its bourgeois hats, but fixed interest is still not abolished .
 In view of Stalin’s too early proclamation, one should not be hasty in proclaiming the abolition of classes, and I’m afraid one can only proclaim it when there is fundamentally no more harm in doing so . I'm afraid .
 Stalin did not make clear the relationship between the means of livelihood produced by state-owned and those produced by collective farms . Stalin made clear that the relationship was not clear between the two .
 Political Economy is in the third edition of Political Economy . Would you all please discuss this in the next edition of this edition's Political Economy.
 One can repudiate only a part of Stalin’s things and should not throw them out altogether . Thus one can repudate only a portion of Stalin's things, not all of them .
 The reason being that he is scientific, to repudiate him altogether would not be good, he says . He says: "To repudiate [Scientific] altogether would be not good"
 Agricultural machinery should not be sold to the collective farms, he says . Such as in [his comments on] the third letter agricultural machinery, he said . The government should not sell the machinery to keep the peasants’ pigtails .
 This looks at the matter as a grant by royal favor, forgetting that class struggles and mass mobilizations had been set in motion . This is a right deviationist point of view, says the writer .
 Our approach was to rely on the poor peasants, to unite with the majority of middle peasants (lower middle peasants) and seize the land from the landlord class . We were able to seize our land from our landlord class, and our approach was that of the poor .
 While the party did play a leading role, it was against doing everything itself and thus substituting for the masses, it did not do everything itself . The party was against substituting itself to the masses .
 Soviet Text Political Economy’s concrete practice was to ‘pay call on the poor to leam of their grievances,’ to identify activist elements, to strike roots and pull things together, to consolidate nuclei . “All for the purpose of unfolding the class struggle,
 Mao explains the difference in the approach to land reform in China as compared with how it was done in the Soviet Union under Stalin’s leadership . Mao is explaining the difference between the approach and that of Stalin's leadership .
 Much of the rest of this document has similar implicit criticism of Stalin and his approach to collectivization . The rest of the document is similar to that of Stalin .
 If there are no priorities in producing the means of production in capitalist society, there can be no expanded reproduction . If there is no priorities there will be no expansion of reproduction .
 In Stalin's time, due to special emphasis on priority development of heavy industry, agriculture was neglected in the plans . In Stalin’s time, special emphasis was on heavy industry rather than agriculture .
 In the time of Stalin there was excessive emphasis on collective interest; individual gain was neglected . Individual gain was also neglected, he says . In the Soviet Union, he said .
 “Now they have gone to the opposite extreme, overemphasizing material incentive, neglecting collective interest.” —Ibid., 94. “They’ve gone to an opposite extreme. Now they’re going to an extreme, overrephasizing
 In many ways, the Soviets continue to progress, but with respect to the production relations fundamentally they have ceased to progress . —Ibid., 101.
 The text emphasizes peaceful competition between the two systems and building up ‘peacefully developing’ economic relations . The text here emphasizes peaceful .
 This turns the actually existing two world markets into two economic systems within a unified world market . This is a step back from Stalin’s view. This turns out to be a step from Stalin's view.
 Criticism of Stalin “Stalin’s Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR, contains erroneous arguments. Criticisms of Stalin contain erroneous arguments,” says author . Criticism of Stalin contains erroneous ideas, he says .
 The necessity for gradually making the transition to direct exchanges of production between industry and agriculture is fully formed, the government says . The transition will be gradually made gradually, starting with agriculture .
 He said that in the enterprises of the collective farms, although the means of production belong to the state, the goods produced are all the property of the separate collectives .
 The labor on the collective is owned by the collectives, while the land that the state has given them for permanent use is in fact controlled by them . The state gives them permanent use of the land, but it is controlled by their labor .
 The collective farms are willing to release into circulation what they produce only in the commodity form, in expectation of obtaining the commodities they need in exchange . Under such conditions ‘the collective farms’ will release . into circulation .
 As to the question of commodity exchange, for Stalin it was only a hypothesis . Stalin said: "As to the . question of commodities exchange, . Stalin was only . a hypothesis. Stalin said .
 This role is played by the law of planned proportional development and state planned economy . The law is also known as the 'planned proportional development' of the economy .
 The text says that the means of production are commodities, nonetheless, in the first place, it must say that they are in the category of ownership by the whole people . Even though the text says . that means of . production are . commodities, nevertheless, in . the first . place
 Purchase and sale of the means of production in no way changes ownership of the company . Purchase and sell of the material does not change ownership of a product .
 The law of value functions differently in the sphere of production and in the process of circulation . In the second place, the text ought to concede that the law is different in production and circulation . The text should concede that, in the first place, it should concede, that value is different
 Stalin’s ‘model Stalin set at that time was not very enlightening’ —Ibid., 109. ‘And it looks as if the model Stalin set . Stalin set is not very enlightened,’ says the historian .
 communists of any country must create new theory, write new works, produce their own theoreticians to serve the political tasks facing them . —Ibid., 115 .
 The 1967 version of this work of Mao’s, which was circulated in CPC party circles, had the words “and Stalin” deleted here . Interestingly enough, the 1967 version had the . words ‘and Stalin' deleted here.
 At that time Stalin had nothing else to rely on except the masses, so he demanded all-out mobilization of the party and the masses . Stalin had no other option but to mobilize the masses in order to survive, he says .
 Afterward, when they had realized some gains this way, they became less reliant on the masses,” —Ibid.,p.9. “Afterward, they . became less . reliant on . the masses’s .
 These comrades in the Communist International simply did not understand, or we could say they utterly failed to understand, Chinese society, the Chinese nation or the Chinese revolution . We could say that they utterly fail to understand the Chinese society and the revolution .
 He said it was improper for us to fight a civil war and it was necessary to cooperate with Chiang Kaishek . He said that it was . improper for . us to . fight civil war, he said .
 Stalin wanted to prevent China from making a revolution, saying that we should not have a civil war and should cooperate with Chiang Kai-shek, otherwise the Chinese nation would perish . Stalin wanted China to avoid a revolution and said we should cooperate .
 After the victory of the revolution, he next suspected China of being a Yugoslavia, and that I would become a second Tito . After the . victory he . suspected China . of being Yugoslavia, he said. "I would become . a second tito"
 China signed the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Alliance and Mutual Assistance . Later, when I went to Moscow to sign the treaty, we had to go through another struggle . The two countries signed the treaty in Moscow .
 It was the time of the Resist America, Aid Korea campaign, from the winter of 1950 . The campaign was part of the resistance to the Korean War .
 He then came to believe that we were not Tito, not Yugoslavia,” —Speech at the Tenth Plenum of the Eighth Central Committee of the CPC, CMTTP .
 Mao speaking: “Stalin felt that he had made mistakes in dealing with Chinese problems, and they were no small mistakes.” —Talk on Questions of Philosophy , CMTTP, 227. Mao speaking].
 In my view there is only one basic law and that is the law of contradiction . In his view there are only two basic laws, the law is contradiction, he says .
 “Quality and quantity, positive and negative, external appearance and essence, content and form, necessity and freedom, possibility and reality, etc., are all cases of the unity of opposites.” —Speech at Hangchow, Dec., 1965, CMTTP,
 The first reason is that my health is not very good; the second was the lesson of the Soviet Union. The former Soviet Union did not have a very good health, he says .
 Malenkov was not mature enough, and before Stalin died he had not wielded power . Before Stalin died, he had never wielded power in Russia . He had not been mature enough .
 “I wanted to establish their prestige before I died; I never imagined that things might move in the opposite direction.” — Talk at the Report Meeting, , CMTTP, 266.
 Mao is implicitly criticizing Stalin for not having better trained his successors . Mao is also admitting that he is having a tough job doing so as well as Stalin .
 Out of concern for state security and in view of the lessons of Stalin in the Soviet Union, we set up a first and second line . I have been in the second line, other comrades in the first line .
 "Now we can see that wasn’t so good; as a result our forces were dispersed," he said . "Now I can see it wasn't so good," he added. "As a result of that, our forces are dispersed"
 When we entered the cities we could not centralize our efforts, and there were quite a few independent kingdoms, says the author .
 Many things are left to other people so that other people’s prestige is built up, he says . When I go to see God there won’t be such a big upheaval in the State, he adds . Many things left to others so that others' prestige builds up
 It seems that there are some things which the comrades in the first line have not managed too well . It seems to be some things that there is not too much to do with .
 “We cannot just blame them. So I am responsible,” he said . “I am responsible. We are responsible, we are responsible for our actions,’ he said. ‘We are not just blaming them.’
 He said that a genius only appears in the world once in a few centuries . For example, he said that in China only in China once in several millennia . He also said that genius only appeared once in centuries and in centuries .
 It depends on a party, the party which is the vanguard of the proletariat, says Leninist leader Vladimir Putin .
 Mao also said that Stalin did not use the mass line . It's not clear what basis Mao had for implying that Stalin was a genius .
 It should be recognized that there are clearly some important changes of viewpoint over time, and even some outright inconsistencies if the changes of views over time are not allowed for . The changes of view over time should be allowed for.
 Mao's early statements by Mao sound almost religious in their devotion, such as that “Stalin is the savior of all the oppressed” and “Comrade Stalin is the leader of the world revolution” Mao wrote .
 Mao presents a more or less unified general critical evaluation of Stalin in most of these collected comments . Despite some changes in views over the years, Mao's view of Stalin has not changed significantly .
 He failed to recognize the centrality of the concept of contradiction in dialectics . He often failed to . recognize the existence of important social and class contradictions, he says .
 Stalin did not use the mass line either in politics or economic work . Stalin used it in both politics and economic work in the Soviet Union . The mass line was used in both political and economic circles .
 Stalin failed to rely on the masses in suppressing counterrevolutionaries and enemy agents, instead relying almost entirely on the security agencies to do this . Stalin relied heavily on security agencies, not the masses, to suppress the opposition .
 Stalin failed to rely on the masses to ward off the danger of a general capitalist restoration . Similarly, Stalin failed in relying on the mass to fend off the threat of a capitalist restoration.
 Even in economic work he tended to rely more on cadres and technology than on the masses . He tended in later years to rely on cadre and technology rather than on masses .
 He was suspicious and mistrustful of those whose complete obedience and total agreement he questioned . He questioned those who had complete obedience or total agreement .
 He did successfully lead the Soviet Union and the world in defeating Hitler . Nevertheless, he did successfully defeat Hitler in the war .
 At several key points, he even tried to prevent the Chinese Revolution from proceeding . At key moments, he tried to stop the Chinese revolution from proceeding.
 Stalin really did have some important positive aspects, says historian . Stalin really had led the Soviet Union to a number of important advances and victories, he says .
 Mao felt that after such a long period of undiluted praise and glorification of Stalin and the Soviet Union while he was in charge, the sudden denunciation of him would all lead to tremendous disorientation on the part of many communists and their supporters around the world .
 Khrushchev’s not-really-so-secret denunciation of Stalin . Many western parties, as Mao later noted, lost huge numbers of members and influence .
 Mao tended to emphasize praise and support for Stalin in his public statements . Mao did openly acknowledge that Stalin had made some serious errors . Mao often acknowledged that Stalin's errors .
 This may have been so that people would have time to reorient themselves about the Stalin era and not lose heart because of Khrushchev's revelations . This may be because of the time it has been given to people to be reorientated about Stalin .
 It was probably due in part to the growing need to reaffirm Marxist principles and traditions in opposition to Khrushchev's ever-more-evident revisionism . The growing need for Marxist principles was probably also due to the need for it to be reaffirmed in opposition .
 Relations between the USSR and the PRC were severed and their troops clashed across their common border in 1969 . The conflict was expanded from an ideological one between two political parties to a conflict between nation states .
 The CPC objected to the CPSU de-Stalinization campaign . They argued that Stalin was a leader of world stature with a world-wide legacy which could not be swept aside by CPSU leadership .
 The CPSU saw disastrous consequences for the world as a whole from nuclear war . The CPC tended to disparage the imperialists, a sentiment echoes in Mao's famous aphorism that ""Imperialists are paper tigers"
 CPSU saw coexistence with the West as in the mutual interest of both systems . The CPSU was founded by the CPSU on the dangers of nuclear war .
 The CPSU and its allied parties advocated using democratic and peaceful means to advance the struggles of the working class . CPSU: "The working class needs to win state power wherever those means are available"
 The CPC, on the other hand, disparaged such methods and proposed that the need for revolutionary war in order to seize power was a universal law of class struggle . The CPC proposed that such a revolutionary war was the only solution to the class struggle in the world .
 The conflict wound down after the death of Mao Zedong and the end of the Cultural Revolution in China . Conflict wound down in China after Zedong's death .
 For a large portion of the latter half of the Twentieth Century whether one was ""Pekingese"" or ""Muscovite"" was pretty much the question for the world's non-Trotskyist Left .
 In 1956, at the 20th Congress of the CPSU, Nikita Khrushchev delivered a report criticizing Stalin . The report was delivered at the then-CPSU 20th Party Congress in 1956 .
 This report caused quite a stir internationally when it’s text was released . This report was published in 2007 .
 The CPC published “On the Historical Experience of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat” (April, 1956) and “More on the Historical experience of the . Proletarians’s . The CPC sought to refute several points made in Khrushchev
 The two principal such meetings were those held in Moscow in 1957 and 1960 .
 Both sides fought to have their views incorporated into the final documents . Though ostensibly to build the unity of the Communist Movement, they were dominated by the widening rift between the CPSU and the CPC .
 China reportedly managed to have amendments included in the documents issued from the conferences . Albania's Albanian delegation was the only member of the Chinese delegation .
 The documents of those meetings were among the last efforts made to compromise on several major issues between the two parties . The documents became reference points in the polemic that followed .
 The Soviets attempted to bring the CPC to heel by suspending distribution of Chinese periodicals in the USSR . In July of that year, all Soviet technical assistants -some 3,000 in all -were withdrawn from China .
 The CPC reasserted that ""revisionism"" was the main danger within the socialist camp . In it, the CPC took the offensive and made a number of proposals .
 The Chinese quickly translated it into several languages and published it, along with the texts of the CPSU letters of February 21 and March 30, 1963, and the CPC letter of March 9, 1963 .
 CPSU proposed a set of counterproposals which, it claimed, would ""normalize"" relations . CPSU then proposed to take the polemic out of public view, as well as advancing counter proposals that would "normalize" relations .
 In sum, the split started after Khrushchev's ""secret speech"" denouncing Stalin and expanded from there as the Soviet Union had the ""rightist"" Khrushchevich in charge .
 The Peking Review has scanned issues of the Chinese Communist Party of the East and West .
 The view from the anti-revisionist side of the fence . Some of these sources come from here . In Refutation of Modern Revisionism in Refutation Of Modern . Revisionism .
 Malayan People, ""Malayan People’s Experience Refutes Revisionist Fallacies" published in 1965 . Sixteenth anniversary of Malayan people’�s Armed Struggle, June 30, 1964, published in 1964 .
 Khrushchov’s Peaceful Co-Existence Line"" on Nov., 1964, published in 1965 . Khrushchev published the line on Nov. 1964 .
 A Great Victory for Leninism — In Commemoration of the 95th Anniversary of the Birth of Lenin . 1965 . 1965. Foreign Language Press . Foreign Language . Press . A great Victory for . Leninism . 1965: Leninism. 1965 .
 Chinese Communists, Carry the Struggle Against Khrushchov Revisionism Through to the End — On the Occasion of the Second Anniversary of the Publication of ‘A Proposal Concerning the General Line of the International Communist Movement’ , 1965 . Chinese Communists carried the struggle against Kh
 Chinese Communists, Refutation of the New Leaders of the CPSU on ‘United Action’ , 1965. Chinese Communist Party, 1965 .
 Chinese Communists, The Leaders of the CPSU are Betrayers of the Declaration and Statement , 1965 . 1965 . Chinese Communists . The leaders of the . CPSU were . Betrayed of the declaration and Statement . 1965.
 In Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution , 1967 . In Commencement of the . 50th anniversary of the Soviet Union's . Great October . Revolution .
 How Capitalism has been Restored in the Soviet Union and What This Means for the World Struggle , 1974 . How capitalism has been restored in the . Soviet Union . How Capitalism was Restored .
 Bannedthought.net says all socialist states face a continuing, and at times acute, contradiction between the necessity of defending the socialist country and the goal of promoting and supporting the world revolution .
 This paper examines how socialist China handled this tension during four periods between 1949 and 1976 . It examines the tension between socialism and capitalism in China during the 1950s and 1960s .
 It contrasts the strong internationalist support given to the Korean people and to the Vietnamese and other struggles for national liberation in the 1960s with the development of bourgeois nationalist lines around the 1955 Bandung Conference and the reactionary “three worlds theory” of the early 1970s .
 The Restoration of Capitalism in the Soviet Union in the 1950s and the Decline of the Soviet Economy is an article which appeared in Cultural Logic in 2010 .
 USSR, In Connection with Mao Tse-tung's Talk with a Group of Japanese Socialists, 1964 . USSR, Japan, USSR, China, South Korea, Japan .
 A Marxist Critique of Theories of Capitalist Restoration in the USSR . 1980 . 1980. 1980. A Marxist Theory of Capitalism in the Soviet Union .
 How differences arose between China's Maoist leaders and the USSR and other socialist countries . How differences arise between China and USSR .
 This may seem like a foreign concept to some but it is actually pretty easy to understand . This may be the first time people have seen a woman in a relationship with the U.S. government .
 The Sino-Soviet split exacerbated differences among revolutionaries across the world . Many moved to protect the legacy of Stalin and against reforms that diluted communism .
 Historically, in the Communist lexicon, the term “anti-revisionism” has been used to describe opposition to attempts to revise, modify or abandon the fundamentals of revolutionary theory and practice in a manner that was perceived to represent concessions to Communism’s adversaries . One
 In recent times, the term has taken on a more specific meaning . In recent years, it has been used to be used to refer to people in the U.S. The term has also been used as a derogatory term .
 Later on, the anti-revisionist movement expanded and diversified to encompass those communists who rejected a pro-Soviet orientation for one aligned with Chinese or Albanian positions .
 Anti-revisionism enjoyed its moment of greatest size and influence with numerous ‘Marxist Leninist’ and “Maoist” parties, groups and publications springing up around the world in the 1960s .
 Its growth was greatly accelerated by international enthusiasm for the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in China . It began to decline in response to controversial Chinese foreign policy decisions in the last years of Mao’s life .
 Some antirevisionists soldiered on, adapting to these changes . Later events spurred other elements to argue for a non-Trotskyist ‘left-wing’ communism .
 Khrushchevite revisionists created the conditions for the growth of the second economy, which in turn undermined the socialist economy .
 In short, a dynamic, socialist system was replaced with a stagnant capitalist system . Within the span of a few years, the socialist system has been replaced by a stagnant capitalism .
 The capitalist system suffered slow-down and final dissolution in 1991 . It was this capitalist system that suffered slow down and final demise in 1991.
 According to a major tendency in Marxism, the leaders who came after Stalin were revisionists . This is according to the leader of the Soviet Union, Vladimir Putin .
 This tendency holds that these leaders wished to revise Marxism by mixing it with capitalist ideology . This tendency also holds that they wished to reform Marxism with capitalism . The result of this tendency is that they wanted to mix Marxism with capitalist ideologies .
 The economic analysis given below provides evidence to support the anti-revisionist line . The analysis is based on the economic analysis of the U.S. Census data .
 The form of the Soviet system may have remained socialist, after 1953, in the sense that there was state-ownership and the semblance of central allocation of the means of production . To put it another way, the form of socialism may have been socialist after 1953 .
 Changes introduced following Stalin’s death meant that the means of production became commodities . However, changes introduced following the death of Stalin meant the means were commodities .
 After 1953, what was being ‘planned’ was in fact capitalist commodity production . After 1953 it was “planned” for the first time . After that, it was a capitalist commodity-production .
 After 1953, the means of production in the Soviet Union were sold at their prices of production, lik e capitalist commodities . Therefore in essence the system after 1953 was capitalist, not socialist .
 Their theses on the so-called party of the whole people are a great fraud, says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "Their theses" on the party are a fraud. They are not a party of whole people, they are a party to whole people"
 We do not want to see the revisionists wreck the achievements of the October Revolution and push the country towards alliance with the imperialists for the restoration of capitalism . The soil watered with the blood of the best sons of the party, of the working class, of Soviet people .
 It is not a theoretical analysis, it does say that the efforts of capitalists to impose their viewpoints is not as successful as they would want . While it is not theoretical, it is a statement that capitalists' attempts to impose viewpoints are not successful .
 Anti-communist propaganda is faltering in the Russian Federation today, even with its right-leaning, capitalistic political party, United Russia, currently in power . Clearly, anti-Communist propaganda in Russia has faltered in recent years .
 By 1933, with the capitalist world mired in a devastating economic crisis, unemployment was declared abolished, and remained so for the next five and a half decades, until socialism, itself, was abolished . Unemployment remained so until socialism was abolished in 1933 .
 The Communists produced social security more robust than provided even by Scandinavian-style social democracy . The Communists achieved with fewer resources and a lower level of development . Despite efforts of the capitalist world to see to it that socialism failed .
 Soviet socialism was, and remains, a model for humanity — of what can't be achieved outside the confines and contradictions of capitalism . Soviet socialism remains a model of humanity, says Julian Zelizer .
 By the end of the '80s, counterrevolution was sweeping Eastern Europe . Mikhail Gorbachev was dismantling the pillars of Soviet socialism . But by the '90s, it was clear that the Soviet Union was no longer in power .
 Others imagined a new era of a flowering multiparty democracy and expanded civil liberties, coexisting with public ownership of the commanding heights of the economy . The model that seemed to owe more to utopian blueprints than hardheaded reality .
 "Of course, none of the great promises of the counterrevolution were kept," he said . Of course, "None of the greatest promises were kept"
 At the time the demise of socialism in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe was proclaimed, not least by leftist intellectuals in the US, as a great victory for humanity . But more than a decade later there's little to celebrate .
 "The dismantling of socialism has, in a word, been a catastrophe," says Julian Zelizer . "It has wreaked irreparable harm, not only in the former socialist countries, but throughout the Western world," he says . Zelizer: The dismantling of socialist socialism has been a
 Millions have been plunged deep into poverty, imperialism has been given a free hand, and wages and benefits in the West have bowed under the pressure of intensified competition for jobs and industry .
 Workers in Western Europe have been forced to accept a longer working day, lower pay, and degraded benefits . And with the threat of jobs migrating to low-wage, high unemployment countries of Eastern Europe, workers have to accept longer working days and lower pay .
 Today, they fight a desperate rearguard action, where the victories are few, the defeats many . Today, the United States are fighting a desperate battle for their place in the world .
 For others, for investors and corporations, who've found new markets and opportunities for profitable investment, can reap the benefits of the lower labor costs that attend intensified competition for jobs, the overthrow of socialism has been something to celebrate .
 It has been welcomed by the feudal and industrial elite of the pre-socialist regimes whose estates and industrial concerns have been recovered . Equally, it is welcomed by those who have recovered their estates .
 Most people in the world were protected from the vicissitudes of the global capitalist market by central planning and high tariff barriers . Prior to the dismantling of socialism, most people were protected against the global market by high tariffs and central planning .
 The pool of unprotected labor available to transnational corporations expanded many times over . But once socialism fell in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, the pool of free labor expanded . China is moving resolutely down the capitalist road .
 Today, a world labor force many times larger than the domestic pool of U.S. workers . And willing to work dirt cheap, the world's corporations are willing to pay dirt cheap . The world's labor force is many times bigger than the United States' labor pool .
 Inevitably incomes fall and benefits eroded, and working hours extended . Inevitable, incomes fall, benefits eroded and hours extended.
 Growing competition for jobs and industry is forcing workers in Western Europe to accept less . Already, growing competition for Western Europe's workers is forcing them to take less .
 Workers at Daimler Chrysler, Thomas Cook, and other firms are working longer hours, and in some cases, for less pay and without increases in benefits, to keep jobs from moving to the Czech Republic, Slovakia and other former socialist countries .
 More work for less money is a pleasing outcome for the corporate class . The result is exactly the outcome the fascists of Germany and Italy engineered for their countries' capitalists in the '30s . The fascists of Italy and Germany engineered the outcome .
 Anti-communism of Mussolini's and Hitler's followers has proved just as useful in securing the same retrograde ends . The methods, to be sure, were different, but the methods were different . The anti-communist methods have proved as effective as the methods of Hitler's
 Nobody who has to subject themselves to the vagaries of the labor market including workers in the U.S. should be glad communism was abolished . Nobody should be happy with the vagary labor market .
 I, no less than others, have admired Zinn's books, articles and activism, but I've come to expect his ardent anticommunism as typical of left U.S. intellectuals . Zinn: "I'm not surprised by his anti-communist views, but
 It should come as no surprise that conspicuous displays of anti-communism become a survival strategy for those seeking to establish a rapport, and safeguard their reputations .
 There may be another reason for the anti-communism of those whose political views leave them open to charges of being soft on communism, and therefore of having horns .
 As dissidents in their own society, there was always a natural tendency for them to identify with dissidents elsewhere . Pro-capitalist, anti-socialist propaganda of the West elevated dissidents in socialist countries to the status of heroes, especially those who were jailed, muzzled and otherwise repressed
 For these people, the abridgement of civil liberties anywhere looms large, for the abidgement of their own civil liberties would be an event of great personal significance . For the people, it would be a great personal tragedy .
 The Red's achievements in providing frugality and economic security to all, while recognized intellectually as an achievement of some note, are less apt to stir the imagination of one who has an income, the respect of his peers, and plenty of people to read his books .
 He doesn't have to scavenge discarded coal in garbage dumps to eke out a bare, bleak, and unrewarding existence . He says he's not afraid of scavenging for scraps of coal .
 Karol, 14, and his sister Alina, 12, everyday trudge to a dump just outside Swietochlowice, in formerly socialist Poland . Karol and Alina trudge daily to the dump, where mixed industrial waste is deposited .
 There, along with their father, they look for scrap metal and second grade coal . Anything to fetch a few dollars to buy a meager supply of groceries .
 Foreign firms are only interested in hiring people under 30, analyst says . Analysts say foreign firms only want to hire under 30s .
 The overthrow of socialism may be a pleasing intellectual outcome for wellfed, comfortable intellectuals from Boston . But it hardly suits that part of the Polish population that must scramble over mountains of industrial waste or perish . That may suit the bottom lines of foreign corporations .
 "Always a place to live, free schools to go to, and doctors to see, without charge" Free schools, free hospitals and free doctors are free to see without charge . Free schools and free health care are also free .
 That the overthrow of socialism has failed to deliver anything of benefit to the majority is plain to see, says Simon Tisdall . The overthrow of socialist socialism is a waste of time, he says .
 More than a decade after counterrevolution swept through Eastern Europe, 17 former socialist countries are immeasurably poorer . Former Soviet-era Soviet Union states are now poorer than ever before .
 One child in 10 three million Russian children live with animals, ill-fed, dressed in rags, and living, if they're lucky, in dirty, squalid flats . Russian children are one of the world's poorest children .
 Infant mortality and tuberculosis are on the rise, approaching Third World levels . Infants are dying at a rate of around 50 per cent in the world's poorest countries .
 The Kremlin passed a new labor code in 2001 that critics denounced as Dickensian for good reason . In Russia, the Kremlin passed the new labor law in 2001 . Critics have called it Dickensian, saying the code is too harsh .
 Soviet-era union guarantees were abolished, maternity leaves shortened, the minimum wage slashed, and the working day lengthened to a ""voluntary"" 12 hours . Aimed at creating a climate conducive to profit-making, maternity leave and minimum wage were shortened .
 That Aleksandr and Victor are now free to denounce the new government in the strongest terms, if they wish, hardly seems to be a consolation . Aleksandor and Victor have been free to speak out against the new Russian government .
 In Bulgaria, 80 percent are worse off now that the country has transitioned to a market economy . Next door, in Bulgaria, in the same country, the country's economy has become more open to the market .
 Retired people and the disabled were provided for and got free medicine . Retire people and disabled were also provided for free medicine and provided for by the government .
 Ostalgie is based on the old regime's full employment, free health care, free education through university (with living expenses covered by the State), cheap rents, subsidized books and periodicals and dirt cheap public transportation .
 During the Cold War era, East Germany's relative poverty was attributed to public ownership and central planning sawdust in the gears of the economic engine, according to antisocialist mythology . East Germany suffered from poverty in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Propaganda conveniently ignored the fact that the eastern part of Germany had always been less developed than the west . The Soviet Union carted off everything of value to indemnify itself for its war losses . East Germany bore the brunt of war reparations to Moscow .
 Those who fled East Germany were said to be escaping the repression of a brutal regime . While some may indeed have been ardent anti-Communists fleeing repression by the State, many were economic refugees, seeking the embrace of a more prosperous West .
 Nobody of an unprejudiced mind would say that the riches promised East Germans, if only they would restore capitalism, have been realized . Today, nobody of a . unprejudice mind would . say that . East Germans would say they would have been rich if they had restored capitalism .
 Unemployment, once unheard of, runs at 25 percent, rents have skyrocketed, and nobody goes to the doctor unless they can pay . Nobody goes to a doctor unless you can pay. Unemployment is 25 percent .
 The region's industrial infrastructure weaker than West Germany's during the Cold War, but expanding — has now all but disappeared .
 Economic refugees, following the footsteps of Cold War refugees before them, make their way westward in search of jobs and opportunity . And the population is dwindling, as economic refugees, as well as those who fled the Cold War .
 Otto Jelinek was a cabinet minister in Canada's conservative, pro-Reagan Mulroney government in the 80s . His family fled to Canada after the Red Army booted the Nazis out and helped install an antifascist government . The Czech family fled after the Nazis were kicked
 The lure of restitution is getting back property, some of it which can be pressed into service as a rent-bearing asset, they, and their families, used to own . And, of course, there's the lure of . restitution—getting back property . Some of it can be
 Vaclav Havel, the Czech playwright turned President, comes from a prominent, vehemently antisocialist Prague family . Havel was born in a family that was vehemently anti-socialist .
 Havel's father was a wealthy real estate tycoon, who developed a number of Prague properties . Havel was a member of the Communist Party .
 One was the Lucerna Palace, ""a pleasure palace...of arcades, theatres, cinemas, night-clubs, restaurants, and ballrooms,"" according to Frommer's . One was a pleasure palace of arcades and theatres .
 The Reds expropriated Lucerna and the family's other holdings, and put them to use for the common good, rather than for the purpose of providing the young Havel with more servants . Havel was the first president of Czechoslovakia .
 Havel presided over a mass return of nationalized property, including Lucerna and his family's other holdings . Four decades later, Havel, as president, is celebrated throughout the West as a champion of intellectual freedom .
 As a business investment, Havel's anti-communism proved to be quite profitable . The Czech Republic was founded in 1961, Czechoslovakia was one of the first republic republics .
 The Roman Catholic Church is another winner, which may explain, in part, why the Vatican takes such a dim view of communism . The Vatican has a history of anti-communist tendencies .
 The pro-capitalist Hungarian government has returned to the Roman Catholic Church much of the property nationalized by the Reds . The government has placed the property under common ownership for the public good .
 With recovery of many of the Eastern and Central European properties it once owned, the Church is able to reclaim its pre-socialist role of parasite . The Church is raking in vast amounts of unearned wealth in rent, a privilege bestowed for no other reason than the land .
 Hungary pays Vatican a US$9. mi llion annuity for property it has been unable to return . Hungary also pays the Vatican an annuity to cover the cost of property it cannot return .
 The Church, former landowners, and CEOs aside, most people of the former socialist bloc aren't pleased that the gains of the socialist revolutions have been reversed . The Church and former landowners are among those who are unhappy with the reversal of their gains .
 Three-quarters of Russians regret the demise of the Soviet Union, according to a 1999 poll . A 1999 poll found that three quarters of Russians regretted the fall of Soviet Union .
 Almost 80 percent of Venezuelans recognize democracy as a front for a government controlled by the rich . Almost 80 per cent of those surveyed say democracy is a front-set up by the wealthy .
 The solution, in the view of the majority, is to return to the status quo ante . Even if it means one-party rule, the majority wants one party to rule . The solution to the problem is to go back to the old way .
 Russians, laments anti-Communist historian Richard Pipes, haven't Americans' taste for multiparty democracy . Americans seem incapable of being cured of their fondness for Soviet leaders, Pipes says .
 In one poll, Russians were asked to list the 10 greatest people of all time, of all nations . Russians were also asked to name the world's greatest people . The poll was based on a survey of people living in Russia .
 In some countries, reconstituted Communist parties have received popular mandates to govern . Some countries have seen popular mandates for new Communist parties .
 Unity and Fatherland has tapped into a deep well of nostalgia for Soviet socialism . Unity has become the parliamentary extension of the president, Vladimir Putin, who is now the president of Russia .
 Former socialist economies have been mostly privatized and placed under the control of the market . The former socialist economies are now mostly privateized .
 Those who accept the goals and values of capitalism have been recruited to occupy pivotal offices of the State . Those who reject the goals of capitalism will be recruited into key positions in the state .
 Economic, legal and political structures have been altered, to accommodate private production for profit . And economic, legal . structures have also been altered to accommodate . private production .
 The pillars of socialism public ownership, central planning, and the lead role of the working class have been dismantled and carted away, tossed, we're told, into the dustbin of history . True, there are openings for communist parties to operate within the new multiparty democracy .
 Getting them back will take something more than returning Reds to parliament . Getting the Reds back in the House of Commons will take a long way .
 Of course, no forward step will be taken, can be taken until a decisive part of the population becomes disgusted with and rejects what exists today, and is convinced something better is possible and is willing to tolerate the upheavals of transition .
 That something better is possible not a utopia, but something better than unceasing economic insecurity, private (and for many, unaffordable) health care and education, and vast inequality is plain . Something better is indeed possible not utopia .
 It has been reality in the Soviet Union, China and Eastern Europe . It hangs on in Cuba, despite efforts of the U.S. to smash it .
 Vaclav Havel, as others whose economic and political supremacy was, for a time, ended by the Reds, was a tireless fighter against socialism . He, and others, who sought to reverse the gains of the revolution, were cracked down on, and sometimes muzzled and
 To expect otherwise is to turn a blind eye to the determined struggle that is carried on by the enemies of socialism, even after socialist forces have seized power . To expect others to turn the blind eye is not to expect otherwise .
 The forces of reaction retain their money, their movable property, the advantages of education, and above all, their international connections, says the author .
 To grant them complete freedom is to grant them a free hand to organize the downfall of socialism, to receive material assistance from abroad to reverse the revolution, says Mao Zed Zedel .
 Few champions of civil liberties argue that in the interests of freedom of speech, freedom of assembly and freedom of the press, that Americans ought to be free to replace their republican form of government with a pro-British monarchy . Germans should be allowed to hold pro-Nazi rallies, establish a
 To survive, any socialist government, must, by necessity, be repressive toward its enemies, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "To survive" government must be repressive .
 This is demonized as totalitarianism by those who have an interest in seeing antisocialist forces prevail, or see civil liberties as the summum bonum of human achievement, or have an unrealistically optimistic view .
 Life expectancy has soared, illiteracy has been wiped out and illiteracy wiped out . Homelessness, unemployment and economic insecurity have also been abolished .
 Racial strife and ethnic tensions has been reduced to almost the vanishing point in recent years . Racial strife is now almost completely eradicated in the country .
 Inequality in wealth, income, opportunity, and education have been greatly reduced . And inequalities in wealth and income have been reduced, he says .
 Where Reds have been overthrown, mass unemployment, underdevelopment, hunger and disease, disease, illiteracy, and racial conflict have recrudesced . Mass unemployment, hunger, disease and illiteracy have recuired, say Reds .
 Communists produced gains in the interest of all humanity, achieved in the face of very trying conditions, including the unceasing hostility of the West and the efforts of the former exploiters to restore the status quo ante .
 What they achieved surpassed anything achieved by social democratic struggle in the West, where the advantages of being more advanced industrially, made the promises of socialism all the more readily achievable .
 These are achievements that have been ignored in the West and greatly missed in the countries where they were reversed in the interests of restoring the wealth and privileges of a minority . Hidden, or at best, acknowledged but quickly brushed aside as matters of little significance .
 East Germany wasn’t a ‘workers’ paradise’, it was in many respects a highly attractive model that was responsive to the basic needs of the mass of people and therefore was democratic in the substantive and original sense of the word .
 It offered generous pensions, guaranteed employment, equality of the sexes and substantial wage equality . Free healthcare and education, and a growing array of other free and virtually free goods and services, were offered .
 The distortions of Cold War history would lead one to believe it was the Soviets who divided Germany . The Western powers were the true authors of Germany’s division .
 The hope of the Soviets, who had invaded by Germany in both first and second world wars, was for a united, disarmed and neutral Germany . The Soviets hope of a united and disarmed Germany would be for a disarmed, neutral Germany.
 First, Germany would be demilitarized, so that it could not launch a third war of aggression against the Soviet Union . Germany would not be able to launch a war against Soviet Union again, he says .
 The United States intended to make post-war life as difficult as possible for the Soviet Union . The U.S. wanted to make life in Russia difficult for the Soviets .
 The USSR was banned from becoming a model for other countries . There were a number of reasons for this, not least to prevent the USSR from becoming an example for other nations .
 Already, socialism had eliminated the United States’ access to markets and spheres of investment in one-sixth of the earth’s territory . The U.S. already has access to the world's largest markets and investment spheres .
 The United States ruling class didn’t want the USSR to provide inspiration and material aid to other countries to follow the same path . The U.S. ruling class .
 The lead role of communists in the resistance movements in Europe, “the success of the Soviet Union in defeating Nazi Germany,” had greatly raised the prestige of the USSR and enhanced the popularity of communism . The success of Russia in industrializing and modernizing,’s success
 Unless measures were taken to check the USSR’s growing popularity, socialism would continue to advance . The area open to U.S. exports and investment in the Soviet Union will continue to contract, the author says .
 A Germany paying reparations to the Soviets was clearly at odds with the goals of reviving Germany and holding the Soviet Union in check . Germany paid reparations in the 1950s and '60s to the USSR .
 The division of Germany began in 1946, when the French decided to administer their zone separately . The French zone was administered separately by the French .
 Western powers merged their three zones into a single economic unit . Soon, the Western powers announced they would no longer pay reparations to the Soviet Union .
 The burden would have to be borne by the Soviet occupation zone alone . The occupation zone was smaller and less industrialized, and therefore less able to offer compensation . It was less industrialized than the occupied zone .
 The new state would be based on a constitution written by Washington and imposed on West Germans, without their ratification . West Germans would be forced to sign a constitution imposed by Washington .
 In 1954, West Germany was integrated into a new anti-Soviet military alliance, NATO, which, in its objectives, aped the earlier anti-Comintern pact of the Axis powers . NATO was formed in 1954, and NATO was based in West Germany .
 The goal of the anti-Comintern pact was to oppose the Soviet Union and world communism . The pact was formed in the early 1930s to oppose Soviet Russia .
 NATO, with a mi litarized West Germany, would take over from where the Axis left off . NATO would replace the Axis with West Germany . West Germany would become NATO's most powerful nation .
 The Soviets had no interest in transforming the Soviet occupation zone into a separate state . The Soviets complained bitterly about the Western powers’ division of Germany .
 Moscow wanted Germany to remain unified, but demilitarized and neutral . It committed to paying war reparations to help the USSR get back on its feet . Moscow wanted to remain neutral, but not neutral .
 As late as 1954, the Soviets offered to dissolve the GDR in favour of free elections under international supervision . This led to the creation of a unified, unaligned, Germany .
 This clashed with the Western powers’ plan of evading Germany’s responsibility for paying war reparations and integrating West Germany into the new anti-Soviet, anti-communist military alliance .
 West Germany refused to recognize its neighbor as a sovereign state, regarding it instead as its own territory temporarily under Soviet occupation . And West Germany ceaselessly harassed and sabotaged its neighbor .
 Pauwels: Americans had occupied Thuringia and much of Saxony during the war . He says Americans occupied a considerable part of the Soviet zone .
 When they pulled out at the end of June, 1945, they brought back more than 10,000 railway cars full of the newest and best equipment, patents, blueprints, and so on from the firm Carl Zeiss .
 The Allies agreed at Yalta that a post-war Germany would pay the Soviet Union $10 billion in compensation for the damages inflicted on the USSR during the war . The Soviets won the war with the Allies in 1945 .
 This was a paltry sum compared to the more realistic estimate of $128 billion arrived at after the war . It was a more realistic $128billion estimate of the war's cost .
 The Soviets took $4. billion out of East Germany, carting away whole factories and railways, while the larger and richer FRG paid a miserable $600 million .
 In the end, the GDR would compensate both the U.S. and the Soviet Union through the loss of its scientists, technicians, blue-prints, patents and so on . The GDR compensated both the United States .
 West Germany’s comparative wealth offered many advantages in its ideological battle with socialism . West Germany's comparative wealth was a key part of the West's ideological battle against socialism .
 The wealth differential could be attributed to the merits of capitalism versus socialism . For one, the wealth differential may be attributed deceptively to capitalism vs socialism . The wealth disparity could be a result of capitalism vs. socialism .
 East Germany was poorer, it was said, not because it unfairly bore the brunt of indemnifying the Soviets for their war losses, but because public ownership and central planning were inherently inefficient . It was said not because East Germany started on a lower rung but because of inefficient planning .
 The truth of the matter is that East German socialism was more efficient than West German capitalism . East German capitalism was more responsive to the basic needs of its population, the author says .
 The counter-revolution in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, and China’s opening to foreign investment, ushered in a rapid expansion worldwide in the number of people vying for jobs . The world has seen a rapid increase in the demand for jobs in recent years .
 North American and Western European workers didn’t compete for jobs with workers in Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovakia and Russia in 1970 .
 Public ownership and central planning turned the eastern part of Germany into a rapidly industrializing country . The east grew faster economically than its West German neighbor and shared the benefits of its growth evenly .
 In the West, the people existed to serve the minority that owned and controlled the economy . The West, in the past, has been dominated by a minority of the population . In the U.S., the West was dominated by the minority of people, not the majority of people .
 The Soviet system of central planning and public ownership produced unfailing economic growth, without recessions and downturns that plagued the capitalist economies of North America, Japan and Western Europe . Excluding the war years, from 1928 when socialism was introduced, until Mikhail Gorbachev began to take it
 The Soviet and Eastern European economies grew faster during the Soviet years . And in most of those years, they grew faster than other countries in the world .
 The Communists produced economic security as robust than that of the richest countries, but with fewer resources and a lower level of development . The Communist Party's economic security was as robust as the richest country, but in spite of the efforts of the capitalist world to sabotage socialism .
 At the time the demise of socialism in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe was proclaimed as a great victory for humanity, not least by leftist intellectuals in the U.S. Two decades later there’s little to celebrate .
 If you were old, if you were a farmer, or a manual worker, the market was worse than even the relatively stagnant Soviet economy of Brezhnev . The market was a great deal worse than the relatively stable Soviet economy .
 The recovery under Putin, such as it was, came almost entirely as a side effect of rising world oil prices, the very process that had operated under Brezhnev . Putin's recovery came largely as a result of rising global oil prices .
 While the return of capitalism made life harsher for some, it proved lethal for others . The return to capitalism made some of the world's most violent dictatorships .
 By 2008, it had slipped to less than 60 years for Russian men, a full seven years lower than in 1985 when Gorbachev came to power .
 Only a little over half of the ex-Communist countries have regained their pretransition life-expectancy levels, study says . Study published in medical journal: Only over half have regained life expectancy levels .
 The Lancet.com: The propaganda conveniently ignored the fact that the eastern part of Germany had always been less developed than the west . East Germany bore the brunt of Germany’s war reparations to Moscow .
 Almost 80 percent of Americans recognize liberal democracy as a front for a government controlled by the rich . The majority of those surveyed say liberal democracy is a front-set up for a rich government .
 The solution, in the view of the majority, is to return to socialism, even if it means one-party rule . The solution to the problem is to go back to socialism . The majority of people want a return to the socialist state .
 Something better than unceasing economic insecurity, private health care and education, and vast inequality, is achievable, says President Obama . Something better is possible, says Obama .
 It was the reality in the Soviet Union, in China, in Eastern Europe, and today, hangs on in Cuba and North Korea . Despite efforts of the United States to crush it, it hangs on .
 There’s been a bit of a discussion about affective labor going around . In Defense of Soviet Waiters: We're proud of our waiters .
 Employers would prefer equality to be established by imposing the love of work on both genders . Employers, of course, would prefer to establish equality by imposing love for work .
 I’m just old enough to remember when people talked about the Communist world as a really existing place rather than a vaguely defined bogeyman . I'm just old . enough to . remember when . people talked . about the . Communist world .
 Restaurant waiters are notoriously surly waiters in many foreign travelogues . They often came up in foreign travel documentaries from behind the Iron Curtain .
 One can find numerous explanations of this phenomenon, from the shortcomings of the planned economy to the vagaries of the Russian soul to the legacy of serfdom . One can also be the result of the Soviet service industry .
 Soviet workers, unlik e their American counterparts, were guaranteed jobs, wages, and access to essential needs like housing, education, and health care . But one factor was clearly that Soviet workers were not American .
 The fear that enforces fake happiness among capitalist service workers was mostly inoperative in the Soviet Union . Pret a Manger's grotesquery is a classic example of the fear of fake happiness in capitalist capitalism .
 During the perestroika era, the American smile was a common reference point when the topic of rude Soviet service was discussed .
 With the collapse of the USSR and the penetration of Western capital into Russia, employers discovered a workforce that adapted only reluctantly to the norms of capitalist work discipline .
 In no time, managers hit on what I’ve described as the third wave form of the work ethic . The managers have hit on this form of work ethic in no time . ‘The third wave’ is the form of a work ethic, the manager says .
 U.S. managers spent 12 to 14 hours a day drilling the Russians on service and food preparation . Pizza Huts in the United Kingdom, Belgium, Australia and other nations also drilled the Russians about service and preparation .
 It’s the Pret a Manger approach to enforced cheerfulness, combined with gamification, 1990-style . It's the Pret approach to enforce cheerfulness and gamification . The Pret aManger approach is similar to that of 1990s .
 With the collapse of Communism they no longer had steady access to the means of payment . But while they may have had the hamburgers, they had to rely on the way of paying .
 The brusqueness of customer service interactions has typically been interpreted as an indication of Communism’s shortcomings . Their low quality has been understood as a mark of capitalism's superiority . But their low quality is understood to be a sign that capitalism is superior to Communism .
 It's a contradiction of the Soviet model, which preserved the form of wage labor while removing many of the disciplinary mechanisms that force workers to accept the discipline of the employer or customers .
 A restaurant where both employees and customers are miserable comes to a head in a restaurant . That contradiction comes to the head in the restaurant . The restaurant is full of employees, customers and customers .
 Service work is different from material shabbiness, since the product and the worker are inseparable . But service work is a bit different from the kind of material shabbyiness he discusses, he says .
 To demand what we’ve come to think of as ‘good service’ is ultimately to demand the kind of affective — and affected — labor that we see throughout the service industry and especially in female-gendered occupations .
 Thirty years ago, journalists like Myerscough were the sort of people grousing about rude Moscow waiters . But thirty years later, they're still grouching about rude waiters.
 In a system based on wage labor, the choice between company-enforced cheerfulness or authentic resentment is unavoidable . The choice between cheerfulness and resentment in the workplace is unavoidable.
 Perhaps it’s time to look back with a bit of nostalgia on the surly Communist waiters of yore, whose orientation toward the system was at least transparent . The waiters were at least honest .
 I have argued many times that the essence of the social-democratic project — and for the time being, the socialist project as well — is the empowerment of labor . This is the case for the future of social-democrats, the author says .
 By means of full employment, the separation of income from employment, and the organization of workers, people gain the ability to resist the demands of the boss . By . means of separation from employment and organization, workers can resist the boss's demands, says the author .
 Affective labor is another example that shows why this supposedly tepid and reformist project is ultimately radical and unstable . But the case of affective labor shows why the project is radical, unstable .
 Take away the lash of the boss, you are forced to confront service employees as human beings with human emotions . Service employees must confront them without masks of enforced good cheer .
 Revealing the true condition of service work can be a de-fetishizing experience, one just as jarring — and quite a bit closer to home — than finding out how your iPhone was manufactured .
 In both cases, we are made to confront unpleasant truths about the power relations that structure all of our experiences as consumers as consumers .
 Major culprits were diversion of budgets and R&D to the military to counter threats of U.S. and NATO aggression . Growing resource extraction costs, not alleged inefficiencies of public ownership and central planning, as widely believed .
 Soviet socialism, while it existed, worked better than capitalism in producing economic growth . In fact, Soviet socialism—while it existed-worked better than Capitalism in producing growth .
 From 1928 to 1989, GDP per capita grew in the USSR by a factor of 5.2, compared to 4.2 in Western Europe and 3.3 in major industrial offshoots of Western Europe . The USSR was the only country to have had a GDP growth rate of 5
 Soviet growth happened without the recurrent recessions that were routine features of the capitalist economies over the same period . And importantly, it happened without recessions—and their attendant pain in unemployment, hunger, and despair- that were commonplace features of capitalism .
 While capitalism was mired in a major depression during the 1930s, the Soviet economy was expanding rapidly . The Soviet economy absorbed all available manpower, absorbing all available labour .
 The Soviet economy expanded without interruption and without inflation or joblessness . And while the dual ills of inflation and unemployment ran rampant in the stagflation crisis during the 1970s, the Soviet economy grew .
 The received wisdom is that the Soviet economy collapsed under the weight of it inefficiencies, and that the demise of the USSR proves that an economic system based on public ownership, central planning and production for use, is unworkable .
 Even Marxists believe this, touting the merits of “market socialism” as the only workable alternative . Even many Marxists think this is the best way to avoid socialism .
 The Soviet economy’s record of peacetime expansion and full employment remained unblemished until Gorbachev began to experiment with the very same market socialism that many Marxists now embrace .
 The reputation for Soviet socialism’s reputation for being unworkable is underserved . Hence, Soviet socialism is under-represented in the Soviet Union .
 A slow-down in economic growth had as much to do with U.S. efforts to cripple the USSR by embroiling it in a ruinous arms race as it did with internal problems . The USSR's slow growth has been transformed into a myth about economic collapse .
 They can turn successes into what appears to be failures, then can also turn failures into what appear to be successes . They can also make failures into successes, then succeed, they say .
 Had the Soviet economy’s record been as bad, it would have long ago been judged, not as inefficient, but as an inhumane disaster . The Soviet economy's record would have been judged as a pox on humanity to be eradicated as quickly as possible .
 In 2009, Rossiya, a Russian TV channel, spent three months polling over 50 million Russians to find out who, in their view, were the greatest Russians of all time .
 Prince Alexander Nevsky repelled an attempted Western invasion of Russia in the 13th century . He repelled the attempt to invade Russia from Russia in 13th Century .
 Second place went to Pyotr Stolypin, who served as prime minister to Tsar Nicholas II, and enacted agrarian reforms . Second place was the prime minister of Russia's second century .
 From its inception in 1928 to the point at which it was dismantled in 1989, Soviet socialism never stumbled into recession, nor failed to provide full employment . From the point of 1989, it was never a recession, except during the extraordinary years of World War II, the Soviet socialism did not
 The Soviet economy grew faster than capitalist economies that were at an equal level of economic development when Stalin launched the first five year plan in 1928 . The United States economy through much of the socialist system’s existence was growing faster than the Soviet economy .
 Soviet economy never caught up to or surpassed the advanced industrial economies of the capitalist core, but it started the race further back . The Soviet economy was not aided, as Western countries were, by histories of slavery, colonial plunder, and economic imperialism .
 The Cold War and arms race kept the Soviet Union from overtaking the West . State ownership and planning not state ownership kept the socialist economy from becoming a major economic rival .
 Gallup poll: For every citizen of 11 former Soviet republics, who thinks the breakup of the Soviet Union benefited their country, two think it did harm . Two think the break-up of the former Soviet Union did harm, the poll says .
 More prefer the former socialist system to the current capitalist one, and think that the USSR’s breakup has done more harm than good . Most think that most aren’t better off, or at least that they don't see themselves as such .
 Male life expectancy in Russia, for example, was 67 years in 1985, under communism . Male life expectancies in Russia range from 67 to 67 years .
 A Russian return to socialism is far more likely to come about the way it did the first time, not elections . A revolution is not likely to happen simply because people prefer a better system to the one they currently have, it will happen again .
 Russians don't think Western institutions are the wonders Western politicians and mass media make them out to be . Now that they’ve had over two decades of multi-party democracy, private enterprise and a market economy, Russians don’t think these institutions are what they see .
 Most Russians would prefer a return to the Soviet system of state planning, that is, to socialism . Most Russians want to return to state planning and socialism .
 Propaganda peaks each year on the anniversary of the USSR's passing . Even so, these realities are hidden behind a blizzard of propaganda .
 We’re supposed to believe that where it was tried, socialism was popularly disdained and failed to deliver . Neither assertion is true, though neither is true . We're supposed to think socialism failed, but it did .
 Of course, that anti-Soviet views have hegemonic status in the capitalist core is hardly surprising . Anti-Russian views are hegraphic status in capitalist core of Russia .
 On the anniversary of the USSR's demise we should not be surprised to discover that socialism’s political enemies should present a view of the Soviet Union that is at odds with what those on the ground really experienced, and what those deprived of it really want .
 The Soviet Union was a concrete example of what a publicly owned, planned economy could produce . Full employment, guaranteed pensions, paid maternity leave, limits on working hours, free healthcare and education, subsidized vacations, inexpensive housing, low-cost childcare, subsidized public transportation .
 It is widely believed that while the Soviet Union may have produced these benefits, in the end, Soviet public ownership and planning proved to be unworkable . The Soviet Union is widely thought to have produced some of the greatest economic benefits .
 When the Soviet economy was publicly owned and planned, from 1928 to 1989, it reliably expanded from year to year, except during the war years . Yet, when the Soviet economies were publicly owned, they didn't expand as much as expected .
 While capitalist economies plunged into a major depression and lapsed into recessions every few years, the Soviet economy just as unfailingly did not, expanding unremittingly and always providing jobs for all .
 Far from being unworkable, the Soviet Union’s publicly owned and planned economy succeeded remarkably well . The Soviet Union's publicly owned, planned economy was remarkably successful . The USSR's planned and publicly owned economy was successful .
 What was unworkable was capitalism, with its occasional depressions, regular recessions, mass unemployment, and extremes of wealth and poverty, all the more evident today as capitalist economies contract or limp along, condemning numberless people to forced idleness .
 What eventually led to the Soviet Union’s demise was the accumulated toll on the Soviet economy of the West‘s efforts to bring it down, the Reagan administration’�s intensification of the Cold War, and the Soviet leadership”s inability to find a way
 Military competition with ideological competitor, the U.S., had slowed growth in several ways . The United States, however, has slowed growth .
 First, R&D resources were being monopolized by the military, starving the civilian economy of the best scientists, engineers, and machine tools . Second, the U.S. military was starving civilian economies of best scientists and engineers .
 Reagan administration’s abandonment of detente in favour of renewed arms race . Arms race was explicitly targeted at crippling the Soviet economy .
 To deter U.S. aggression, the Soviets spent a punishingly large percentage of GDP on the military . The Americans, with a larger economy, spent more in absolute terms but at a lower share of national income .
 The Soviet Union chose to extract raw materials from its own vast territory . To protect itself from the dangers of relying on foreign imports of important raw materials that could be cut off to bring the country to its knees .
 While making the USSR self-sufficient, internal sourcing ensnared the country in a Ricardian trap . The USSR became self-sustained in the 1970s, the USSR was caught in the trap of internal sourcing .
 The costs of producing raw materials increased, as new and more difficult-toreach sources needed to be tapped as the older, easy-to-reach ones were exhausted . The cost of producing materials increased as the old and new sources were tapped .
 Fourth, in order to better defend the country, the Soviets sought allies in Eastern Europe and the Third World . Third World was the focus of the Soviets' efforts to build allies in the region .
 The USSR was richer than the countries and movements it allied with . It became the anchor and banker to other socialist countries, liberation movements, and states seeking to free themselves .
 Washington manoeuvred to arm, finance, and support anti-communist insurgencies in an attempt to put strain on the Soviet treasury . The costs to Moscow of supporting its allies mounted as the number of its allies increased .
 The Soviet Union's defence costs seriously impeded Soviet economic growth . These factors combined with the need to provide for the Soviet Union’s defence . The cost of the Soviet defence pushed costs to the point where they impeded economic growth.
 With growth slowing, and costs of defending the country increasing, it appeared as if it was only a matter of time before the USSR would find itself between the Scylla of an untenable military position and the Charybdis of arms race-driven bankruptcy .
 He moved to end the Cold War, withdrawing military support from allies, and pledging cooperation with the U.S. He also withdrew support for allies in the war .
 On the economic front, he set out to transform the Soviet Union into a Western-style social democracy . The Soviet Union was transformed into a social democracy in the 1950s .
 Gorbachev’s capitulations on foreign and economic policy led to disaster . However, rather than rescuing the country from a future of ever slowing economic growth, Gorbaugh's capitulations will lead to disaster.
 The United States embarked on a series of aggressions around the world, beginning with Iraq, proceeding to Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Iraq again, and then Libya, with numerous smaller interventions in between . With the restraining hand of the Soviet Union lifted, the U.S. embarked on the series
 Gorbachev’s abandonment of economic planning and efforts to clear the way for the implementation of a market economy pushed the country into crisis . The country was plunged into crisis in the 1980s .
 Unemployment, homelessness, economic insecurity and social parasitism returned with a vengeance . Unemployment, homeless, and economic insecurity among social parasites returned to the streets .
 On Christmas Day, 1991, the day the USSR officially ended, Gorbachev said, “We live in a new world.” On that day, the Soviet Union officially ended . On Christmas Eve, the USSR was officially declared over .
 The arms race and the mad militarization of states, which deformed our economy, society and values, have been stopped, says President Obama . "The arms race," he says, "has been stopped"
 The world's first conscious attempt to build an alternative to capitalism had been brought to a close . Contained within Gorbachev's words was the truth about why the world’s first conscious effort was brought to an end . The truth was revealed in the words of Mikhail Gorb
 The real reason for the USSR’s demise was that its leadership capitulated to an American foe, which, from the end of World War II, sought to arms race to death the Soviet economy . U.S. sought to kill Soviet economy in arms race with arms race against
 This was an economy that worked for the bottom 99 percent, and therefore, if allowed to thrive, would have discredited the privately owned, market-regulated economies that the top one percent favoured and benefited from . The top one per cent favoured the private economy that the bottom one percent benefited from
 It was this model of free enterprise and market regulation which made vast wealth, security and comfort the prerogatives of captains of industry and titans of finance . Unemployment, poverty, hunger and hunger, hunger, economic insecurity, and indignity—the necessary conditions of the top one percent
 There would set in an era of the blackest reaction in all the capitalist and colonial countries . There would be a black era of reaction, says the British Prime Minister .
 Stalin accurately predicted the consequences of the Soviet Union’s falling to the forces of capitalism . Stalin predicted 10 years before Operation Barbarossa, the Nazi invasion of the USSR, that his country had only 10 years to prepare for an attack .
 Washington has more latitude to use its muscular military to pursue its reactionary agenda around the world . Washington now has more power to use it to pursue a reactionary agenda .
 Public ownership and planning hang on in Cuba and North Korea, but the U.S. and its allies use sanctions, diplomatic isolation and military harassment to sabotage the economies of the hold-outs . The consequences can be falsely hung on what are alleged to be the deficiencies of public ownership and
 They are in reality the consequences of a methodical program of low-level warfare . The consequences of the program are the result of low level warfare, says the author .
 Soviet economic system had failed, many people believed it had failed . Many concluded that the system of public ownership and planning is inherently flawed .
 Communists abandoned communist parties for social democratic ones, or abandoned radical politics altogether . Communists abandoned the party for social democracy or even radical politics .
 Social Democrats shifted right, eschewing reform, and embracing neo-liberalism . Social democrats shifted right to embrace neo-libertarianism .
 privatization in the former Soviet Union and formerly communist countries of Eastern Europe expanded the global supply of wage-labour, with predictable consequences for wage levels .
 The world's largest capitalist economies have been in crisis since 2008 . The world’s largest . capitalist economies are in a state of crisis .
 Some are trapped in an austerity death-spiral, some in the grips of recession, most growing slowly at best . Some of the world's economies are still in the throes of austerity, but most are growing slowly .
 Austerity—in reality the gutting of public services—is the prescribed pseudo-remedy . Austerity is in fact the gutted public services, says David Cameron . It's not the only solution to austerity, says Cameron .
 In some parts of Europe, official unemployment reaches well into the double-digits, youth unemployment higher still . Official unemployment in some areas of Europe is well into double-digit levels .
 Capitalism is not working. Yet, free to develop without the encumbrance of an organized effort to sabotage it, it's not working . Capitalism is free to grow without an effort to undermine it, the author says .
 The Soviet model of public ownership and planning never stumbled into recession, nor failed to provide full employment . By contrast, the Soviet model was the target of a concerted effort to undermine it . It was never once, except during the extraordinary years of World War II, during that period .
 It is understood by some former supporters of the Soviet Union, to have been unworkable . Yet it is understood, including by some ex-Soviet Union supporters, that it is still not a workable solution .
 The experience of the Soviet Union did not demonstrate that an inherent weakness existed within its publicly owned, planned economy that doomed it to failure . Contrary to a widely held misconception, the experience did not prove that an underlying weakness existed in the Soviet economy . The Soviet Union was not doomed to failure
 It could do so year after year and continued to do so until the Soviet leadership pulled the plug . Moreover, it could continue to do it despite the fact that it did so .
 The defeat of the Soviet Union has ushered in a period of dark reaction, says Julian Zelizer . It also demonstrated that the top one percent would defend private ownership by using military, economic, and ideological means to crush the system .
 The way out remains, as ever, public ownership and planning is public ownership . The Soviet experience from 1928 to 1989 demonstrates works remarkably well . Public ownership is key to success, and struggle against those who would discredit, degrade or destroy it .
 The benefits of the Soviet economic system were found in the elimination of the ills of capitalism, the author says . Unemployment, inflation, depressions and recessions, and extremes of wealth and poverty were also found .
 Among the most important accomplishments of the Soviet economy was the abolition of unemployment . Unemployment was abolished in the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union provided jobs for all, work was considered a social obligation . Work was considered such an important social obligation that it was enshrined in the constitution .
 Making a living through means other than work was prohibited . On the other hand, making a living without work was also prohibited .
 Workers employed at dangerous jobs or where sustained alertness was critical worked six or sevenhour shifts, but received fulltime pay . Workers employed in dangerous jobs received full-time pay for those shifts .
 The right to a pension was guaranteed by the Soviet constitution, rather than being revocable and subject to the momentary whims of politicians, as is the case in capitalist countries . Pension is guaranteed by Soviet constitution rather than by politicians, not by politicians .
 Women in the USSR accorded equal rights with men in all spheres of economic, state, cultural, social and political life . Equal right with men to employment, rest and leisure, social insurance and education .
 It was the first country to bring women into top government positions . It was also the first time women were allowed to hold government posts .
 An intense campaign was undertaken in Soviet Central Asia to liberate women from the misogynist oppression of conservative Islam .
 Urban housing space per capita was about half what it was per capita in Austria and West Germany . Urban living space, however, was cramped, about half the size of homes per capita .
 The reasons were inadequate building in Tsarist times, the massive destruction of housing during World War II, and the Soviet emphasis on heavy industry . The reasons for the housing shortage are not known .
 Prior to the October Revolution, inadequate urban housing was built for ordinary people . Inadequate urban housing has been built in Russia since the revolution .
 After the revolution, new housing was built, but the housing stock remained insufficient . New housing stock was built after the revolution but housing was not enough .
 Housing draws heavily on capital, which the government needed urgently for the construction of industry . Housing is a major source of capital for the government, which is needed urgently .
 City-dwellers typically lived in apartment buildings owned by the enterprise in which they worked or by the local government . City dwellers lived in apartments owned by their employers or by local governments .
 This differed sharply with the U.S. where rents consumed a significant share of the average family budget . The United States still does, but rents are still a significant part of the budget .
 Food staples and other necessities were subsidized, while luxury items were sold well above their costs . Luxury items were also subsidized by government .
 This is because efficient, affordable and extensive public transportation would severely limit the profit-making opportunities of automobile manufacturers, petroleum companies, and civil engineering firms . Public transportation would also limit the profits of automobile makers, petroleum firms, civil engineers and other firms .
 In order to safeguard their profits, these firms use their wealth, connections and influence to stymie development of extensive, efficient and inexpensive public alternatives to private transportation .
 Governments, which need to keep private industry happy so it continues to provide jobs, are constrained to play along . Governments must play along with private industry .
 The only way to alter this is to bring capital under public control . Capital should be used to meet public policy goals set out in a consciously constructed plan, says David Cameron .
 Soviet Union placed greater stress on healthcare than their capitalist competitors did . The Soviet Union put more emphasis on healthcare in the Soviet Union than its capitalist competitors .
 Income inequality in the Soviet Union was mild compared to capitalist countries . Income inequality was mild in Soviet Union compared to the other countries .
 An income 10 times larger would be $430,000—about what members of the capitalist elite make in a single week . An income of 10 times that large would be 10 times the average income of the rich .
 A factor that mitigated the modest degree of Soviet income inequality was the access all Soviet citizens had to essential services at no, or virtually, no cost . All Soviet citizens were able to access essential services .
 Critics of the Soviet Union accused the elite of being an exploiting ruling class . But the elite’s modest incomes and humble material circumstances raise serious doubt about this .
 If it was indeed an exploiting ruling class, it was the oddest one in human history . It was the most powerful group in the world to exploit .
 From the moment in 1928 that the Soviet economy became publicly owned and planned, to the point in 1989 that the economy was pushed in a free market direction, Soviet GDP per capita growth exceeded that of all other countries but Japan, South Korea and Taiwan .
 The USSR’s record in raising incomes was better than that of the major industrialized capitalist countries . In other words, over the period in which its publicly owned, planned economy was in place, the USSR‘s record was better .
 The Soviet Union’s robust growth over this period is all the more impressive considering that the period includes the war years when a major assault by Nazi Germany left a trail of utter destruction in its wake .
 Growth was highest to 1970, at which point expansion of the Soviet economy began to slow . Growth in the Soviet Union was highest until 1970, when it began to decline .
 While Soviet GDP per capita growth rates compare favorably with those of the major capitalist economies, a more relevant comparison is with the rest of the world . The Soviet economy's growth rates are much higher than those of major capitalist countries .
 In 1928, the Soviet Union was still largely an agrarian country . Most people worked in agriculture, compared to a minority in Western Europe and North America . Most Soviet Union workers were farmers .
 The economy of the USSR at the point of its transition to public ownership and planning was very different from that of the industrialized Western capitalist countries . The USSR's economy at the time of transition is very different .
 It is therefore the rest of the world, not the U.S. and other advanced industrialized countries, with which the USSR should be compared . The USSR should not be compared to the United States and other industrialized countries .
 From 1928 to 1989, Soviet GDP per capita exceeded growth in all other regions of the world combined, and to a greater degree . The Soviet economy grew much faster than growth in the rich countries .
 The USSR's planned economy outpaced the economies of richer capitalist economies . It grew even faster than those of countries that were most like the USSR in 1928 .
 Outside its southern core, Latin America’s GDP per capita was $1,332 - almost equal to the USSR’�s $1.370 . Outside the southern part of Latin America, the region had a GDP of $2,000 per capita .
 Public ownership and planning had raised living standards to a higher level than capitalism had in Latin America, despite an equal starting point . Public ownership, planning and planning have raised standards to higher levels than capitalism has in the region .
 While the Soviet peacetime economy unfailingly expanded, the Latin American economy grew in fits and starts . enterprises regularly shuttering their doors and laying off employees .
 The best illustration of how public ownership and planning performed better at raising living standards comes from a comparison of incomes in Soviet Central Asia with those of neighboring countries .
 For Central Asians, it was clear on which side of the Soviet Union’s border standards of living were highest . The Soviet Union's border standards were highest in terms of living .
 Advocates of a free enterprise economy would have you believe that public ownership and planning stifle innovation, while free enterprise encourages it . Public ownership stifles innovation, but free enterprise promotes it, says economist .
 In fact, the truth about innovation is the exact opposite of what free-enterprise promoters would have us believe . Free enterprise promoters would like us to believe in free enterprise innovation, he says .
 It is not free enterprise, but planning and public funds, that drive it. It's not the free enterprise but planning, it's the planning, public funds . It's a good idea to use public money to get ahead of big business.
 Soviet accomplishments in space are startling, considered in light of the mistaken view that the USSR was always a poor second-best to the supposedly more dynamic United States, is truly startling .
 Soviet achievements include the first satellite, first animal in orbit and first human in orbit . First woman in orbit, first spacewalk, first image of the far side of the moon . First space rover, first space station and first interplanetary probe .
 The panic created in Washington after the allegedly . innovation-stifling Soviet economy allowed the USSR to beat its much richer ideological rival into space . The panic . galvanized the United States to take a leaf from the Soviet book .
 Washington would use public funds to power research into innovations . Just as as the Soviets were doing, Washington would be using public funds for research .
 This would be done through the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency . The project would be funded by the Department of Energy and Space Security .
 DARPA would channel public money to scientists and engineers for military, space and other research . DARPA is the brainchild of President Barack Obama .
 In this way, private investors were spared the trouble of risking their own capital, as free enterprise mythology would have us believe they do . In this case, the government was spared from risking its own capital . Private investors were also spared from the trouble .
 In this myth, far-seeing and bold capitalists reap handsome profits as a reward for risking their capital on research that might never pay-off . The myth is that they risk their capital for research that may never pay off .
 It is far better for investors to invest their capital in ventures with less risk and quicker returns, while allowing the public to shoulder the burden of funding R&D with its many risks and uncertainties .
 Using their wealth, influence and connections, investors have successfully pressed politicians into putting this pleasing arrangement in place .
 Between 1971 and 2006, 77 out of R&D Magazine’s top 88 innovations had been fully funded by the U.S. government .
 Guardian columnist Seumas Milne points out that the algorithms that underpinned Google’s success were funded by the public sector .
 In both the U.S. and Britain it was the state, not big pharma, that funded most groundbreaking ‘new molecular entity’ drugs, with the private sector developing slight variations .
 Finland's public sector funded the early development of Nokia and made a return on its investment . Nokia is one of the world's most successful mobile phone companies .
 Nuclear power, satellite and rocket technology, and the internet are other examples of innovations that were produced with public money .
 United States president Barack Obama acknowledged the nature of the swindle in his 2011 State of the Nation Address .
 The United States kick-started innovation in its economy by emulating the Soviet model of state-directed research . Free enterprise was not up to the task. The U.S. emulates the Soviet-led research model .
 The U.S. channels public money into R&D for private profit . Rather than emulate the Soviet model for public benefit, the United States channels public funds to private profits .
 The fact that the Soviets socialized the benefits that flow from socialized risk, while the U.S. privatizes them reflects the antagonistic nature of the two societies . One, a massoriented society organized to benefit the masses, the other, a business society organized for a minority
 That a system of public ownership and planning stifles innovation; That the profit system stimulates it. That a public ownership system stimulates innovation, he says . That is not true .
 While the Soviet economy grew rapidly from 1928 to 1989, it never surpassed the economies of North America, Western Europe and Japan .
 USSR's per capita income was always less than that of the industrialized capitalist economies . Consequently, the USSR’s per capita incomes were never higher than those of the capitalist countries .
 The comparative disadvantage in incomes and living standards was falsely attributed to the alleged inefficiencies of public ownership and planning, rather than to the fact that, having started further back than the rich capitalist countries, the Soviet Union had more ground .
 When the race began in 1928, the Soviet Union was still a largely agrarian country . The United States was industrialized . The race was held in 1928 in the United States .
 The Soviet Union had to cover ground the U.S. had already covered when Russia was under the stifling rule of Tsarist tyranny .
 The USSR did have an empire of sorts, but it was never exploited economically by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union never exploited its Eastern European neighbors economically .
 The Soviets came out on the losing end of its trade relationship with its satellites . If anything, the Soviets exported raw materials to Eastern Europe in return for manufactured goods .
 Moscow allowed its Eastern European allies to chart their own course . So long as they remained part of the Warsaw Pact, Moscow allowed some semblance of public ownership . The Warsaw Pact was formed in response to the creation of NATO .
 By the mid-1970s there was serious concern in Washington that the Soviet economy was on a course to overtake that of the U.S. By the 1970s, Washington was concerned about the Soviet economic success .
 A Soviet lead would deal a mortal blow to the legitimacy of U.S. capitalism . Washington always pointed to the United States’ greater average income and higher living standards to mobilize the allegiance of its population .
 Estimates show Soviet gross national product was gaining on that of the United States . Estimates show that Soviet GDP was gaining in the U.S.
 At current rates of growth, the Soviet economy would overtake the U.S. economy by 1982, planners in Washington thought . The danger loomed at the time of the late 1950s, planners said .
 At that point, the U.S. population’s belief in the legitimacy of free enterprise would crumble . The entire belief in free enterprise produced higher living standards than public ownership and planning, he says .
 Soviet GDP per capita grew at an annual rate of 3. percent from 1928 to 1970, but at less than half that rate, 1. percent, from 1970 to 1989 . According to figures provided by Allen, the Soviet GDP grew at a rate of 1.1 percent, less than
 Soviet leaders recognized that a planned, publicly owned economy was an anathema to the captains of industry and titans of finance who use their wealth to dominate policy in capitalist countries .
 The USSR had been invaded multiple times, and on two occasions by aggressive capitalist powers with the objective of wiping the Soviet system off the map . The USSR was invaded several times, with the aim of wiping out the system .
 "In order to deter future aggressions, it was necessary to keep pace militarily," says President Obama . "It is necessary to [keep pace with the U.S. military," says Obama .
 The smaller size of the Soviet economy relative to that of its ideological competitors created problems . However, the smaller economy created problems for the Soviet Union .
 The necessity of maintaining a rough military parity would mean spending a far higher percentage of GDP on the military compared to what the U.S. and other NATO countries spent on their armed forces .
 From the 1950s through the 1970s, the Soviets spent 12 to 14 percent of their GDP on the military . Reagan administration hiked U.S. military spending, anticipating a Soviet effort to keep up that would harm the USSR’s economy .
 Another constraint imposed on the Soviet economy by the need to deter military aggression was the monopolization of R&D resources by the military .
 Keeping pace militarily involved involved an unceasing battle to catch up with U.S. military innovations . Keeping pace in the United States military is a challenge .
 When the United States exploded the first atom bomb in 1945, the Soviet Union raced to match the U.S.’s grim scientific feat . The Soviet Union did four years later .
 The United States introduction of the hydrogen bomb in 1952 was quickly followed by the Soviets exploding their own hydrogen bomb a year later . The U.S. introduced the first hydrogen bomb to the United States .
 A U.S. first in submarine-launched nuclear missiles was matched by the USSR a few years after . A United States first in submarines, the USSR matched it in the mid-'70s .
 Unlike the United States, the USSR had no military bases ringing its ideological rival . Unlike the U.S., the USSR needed a way of delivering nuclear warheads over long distances .
 Soviet consumer goods were often said to have been of low quality, but no one ever said the same about Soviet military equipment . Soviet consumer products were often criticized for being poor quality . However, Soviet military goods were never said to be of quality .
 The necessity of channelling the bulk of, and best, R&D resources to the military meant that other sectors suffered, and GDP growth was impeded . GDP growth is impeded.
 The Soviet Union had an abundant supply of all the raw materials an industrial economy needed, and at first, they were easy to reach and therefore could be obtained at low cost . In the Soviet Union, it was able to reach all the materials it needed .
 In the early years of the USSR’s industrialization, open pit mines were dug near industrial centres . For example, in the 1970s, the Soviet Union was forced to use open pit mining sites .
 Minerals were close to the surface and could be transported over short distances to nearby factories . Minerals could be easily transported from the surface to factories in nearby areas .
 Over time, minerals that were close to the surface were scooped out and pits became deeper and narrower . However, over time, the minerals that remained near the surface of the pit became deeper .
 At deeper depths, the quantity of minerals that could be extracted diminished and the costs of reaching them increased . At deeper waters, the amount of minerals extracted diminished . The costs of extracting minerals at deeper depths increased .
 Eventually, the mines were exhausted, and new mines had to be opened, but at greater distances from industrial centres . This meant higher costs to transport raw materials to factories, which led to higher costs .
 In the early 1970s, the USSR was spending $4.4 billion per year to maintain its oil industry . The USSR spent $4 billion a year on oil production in the 1970s and 1980s . The Soviet Union was spending that much more than a billion dollars a year to
 As oil became more difficult to reach, the Soviets had to drill deeper and through harder rocks . The Soviet Union drilled deeper and harder into harder rocks to find oil .
 The Soviets could have escaped the Ricardian trap by shopping around for less expensive imports . The Soviets should have shopped around for cheaper imports, the author says .
 The United States and its allies would always be hostile to the USSR, except when expediency dictated temporary alliances or easing of tension . The U.S. could interdict raw materials from the USSR to bring it to its knees or extort concessions .
 Given the high lik elihood that the U.S. would exploit opportunities to place the Soviet Union at a disadvantage, shopping around for cheap imports, was not a realistic option . In other words, the United States would not be able to rely on cheap imports .
 The costs to the USSR to support its allies began to mount to unsustainable levels . Another reason the Soviet economy slowed was that the costs to support the allies were mounting . The Soviet economy began to slow in the 1980s .
 The Soviet Union set out to expand its alliance of friends by providing economic and military assistance to countries and movements hostile to the forces of reaction .
 It became the banker for national liberation movements, Eastern European socialist countries, and various Third World countries seeking to escape and remain free from domination by powerful capitalist states .
 By 1981, the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies had 96,000 economic advisers in 75 countries and 16,000 military advisers in 34 countries . The Soviet Union also had a contingent of 39,000 Cuban troops in Africa, which Moscow was footing the bill .
 The war in Afghanistan was draining the Soviet treasury to the tune of $3 to $4 billion per year . Meanwhile, the Soviet government was spending billions on Afghanistan . The Soviet government spent billions on the Afghan war .
 The costs of sustaining allies had grown enormous, raw material costs were mounting . The best scientists, engineers and machine tools were being monopolized by the military . Military expenditures were consuming a punishingly large percentage of national income .
 Reagan administration had taken a decision to try to cripple the Soviet economy . A large part of the predicament the Soviets found themselves in was due to a decision the Reagan administration took to try .
 Ronald Reagan unveiled what would become known as the Reagan Doctrine in 1983 . The Reagan Doctrine was unveiled by Ronald Reagan in October 1983 . Reagan was the first president of the United States to unveil the doctrine .
 The “goal of the free world must instead be stated in the affirmative,” the author says . Instead, the goal of the world must be stated “in the affirmative”
 Reagan Doctrine was spelled out in a series of national security decision directives, or NSDDs . More formally, the Reagan Doctrine has been spelled out by the Reagan administration .
 NSDD-66 announced that it would be U.S. policy to disrupt the Soviet economy . The United States committed the United States to trying to drive up costs in Soviet economy in order to plunge the USSR into a crisis .
 It would force Moscow to divert more resources to the military, and channel even more of the USSR’s scientists, engineers, machine tools, and budget into military R&D . The move would hobble the civilian economy even more than the Cold War already had .
 The aim was to force the USSR “to expend precious lifeblood to run a race against a more athletic foe” , a foe which had a larger economy and more resources to last the race because it had started at a higher level of development and was plundering various countries around
 To keep up, Soviet military spending, previously at 12 to 14 percent of GDP, started to climb . The Soviet military budget was then at 12-14 percent of the GDP .
 Already twice as large as the United States’ as a percentage of national income the defence budget grew larger .
 Military expenditures increased by 45 percent in five years, outpacing growth in the Soviet economy . Military expenditures in Soviet Russia exceeded growth in Soviet economy in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Moscow increased its military R&D spending nearly two-fold in the past year . Moscow also increased its defense spending in the last year . Russia increased its spending on defense in the wake of the crisis .
 The Reagan administration had taken a page out of Che Guevara’s book . Meanwhile, the Reagan administration took a page from the Che Cheer-era book . The U.S. government has been in touch with the Cheers .
 Argentine revolutionary called for not one, not two, but three Vietnams to drain the U.S. treasury . The Argentine revolutionary had called for the United States treasury to be drained .
 CIA Director Bill Casey called for not one, not two, but a half a dozen Afghanistans . Casey: "Turns Che’s doctrine against communism"
 To bog down the Soviets in ‘their own Vietnam,’ the Afghan mujahedeen were showered with money and arms . To bog-down the Soviets, the Afghans were given arms and money to fight back .
 Soviet foreign secretary Andrei Gromyko complained that the U.S. military build-up was aimed at exhausting the USSR’s material resources and forcing Moscow to surrender . The U.K. was accused of exhausting Soviet material resources .
 Gorbachev echoed Gromyko, telling Soviet citizens that, The United States wants to exhaust the Soviet Union economically through a race in the most up-to-date and expensive space weapons . Gorbachachev echoed the U.S. desire to exhaust Soviet Union through space weapons
 By the mid-1980s, it was clear in both Washington and Moscow that the Soviet Union was in trouble . The U.S. and Soviet Union were in trouble in the early 1980s .
 It was not that the system of public ownership and planning was not working. It's not that it's not working, it's that the planning system is not working .
 The United States had emulated the Soviet system to stimulate innovation in its own economy . The U.S. emulated it in the hope of stimulating innovation in the United States' economy .
 The Soviet economy was still reliably expanding, as it had done every year in peacetime since Stalin had brought it under public control in 1928 . The economy had been expanding every year since Stalin's return to public control .
 Defending the country in the face of a stepped up Cold War was threatening to choke off economic growth altogether . However, defending the country was facing a stepped-up Cold War .
 Moscow’s prospects for keeping pace with the U.S. militarily, while propping up allies under attack by US-fuelled anti-communist insurgencies and overthrow movements, were far from sanguine .
 If Moscow continued to try to match the United States militarily, it would eventually bankrupt itself . Moscow's ability to deter U.S. aggression would be lost if it continued to do so .
 If it did not try to keep pace, it could no longer deter U.S. aggression, U.N. says . If it didn't try, it would no longer be able to deter aggression .
 The only difference was how long it would take the inevitable to play out . "The only difference" is how long the inevitable will play out.
 Gorbachev withdrew support from allies and pledged cooperation with the U.S. He then pledged cooperation to the United States . The Soviet Union brokered relations with the West in the 1980s .
 The capitulation was hidden behind honeyed phrases about promoting international cooperation and fostering universal human values, but the rhetoric did not hide the fact that Gorbachev was throwing in the towel .
 In reducing the threat of a global nuclear conflagration, Gorbachev had indeed achieved a victory for humanity, writes Peter Bergen . The world's first nuclear war broke out in 1980s and 1990s .
 The victory was brought about by caving in to the United States, which was now free to run roughshod over countries that were too weak to refuse U.S. demands that they yield .
 Economic growth has certainly slowed, and there was indeed a danger that continued slow growth would threaten the country’s position vis-a-vis its capitalist rivals . Economic growth had certainly slowed .
 The planning apparatus, which had unfailingly charted a course for unremitting growth during peacetime, was dismantled . In order to move the economy toward regulation by market forces, it was moved to market forces .
 The abandonment of planning did not boost economic growth, as Gorbachev hoped . Rather than boosting growth, it did the very opposite, the abandonment did the opposite .
 The economy tumbled headlong into an abyss, from which the USSR’s successor countries would not emerge for years . The economy would not be able to recover from the collapse of the Soviet Union for years.
 Gorbachev is still widely admired in the West, but his popularity stops at the Russian border . Gorcachev's popularity in Russia stops at least at the border .
 What passes for serious discussion of the USSR is shot through with prejudice, distortion, and misconception . With few exceptions, what passes for discussion of USSR is often distorted .
 Washington deliberately fostered misunderstandings of its ideological foe . Locked in battle with the Soviet Union for decades, Washington intentionally fostered misunderstanding . Washington's relationship with Russia has been strained for decades .
 The aim was to make the USSR appear bleak, brutal, repressive, economically sluggish and inefficient . The USSR was not the kind of place anyone of sound mind would want to emulate or live in .
 Today, scholars, journalists, politicians, state officials, and even some communists repeat old Cold War propaganda . Today's scholars and journalists repeat the propaganda messages .
 The Soviet economy grew faster over the period it was publicly owned and planned than did the U.S. economy . The USSR economy was brought under public control in 1928 .
 The Soviet system of public ownership and planning efficiently employed all its capital and human resources, rather than maintaining armies of unemployed workers and inefficiently running below capacity, as capitalist economies regularly do .
 Every year, from 1928 to 1989, except during the war years, the Soviet economy reliably expanded . The Soviet economy provided jobs, shelter, and a wide array of low-and-nocost public services to all . capitalist economies regularly sank into recession and had to struggle out of
 The Soviet economy failed to provide employment, food, clothing and shelter to all, but capitalism is both the only game in town and the superior system . Yet at the same time, we are told that the Soviet economy never worked, and that capitalism, with its regular crises, is the
 Clearly, it is neither superior or inferior, nor it is the only choice . Clearly, neither is superior, but it is clearly inferior or inferior .
 It is time to tear down the wall of politically engineered misconceptions about public ownership and planning . It's time for public ownership, planning and planning to be public-owned, it says .
 For too long, the wall has kept us from seeing a viable alternative model to capitalism, says Julian Zelizer . Capitalism's track record of unequalled success points to a realistic and possible future for the bottom 99 percent, he says .
 The Chinese may have the most efficient and comprehensive rail network in the world, but those soviet-era Russian trains leave everyone well behind when it comes to comfort . The most expensive trains in Europe are in Russia .
 Apart from the plush comfort of the sleeper compartment, they also boast those magnificent stainless steel toilets that simply open onto the track . Apart from plush comfort, the toilets also boast stainless steel toilet seats that open onto track .
 Not for a long time yet, since they are continually repainted and refurbished . Not for long yet, as they are constantly repainted .
 Try sitting on the hard, uncomfortable seats of a train in Western Europe after travelling on these and you’ll see what I mean . The hard-to-be-hard seats are hard to sit on and are uncomfortable .
 The Soviet War Memorial in Treptower Park is one of the most striking sights in east Berlin .
 It was the Soviets who captured Berlin and put an end to Hitler’s efforts . More than 80,000 Soviet soldiers who died in the battle are buried here .
 Direct quotations from Stalin are on each of the sarcophagi . The most heartwarming moment is to discover that good old Iosef Stalin is everywhere .
 Churchill and Roosevelt may have been dispensable and the war still won . Roosevelt may be dispensable, but the war was still won.
 Stalin is at the most important of war memorials in Berlin, inscribed in stone . Stalin is there to stay at the Berlin memorial, with his name on the memorial .
 Berlin's Treptower Park is one of the most popular tourist spots in the city . The park is located in Berlin and is located near the city centre .
 Stalin was the subject of a new book about the Soviet Union . The book was published yesterday, and the book is published today .
 The most breathtaking was an effort to attribute to Putin and his henchmen the increasing popularity of Stalin in the Russian Federation . The most shocking part of the story was an attempt to blame Putin for Stalin's popularity in Russia .
 Putin is responsible for school textbooks that speak of Stalin’s ‘effective management’ during the 1930s program of industrialization . Putin is also responsible for textbooks that talk of Stalin's 'effective management'
 He has been behind a campaign to return to name of Stalingrad to the city of Volgograd . The city is the site of the battle that turned the tide of the Second World War .
 He praises Stalin's achievement of expanding Russia’s territory in the form of the USSR . Describes the dismantling of the Soviet Union under Gorbachev as a major disaster .
 He has failed to condemn Stalin’s repressions, murders, gulags, failures at the Olympics, and pretty much every other sin in Russian history . ‘I’m not sure if he’ll be able to condemn the crimes of Stalin,’
 This was a response to the veneration of Lenin after his death, and we find it here with all manner of icons of Stalin, signs of the cross, lighting candles in churches, and beliefs in Stalin's mystical powers .
 He deals with post-1991 Belarus, on language, independence, identity, economy and politics . He also deals with language and identity of Belarus .
 If we are to believe the corporate media, if not economic ‘experts’, Belarus’s economy should have collapsed ages ago, it would have collapsed years ago, says the media .
 Belarusian economy actually grew throughout the 2000s, achieving 9.9 percent growth in 2006 . Belarusian economic growth was 9.3 percent in 2006, according to the Belarusian Statistical Statistical Statistical Service .
 The country refused to undergo the ‘shock therapy’ imposed in neighbouring Russia, Ukraine and other parts of the former Eastern Bloc .
 All of the main enterprises remain in state control, with only a quarter of the economy in private hands . Only a third of the country's economy is privately owned .
 Belarusians simply saw no sense in squandering the significant industrial base that had been built up during the USSR . Most Belarusians also saw no interest in destroying universal health care, education and so on .
 Belarus has one of the most open trade policies in the world . Ioffe points out that Belarus has an open trade policy, especially for industrial products .
 Ioffe convincingly shows that Lukashenka consistently has widespread popular support . Yet, she says, she doesn't want to give up her support for the Ukrainian government .
 He admits that a few extra votes may have appeared from somewhere, but even without them, observers admit that he would have won the presidential elections anyway . Observers admit that even without the extra votes, observers say he would win anyway .
 He has presided over steady economic growth that is agreed to be socially equitable . He has also presided over social growth that has been socially equitable, which is remarkable given international efforts to ruin the economy .
 The intelligentsia hates him, mocking his mode of speech and policies, but above all for depriving them of the power they feel is their birthright . The intellectuals hate him, mock him, and he's been deprived of power .
 Lukashenka has an uncanny ability to sense what common people are feeling, says the Russian politician . He says he has no idea how common people feel .
 Russia is a model for what the Eastern Bloc should have done after 1989, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 Belarus had the balls to resist the vicious and retributive ‘shock therapy’ imposed by Western Europe and the USA in the 1990s . Belarus resisted the vicious 'shock therapy' imposed by the West and the U.S.
 The KGB headquarters sits right on the main thoroughfare, so you can simply stroll past . This glorious building the KGB headquarters is located in the heart of Moscow .
 If you want to see eastern European communism in the 21st century, get yourself to Belarus . Belarus is one of the last bastions of communism in eastern Europe .
 Sergey sent me this great link to Zyuganov‘s speech on the auspicious day of 27 October this year . We’ll definitely be back, Without theory we are dead .
 Gorbachev took advantage of theoretical stagnation in Marxist thought and was thereby able to defeat the CPSU ideologically . He points out that Gorbach was able to use theoretical stagnation to defeat CPSU .
 He has quite a bit of a lot to say about religion, but he also has a lot more to say .
 He reasserts the old party platform of freedom of conscience in the party on matters of religion . The need for religious institutions and the party to operate in peaceful coexistence, he says .
 He quotes Stalin to kick off a discussion about radical and revolutionary forms of religion, so much so that they share the goals of scientific socialism . And then he quotes Stalin .
 Che Guavara turns up, as does Hugo Chavez, along with liberation theology . Hugo Chavez and liberation theology also appear in the film .
 All of them oppose the Golden Calf of capital, whether socialist, Christian, Muslim, Buddhist and so on . All of the world's religions oppose capital .
 Stalin has not had a great press, although I have suggested once or twice that the man was a little more ambivalent than the standard accounts would have it . Stalin has had a reputation for being ambivalent to the press, but he has been accused of being a little less ambivalent
 It comes from a book called Towards a New Socialism by W Paul Cockshott and Allin Cottrell . The book is published by Paul Cockockott and his co-authors .
 They argue that the full implementation of the communist economic system happened under Stalin . They argue quite persuasively that the . full implementation . of the . communist economic . system is under Stalin, they say .
 Through the late 1920s the capitalist mode of extracting surplus value was replaced by a planned economy . Capitalist mode was replaced with the planned economy in which surplus was controlled and allocated by the planning mechanism .
 Under Soviet planning, the division between the necessary and surplus portions of the social product was the result of political decisions . The division of the surplus and necessary portions of social product is a result of a political decision .
 Goods and labour were physically allocated to enterprises by the planning authorities . Planning authorities would always ensure that the enterprises had enough money to ‘pay for’ the real goods allocated to them .
 If an enterprise made monetary Tosses, and therefore had to have its money balances topped up with ‘subsidies’, that was no matter. That was not a matter. If an organisation made monetary 'tosses', it would have to be topped up
 Possession of money as such was no guarantee of being able to get hold of real goods . On the other hand, possession of money is not a guarantee of getting hold of goods .
 The resources going into production of consumer goods were centrally allocated . By the same token, the resources being used in production were allocated .
 Higher wages would simply mean higher prices or shortages in the shops . Higher wages mean shortages in shops or prices in the UK .
 Under the circumstances of such rapid change and in the face of a sustained threat from international capitalism, that compulsion took the form of carrot and stick . The UK has been in the throes of rapid change in the world since the 1970s .
 Forced labour, exile and ‘terror’ were deployed for those less inclined to engage . Forced labour and exile were used as a means of torture and imprisonment .
 Stalin embodied the sheer grit (thereby making up for what he lacked in oratorical skill) of the revolutionary ‘miracle’ required to adopt such a radically new economic system . Crucial to this process was the personality cult of Stalin .
 The USSR's economic system enabled the recovery during the Second World War and the eventual victory by the USSR over Germany and fascism . I would add that this combination, along with the deep strength of the communist economic system, enabled the extraordinary recovery during World War II .
 Amazing trip from Sofia to Yalta by train . Three days and nights without a wash . Bloody amazing trip . Border guards wake you up in the middle of the night .
 At Ungheni on the Moldovan border I was roused from my snooze by a swaying, banging carriage . A late night stop in Bucharest was a visit to the Romanian capital's capital .
 The rail guage was deliberately varied on the border in order to deny those pesky capitalist Americans a free ride into the USSR should they invade .
 They’d have to stop first for three hours to change over all their wheels . It would be three hours long to change all the wheels on their cars .
 The Moldovan border guards were nice bunch, as were the Romanians, but not so the Ukrainians . The Ukrainian border guards are nice, but the Ukrainians are not so, says CNN.com correspondent .
 I was questioned, questioned, had sniffer dogs in my compartment, had police, army, airforce, navy and the rest searching the train high and low . I was up for four hours from 1.30 am to 1.50 am on the train .
 Final leg was a luxurious and clean Ukrainian train from Kiev to Simferopol . The final leg of the journey was a comfortable and clean train from the city .
 One more night on the train and I was in Simferopol in the Crimea . And they know how to pamper you: One night on a train and one night in Simfopol, Crimea .
 Boris insisted I board a mini-bus for the two-hour run over the mountains to Yalta . Boris met me and insisted he board the bus for two hours . Boris insisted he boarded the bus to take him to the city .
 The driver was one of those multiskilled types, able to smoke, talk on his mobile phone, change gear with his little finger and overtake slow trucks on tight mountain corners at the same time . He was able to change gear and change gear in one of the most difficult places in
 A shit, shower and shave in Yalta and I was whisked away to a conference on Religion and Civil Society all in Russian . But a lovely Tartar woman whispered the translation into my ear .
 The evening ended with vodka-fuelled Ukrainians and Russians dancing wildly away to old Soviet numbers .
 The distinct differences in the political systems of the two countries often prevented them from reaching a mutual understanding on key policy issues . As in the case of the Cuban missile crisis, the two nations faced the brink of war .
 The United States government was initially hostile to the Soviet leaders for taking Russia out of World War I . The U.S. government was opposed to a state ideologically based on communism .
 The two countries did not establish diplomatic relations until 1933 . The United States embarked on a famine relief program in the Soviet Union in the early 1920s .
 By that time, the totalitarian nature of Joseph Stalin's regime presented an insurmountable obstacle to friendly relations with the West . Stalin's totalitarian nature was an obstacle to the West's efforts to reach an agreement .
 World War II brought the two countries into alliance based on the common aim of defeating Nazi Germany . The Soviet Union's aggressive, antidemocratic policy toward Eastern Europe created tensions even before the war ended .
 The Soviet Union and the U.S. stayed far apart during the next three decades of superpower conflict and the nuclear and missile arms race .
 Beginning in the early 1970s, the Soviet regime proclaimed a policy of detente . The Soviet regime sought increased economic cooperation and disarmament negotiations with the West . The West has since agreed to normalize relations with Russia .
 The Soviet stance on human rights and its invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 created new tensions between the two countries . However, the Soviet stance of human rights in Afghanistan created tensions .
 The United States and Russia have been friends since the Soviet Union ended in 1991 . The U.S. and the former Soviet Union was one of the most powerful allies of the Cold War .
 After the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, the ensuing Civil War produced acute food shortages in southwestern Russia . After the Civil War, the Russians were forced to rely on food from their food supply .
 By 1920 it was clear that a full-scale famine was under way in the Volga River Valley, Crimea, Ukraine, and Armenia . Wartime devastation was compounded by two successive seasons of drought .
 The Soviet government sent out a worldwide appeal for food aid to avert the starvation of millions of people in 1920 . Conditions were so desperate that in early 1920 the Soviet government . Millions of people were starving .
 An estimated 10 to 20 million lives were at stake when the U.S. and European relief efforts were launched . The U.N. and Europe had organized relief programs .
 In August 1920 an informal agreement was negotiated to begin a famine relief program . Although it had not officially recognized the Soviet regime, the United States government was pressed to intervene .
 In 1921 President Warren Harding appointed Herbert Hoover, then secretary of commerce, to organize the relief effort . President Harding appointed Hoover to organize relief effort in 1921 .
 Congress authorized $20 million, and Hoover organized the American Relief Administration to do the job . Hoover proceeded to organize the relief administration .
 Under Hoover's terms, the ARA was to be a completely American-run relief program for the transport, storage, and delivery of relief supplies to those in the famine region . The ARA program was to provide food and seed grain .
 Hundreds of American volunteers were dispatched to oversee the program . After Soviet officials agreed, hundreds of Americans were sent to oversee it .
 The ARA gradually earned the trust of the local Communist authorities . It was given a virtually free hand to distribute thousands of tons of grain, as well as clothing and medical supplies .
 This remarkable humanitarian effort was credited with saving many millions of lives . This remarkable effort to save millions of people was credited .
 ARA aid continued into 1923, by which time local farms were again producing and the famine's grip was finally broken .
 Hoover and his ARA were later honored by the Soviet government for the care and generosity that the U.S. had shown in this desperate crisis . Hoover was later honored for his role in helping the Soviet effort .
 During the 1920s and early 1930s, tensions between the Soviet Union and the West eased somewhat, particularly in the area of economic cooperation . During the 1930s and 1940s, the West and the Soviet-Russian tensions eased somewhat .
 The economic situation was made even more difficult by the social and economic dislocation caused by World War I, the revolutions of 1917, and the Civil War of 1918-21 . The social dislocation was caused by the Great Depression and the revolution of 1917-1919 .
 Lenin instituted the New Economic Policy in 1921 to infuse energy and direction into the fledgling Communist-controlled economy . The policy was designed to help alleviate the suffering of famine in the countryside .
 NEP retreated from Communist orthodoxy and opened up the Soviet monolith economically . NEP was a Soviet state of the Cold War .
 For a variety of reasons, Western diplomats and diplomats began opening contacts with the Soviet Union . Western businessmen and diplomats opened contacts with Soviet diplomats in the 1980s .
 Averell Harriman, Armand Hammer, and Henry Ford, sold tractors to the Soviet Union . Henry Ford was one of the three men who sold the vehicles to the Soviets .
 Soviet-U.S. commercial ties facilitated commercial ties between the Soviet Union and the United States . Such endeavors established the basis for further cooperation, dialogue, and diplomatic relations between the two countries .
 This era of cooperation was never solidly established, however, and it diminished as Joseph Stalin tried to eradicate vestiges of capitalism . Stalin attempted to make the Soviet Union economically self-sufficient . The Soviet Union was never economically independent enough .
 Lenin believed a well-disciplined, hierarchically organized party was necessary to lead the working class in overthrowing capitalism in Russia and the world . Lenin believed that a well disciplined, well-organized party was needed .
 The Communist Party of St. Petersburg began using the term Communist to describe themselves . They later began using it to refer to themselves as 'Communist' in Russia . The party later used it as a derogatory term for themselves .
 The Communist International was created to control the Communist movement throughout the world . The next year, they created the Communist International to control it .
 After Comintern's dissolution in 1943, the Soviet party's Central Committee continued to use Communist parties from other nations as instruments of Soviet foreign policy . The Comintern was dissolved in 1943 .
 Each national party was required to adhere to the Leninist principle of subordinating members and organizations unconditionally to the decisions of higher authorities . Party members were required to obey Leninist principles .
 American socialists and radicals met in Chicago in 1919 to organize an American Communist party . Strongly influenced by the success of the Bolshevik Revolution, the party was formed in Chicago .
 One group consisted primarily of relatively recent Russian and East European immigrants, who emphasized adherence to Marxist orthodoxy and proletarian revolution . Another group of recent immigrants were mostly recent Russian, East Eastern immigrants .
 Other group, dominated by native-born, somewhat more pragmatic American radicals, sought mass influence . The other group sought mass power .
 The Communist movement in the United States was a small sectarian movement . Such conflicting goals combined with the discrepancy between Communist doctrine and American reality, kept the movement a small sect .
 In 1922 the Comintern forced the two American parties to amalgamate and follow the party line established in Moscow . The two parties consisted of about 12,000 members . The Comintern had to force the two parties to merge .
 membership in the American party rose to about 75,000 by 1938, following the Great Depression . Many members left the party after the signing of the Nazi-Soviet Nonaggression Pact .
 Others left in 1956 after Nikita Khrushchev exposed some of Stalin's crimes and Soviet forces invaded Hungary . Others left Hungary in 1956 following the invasion of Hungary .
 Only hardcore members remained after such reversals of Soviet policy . Only the hardcore members of the Soviet Union remained after .
 The American party, a significant although never major political force in the United States, became demoralized when Boris Yeltsin outlawed the Communist party in Russia in August 1991 . The archives reveal the continued financial and ideological dependency of the American Communists on the Soviet party .
 Three months after the invasion, the U.S. extended assistance to the Soviet Union through its Lend-Lease Act of March 1941 . Three months later, the United States extended assistance .
 Trade between the U.S. and the Soviet Union had been conducted primarily through the Soviet Buying Commission in the United States . Before September 1941, trade between the two countries was conducted primarily via the Soviet Buying Commission .
 Lend-Lease was the most visible sign of wartime cooperation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The partnership was most visible in the United States and Russia .
 About $11 billion in war materiel was sent to the Soviet Union under that program . About $10 billion was sent in Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 Additional assistance came from United States Russian War Relief and the Red Cross . Additional assistance was provided by United States Russia War Relief .
 About seventy percent of the aid reached the Soviet Union via the Persian Gulf through Iran . The remainder went across the Pacific to Vladivostok and across the North Atlantic to Murmansk . About 70 per cent of aid was sent via Iran .
 President Roosevelt attached the highest priority to using it to keep the Soviet Union in the war against Germany . Lend-Lease materiel was welcomed by the . Soviet Union .
 The program did not prevent friction from developing between the Soviet Union and the other members of the anti-Hitler alliance . Nevertheless, the program didn't prevent friction .
 The Soviet Union was annoyed at what seemed to it to be a long delay by the allies in opening a ‘second front” of the Allied offensive against Germany . The Soviets were annoyed that the allies had not opened a second front in the war .
 As the war in the east turned in favor of the Soviet Union, friction intensified . Despite the successful Allied landings in Normandy in 1944, the earlier friction intensified over irreconcilable differences about postwar aims .
 Lend-Lease helped the Soviet Union push the Germans out of its territory and Eastern Europe, thus accelerating the end of the war . The Soviet Union pushed out of Eastern Europe and pushed out Germany .
 With Stalin's takeover of Eastern Europe, the wartime alliance ended, and the Cold War began . The alliance ended with the fall of the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 U.S. servicemen missing in action and unrepatriated prisoners of war still concern the nation . The guns of distant battles fell silent long ago, but unanswered questions remain unanswered .
 Recently, the missing and prisoners of war from the Vietnam War have been the focus of attention . The missing and POWs of war have been a topic of the past few weeks .
 The fate of those missing in the Cold War may become known as well . Through such efforts, additional cooperation, the fate of the missing will become known .
 Russian news reports tell of a U.S. B-29 aircraft shot down by Soviet interceptors over the Baltic Sea in April 1950 . The plane was shot down in the same place as a B-27 .
 One of the Soviet pilots who downed the B-29 reported that the aircraft was recovered from the sea, but the fate of the crew is unknown . The fate remains unknown .
 The history of warfare cruelly suggests that some questions concerning the missing in action and prisoners of war will never be answered . Some questions about missing soldiers and missing soldiers will never answer .
 Candor, goodwill, and a spirit of cooperation can minimize such questions . Nevertheless, candor and goodwill can be helpful, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The opening of archives is a step forward in getting at the truth which can clear up the confusion and suspicion created in the past . It is hoped the archives will clear up confusion created by the past and clear up what has happened .
 Winston Churchill warned in 1946 that an ‘iron curtain’ was descending through the middle of Europe . After the war, disputes between the Soviet Union and the Western democracies led Winston Churchill to warn of an iron curtain descending .
 Joseph Stalin asserted in 1946 that World War II was an unavoidable and inevitable consequence of “capitalist imperialism” and implied that such a war might reoccur . For his part, Joseph Stalin deepened the estrangement between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 The Cold War was a period of East-West competition, tension, and conflict short of full-scale war . It was characterized by mutual perceptions of hostile intention between military-political alliances or blocs .
 There were real wars, sometimes called ‘proxy wars’ because they were fought by Soviet allies rather than the USSR itself . There was also competition for influence in the Third World, and a major superpower arms race .
 After Stalin's death, East-West relations went through phases of relaxation and confrontation . The two countries went through a cooperative phase during the 1960s and another, termed detente, during the 1970s .
 A final phase during the late 1980s and early 1990s was hailed by President Mikhail Gorbachev, and especially by the president of the new postCommunist Russian republic, Boris Yeltsin, as well as by President George Bush . The final phase was hailed as beginning a partnership
 Nikita Khrushchev stated in 1956 that imperialism and capitalism could coexist without war because the Communist system had become stronger . After Stalin's death, Nikita said capitalism and communism could co-exist in Russia .
 Geneva Summit of 1955 among Britain, France, the Soviet Union, and the United States . Camp David Summit of 1959 between Eisenhower and Khrushchev raised hopes of a more cooperative spirit between East and West .
 In 1963 the U.S. and the Soviet Union signed some confidence-building agreements . In 1967 President Lyndon Johnson met with Soviet Prime Minister Aleksei Kosygin in Glassboro, New Jersey .
 The Cuban missile crisis of 1962 and Czechoslovakia of 1968 were some of the key events that threatened broader conflict . Interspersed with such moves toward cooperation, however, were hostile acts that threatened wider conflict, such as the Cuban-led invasion of 1968 .
 Soviet stance toward the U.S. became less overtly hostile in the early 1970s . The Soviet stance against the United States became less overtaken in the 1960s .
 Negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union resulted in summit meetings and the signing of strategic arms limitation agreements . U.S. and Soviet Union signed strategic arms limitations agreements .
 Brezhnev proclaimed in 1973 that peaceful coexistence was the normal, permanent, and irreversible state of relations between imperialist and Communist countries . He warned that conflict might continue in the Third World, but warned that it might continue .
 In the late 1970s, growing internal repression and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan led to a renewal of Cold War hostility . In the 1980s, internal repression led to the collapse of the Cold War .
 Soviet views of the U.S. changed once again after Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in early 1985 .
 President Reagan undertook a new series of summit meetings with Gorbachev . Arms control negotiations were renewed, and arms reductions led to arms reductions . Growing sympathy even among Communist leaders for more cooperation .
 Russia pledged at last to overcoming both imperial and ideological legacies of the Soviet Union . Yeltsin's recognition of independence for the other republics of the former USSR . Russia's economic reform program designed to create market economy .
 The Soviets, opposed ideologically to the capitalist values of the U.S., had much to say . The Soviets were opposed to the American values of capitalism .