 This week in our series, we continue the story of President John Fitzgerald Kennedy . I'm Steve Ember, Steve Ember. I’m Steve Ember .
 Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon in one of the closest elections in U.S. history . Kennedy, a Democrat, defeated Republican Vice President Richard Nixon .
 Armed Cuban exiles tried to invade Cuba, less than one hundred fifty kilometers from the American state of Florida . Armed exiles were less than 100 kilometers from Florida .
 Their goal was to overthrow the island's communist leader, Fidel Castro . They wanted to overthrow Castro's government in Cuba .
 In nineteen fifty-nine he and his guerrilla forces had overthrown Fulgencio Batista, the president who was supported by the U.S. He was overthrown by Batista .
 The last administration, under President Dwight Eisenhower, had planned the invasion . The invasion was planned by Dwight Eisenhower .
 After the failure, some Americans again wondered if the forty-three-year-old president had enough experience to lead .
 In May nineteen sixty-one, Kennedy went to Paris and met with French President Charles de Gaulle . Kennedy met with the French President in May 1960 .
 Kennedy visited France with his wife Jacqueline, who spoke French and had studied there . Jacqueline had studied in France and spoke French . Kennedy died in 1968 at the age of 92 .
 Kennedy met in Vienna, Austria, with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in June . In June, Kennedy met with the Soviet Premier in Austria .
 He threatened to have the East Germans block all movement into and out of the Allied-controlled western half of Berlin . West Berlin was occupied by the Allies in 1944 .
 In November, the East Germans, with Soviet support, started building the Berlin Wall to separate east and west . The East Germans built the wall in November with the help of the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy quickly announced a large increase in American military forces in Germany . President Kennedy also announced an increase in U.S. military presence in Germany.
 President Kennedy made an announcement to the American people on October twenty-second, nineteen sixty-two . Kennedy made the announcement on October 20, 1962 .
 Several of them include medium range ballistic missiles, capable of carrying a nuclear warhead for a distance of more than one thousand nautical miles . Several of the missiles include medium-range ballistic missiles .
 Kennedy and his national security advisers debated what to do about the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do. I'm sure we're going to make a decision"
 Kennedy decided to use a naval blockade to prevent any more Soviet ships from reaching Cuba . Kennedy called it a ""quarantine"" to prevent Soviet ships reaching the island .
 Khrushchev demanded a promise that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . The Cuban government refused to comply with the promise . The United States refused to invade Cuba in the 1950s . The U.N. embargo was lifted .
 He promised that the United States would remove its Jupiter missiles based in Turkey, after the crisis was over . The U.S. will remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey, he said .
 The Soviets agreed to remove their missiles from Cuba, and turned their ships around . But it ended peacefully when the Soviets agreed that they had to remove the missiles .
 In Asia, the Kennedy administration tried to fight communism in Vietnam by increasing the number of American military advisers there . The Kennedy administration increased the U.S. military advisers in Vietnam .
 The United States and the Soviet Union did make some progress on arms control . The U.S. and Soviet Union made some progress in arms control efforts .
 In nineteen sixty-three, the two countries agreed to ban tests of nuclear weapons except underground . The two countries also agreed to a ban on underground tests of nukes .
 Kennedy also had to deal with domestic issues, including discrimination against blacks . Kennedy had to also deal with racism and discrimination in the home of African Americans .
 His brother Robert was attorney general, the nation's top law enforcement official . His brother is attorney general . He is the brother of former Attorney General Robert Sessions .
 Justice Department took legal action against states in the South that violated laws on voting rights . The Justice Department sued states that violated voting rights in the southern states .
 The administration also supported a voter registration campaign to sign up more 5 black voters . The administration supported the campaign .
 Robert Kennedy repeatedly called on National Guard troops to protect blacks when they tried to register to vote or attend white schools . Robert Kennedy called for the National Guard to protect black people from going to white schools or registering to vote .
 President Kennedy said the situation was causing a moral crisis in America . President Kennedy called the situation a 'moral crisis' in America.
 He decided it was time to propose a new civil rights law that would guarantee equal treatment for blacks in public places and jobs . He decided to propose it .
 Congress did not pass a wide-reaching civil rights bill until nineteen sixty-four . The bill was passed by Congress in 1964 .
 The dispute might have affected his chances for re-election in nineteen sixty-four . The dispute may have affected the chances of reelection in that year .
 President Kennedy was shot and killed in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 . Kennedy arrived in Dallas in the late morning of November twenty-second .
 The president and his wife were seated in the back of an open-topped car as his motorcade drove through the city .
 In Dallas, Texas, three shots were fired at President Kennedy's motorcade in downtown Dallas . President Kennedy was traveling in a motorcade when the shots fired at him .
 Lee Harvey Oswald worked in a building near where Kennedy had been shot . Oswald worked for Oswald in the building where Kennedy was killed . Oswald had worked in the same building as the president .
 He had lived for a while in the Soviet Union and had tried to become a Soviet citizen . He had also lived in Russia and tried to be a citizen .
 He worked for a committee that supported the communist government in Cuba . He also worked for the government that supported Cuba's communist government .
 Oswald was questioned by police about the shooting of President Kennedy . Oswald was arrested in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 . Oswald shot President Kennedy in Dallas in 1963 .
 He said he shot Oswald to prevent the Kennedy family from having to live through a trial . Oswald was shot to death in November 1963 .
 The chief justice of the United States, Earl Warren, led the investigation . Earl Warren led the probe into the death of John Kennedy .
 In its report, the Warren commission said that Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone . The Warren commission also said Oswald acted alone in the assassination .
 President Kennedy was buried in Arlington National Cemetery, across the Potomac River from Washington . The eternal flame honoring President Kennedy at Arlington is lit by the flame .
 You can find our series online with transcripts, MP3s, podcasts, and pictures at voaspecialenglish.com.com .
 The MAKING OF A NATION -American history in VOA Special English . I’m Steve Ember, inviting you to join us again next week for the MAKING of a NATION .