 He was telling us off for surrounding ourselves with people who look and sound like ourselves . He was also telling us that we should not surround ourselves with anyone who looks and sounds like us .
 Even the best companies in our sector aren’t anywhere near equal in gender mix at that level, says CEO . "Even the best . companies in the sector aren't anywhere . near equal"
 Diverse mix of people strengthens the teams working together immeasurably . And the fact that they make our mix of . people more diverse strengthens our . teams, he says .
 There isn’t a business in the media and advertising sector that can be complacent about the proportionate mix of its BAME diversity .
 "Without doubt we need to work harder at this, and without doubt it will pay dividends in terms of making the business stronger," he said .
 Even if we look and sound alike, we can stop agreeing with each other . Meanwhile, and also in addition, even if we're all over the world, we should stop agreeing on each other.
 The first televised presidential debate between JFK and Nixon, said to have changed the course of politics . Image became more important than it had ever been to getting elected .
 Fifty-five years ago the CIA launched a strike against Fidel Castro, the Soviet-backed leader of Cuba and the ouster of the US-backed President General Batista . The CIA launched the strike against Castro in Cuba in 1953 .
 U.S. trained troops were overwhelmed by Castro's army, and swiftly surrendered . American trained troops surrendered after being overwhelmed by the army .
 As a response Castro requested Soviet nuclear missiles be placed in Cuba to deter future harassment . Castro requested them be placed on Soviet missiles to deter harassment .
 When the news broke in America of Soviet missiles being installed 90 miles from Florida a crisis began . The crisis began when news broke that Soviet missiles had been installed in Florida .
 A United States blockade began, and so did long and very tense negotiations . The U.S. blockade began and negotiations began to begin . The United States and the U.N. imposed a blockade .
 For 13 days in October 1962, the world was on the brink of nuclear disaster . Then for 13 days, the situation worsened . The world was at risk of a nuclear war . The situation worsened and the world had to be on the verge of disaster .
 In the deliberations in the White House during this period various options were considered . The White House is considering a variety of options .
 These included bombing the missile sites and a full-scale invasion of Cuba . These included bombings and invasion of the island nation .
 U.S. defence secretary Robert McNamara said, ""I thought it was the last Saturday I'd ever see"" when an American reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba on 27 October .
 JFK talked about the crucial importance of challenging your colleagues, not just your opponents . JFK also spoke about the importance of engaging with your colleagues in politics . JFK said that challenging your opponents is important to your political success .
 This sounds like reflection from a man who was in the centre of conflicting advice, and a furious and crucial debate . This is not the first time I have heard from such a powerful figure in the world .
 It's useful to bear in mind that there's nothing healthy about consensus consensus . It's unlikely that you're about to face decision-making in your next meeting .
 If your office culture means you're surrounded by people who don't challenge you, then you're never going to get to a good decision . If you want to make a decision, you need to be challenged by people in your office .
 It's irrelevant whether the lack of challenge comes from niceness, kindness or fear and trembling . It's not irrelevant whether it's not a challenge, it's a challenge for a person to overcome .
 Either way it is dangerous – for your business, your career, and your customers and clients . Either way, it's dangerous for business, and for your career .
 PRWeek Asia Medical Marketing & Media Site Hubs Media Brands Agencies Campaign Insight Campaign Jobs .