 President Kennedy goes on television to tell the world that the Soviet Union has placed missile installations in Cuba, only 90 miles from the U.S. mainland . Kennedy administration was not shocked by the revelation .
 A U-2 spy plane returned high-altitude photographs showing the presence of at least 15 Soviet surface-to-air missile launchers . There were also unconfirmed reports of SS-3 and SS-4 missiles on an airfield outside Havana .
 Russian military personnel and technicians were also known to be on the island . There was the real threat of nuclear holocaust .
 The Russian move disregarded the Monroe Doctrine with its political justification for American hegemony in the Western Hemisphere . There was also the audacity of the Russian move, which completely disregarded Monroe Doctrine .
 Nikita Khrushchev feared another U.S. attempt to overthrow his ally Fidel Castro, so the missiles were meant as much as a deterrent as a threat . The invasion still fresh in his mind, the invasion still .
 The Russians were also unhappy about the U.S. putting their missiles right next door in Turkey, so this represented a quid pro quo . Kennedy reacted swiftly to the revelation .
 His image has been softened over time by the Camelot mythology but make no mistake -Kennedy was no dove . Kennedy was a man of integrity, not a dove .
 Washington informed the Kremlin that any attack launched against the United States from Cuban soil would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union itself . The resulting consequences would be the resulting consequences .
 Kennedy also ordered a naval blockade of Cuba, posing a direct challenge to the Soviet freighters still in the process of delivering their military hardware . The Cold War was suddenly getting hot .
 On Oct. Kennedy raised military readiness to , one step removed from a total war footing . Kennedy raised readiness to . on Oct. 2013 .
 The Cuban missile crisis was the closest the world has come to an all-out nuclear war . In the end, Khrushchev blinked first .
 President Kennedy offered to withdraw missiles in exchange for American guarantees not to invade Cuba . He sent a letter to Kennedy offering to withdraw the missiles . Kennedy realized he'd overstepped himself .
 A second letter -saying that Russia would pull their missiles from Cuba if the U.S. removed its missiles from Turkey -was ignored by Washington . The U.K. did not respond to the letter .
 1962: President Kennedy goes on television and informs the world that the Soviet Union has placed missile installations in Cuba, only 90 miles from the American mainland . "Nuclear Warhead Bunker Site 1 under construction in San Cristobal, Cuba .
 1962: President Kennedy goes on television and informs the world that the Soviet Union has placed missile installations in Cuba, only 90 miles from the U.S. mainland .
 To revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories. FacebookTwitterEmailSave Story .
 Nuclear Warhead Bunker Site 1 under construction in San Cristobal, Cuba . U.S. intelligence photograph of nuclear warhead bunker site .
 1962: President Kennedy tells the world that the Soviet Union has placed missile installations in Cuba, only 90 miles from the U.S. mainland . Kennedy administration was not shocked by the revelation, and especially the American public .
 A U.S. spy plane returned high-altitude photographs showing the presence of at least 15 Soviet surface-to-air missile launchers . The president had known about the installations since at least Oct. and received final confirmation on Oct. 15 .
 Russian military personnel and technicians were also known to be on the island . There was the real threat of nuclear holocaust. So there was a real threat .
 The Russian move disregarded the Monroe Doctrine with its political justification for American hegemony in the Western Hemisphere . There was also the audacity of the Russian move, which completely disregarded Monroe Doctrine .
 Nikita Khrushchev feared another U.S. attempt to overthrow his ally Fidel Castro . The Bay of Pigs invasion still fresh in his mind, so the missiles were meant as much as a deterrent .
 The Russians were also unhappy about the U.S. putting their missiles right next door in Turkey, so this represented a quid pro quo . Kennedy reacted swiftly to the revelation .
 Washington informed the Kremlin that any attack launched against the U.S. from Cuban soil would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union itself . The resulting consequences would be the resulting consequences .
 Kennedy also ordered a naval blockade of Cuba, posing a direct challenge to the Soviet freighters still in the process of delivering their military hardware . The Cold War was suddenly getting very hot .
 On Oct. Kennedy raised military readiness to DEFCON 2, one step removed from a total war footing . Kennedy raised readiness to DeFCON2, the equivalent of a war footing in the United States .
 The Cuban missile crisis was the closest the world has come to an all-out nuclear war . In the end, Khrushchev blinked first .
 It is the essential source of information and ideas that make sense of a world in constant transformation . CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of the world to the gallery .
 The WIRED conversation illuminates how technology is changing every aspect of our lives . Technology is changing the way people interact with it .
 The breakthroughs and innovations that we uncover lead to new ways of thinking, new connections, and new industries . Condé Nast is committed to innovation and innovation .
 The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast .
 "dangerousSuccessHed" is the name of a new album . The album was released in March .
 "Blast to the Past With Our Classics Newsletter"  - "dangerousDek" is a weekly look at Silicon Valley's early days . "Dek," "SuccessHed" is "dreadful throwbacks every Thursday and gripping tales from Silicon Valley" "D
 Fast Forward Newsletter: "See What’s Next in Tech With the Fast Forward newsletter" "Fast Forward" is a weekly newsletter covering tech startups and tech startups . You can unsubscribe at any time .
 1962: President Kennedy goes on television and informs the world that the Soviet Union has placed missile installations in Cuba, only 90 miles from the American mainland . "A United States intelligence photograph of Nuclear Warhead Bunker Site 1 under construction .
 1962: President Kennedy goes on television and informs the world that the Soviet Union has placed missile installations in Cuba, only 90 miles from the American mainland . The Soviet Union placed missiles in Cuba 90 miles away .
 The Russians were also unhappy about the U.S. putting their missiles right next door in Turkey, so this represented a quid pro quo," says CNN's John Sutter .